THEHISTORY OF BOROUGHSANDMUNICIPAL CORPORATIONS.". V** Tht Court lett and Court barons are still in being in the country, retaining thesame name and nature they had before the Conquest.« Surely, that old way of justice at home, and the exact division of it, caused greatease and safety to the people; and though there be difference at this day in thesecourts, from what they were anciently, yet they may (without so gross an error as^^jPrsome would reckon it) be yet styled the same." — 2 Whitelocke, 420 & 421.f^:THEHISTORYOF THBBOROUGHSANDMUNICIPAL CORPORATIONSOFTHE UNITED KINGDOM,FROM THE EARLIEST TO THE PRESENT TIME:WITH ANEXAMINATION OP RECORDS. CHARTERS, AND OTHER DOCUMENTS.ILLUSTRATIVE OF THEIR CONSTITUTION AND POWERS.BYHENRY Walworth MEREWETHER,SERJEANT AT LAW,SOLICITOR GENERAL TO THE QUEEN ;ANDARCHIBALD JOHN STEPHENS, Mea. F.R.S.BARRISTER AT LAW.IN THREE VOLUMES.— VOL. III.LONDON:STEVENS AND SONS, BELL YARD ; S. SWEET, CHANCERY LANE ;AND A. MAXWELL, BELL YARD, LINCOLN'S INN ;Milliner AND SON, DUBLIN; AND T. CLARK, EDINBURGH.MDCCCXXXV.8TBVBN8 AND Paton, Printers,BILL YARD, TBMPLB BAR.CONTENTS OF VOL. III.James I. . . 1469Parliament 1470Statutes 1471Cases 1472Charters 1488Municipal Documents 1502Glanville's Reports . 1547Charles I. 1627Statutes . 1628Cases 1659Charters 1661Municipal Documents 16681646 to 1660 1681Charles II. 1689Statutes . 1690Charters 1696Municipal Documents 1709leases . . . 1721Whitelocke 1776London Quo Warranto 1778James II. . . 1817Proclamation 1836CONTENTS.William & Mary . 1834Brady . 1900Anne 1943George I. 1981George II 2021George III 2083George IV 2193William IV 2267Lists of Boroughs, Burgesses, and Charters.I. A list of the Boroughs or Burgesses mentioned in Domesday, inthe several counties, in the order they are entered 2273II. A list of Boroughs not mentioned in Domesday, and the periodwhen they first appear as Boroughs 2274III. Boroughs created after William I., and before Richard I. 2276IV. A list of the Places which were called upon as Boroughs, to sendBurgesses to Parliament in 1297> the 26th of Edward I., and atsubsequent periods 2277Charters granted in the several reigns 2279Index 2285HISTORYOFCORPORATIONS.JAMES I.The transmission of the crown from the house of Tudor to josthat of the Stuartss, was accompanied by little or no sensa |^tion, owing both to the character for moderation and wisdomwhich the king possessed, and to the preparation which thepublic mind had undergone during the latter part of the latequeen's reign for the change of succession.It was the obvious policy for the successor of such a queen,ascending the throne, in some respects, in the character of aforeigner, to preserve public affairs in the position they occupiedat his accession. James was so much actuated bythis principle, that he is said to have pronounced it as amaxim, ^Hhat no prince should begin any considerable undertakingin the first year of his reign ;" and he continuedfor some time, and to some extent, the same measures whichQueen Elizabeth and her immediate predecessors had begunand at the commencement of his reign he added, as weshall see hereafter, some few places to the list of boroughswhich returned members to Parliament ; and restored othersto this privilege.He, however, at last experienced the evil to which we havebefore alluded ; and found the greatest difficulty in managingthe House of Commons, from the number of its members.VOL. III.1470 PARLIAMENT.•^^"^ ^' When therefore it was suggested to him to add to thenumber of the boroughs, his practical and peremptory answerwas, ** that he had too many already."Still at some periods of his reign the Parliament weresufficiently compliant to his will, and submitted patiently tomany strong exertions of the prerogative of the crown.The chancellor in some instances exercised a discretionarypower in issuing writs to fill up vacancies in the House ofCommons — but at last this branch of the prerogative wasabandoned.However, in the beginning of his reign, the king, on callinga Parliament, issued a proclamation, threatening with fineand imprisonment any who should take upon themselves theplace of knight, citizen, or burgess, not being duly elected.And he, through his council, ordered a member of the Houseof Commons to be banished the House; and a new writissued to supply his place.So strong was the supposition of the king's dispositionto control the Parliament, that the Commons adopted therumour that some persons called '' undertakers," attached tothe king, had laid a regular plan for the new elections, andhaving spread their influence all over England, had undertakento secure a majority for the court.*These measures or suspicions naturally begot a spirit of resistancein the Commons : and they began to dispute the prerogativeof the crown, and to assert their own independence.Thus, increasing their power and importance, a seat in theHouse, instead of being considered a burden, began to be anobject of earnest desire : hence the elections were severelycontested, and the ascertaining who were the real burgesses,and had the right of election in the several boroughs, beganto be a consideration of vital interest.This imperceptibly led to the formation of the learned andpowerful committee of elections, which sat during the latterpart of this reign: whose decisions were reported by Mr. Ser-glanville.meant Glanville, as well as in the Journals of the House :f —• 5 Pari. Hist. 286; Journey 12th April, and 2nd May, 1614.t Journal, 3d July, 1607.PARLIAMENT. 1471which at this time were specially ordered to be regularly kept. James i.In the decisions of this committee — one of the distinguishingfeatures of this period — (upon which we shall hereafterobserve more fully in detail) broke out that spirit of soberliberty which had taken possession of the House; andthe leading members, men of genius and extensive views,were desirous of establishing the law of elections on sure andfixed principles. And as to the rights of Parliament ingeneral, the House insisted upon freedom of speech — andthat their liberties — franchises — privileges, and jurisdiction,were the ancient and undoubted birthright and inheritanceof the subjects of England.It must however be remembered, that in the midst of theirresistance to the abuses of the power of the crown, many ofthe wisest and most prudent members retained, and openlyavowed, their due regard for the just and legal prerogativeof the king : and were most desirous to keep their proceedingsand remonstrances under the strictest restraints of decorumand propriety.But the wide field of historical discussion is not ourprovince : — ewe wish rather to confine ourselves strictly to thesubject of our inquiry, and to the collection of the recordsand documents which directly bear upon it, to the enumerationof which we proceed.STATUTES.The Statutes of this reign containing, with one or two exceptions,nothing material to our inquiry, will afford only afew short extracts.We have lately observed the continuance of the courts-leet Connect.during the reign of Queen Elizabeth.The fifth chapter of the second year of James I. relates to 1^04.Cap. 5.the same subject : — and after reciting, that the jurisdiction ofthe leet and court baron was for the true administration of justice,and for the punishment and suppression of offences ; andthat the stewards had obtained grants of the fees and profits Stewards,of these courts for their private gain ; — prohibits the same forthe future.1472 STATUTES.^^"^^ ^' Some cases of this period relate to the same subject: —1607. thus from Buller's case,* in the fifth year of James I., wefind the origin, nature and practice of the court-leet mostaccurately defined. And although it appears at the close ofthe report to be assumed, that the court had in some degreebecome obsolete; yet it is obvious — from the abovestatute — from this case — and from others which occurred inthis reign — that the court was still in existence, and maintainedits ancient jurisdiction— excepting where, in a fewinstances, the general scope of its authority had been interferedwith by the legislature ; or by usage it had varied insome of its forms. And although it is asserted, that the casewas intricate and involved in much doubt, yet from the documentswe have before quoted, the dilemma, if any, must havearisen from a disinclination to attempt to overcome theapparent difficulty.It was agreed, that the lard of a leet might well have acertain sum, as 10«. pro certo lets of all the resiants withinLeet. his leet,+ called sometimes " capitation," &c. and sometimes" certum letaB," and by other names ; — and it might havea reasonable beginning ; scil. when the lord purchased andacquired the leet for the ease of the resiants therein ; so thatSheriff's they need not go to the sheriff's tourn ; but do their suit realat the lord's leet. Also the lord of a leet was at every eyreobliged, at his own costs, to claim this franchise, &c. Andin the case at bar, the issue was, whether the plaintiff at thepledge, court leet* mentioned in the record, was a " chief pledge''of the same court or not. And thereupon a special verdictwas found, that the plaintiff was resiant ; and that he wascertified in the leet to be a " chief pledge," by the chiefpledges there. But he made default, and was amerced2s. 6d.; so that he did not appear, nor was sworn as chiefpledge, &c. And it seemed to the court, that they couldJudgment, not adjudge him a chief pledge upon this verdict. For leetswere divided in decurias or decennas (unde decatur decennarito this day) and out of every ten. (each of them being pledge♦ 6 Co. 78. A. D. ie07.t And see also the court leet, mentioned God. 179. 8 James 1.itCASES. 1473for the other ^ from whence the court was called " curia visas Ja"™*^ i-france plegiiy) one was called " capitals elegies;" seu 1607.primaries fidei jussor. And in some places, at this day, heis called the " tythingman.'* And in Yorkshire, "fenwiawtofc."And therewith agreed Lambert in his book, ^* De priscusAnglonim Legions:" — and Fleta, lib. ii. c. 45. And reasonproves it ; for he cannot be called capital pledge, but in respectthat others are inferior pledges. Vide the statute of28 £dw. II. de vise france plegii — of chief pledges ; and ourbooks speak of chief pledges. Vide 4 Edw. III. 126, 126 ; —and 4 Edw. III. 30;— 46 Edw. III. 23;— so that the returnof the constable, or the presentment of the jury in the leet,doth not make a man chief pledge. For it appears by thesaid act of 18 Edw. II., that ** it ought to be inquired atthe leet, if all the chief pledges, with their defenders —that is, the other nine — appear." By which it seems thatthe tenth principal man was the ** chief pledge;" and vide30 Edw. Til. 23, of the frankpledge of the town, and itsauthority.In another report of the same case,* the chief pledgesyi tie fined by the steward for refusing to be present at thecourt leet J which amercement was held good. Leet.In the course of the argument it was admitted, that beforethere was any leet, the sheriff ^s toum existed ; but that the toum.lords of the hundred purchased a leet for the ease of theinhabitants within the hundred ; and that whenever a charge inhabitantswas to be imposed, it should be upon all the inhabitants.The principle in this case was laid down, " that when anythingought to be done by the common law, the commonlaw gives a power to punish ; but where a thing commencesby a custom, the custom ought to give the remedy."It was also stated, that the leet was the greatest court theking had during the Saxon aera. That any one might withsafety travel with money without protection : for if a personwas suspected, he was immediately compelled to find pledgesfor his good behaviour.The following case, also in the 16th of James 1., will show *^^^-• 2 Molle's Rep. 32 St 73.6b1474 CASES AND STATUTES.James I. that the doctrine of the leet was at that time fully understood1618. and practised.In replevin* the defendant avowed, because he had aLet. leet of all the inhabitants and resiants within his manor ; andthe plaintiff, being an inhabitants was summoned to appearat the leet, and having made default, was amerced.It was admitted, that all churchmen — women — noblemen —knights — ^and their eldest sons — were free of this service.But that all others above the i^e of 12 years ought to dotheir suit and service, which was called " suit real or royal*For although the lord had the benefit of the court, yet thecourt was for the king. And the service done was the serviceof the kings And the lord cannot grant that one should bedischarged of his suit at the leet. In a subsequent partof the case it was noted, that the king could not release aperson from doing suit at the leet, as it would be to the prejudicesthe lord.It might also have been added, that it would have been inderogation of the common law.In the case of Cook r. Stubbs J it was expressly laid down,Leet " that every man ought to be within a leet, and none could beof two leets"1G23. It was also held in the 21st of James I.,§ that ^' a courtleet could make bye-laws ; not only touching husbandry,but also touching trades and mysteries."Cap. 14. The 14th chapter of the statutes of the same year providedremedy for the freemen of London to recover their debts ; andprohibited — as is the case in many charters and bye-laws —that they should sue any other freeman out of the city.Cap. 28. The 28th chapter in the same year, is a confirmation of theking's letters patent, granted to the mayor, bailiffs and bur-berwick,gesses o( Berwick-upon-tweed f and the franchises and libertiesof the borough.1624. Subsidies were granted at the close of the last year, aswell as in this, and so continued during the whole reign ; the2 Rolle's Rep. 56. t See before, Singleton.t Cro. Jac. 583. § Rollers Rep. 391.CASES AND STATUTES. j^y^last subsidy being granted, amongst other things, for the James I.decayed cities and towns; accompanied with the usual con Subsidies.filiation of the king's general pardon.In the 10th year of James I., the act passed in furtherance 1^*2.of the king's favourite project, for the repeal of hostile laws,and all hostilities between England and Scotland ; upon conditionof a similar repeal in England.The 10th chapter of the same year contains a confirmation Cap.io.of the charter granted by Henry VI. to the mayor, bailiffsand burgesses of the town of Southampton — all merchants, southamptonbeing free of that town, and all strangers being restrainedfrom buying or selling in the town.CHARTERS.King James, in the third year of his reign, granted a char ^^,?,"'ter to the city of London, referring to the office of bailiff, andthe conservancy of the water of the Thames, from Stainesbridge to Yean Leet ; and also the measuring of coals, grain,&c. And that the mayor, commonalty and citizens hadbeen disquieted in such measuring, particularly in that ofcoals — to remove all doubts respecting the same, the kingcertified and confirmed the offices of measuring to themayor, commonalty and citizens with the conservancy ofthe Thames.And in the sixth year of James L, that king granted a J^\general confirmation of all charters and privileges, to the charter.mayor and commonalty and citizens by whatsoever nameof incorporation* they were before granted or confirmed; incorporatedthe search and surveying of oil, hops, soap, salt, &c.,and the measuring of all com, &c., were expressly grantedby that charter.All the inhabitants and dwellers within the city, are placed inhabitantsunder their rule, government, jurisdiction, and oversight,as well as the present and future inhabitants of the BlackFriars and White Friars, both of which, with the wholeThese words appear to be the first time applied to the corporation of London ;though they had been applied, in the second year of this reign, to Maidstone, in acharter to that place.5b21476 LONDON.J^^^ ^* precincts, circuit, and compass, and all buildings therein,1G08. are to be quit of all taxes and other burdens, &c., and watchand ward. sind wards. And the inhabitants are. to be exempted fromthe offices of constable and scavenger, and other offices ofcharge within the city, without the limits of the Black Friarsand the White Friars. But all freemen inhabiting withinFreemen, them, are to be eligible, like other freemen to all offices, ofmayor, sheriffs, and aldermen, as of the company of whichthey shall be free. And all persons, though not free of thecity, who dwell within the city, (except the inhabitants withinBlack Friars and White Friars,) shall be reasonably taxed,and contribute to all aids, talliages, and other contributions,to be levied by the mayor, commonalty, and citizens — providedthat such residents and dwellers in any houses* withinthe city, who are not, or will not be, freemen of the city, shallbe taxed to such aids and tallies only for the horses inwhich they shall inhabit or reside, or are dwelling — withpower for them to appeal to the chancellor, if they shouldthink themselves unjustly grieved.Justices. The mayor, recorder, and aldermen who have borne thecharge of mayoralty of the city, are to be justices of thepeace : other keepers of the peace not intermeddling. Andthe sheriffs of the city are to be aiding and assisting to themayor, recorder, and aldermen.1614. I" t^c 12th year of James I., the king granted a charter tothe mayor, commonalty, and citizens, confirming to them theweighing of all coals, &c., in the port of London ; and fixingthe fee at 8rf, for every ton, for the costs of the mayor, commonalty,and citizens, in the beam and weights, and for theirattendance, labour, and necessary expences, and for theprevention of forestalling. All persons are prohibited fromselling any coals upon the waters of the Thames in any boatsor lighters, but only in the ships in which they are firstbrought to London.We have seen, in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, to whatan extent it had been stated in the charters, contrary to theThis shows clearly, that the persons who were to contribute to the aids of thecity, were the householders.LONDON. 1477fact, that the places to which the grants were made, had been •^*'°" ^'immemorially incorporated. It appears that the same doc 1614.trine had spread into the courts of law. And thus, in thecase of Day and Savage, in the 12th year of James I.,* thedefendant pleaded, '^ that London was an ancient city, and sohad been time out of mind ; and that the mayor, citizens, andcommonalty had been, by all that time, a corporate body ;"though undoubtedly the fact was not so.In the books of the city,t it appears, during this reign, ^^'that a poor inhabitant of Lydgate was, at the request of theother inhabitants admitted by redemption into the MerchantTaylors' Company, paying 6s. 8rf.Another provision was made for restricting the number of 1614^redemptioners,;]: so as they should not exceed 36 yearly;and that no grant of freedom should be made but in fullcourt ; — 13 at least being present.The Cordwainers' Company were allowed to name 20 shoemakers,English bom,% to be admitted by redemption, orfines of 6s. 8d. ; so that they were presented to, and allowedby the court o aldermen.At this periods a committee was appointed to consider as 1621.to the granting of freedom by redemption, whether by the Freedom,court of aldermen, or common council only ; and what numberwere to be granted yearly by the court of aldermen.The following is an extract from a document in the Cot 1606.ionian Library ,5[ relative to ** the government of the city ofLondon, and the dignity of the aldermen." And it will beseen, that in conformity with the cases which we have beforequoted from the Year Books, it describes the inhabitants asthe commons of the city. Commons.The city of London is a corporation, privileged frommuch of the ordinary course held throughout the kingdom,and endowed with many liberties and immunities, firstgranted through special favour of the kings of this realm,• Hob. 116. t Repass, fol. 114.I The redemptioners were those who were made by redemption, as it was called—that is, on the payment of a fine.— Rep. 30, fol. 2 b.§ Jot. 29, fol. 297 b. || Lor. 31, fol. 352.f Bill. Cotton., Vespasian C. 14, p. 314.1478 LONDON.J^"°<^ ^* and afterwards continued by divers acts of Parliament, as1608. aiming at the benefit and honour of the state ; which theinhabitants industry and loyalty of the inhabitants hath so well answered,that the place hath thereby gained the name of the king'schamber.'* The government of this city depended chiefly upon theMayor. mayoTy as the king's lieutenant — and secondarily, upon theAldermen, aldermen, as subordinate magistrates, to govern the severalWard. divisions or wards of the same, whereof (by like authoritygranted from sovereign majesty) they are made keepers.inhabitants And to these aldermen is left the rule of the inhabitantsresiding in the same, which are known by the name of theCommons, commons of the city.Guilds. " The body of the commons is divided into guilds or com*ponies, which are antiently ranked in degrees of priority orprecedency, according to the worth of their trades ormiseries.And the brethren of every guild have their places in thecompany, either according to their seniority, or as they heldoffices in the same''After which, this document proceeds at great length, togive the order of precedence to be observed in going toWestminster.1614. In the 12th year of James I., an important case relative toLondon occurred, upon an information for prisage, institutedWaller u. by Sir Thomas Waller against Frances Hanger, widow, for*'^"^'''* prisage of wines brought in from ships— two of which shealleged arrived in the lifetime of her husband ; and two afterhis death ; — and he appointed the defendant his executrix.Free In answer, she alleged that she was a *free woman*' andclaimed to be discharged from prisage, under the exemptiongranted by the charter of the first of Edward Iii,* to themayor, commonalty, and citizens of London. And she said,that her husband was a " citizen's and ^* freeman'' of thecity of London, of the Company of Cloth-workers. AndSee before, p. 630. 2 Bulst. 134, 261 . 3 Bulst. 1.t Thb is another instance of the distinction we have before taken, with referencelo the ancient liber homo — citnen—OT burgess — and the person who, by reason ofhis belonging to any fraternity, was free to trade.woman.LONDON. 1479she alleged, that the city was an ancient city ; — which was James I.strictly correct. But when she also added, that it was incog 1614.ported, by the name of " mayor and commonalty " — that, forthe reasons we have shown, was clearly without foundation.To her plea, the king's attorney-general demurred ; and instatingthe case, Bulstrode, the reporter, says, that the merchants,freemen, citizens, and resiants in London, were, bythat charter of Edward III., discharged from the paymentof prisage. And the question was. Whether these winesshould be so discharged ? The case was argued in differentterms for two years ; and the judges being divided in opinoh,gave their judgments severally.Croak, justice, was of opinion, that the exemption oughtto be construed largely. And that it would extend tocitizens, men or women. That women were not to be excludedfrom the benefit of the charter ; for the widow of amerchant citizen was a citizen, and should have the sameprivilege as her husband, as long as she was resiant in the resiant.city. And he said it was not sufficient that a person wasborn, or had come to the place ; but he ought to be a citizen,resident and commandant — cm inhabitant of the place civis Resident.resident et commons, incola civitatis. A woman may be acitizen ; but in this case she is not an owner. If a citizenmakes a foreigner his executor, who unlade the wine, heshall not have the benefit of the discharge ; for a foreigneris not entitled to it : he is not " civis'' nor are the winesbona civium.^^Letters patent of the king ought to be construed secundum Charters.intentioned domini regis ; et nan ad deception.If the widow had the wines in her own right, she shouldhave the discharge ; but as in right of another, she shall not.And Know's case, in the fourth of Henry VI., was cited,who removed his household cum panis, and dwelt at Bristol,but kept his shop in London, and claimed discharge fromprisage. But it was voted against him. For he was notsuch a citizen as could claim the discharge; he ought tobe"dri*', incola, cormorants'' In the reign of Henry VI.,complaint was made, that the lord mayor of London would1480 LONDON-jamesI. make strangers citizens. And it was declared, that the .charge from prisage did not extend to such citizens asstranger. ^^^^ « dotati" made free— but to those only who wereresiant. commorant — insolent — and resiant within the city. And herethe widow only pleads that she is a " libera foemina/' and not"civis;" and therefore he held the plea was bad. AndSacheverell's case, in the 43rd of Elizabeth, was cited, inwhich it was determined, that those who were not " mastersof families' but had taken chambers in the city, and werefreemen, and subject to scot and lot, yet could not have thebenefit of the discharge, for they were not "income."So if a citizen merchandise with another, he shall not havethe discharge.A citizen ought to be such, to all purposes and intents ;otherwise he shall not have the benefit.Williams, justice, upon the contrary, thought she ought tobe discharged. And he relied upon the case of the mayorof Norwich ; and the supposed case of the grant to the goodmenof Dale, for the purpose of establishing that Londonwas incorporated: — which we have shown not to be thefact, either with respect to London or Norwich, at the periodto which the case refers. But he admitted the case of aForeigners. foreigner. And he said, it was not to be disputed but thata woman might be a citizen. And he cited the 46th ofCitizen. Edward IIL, fol. 13, that ^^ he is a citizen who is commorant^^ and an inhabitant, and subject to pay scot and lot. If hedwell in another place he shall not be free''And in another part of his judgment, he lays down thatReason, sound principle of the law, '^ that common reason makes thelaw."Yelverton, justice, was also of opinion, the woman oughtto be discharged. But he cited the case of the 21st ofEdward IV., to show that the citizens of Norwich, who wereto be exempt from serving upon j cries, must be members ofthe city ; for that none but citizens were to have any benefitof that immunity ; for the words of the grant are, " promelioration civitatis'' for the advancement of the honourand civil offices. And he referred again to the citizenLONDON. 1481who removed to Bristol: and Sacheverell's case, who James i.though he bore civilian et publica opera, yet he was not 1614.entitled to the benefit; for he was not " incola,*^ but only incog.domicilianus, or chamberer. He was a citizen — a freeman —and commorant. But he ought to be " iTiquilinus" and havea house. And he put the case of a person being disfranchised ^^'before the arrival of the wines. And spoke of strangers andtheir claim of exemption. And no person would be entitledby being locally within the city, unless he bore its burdens.And he denied that a woman could be a citizen, (as it appearsupon substantial grounds) — for she cannot bear the '^ civilian*' or publica opera'* of the city — she cannot do anything forthe benefit of the city — she cannot perform watch nor tvard,nor bear office in the city. She may be a free woman ; butthat is only to have her will, as many so have, but to no otherpurpose.And ^oif^A^on, justice, with reference to the right of thewidow to be free, quoted Otes*s case,* from the Book ofAssise, and from the 45th of Edward III. In which it wassaid by Finchley, that " the citizens to whom the privilegesextended, were those who were born or inherited in the Citizen.city, or who were resiant and taxable to scot and lot ; and^' that he which is not so, shall not be said to be a citizen,unless he is commorant and resiant ^ subject to scot for paymentsand lot to supply the places and offices, there heritable,'' And if he be not such a one, he shall not be said to bewithin the privilege of a citizen." As to the widow, notwithstanding,by the custom of the city, she hath some privilegeas to merchandise during her widowhood ; and so as tosome purpose, shall be said to be a citizen : yet it is only to acertain extent, because she is not subject to scot and lot.Dodridgcy justice, in delivering his judgment said, thatbeing a citizen of London hath divers significations : — someare there inhabiting : and so in this regard they are called inhabiting.citizens. But if he hath not jus societatis, the discharge ofprisage would not extend to him.Also, every one who hath land in London, by custom, Land.Vide ante, p. 633.Commo*rant.1482 LONDON.James I. may devise it in mortmain ; and yet notwithstanding he is no1614. citizen.* A citizen is such a one as ought to be subject toScot and scot and lot. and he ought to be " liber homo'' Scot and lotlot. . .are particular payments imposed upon every one ; but extendsnot to one who is commorant in another place. Heought to be a citizen and a freeman, and also commorantthere, who is to have benefit of this charter of immunity.And he cited the case of Knowles who was a citizen andfreeman of London, but he lift his commorancy and dwelt atBristol, and yet remained a citizen and a freeman, and waseligible to be called into any office ; — there it was adjudgedhe should not have the benefit of this charter, to be dis-chainedfrom the payment of prisage, but he ought to be alsoki^"T ^ housekeeper in London. But if he be a citizen and freemanof London, and do dwell there — as if he keeps no house, buttakes a chamber, and so is an ^* inmate," this charter of dischargeshall not extend unto him — and this was adjudged inthe Exchequer, in the 43d of Elizabeth, j: Therefore, it is tobe considered what manner of persons ought to be citizenslouse freemen — and commorant not in a chamber, but to keepa settled house there ; and this is sufficient for persons capableto have the benefit of this charter of discharge.Coke, chief justice, observed, that it was a case of greatimportance, and he brought it under consideration a secondtime, referring to the division among the judges. Hestated that the charter was granted for the advancement oftrade and traffic— for the advancement of the navy — ^and thegeneral amendment of the city. And, in an elaborate divisionof what citizens are, he says, that " one may be a citizen inHQsviencc, fact, and not by residence, and such a one is not in judgmentof law a citizen : for which he cites 36th of Henry VL,foL 12 ; 36th of Heniy VL, fol. 28, which latter was the instanceof a person not dwelling in London — and the 4th ofEdward IV., fol. 10, where one is mentioned as a citizen ofLondon, and dwelt in another place. So, also, if he is residentonly in name, that is not good. If he be not a citizen and• 5 Hen. VII. fol. 10 ct 19, 45 Edw. 111. fol. 26. t 4 Hen. VI. Rot. 14.t Het. Rot.22.LONDON. 1483^freeman he cannot devise his lands in mortmain ; so if he be •^*™®* '•but " inquiries " this will not serve his turn — he ought to be 1614.a continuing citizen and resident. He ought to have ^^jus ha nugj *"Stations; ejus societatis,^' If in the interim he happensto be disfranchised, he shall not have the benefit, for heought to be a " continual citizen*' If all then concur in him, Citizen.and he continues to be " civis," then he is every way complete,and enabled to enjoy the benefit; for which he citesBracton, fol. 411, which author, he says, comprehends allthese in one word, to wit, " Barones London," — sand it may Baron,equally be said, as we have often observed before, that thesingle term " burgess " has the same import. Burgess.The reader will perceive that this case throughout confirmsthe doctrine for which we have contended from the earliestperiods of our history; and it, in truth, brings down theprinciples connected with the right of citizenship, foundedupon the same grounds, to the reign of James I.The reporter describes the persons entitled to prisage as'^ freemen, citizens, and reliant," which is a most correct Resigns.description of what such a person ought to be.He should be a " freeman ;" — that is oifree condition — a Freeman,liber homo: — for none other could enjoy the privileges.He should be a citizen ; — that is, he should be admitted, Citizen.sworn, and enrolled at the wardmote : — for otherwise, if notadmitted, he would not be recognized as a citizen by the Admitted.public officers or his fellow citizens — nor would he be " alegalis homo,'^ a lawful man having given his pledges to the Swim.law and taken his oath of allegiance.Again ; though he was of free condition, and had been admitted,enrolled, and swim, still he would not be entitledto this or any other privilege, unless he continued a resiant resiant.or inhabitant householder within the city.TTiis doctrine is most expressly and repeatedly laid downby Mr. Justice Broke, and almost in every form of expression,both Latin and English ; properly connecting theresidence, as an inhabitant householder, with the payment V^}^'of scot and lot, which was a accessary consequence of it. Scot andMr. Justice Williams asserts the same doctrine, founding1484 LONDON.James I. himself upon the authority of the Year Book, which we have1614. before quoted.*Mr. Justice Yelverton maintains the same, particularly referringto the occupation of the lousy and the consequentnecessity of bearing the civil and public burdens of the city,Watch especially watch and ward ; and the filling of offices to whichhe might be elected. He also refers to the Year Book.Mr. Justice Doddridge most correctly confirms the doctrinewe have before asserted, of the loss of the privileges of^^n™°* the city by becoming " commorant " in another place ; andHouse mentions the requisite of being a housekeeper.The chief justice, Lord Coke, although his mind wasstrongly impregnated at that time with the notion of corporations,delivers, in substance, even upon the second considerationof the case, the same opinions, insisting upon thenecessity of residence — of being of free condition — and continuinga citizen by continual residence ; for all which doctrinehe quotes, as we have done before, the ancient authorityof Bracton.Another case, also of considerable importance, occurs in the1609. 7th year of James I. ; nearly at the time at which one of thecharters we have before quoted was granted ; in which muchof the same doctrine was asserted. But the reader willperceive, that it was unwarrantably mixed up with theTrade, considerations of 'trades'' and involved with some of theintricate doctrines which have in modem times been appliedCorpora to Corporations. Particularly it will be observed, that thelions. . *^ ^ '^ 'rights by birth, servitude and redemption, were strangelyconfounded together ; as we have before had occasion to notewith respect to other places.We shall give a short extract from this case, and close itwith a few observations.9^^P^ In the city of London cases the mayor, aldermen, andcase. sheriffs, in a return to a habeas corpus, to bring up the bodyof James Wagoner, set out the customs of London, statingthat they were confirmed by Parliament, and alleging anordinance made by the lord mayor, aldermen and commons,See bcforci p. 633, et seq. t 8 Co. 241.LONDON. 1485in pursuance of their customs reciting a former in the •^^"°^*^-third year of Edward IV., which prohibited foreigners from 1464.setting up shops within the liberty of the city. And anotherordinance, in the 17th of Henry VI II., that no person 1625.being ^* estrange'* from the liberties of the city, should Strangers.keep a shop within them, upon pain of imprisonment andforfeiture. And that sundry strangers and foreigners, notregarding these provisions, but intending their private profit,have devised by all sinister and subtle means, to defraudthe charters and ordinances, and secretly sell theirwares, &c. within the city, to the detriment of those whopay scot and lot, bear office, and undergo other charges,which strangers, and other persons not free, are not chargeablewithal: for avoiding which damage it was ordained,that '' no person not being free of the city, should, by** any colour, directly or indirectly, sell any wares, nor'' keep any shop, nor use any art or handicraft within thecity, upon pain of 5Z. (with a proviso excepting victuals)"for non-payment of which forfeiture Wagoner had beenarrested. And it was resolved, that the custom of London,and their ordinances founded upon it, were good ; but thatthey would not be good by grant, and therefore no corporalturn made within time of memory* can have such privilege,unless by act of parliament. And it was adjudged, that agrant to restrain trade and traffic was void, because tradeand traffic is the life of every commonwealth, and especiallyof an island. And therefore the king might erect gildasmediatorial, i. e. a fraternity or society or corporation o^ Merchantmerchants, to the end that good order and rule should be bythem observed, for the increase and advancement of trade andmerchandise, and not for the hindrance or diminution of it.And gildas is a Saxon word, and signifies severe, i. e. that all Gildas.of such fraternity shall be subject to pay scot and lot: andtherefore at this day such part of the country which is contributoryamong themselves to pay common charges is calledthe guildable;f and if there be any special liberty it is called Suitable.the franchise. JAll corporations in England are within time of memory.t See before, in the time of Henry VIII. t ^ Brown, 287» 178; 1 Bui. 195.I486 LONDON.j^amw^. It was observed, that one may be liber homo, that is a1600. freeman of London, by three ways : —1. Service. 1st. By service, as he who serves his apprenticeship.2. Birth. 2nd. By birthright, as he who is the son of a freeman ofLondon.3. Re- 3rd. By redemption, that is by allowance of the court ofemotion. j r ^ jmayor and aldermen.And all these three ways are allowed by the custom ofthe city of London. And by no other means can a manbecome a freeman of London, for none can be made freeof the city of London by charter.* And therefore it appears,that Edward II L granted to John Account de Lucy,apothecary, citizen of London, " quod ipse omnibus libertasquae cives civitatis predicta habet in eadem civitateset alibi infra regnum nostrum Anglaise, habet, gaudeatet utatur ; et quod de tribus denarii de libra, et omnibusalias prsestationibus et customs, quae alienigenae de bonis etmerchandises suis infra regnum Anglaise severe tenentur, depropriis bonis et merchandises ipsius Johannes infra idemregnum et total vitam sum sit quietus ; et quod plus quamalii cives nostri London indigenes pro customs merchandises,et aliorum bonorum quorum nobis solvent severe nonteneatur, nee ad hoc, aliqua liter compellatur." — But all these^freeman, words do not make him ^freeman of London, for he oughtto attain unto it by one of the said three ways, according tothe custom.It will be seen that this case turns chiefly upon the disability,which has so frequently occurred before in the charters,and the local and municipal documents, oi foreigners andStrangers, strangers to trade in places to which they did not belong.Scot and The ancient Saxon obligation to pay scot and lot isstrangely united with the question of trading : and referenceMerchant is made to the Gilds Mediatorial which many charters anddocuments have already shown to be distinct from the municipalgovernment of the place ;+ and the members separatefrom the general class of burgesses.• Pat. 32 Edw. III.t Vide ante, pp. 320, 322, 340, 381, 390, 392, 468, 469, 559, 599, 839, 842, 1048,1049, 1147, &c.LONDON. 1487It is said that a person might be a "liber homo," or James i.freeman of London, by three ways; as to " birth' and ieo9.servitude," it is true. The grounds of which respectively ^oJ^*!we have before shown, and they each undoubtedly made aperson oifree condition.*But " redemption'' stands altogether upon other grounds, Redemp-and does not directly apply to the question of freedom.Redemption is properly the admission of a person into theplace upon his being thought fit to be admitted, and payinga contribution to the common stock of the town. Such a Commonstock.person ought in strictness to have been of free conditionbefore he was admitted into the place. Because if he wasa villain the inhabitants of the place receiving him might. Villain.as we have seen before, be called in question for harbouringhim. But his residence there for a year and a day withoutclaim might obviate that difficulty: — and, in that point Redemp-of view alone, his admission into the place might be connectedwith his being oifree condition. But otherwise thetitle by redemption has nothing to do with that fact : butproceeds upon the assumption of his being so: and is amere permission to him, as being previously a freeman, to Peimis-become a freeman of the particular city or borough : and sohe is admitted as a citizen or burgess.And in this manner the two cases may be reconciledtogether upon the principles of the common law ; otherwisethey would be inconsistent, and lead the mind to that stateof uncertainty which too commonly arises from perusingcases of this description, without considering the ancientnature and origin of such rights and usages.In the last two cases frequent references were made tothe confirmation of the customs of London by Parliament,which has been sedulously maintained from that period tothe present time.The assertion is not quite so clear as is usually assumed: — and if it is correct, there are many more placesin England which might, if they thought fit, assert the sameprivilege.Vide etiam, post. temp. James I., Newcastle-upon-Tyoe.sion.1488 LONDON.James 1. At all events, the claim must be made by the city of Longdon, subject to the qualification contained in the followingcase of the 21st of James I.,* respecting an ordinance madeby the common council, for the ordering of the company ofbricklayers and plasterers ; in which it was said that theconfirmation, by statute, of the customs of the city of London,extended only to good customs, which were reasonablefor the common weal.Besides the charters to London, granted in this reign,some were conferred upon other places, which it is necessaryshortly to mention.NE WC ASTLE-UPO N-T Tyne.1603. In the first year of James L, the powers and provisionsof the charter of Elizabeth to Newcastle were, with somefew omissions, alterations, and additions, repeated andconfirmed.1604. And in the 2nd year of this reign, another charter to Newcastle,recites that disputes between 'the mayor, aldermen,and common council — and the governors, stewards, and brothersof Hasten, &c. had arisen : — and in order to put anend to them, the king grants to the mayor and burgessesthat the choice of all the elective officers should be in themanner therein described.The 12 That the election of the two of each of the 12 mysteries,fnvstenesshould be the same as in the charter of Elizabeth, exceptthat the persons to be elected had, in that charter, the additionaldescription of " burgenses villae predicta :" — andinstead of being described merely as " vires et homines "as they are in the charter of Elizabeth — they are calledBurgesses. a burgesses''The mayor, three aldermen, and eight burgesses, were tobe elected, as by the charter of Elizabeth.But instead of those 12 electing 12 other inhabitant burgesses,as directed by the charter of Elizabeth; the goodmenand burgesses of the 12 societies or mysteries, were to• Rolle's Reports 391.NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE. ]489meet separately, and severally nominate from each society James I.one such man as to them shall seem fit — which 12 men 1604.shall present to the first elected 12 men, 6 out of their ^**® ^^'number, to make together 18.That the mayor recorder, and aldermen, or any five ormore of them, should he justices of the peace.After which follows a clause, that every free burgess, by Birth.ihrth or servitude, with any free burgess of any free mystery, Servitude,and no other, should be able to be admitted into the fraternityof hostmen, and he as a brother, if he should demandit, and should pay on his admission 53^., and not more.And every person a free burgess, by reason of birth or servitude,with any brother of the society of hostmen, oughtto be admitted into that fraternity as a brother, if he should'demand it; and every such person should pay for his admission,33s. 4:d., and not more.The charter then concludes with the usual clause for theenjoyment of all former liberties and privileges held by theburgesses, " by any incorporation, or pretence of incorpo- Pretenceration," with this special addition, '^ which are not contrary portion.to this charter."It is clear from this clause, that birth and servitude were Birth,properly treated as qualifications for free burgess-ship; inthe manner we have before' explained in the London case-forboth birth and servitude made a person oi free condition ;and if he was a householder within the borough, and thereforepaid scot and lot, and was sworn and enrolled, he was afree burgess.It also further appears from this charter, that the free burgessesof Newcastle were a distinct class from the hostmen ; hostmen.and that free burgess-ship was a qualification for being thelatter ; as in many other places, where the different craftsand guilds were separate from the municipal government. Guilds,and were altogether collateral to the municipal rights.There is also the following document relative to this place,of the ninth of James I. An order of council signed by 20 lei.persons, after reciting that business of importance, concerningthe general state of the corporation — especially the found1490 NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE.James I. dation of several hospitals &c. — ought to be performed at1611. London; therefore, " the mayor, aldermen, sheriff, and restCommon of the common council of the town of Newcastle-upon-Tyne,council — ^for the foTy and in the nancy stead, and place of the mayor andburgesses. j^^^g^^^^ order, that the further handling and proceedingsin the same shall be in the consideration of the presentmayor and aldermen, or the most part of them, as in theirdiscretions shall be thought fit ; whose act and doings thereinthey did, by that order, approve and ratify."In illustration of the position which is so generally important— particularly with reference to the Combe case,*that the common council acted only by *' delegation *' fromthe body at large, we may instance the above document ofthis date, by which the mayor and conunon council seemthemselves to admit the fact; for the mayor, aldermen,sheriff, and rest of the common council of the town ofNewcastle-upon-Tyne, are described as acting "/or and inthe name, stead, and place of the mayor and burgesses'*And certain businesses of importance, touching the generalstate of the corporations, especially as to the hospitals, areleft in the consideration of the then mayor and aldermen, orthe most part of themesGODMANCHESTER.The borough of Godmanchester also received a charter from1604. James I., in the second year of his reign. It commences byreciting, that Godmanchester was an ancient borough, and ofancient demesne; that the men and inhabitants had petitionedfor the town to be incorporated. And in consequencethereof, the king had granted, that it should be a free bo-menand rough ; and that the men and inhabitants of the town, andants. their successors, should be a body corporate, by the name ofincorpo- " the bailiffs, assistants and commonalty of the borough ofGamester or Godmanchester, in the county of Huntingdon;" with all corporate powers.That two of the most honest and discreet burgesses should• Rex V, Westwood, 4 B. & C. 782, 798, 818— Dom. Proc. 1830.t See I Brand. App. 648.GODMANCHESTER. I49Ibe bailiffs; and 12 others assistants; who, with the two James l.bailiffs, should be the common council. ieo4.Powers are then given to the common council to make Commonbye-laws, &c. for the governance of the officers, ministers,artificers, inhabitants, and resiants whatever within theborough. The two bailiffs and 12 assistants are then namedand appointed; and for the future, the bailiffs were to beelected from the burgesses, by the bailiffs, assistants, andcommonalty; and the assistants by the assistants, from theburgesses and inhabitants, as vacancies occurred.A recorder, town clerk, fair, court of pie powder, &c. arethen granted.STAFFORD.James I., in the third year of his reign, granted a charter 1605.to the borough of Stafford,* which commences by reciting,that it was an ancient and very populous place ; and that theburgesses from time immemorial had enjoyed divers liberties,sometimes by the names of burgesses of Stafford, &c. and oflate by the names of bailiffs and burgesses of the boroughof Stafford ; and by other names : and also by means of diversprescriptions, uses and customs.And that variances and inconveniences in the boroughhad arisen, for that the principal officers, the two bailiffs, DaiiitTs.by letters patent, having equal authority for the rule and governmentof the borough, and the execution of their office,were so contrary in themselves, that divers controversies andfactions had grown ; and that other defects had arisen whichmight greatly hurt the public good and profit of the borough,and the good order and governance thereof: wherefore, thebailiffs, burgesses and inhabitants of the borough sued the inhabitantsking to extend to the bailiffs and burgesses his favour, andconstitute and of new create the bailiffs and burgesses, andother the inhabitants of the borough — by what name ornames before that time they were incorporated — or whetherbefore that time they were incorporated or no— to be a newbody politic and corporate, by the name of " mayor and• Hargrave MSS.,288, p. 1.5c21492 STAFFORD.J^p^^ ^- " burgesses of the borough of Stafford, in the county of1605. Stafford' for the amendment of all the defects aforesaid ;and with addition of such liberties and privileges as shouldbe thought fit, &c. The king therefore granted, that theJj^^ jj borough of Stafford for ever thereafter should be a freeBurgesses borough of itself; and that the bailiffs, burgesses, and inhabitants,habitants (by what name or names they or their predecessorsbefore that time were incorporated— or whether before thattime they were incorporated or not) — and their successorsfor ever thereafter, should be a body corporate, by the nameincojjo- of " mayor and burgesses of the borough of Stafford, in thecounty of Stafford'*That they should have perpetual succession; purchase,hold and receive lands and liberties; plead and be impleaded;have a common seal; with power to make 10aldermen and 10 capital burgesses, who, with the mayor.Common were to constitute the common council; having power tomake laws for the government of the town.That all fines and amerciaments should be applied to theuse of the mayor and burgesses of the borough.That the mayor, 10 aldermen, and 10 chief burgesses appointedby name for life, and they only, should elect a mayorupon St. Luke's day, who should be chosen out of the aldermen.And vacancies in the chief burgesses were to be filled bythe mayor, aldermen, and chief burgesses, out of the mostX u^®5 honest and discreet men inhabiting within the borough.inhabiting. •^ ®Strange. That no Stranger ox foreigner (except he be ?l freeman andburgess) should sell any merchandise within the borough,except in gross, without it be in open fairs and markets ;neither shall use any mystery, trade, or handicraft, withoutthe license of the mayor and aldermen.Neither should strangers be put with the burgesses inassises, juries, or other inquisitions. But those which shouldarise within the borough, should be done there only by themen of the same borough, except the matter concern the king,his ministers, &c.*In 1826, the corporation became dissolved, by the common council havingDEVIZES. 1493James I.DEVIZES.This king also, in the same year, granted a charter to i605.Devises, which commences by reciting, that it was an ancientborough, and had enjoyed divers liberties, &c. fromtime immemorial; that the mayor and burgesses had besoughthim to change the time and manner of choosing themayor, and to explain and confirm the franchises which hadbeen granted to them.The king, in consequence thereof, confirmed and grantedall previous liberties to the mayor and burgesses, by whatevername or names of incorporation they had been given ;and for the better state of the borough, and for the burgessesand inhabitants granted that the mayor and commonclerk, together with 36 capital burgesses, being the commoncouncil, might elect one honest and discreet man of thenumber of the 12 capital burgesses, who should be mayor of Mayor,the borough ; that the mayor, common clerk and 36 capitalburgesses should have the selection of all officers andministers within the borough ; that ** the mayor and burgesses"might hold lands, plead and be impleaded, makebye-laws, &c. for the government of the burgesses, inhabitantsand artificers.Jurisdiction is then given over all personal and real actionsarising within the borough, so that the damages andsuits do not exceed 40/. The mayor to have the regulationof all victuals, &c. and weights.The charter then recites, that a guild of merchants within Guild.the borough had been famous as being inhabited by diversartificers who made woollen cloths, whereby the poorer inhabitantswithin the borough got themselves a laudable andhonest livelihood, who were then reduced to poverty, becausecertain foreigners, not inhabitants within the borough, broughtto the weekly market wares and merchandises other thancom, grain, victual, cattle, wool and woollen yam ; and soldneglected to fill up vacancies. And his majesty George IV. granted them anothercharter in 1827, giving them all previous privileges, but that of exemption fromservice on county juries.1494 DEVIZES.James 1. them there by retail and not in gross, to the prejudice of the1605. inhabitants of the borough; and to prevent the same for thefuture, the king prohibited every such stranger y inhabitant orresident without the borough, from producing any merchandiseswithin the borough, except in gross and at fairs.The mayor, common clerk and one of the capital burgesseswere to be justices of the peace; and a confirmation of allformer privileges, closes the charter.inhabitants This grant also was clearly intended for the benefit ofthe inhabitants; and we should add, that the king also1610. granted by charter, in the eighth year of his reign, certainlands to the burgesses of Devises for their use.1624. In the 22nd year, the king also gave to the mayor andLeet. burgesses authority to hold courts leet for all the resiants ;and confirmed the market and fairs.This charter expressly adds to the former burgesses theinhabitants, and in direct terms incorporates them.SALISBURY.1611. James I., in the ninth year of his reign, granted a charterto Salisbury : reciting that it was an ancient town, and thatthe citizens and inhabitants had enjoyed various privileges,Incoijo- &c. ; and that they had besought the king to incorporatethem, which he accordingly did, and intrusted the governmentof the town to a mayor, recorder, 24 aldermen, twochamberlains, 48 assistants, described as '^ men, inhabitants,and citizens," &c.Towards the conclusion of the charter, the followingclause occurs : —Whereas the citizens and inhabitants then residing anddwelling, for the better rule, &c., and for defence in keepingWatch watch and ward, and repair of gates, ways, &c. are chargedwith burdens ; and many merchants, artificers, husbandmen,workmen, labourers, and other inhabitants, in otherinhabitants cities, rcmovc themselves from their places of habitation,and come there to dwell as long as they please ; and whenany char«];e is laid on the inhabitants they depart withoutany contribution, whereby the city is reduced : — the kingSALISBURY. 1495grants to the mayor and commonalty that they, in their James I.common council, under their common seal, might make free Iii.citizens. .*>^citizens.HEREFORD.Hereford received a charter from King James, in the 17th 1619.year of his reign, which commences with the recital, thatthe city of Hereford was from ancient times a town and cityincorporate, and the inhabitants and their predecessors had inhabitantsenjoyed various liberties and franchises, &c., which the thencitizens and inhabitants held at the fee-farm rent of 40Z. perannum: that the grants and confirmations to the citizensand inhabitants were made, not by one name of incorporation,but by various — as " bailiff and commonalty," —"citizens," — "mayor and commonalty," — "mayor andcitizens," — and " mayor, aldermen, and citizens : " — and thatthe mayor, aldermen, and citizens had besought the kingto confirm all their previous charters, with an augmentationof their liberties. The king therefore granted, that the cityshould be for ever incorporate by itself ; and that the citizens incorpo-should be a body corporate, by the name of " the mayor, ^^ ' ^aldermen, and citizens."The usual corporate powers are then given ; — and that oneof the citizens should be mayor ; and six persons named are Mayor,to be the aldermen.That the mayor, aldermen, and citizens should have allthe liberties which the bailiff and commonalty of the townof Hereford — the men of the town of Hereford, &c. &c., bywhatsoever other name of incorporation, or pretence of incorporationhad hitherto used and enjoyed.That there should be one-and thirty men, of the betterand more approved citizens — of whom the mayor and aldermenshould be seven — who should be the chief citizens andcounsellors, and be called the common council of the city ; Commonassisting the mayor and aldermen in all causes concerningthe city.That the common council should yearly assemble, and Mayor.elect one of themselves to be mayor.1496 HEREFORD.James I. That the aldermen should be elected, as vacancies .cursed, from and by the common counciLThat vacancies in the common council should be suppliedby them from the better and more honest citizens.The chief steward, and the corporate officers, are thennamed and appointed.Other clauses also occur, granting, among other priviesleges, a court of record, view of frankpledge of all the citie. ./ ./ -f •/ ^sens and inhabitants — the return of writs, &c., with all feestherein, &c. The mayor is to be justice of the peace in hismayoralty, and one year after. Likewise the aldermen,chief steward, and deputy steward.Guild. That there should be a guild of merchants, with a hanse,and all customs thereto belonging ; so that none, unless inthe time of markets and fairs, who are not free of the guild,should merchandise in the city, unless at the will of thecommon council.That all men dwelling and residing within the city, &c.Scot and should be at scot and lot with the citizens, and be partakerswith them, in all manner of aids, talliages, and taxationswhatsoever. That no inhabitant there should maintain anyliberties or franchises within the city, suburbs, and libertiesunless he were a citizen in the guild of merchants there,continually residing and conversant within the city, suburbs,and liberties.That no foreigners should be placed with the citizens inany assises, &c. ; but that those which arose in the cityshould be only by citizens.That the common council should have power to admit anyInhabitants of the inhabitants of the city, from time to time, to be citizens^nA freemen.This charter was recited and confirmed by William III. in1697, who states, that in the 34th year of King Charles II.,Surrender, the charter of James I. was surrendered, and a new onegranted ; but that the surrender was never enrolled, and inconsequenceof the proclamation of James II., the citizensand inhabitants resumed their previous charter, by whichthey had since been governed.HEREFORD. ]497This charter was also clearly intended to include all the •^^^mes i.inhabitants, at least all the householders paying scot and lot, 1619.and duly enrolled and swam. And the whole would be JSuJ^***"*unintelligible unless it was so considered. holders.It mentions the view of frankpledge, of all the citizens Frank-andinhabitants; and no doubt all the householders mustlaye done their suit, and been sworn at that court.All men dwelling and residing within the city, are expresslydirected to be at scot and lot with the citizens: and Scot andlot.no foreigners are to be placed in assises with them.With reference to these clauses, it would be most unjustto construe them so as to make the inhabitants liable to allthe burdens under the charter, and yet not entitled to theprivileges which were obviously intended for them all. Andas to the latter clause, the exclusion of the foreigners seemsto import the necessity of all the inhabitants being upon thejuries.It is true that one passage describes the persons who Guild,should enjoy the franchises as being " citizens — in the guildof merchants — and continually residing, and conversantwithin the city." And no doubt, generally speaking,those qualifications were requisite (to use the language inthe London case),"*^ ^' to make and continue a person a fullcitizen." Excepting that from the numerous instances wehave given before, the being in the guild (which was aseparate collateral matter granted by this charter), was notan absolute requisite to the being a burgess. But theremight be persons who were burgesses and not in the guild ;and persons in the guild who were not burgesses.This part, therefore, of this clause, seems to be wordedmore strongly than is usual in other charters, and wouldappear to be contrary to the tenor of the common law, unlessit is intended here to describe, as in the Saxon term itwould be, those who were to contribute to the scot and lot.This charter gives to the common council the power to Draining° ^ freemen.admit any of the inhabitants to be citizens and freemen.We have before observed, that when villainage ceased, vmaintge.See before, p. 1484,1498 HEREFORD.James I. this power was properly introduced into the charters. The1619. only question is, whether it gave the common council thepower of arbitrarily excluding whom they thought fit ? If itdid, it placed the whole municipal power in their hands ; andthis clause would operate to neutralize all the other parts ofthe charter, which evidently intended the general benefit ofthe inhabitants. Moreover it would be inconsistent withthe general law. This clause ought, therefore, properly tobe construed as a recognition by the king, of the power ofJury, the common soundly instead of the jury at the court leet, toswear and admit the inhabitants as freemen ; but not interferingwith the right of the inhabitants to be admitted. Ithowever affords a proof that the king was dissatisfied withthe conduct of the burgesses and inhabitants at large : andwas desirous of throwing the power into the hands of theselect body, whom he could more easily manage.Coventry. For we find, two years afterwards, that King Jamesgranted a charter to Coventry, in which he expressly givespower to the common council, to ** elect" so many and suchcitizens, as may be necessary for the rule and governance ofthe city. But still, with reference to the ancient institutions,it provides, that all the officers should be electedLeet. upon the day of the leet or frankpledge. And the body of 31are to be nominated ; and they are, like the ancient grandjury, to nominate one person to be mayor, and two personsto be bailiffs.It also states how the aldermen had been elected in the 10Wards, wards ; and 31 persons are to have the power of makingInhabitants assessments upon all the inhabitants towards the repair ofthe walls of the town.So that although the king appears to have given somewhata new character to the institutions of the city, for thepurpose of giving more power to the select body, yet manyof the ancient forms still continued, as will be seen by theCharter, charter itself — which recites, " That the city of Coventry'' was an ancient city and borough ; and the citizens andburgesses were, and yet are incorporated, or mentioned tobe incorporated, as well by prescription or custom fromCOVENTRY. 1499*' time immemorial, as by divers charters and letters patent, James i.^ by the name of the mayor, bailiffs, and commonalty of the 1621.city or town of Coventry, and by divers and several other** names of incorporation; for the better certainty thereof,*^ and that one certain name of incorporation might be observedand holden," the king granted and confirmed tothe then mayor, bailiffs, and commonalty of the city or townof Coventry, and their successors, that they should be abody corporate, by the name of " the mayor, bailiffs, and corporate.commonalty of the city of Coventry'' with the usual corporatepowers.The former charters are then recited and confirmed ; andit is declared, that it should be lawful for the mayor of thecity, and other persons, citizens of the city, then of thecouncil of the city, to elect so many and such persons from Elect,the citizens of the city, as might be necessary for the ruleand governance of it.That the mayor, recorder, sheriffs, bailiffs, coroner, steward,chamberlains, wardens, and other officers, should be nominatedand elected yearly, and every year, on the day of theleet or view of frankpledge to be holden in the city. And that Leet.it should be lawful for the mayor of the city and the personsof the council-house, on the day of holding the leet and viewof frankpledge yearly to nominate and return into the courtleet, in writing, the names of 31 persons, from and out ofthemselves, and the more ancient citizens, who have hadand exercised the office of mayor, bailiffs, chamberlains, orwardens, &c. And that the same 31 persons, in that court 31 persons,from time to time nominated and returned, shall not onlynominate and elect one person, then being a citizen of thecity, from those who had exercised the office of one of the Mayor,bailiffs and sheriffs, to be mayor of the city — but shall nominateand elect two other persons, being free citizens, tobe bailiffs and sheriffs — and also the recorder, coroner, andall other officers.It is then recited, that from time immemorial, 10 wards Waits.had existed, for the good rule of the city, citizens, and inhabitants,living and residing therein. And for each of the1600 COVENTRY.James I. wards one sufficient freeman of the city, who had exercised1621. the office of mayor or bailiff of the city, had been appointedfor the better government of the inhabitants within thewards. And that the persons so appointed, had been calledAldermen, aldermen. And it was granted, that for the future, withinthe 10 wards, there should be 10 persons, being freemen,nominated thereto, who had previously exercised the officeof mayor or bailiffs, and who should be called aldermen ofthe city, for the governance of each ward.Justices. The mayor and aldermen were to be justices of the peace ;and no other justices were to intromit.That it should be lawful for the mayor and other citizensof the council, to associate to themselves so many other menof the citizens and freemen, who had been bailiffs, chamberlains,or wardens, amounting to the number of 31 personsinhabitants in the whole, to tax and assess themselves and all the inhabitantsfor the reparation of the walls of the town.That the mayor and other persons of the council-house,shall elect 26 of the more discreet citizens or freemen of thecity, who should be called the secondaries, or commoncouncil of the city.Stranger. That no Stranger or foreigner not being a freeman of thecity, should sell any wares or merchandises otherwise thanin gross, except at fairs, without the special license of themayor and aldermen.Gregory.1620. With a view also of limiting the powers of a borough tothe select body of eight burgesses, the king appears to havegranted a charter, in the same year, to the borough of 7Ve-gonj/f* which recites, that it was an ancient borough, andthat a port reeve or mayor had, time out of mind, governedthe same ; and that the present port reeve or mayor, havingbesought that it might be incorporated he, the king, ordained,that Tregony should be a free borough, consisting ofa mayor and eight burgesses, who should govern the same ;nd that Philip Jagoe should be first mayor, and eight other• Rot.Cart. p.2. n. 16.Gregory. 1501persons named the first capital burgesses ; and that they J^met i.should yearly choose a mayor, on the Tuesday following \csto.Michaelmas-day — and have a recorder — ^and keep a court ofrecord, on the first Monday of every month — and enjoy alltheir ancient privileges, &c.BRISTOL.This king also, in the 2nd and 27th years of his reign, i604.inspects and confirms the charters of Elizabeth to Bristol.And in the 19th year confirmed the charters of Lyme. lead.To satisfy the reader that the charters of incorporation didnot materially affect the class of burgesses — the generalrights of the borough — and particularly the parliamentaryrights, we will, before we quit this branch, add aninstance of a grant to a borough not returning members toParliament; and where, therefore, there has been no temptationto disfigure the ancient rights by modem usurpation.Accordingly we find none of the measures resorted to eitherby the king or the governing body in this obscure borough,which were usually adopted with reference to those placeswhere the rights were of greater importance, and followedby more considerable results.Abridge.The king, in the 21st year of his reign, granted a charterto Axbridge, which commences by reciting, that it was aborough, ancient and populous ; that the mayor, aldermen,and burgesses had enjoyed divers liberties and franchises,&c. as well by charter as prescription, &c.And the corporation represent, that there were divers ambiguitiesand omissions in the charter of Queen Elizabeth,and therefore pray the king to confirm the same, with certainamendments and additions.The king, willing to remove all doubts and to preservethe peace of the borough, and that justice, should be therekept, &c. grants, that it should be a free borough for ever; beforehandthat the mayor, aldermen, burgesses, and inhabitants, inhabitantsby whatsoever name heretofore incorporated, should be a1602 Abridge.James I. body Corporate, by the name of " the mayor, aldermen, andCorporate, burgesses of the borough of Axbridge, in the county ofSomerset ;" and might be capable to hold and grant lands,&c. That one of the burgesses should be named the mayor ;another the alderman; and eight other the capital burgesses; the nomination, election, and swearing of the mayor,aldermen, and capital burgesses, to be at the same days,times, places, &c., as in times past had been accustomed.MUNICIPAL DOCUMENTS.There are in this reign a few documents and records relativeto some of the boroughs which it may be expedient hereCinque to insert. Thus, with reference to the Cinque Ports, it willbe seen that they insisted, according to the principles ofthe common law, which we have before detailed, upon their^"^Si "S^^ ^^ compel persons living within the liberties to be swornas freemen. This was in accordance with the duties andfunctions of the court leet. However, upon a perusal of thefollowing document, it will be seen, that the brotherhoodof the Cinque Ports engrafted upon the general onionlaw, some of the more modem usages and customs of corporations.1603. We find at this period, in the records of the CinquePorts, at a brotherhood held at New Romney, several resolutionswere made, which commence by reciting, that ** thereare, in many of the towns and members of the CinqueDwelling. Ports, men of wealth, and of good government dwellingwithin the same, who enjoy much benefit of their so dwelling; viz. freedom from payments of fifteenths and tenths, andJuries, from being returned to appear at assises or sessions in thecounty where they inhabit ; and receive many other privilegesor benefits by reason of their so inhabiting within theCinque Ports, ancient towns, or members, which otherwiseRefuse to they could not enjoy, and yet refuse to be freemen of themen. town and port where they dwell and enjoy those benefits.By reason whereof divers of the towns, ports, and membersare unprovided of sufficient and able men to execute suchoffices and services as they are by the charters and customsof the Cinque Ports, bound to do. It is, therefore,MUNICIPAL DOCUMENTS. 1503fully agreed, that if the mayor, jurats, and commonalty ^ or ^^^^ i*the more part of them, in any of the Cinque Ports, towns. Cinqueand their members (or bailiffs, jurats, and commonalty where led!no mayor is), or the most part of them, shall think any inhabitantdwelling amongst them, fit to be a freeman, and shallby the more voice of them choose such inhabitant to be afreeman of the town where they govern, and shall call himto their court hall, and there in full and open court acquaint ^<>^^'him of their choice ; and then and there require such personto take the usual oath of a freeman ; and he shall not thenand there, without further delay, take the oath, and becomea freeman of the same place, he shall forfeit to the use ofthe town and corporation, a fine of 102., to be levied as fines ^^^'in the same place are used to be.It will be observed that this document, according to thespirit of the time in which it was framed, speaks of themaking freemen as a choice, or election by the governingbody; and thus introduces into the Cinque Ports the object Election.tenable innovation of arbitrary election and exclusion. Italso speaks of the inhabitants as being called to be freemen —a term totally unknown to the common law, or to the usagesand customs of the Cinque Ports : — but it is the expressionupon which the modem term of '' advocate," in use in theCinque Ports, was founded ; and which in truth is synonym Atrocity.mous with the more common appellation in other boroughsof " honorary freemen ;" allowing of non-residence, and allthe other mischiefs which attend the unlimited right of admission,assumed in later times by the corporations: —notwithstanding all the early documents of the CinquePorts are directly prohibitory of any persons enjoying theirprivileges, unless they are dwelling and resident within theliberties.The admission to the freedom is, however, by these resolutions— in conformity with the ancient usages, and the practiceof the court leet — directed to be " in the full open court " Openand the inhabitants who are admitted are directed to takethe oath, which must be the oath of allegiance, to be taken by Oath.every resiant in the court leet : — for there is no legal power or1604 MUNICIPAL DOCUMENTS.J*"^^- authority to administer to any person an oath merely as aCinque Corporator; nor indeed any, but by the common law at the1G03.' leet ; and, therefore, it is found as a matter of fact, that theOath, oath administered in all cities and boroughs to the citizensand burgesses, commences with the oath of allegiance : — althoughthere are often many other irrelevant matters introducedin it, which, properly speaking, have no legal warrantsome unnecessary, because they are implied by the commonlaw — as that they should pay scot and lot, and perform alloffices to which they are appointed — and other heads of asimilar description.It is ti-ue, that some charters specially require that theSworn, mayor, the other officers, and the freemen should be sworn.The former the crown had the power of directing by its prerogative,as they were originally the officers of the crown : —but it may be very questionable whether it had the powerof ordering the administering of any oath to the freemen, butthat of allegiance, which was required by the common law —or the oaths afterwards imposed by statute.It would, at all events, seem clear, that the corporationOath. itself could have no power of administering any oath, norof making any alteration in it, which the general law did notsanction ; for as Lord Coke says,* speaking of the oathof fealty, " it is not to be changed for any novelty or nicety ofinventionsThe resolutions then subject the inhabitant ^ who shall re-Penalty. f^gg to take the oath and become a freeman, to penalties ;which it is certain the brotherhood could have no right toimpose, unless it was a duty to do those acts, for which thereis no pretence, except as a part of the functions of the court^^^ leet under the common law ; and therefore these resolutionsthus again afford internal evidence of the real nature of thoseproceedings, although, as observed above, they were in somedegree mingled with the then modem doctrines of corporations.Common ^^ order also to show the real nature of the general fundstock. or common stock of the different boroughs, it should be Co. Lit. 92 a.iMUNICIPAL DOCUMENTS. j^q^secrecy that the fines which are here imposed are directed James I.to be "/or the common use of the town'' cinqueThat the object of the privileges granted to the Cinque ^^^'Ports, was the security and local advantage of those places,and that they were to be enjoyed, as well as the burdensborne, by the inhabitants there, may be collected from thefollowing copy of the reasons which were assigned for theCinque Ports not sending forth land services.Ist That they are situated near the sea, in places ofgreatest danger for the landing of foreign enemies ; and thatmany of them, in times past, have been by them burned,wasted, and destroyed, and therefore have need to be keptwell guarded and defended.2nd. That the* continual residence and attendance of their Residence.inhabitants for the defence of the sea coast, and of the saidtown, ports, and members, is the main ground of the manyand great liberties and exemptions which they have, eversince the Conquest and before, above other parts and portsof this kingdom ; which have also been confirmed to them bymore than 20 several acts of Parliament, and also by hismajesty's late charter.3rd. And upon that ground it is, that " breve domini regis Juries.non currie infra quinque portus," — and that they are not to beimpleaded but at home within the ports, &c. ; that they arenot to be called out of the ports to serve in juries, or to doother services in the king's court at Westminster, or beforethe judges of assise or of gaol delivery in the county, &c. ;nor before any other of his majesty's commissioners, &c.And for that ground also, the Cinque Ports have ever enjoyedthis exemption, to be free from levying land soldiers. Forif their inhabitants should be drawn out to serve his majesty inhabitantselsewhere, they might be left as a prey to foreign enemies,who might be encouraged there to land, upon hope to findlittle or no resistance.4th. That upon consideration of that danger, his majesty,in the second year of his reign, set forth his proclamationthat the inhabitants of the port and sea town should keepSee Domesday, Dover.5d1606 MUNICIPAL DOCUMENTS.James I. their continual residence there, for the better defence andCinque safety of those parts, and the whole kingdom, &c.About the same time a letter was sent from the lords of thecouncil to the then lord warden, to command such persons aswere then gone out of the ports to return thither, for the safeguardand defence of the towns. Whereby it appeared, andso it seemed to the state and council, that the strength of theports and members for their defence did consist in the bodiesinhabitant. of the persons there inhabiting ; which, if they should bedrawn out, would be a great weakening to the inhabitants,and discouragement to others there to dwelL5th. That the great armies that are at this present in thefield, beyond the seas, not far off from the sea coast and theCinque Ports, give them warning not to be secure, but to bewell provided with men and arms for the defence and safetyof themselves and the whole kingdom.Watches. 6th. That for the same purpose, and preventing sudden dangers,there are nightly watches continually kept in most of theCinque Ports ; and they are all charged with a far greaterproportion of arms than any other ports of the kingdom.7th. That the most of the Cinque Ports, &c., by reason oftheir great charges at home, and sending forth 21 bailiffsyearly to Yarmouth, are become very poor, and some of themalmost depopulated.Inhabitants 8th. That the ouc half of the inhabitants of most of the portsconsists of mariners and fishermen, who are commonly at sea,and of them there hath been about 200 yearly prest of late,to serve his majesty in his ships — besides many pilots thencedaily taken up for his majesty's navy royal.Strangers. Nth. That there are a great number of strangers — French,Dutch, Walloons, and all other nations — inhabiting withinmost of the principal Cinque Ports, who, if the strength oftheir towns shall be drawn away to serve his majesty elsewhere,may give advertisement thereof to foreign nations,with whom they have general trade, and continual intercourseFreemen, by letters ; being passengers that go to and fro daily, wherebygreat peril may ensue.*Boys* History of Sandwich, p. 752.MUNICIPAL DOCUMENTS. ]50710th. All freemen inhabiting within the ports, towns, and ^^^^ I-members thereof, upon their admission, take oaths to maintain Cinquethe charters, liberties, customs, and privileges thereof — and Oath.'are therefore more careful therein.From this document it is clear, beyond the possibility ofquestion, that all the free inhabitants of the Cinque Portswho contributed to the burdens and services due from them,were the persons entitled to the privileges. Those who weretoo poor to contribute, would not be included — because the Poor,reasons would not apply to them: — nor would villains —because they would not be sufficiently at their own disposalto perform the services : — nor occasional visitors, guests, orstrangers, according to the common law, and as is expresslystated in this document. And the expression at the close ofit, is in conformity with that which we established, by theauthorities from the earliest periods, that all freemeninhabiting were bound to take the oaths : which is also inaccordance with the law of the leet, and is a most distinctdescription of a free burgess — that is, a " freeman," a " liberhomo'' inhabiting within a borough.Thus this document is decisive as to the Cinque Ports.And we have seen, in numerous instances, that the sameprivileges — for similar reasons — in substance, were grantedto most other boroughs. And, therefore, this record, ineffect, is equally decisive as to all boroughs — and theirburgesses ; — defining their class — and confirming the generallaw.HYTHE.The following entries relative to Hythe tend, in a greatdegree, to establish the same positions, and explain thegeneral system.In the seventh of James I., three persons are admitted to i609.be free of the town, being born there when their fathers were Birth.freemen, and paid \bd. each, and were sworn.*In the 18th of James I. the following entry occurs: i620.At this assembly came Guy Hudson and Robert Hutson,t• Book I, fol. 5 b. t I, fol. 142 b.6d21508 MUNICIPAL DOCUMENTS."^""^ ^- and did request to be made free; and because it could notHythe. appear unto the house that they were free born, it wasordered and agreed, that, if the said Guy and Robert, uponFree born, search thereof to be made, should be found not to be freeborn, then they should pay for their freedoms to the chamberlain,to the use of the toum, 20s. a piece, to be paid atMidsummer and Christmas ; and if they should be found tobe free born, then they are to be free for I5d. And so theywere admitted freemen, and were sworn.In the 19th of James I. is the following entry:*1621. " Whereas Mr. William Knight was heretofore elected andchosen one of the wardens of the hospital of St Andrew andBartholomew, in the parish of Saltwood,^ and since hathBemoYtd. removed his dwelling out of this town, whereby he convenientlycannot join in the businesses of the hospital, thereforethis assembly do with one consent order, that the saidMr. Knight shall from henceforth stand and be dismissed ofthe said place of warden, &c."If non-residence was a ground for removal from such anoffice as this, certainly it would put an end to the right tobe a burgess, from whom personal services were required.The following entry proves most distinctly that actualresidence was the ground both of the obligation and theright.In the 22d James I.J At this time, this house intending1624. to make Mr. John Hales and Mr. John Knight jurats, sent forthem, and made them acquainted that the house was pleasedto make them freemen of this town. And they being therepresent, Mr. John Hales answered, that if he were chosen aRemove, freeman, he would leave his dwelling here, and remove anddwell elsewhere at Easter next. And the said Mr. John Knightthen also present, made answer, that if the town were willingto be rid of his company, then they might make him a freeman,for then, he said, he " would n.ho leave his dwelling there, anddepart the town'' adding, that "as yet he thought himself• I. fol. 148 a.t An adjoining parish, in which some part of the town of Hythe is situated.t I, fol. 193 b.MUNICIPAL DOCUMENTS. 1509Unot fit to undergo such place as the town intended to put James I.upon him. Hythe.It is impossible not to infer from this entry, that everyperson who dwelt in the town was obliged to serve the officeswithin it to which he might be chosen ; but that if he actuallyleft the town, and gave up his dwelling, and went to anotherplace, he would then be released from that obligation.SANDWICH.The following entry occurs in the third year of James I. 1605.in the books of Sandwich.By consent of the assembly in this year it is decreed thatno person whatever, challenging his freedom by the purchaseof a free tenement, shall at any time hereafter be admittedto his freedom here, by any such purchase, except suchtenement be free, and of the ordinary yearly rent of 5/. orupwanis."*And therefore we shall find hereafter, that the freeholdershave erroneously been allowed to vote at Sandwich.CHESTER,As a proof that James L continued the same interference 1606.with corporations which Queen Elizabeth had begun, it appearsthat in the third year of his reign, the king addresseda letter to the mayor, aldermen and burgesses of Chester,requesting them to elect Hugh Mainwaring, Esq. as theirrecorder.To which solicitation they replied : — " That no person waseligible to that office, except he was one of the 24 aldermen; and that none could be chosen an alderman, excepthe were first enfranchised, and made 2l free citizen ; thatMr. Mainwaring had never come to them in person to desirethe same, but was a mere stranger to them."U«This entry no doubt referred to those who care to reside at Sandwich in housesthey had bought there : and who would not be entitled to be sworn and admitted asfreemen, until they had resided there a year and a day — unless the houses they purchasedwere freehold — in which case they would be entitled to be admitted immediately,and challenge their freedom. The omission of any mention of residence inthis order, has led to the misapprehension that the freeholders, merely on that title,were burgesses.1510 MUNICIPAL DOCUMENTS.J"°^^' The following document relative to the same place, willChester, also show that the being admitted into any of the tradingcompanies was a matter distinct from being a freeman orburgess.* •"Good Sir, — I have sent you a copy of the judge's order.There is nothing to that which our company did conceive it tobe. Good Sir, if you can conveniently, that yourself andour counsel, Mr. Downes, if he be with you at Dynias,would move the judges to explain themselves in their ordersFreeman, that Birchley is only to be but a freeman, and not to useTrade, any trade except he first compound with that company whichhe would be free of; and that if he should break any orders,that then it shall be lawful for the mayor to fine him andimprison him as the mayor and his brethren in their discretionshall think good, &c. &c.Your loving friend to be commanded,Peter Drinkwater."The following writ was also sent to Chester, for restoring1622. Birchley, in the 19th of James I., 1622.tWrit to the mayor and citizens of the city of Chester,reciting that Thomas Birchley had complained that he wasBon. Q, freeman born of the city, and in the liberties, and was admittedto the same, and quietly enjoyed them. And thathe from the liberties and franchises aforesaid, without reasonablecause, had been removed, and that they had madethe doors and windows of his shop in the city to be shutand locked, to his damage and grievance. It then directsthat he to his former liberties and franchises should be restored,that his doors and windows should be opened, andthe merchandise in his shop he should be permitted to sellwithout interruption.The following is another document as to Chester, of the samedate, and in the same depositories:Mr. Recorder, in answer to those letters we received, we♦ Harl. MSS. 2104, 348. t Harl. MSS. 2091, 117.t Harl. MSS. 2104, 358.MUNICIPAL DOCUMENTS. lendesire you to take our direction, and to acquaint the protho- Ja™«« I-notary therewith. We ail agree in this, that Birchley is to be Chester.restored to his freedom of Chester only. Ye make a questionwhether by the writ ye ought to be commanded tosuffer him to open his doors and windows. We are of opinionthe writ must be so, and so is my Lord Dyers, president.For otherwise he is restored to nothing. And if when hisdoors and windows be opened, he use any other trade, thanhe may do by the custom and ordinances of your city, youmay take your course against him for that in a lawful manner.And thus we bid you farewell, and restYour loving friends,Ludlow Castle, James Whitlocke.24th January, 1622. Armature Lloyd.To our loving friend, Mr. Edward Whitby, Esq.Recorder of the city Chester, in Chester, givethese*'And the following is the order for his restitution, which 1623.fully states all the circumstances.*An assembly at the common hall of pleas for the city ofChester, before the mayor, aldermen, sheriffs, and commoncouncil of the same city.Whereas in the time of the mayoralty of Sir CandleMainwarynge, knight, at an assembly holden in the InnerPrentice upon the third of July, 7 James I., Thomas Birch-leywas disfranchised and put from the freedom of thiscity, for the several causes in an order of the said disfranchisementappearing. And that Birchley afterwards sueda writ of restitution before his majesty's justices of Chester,directed unto the mayor and citizens, unto whichwrit the mayor and citizens made a special return, andamongst other matters therein contained set forth, that bythe immemorial custom of the city, no person might useany trade or occupation within the city, or the libertiesthereof, unless such person were a freeman of the city, andadmitted and made free of the company and society of such♦ Hail. MSS. 2001, 90.1512 MUNICIPAL DOCUMENTS.J^e&l. trade as he would use. And also that no person being soChester, admitted and made free of one trade might use any otherwithin the city or liberties thereof, unless such person didleave off his first trade, and was admitted and made free ofFree of the ^^^ society and company of such other trade as he wouldcompany. •' ^ .use ; upon which writ and return the cause was at severaltimes argued before the justices, by counsel on both parts,at the assises held within the county of Chester, and wasargued by the right worshipful Sir James Whitelocke,knight, then chief justice, and Sir Armature Lloyd,knight, then also justice of Chester, who both of them intheir several arguments did agree, and also adjudge, thatboth the recited customs were good, and consonant andagreeable with law ; and that Birchley being first an embroidererwithin the city, could not, contrary to the custom,use any other trade ; and thereupon, and also for some defeet in the writ of restitution, they did adjudge that Birchleycould not be restored to any trade, but only unto the freedomof the city. And whereas afterwards a writ of restitution forBirchley was awarded by the said justices unto the mayorand citizens. It is now at this present assembly ordered,that Thomas Birchley shall be restored to the freedom ofthe city, according to the said judgment by the justices;and he is hereby restored accordingly."POOLE.1607. Another instance of an erasure in the books of a borough,in addition to those we have already instanced, occurs atPoole, in the fifth of James I.By an order or agreement, it was agreed, with the consentof the then recorder and mayor, and Maud ley Mann,and others burgesses, that the town clerk should be paid 40s.per annum out of the town revenues, for doing the town'sbusiness."After the words " and other the burgesses'' the words "anrfinhabitants' appear to have been originally written, butafterwards struck out.*So Colchester, Winchcclcr, Quccnborough.MUNICIPAL DOCUMENTS. 1513Again, in the same books, it is ordered by the mayor and James I.other burgesses, that all such merchants and victuallers of Poole,the town, who were not admitted and sworn free burgesses, *^^^*should pay 2d. per ton for quayage, &c. &c.Lynn REGIS.Two letters, one from Sir Robert Hitch, knight, the 1613-14.other from Sir Henry Spelman, knight, desiring to be electedburgesses for the next parliament, having been sent to theburgesses of LynnCj they state, '' forasmuch as the statute** of the first of Henry V., cap. 1, doth appoint that burgesses 1 Hen. V.** should be men residing and free in the borough, at the*' time of their election;" — it is agreed to answer these letters,by saying that ** the corporation is minded to choose accordingto the statute."There was also a second letter from the above to thesame effect.Sterling.The following is the copy of a letter to the Borough of los.Steyning in the 20th of James I., from the Earl of Arundel,*which explains the irregular manner in which the statutewas evaded : —'^ After many very hearty commendations, it hath pleased Electionhis majesty to call a present parliament, to which you are to ben.send two burgesses. It were well if the old custom wereduly observed, and every borough should elect members oftheir own body to undergo that service. But in regard,many towns are depopulated, and some are so impoverished,as would be heavy unto them to support the charge incident,it hath been a usage of long continuance for mosttowns to make choice of such foreigners as were fit and Forgersworthy of the places, and herein to have recourse andrespect unto the tender made unto them of able men bytheir chief lords ; and so my ancestors have done unto yourpredecessors. And although at the summons of the lastPrinted in a collection of Historical Anecdotes of the Towards, in 1769, p. 89.Vide ante, Paston Letters, pp. 911, 1108.1514 MUNICIPAL DOCUMENTS.J^"^^' parliament those two worthy gentlemen, which by my listening.rection were nominated unto you, were by you neglected,and two other strangers unto you preferred in your election ;yet being now given to understand, that it rather proceededout of ignorance than neglect towards me, I have thereforethought good now again to recommend unto you, Mr. PhilipMainwaring, and Mr. William Gardiner, Esq., whom Iknow to be every way worthy and fit for those places ; andfor idiom I will Undertake that they shall not require anyparliament wages. If therefore you shall make election ofthese, I shall take it well at your hands, and will deserve it.Howbeit, I neither may nor will press you further than totake due consideration thereof, and to proceed, as to yourselvesshall seem convenient ; only I desire and expect thatyou give me speedy notice what resolution you take inthis behalf; and so I rest, your loving friend,Arundel and Surrey.Whitehall, January 9th, 1623.^' To the constable and inhabitants of the town and boroughof Steyning."PLYMPTON EARLE.16-23. We find also at this period a compilation of bye-laws,customs, &c., confirmed by the mayor and common councilof Plympton Early lawfully assembled for that purpose.They commence by declaring, that " if any free burgessshould be chosen by the mayor, and refuse to be sworn, hewas to forfeit 20/. for the common good and profit of theborough, (as before ordered in the case of the Cinque Ports)*If any person inhabiting within the borough, and chosenconstable, should refuse to execute the office, he was toforfeit 5/."By the common law, the party was liable to be fined forsuch default; and such a fine was inflicted in a recent casesIf any freeman or other person whatsoever, inhabitingwithin the borough, sue or implead any person inhabitingthere, in any foreign court out of the borough, such inhabitSee before, p. 1507. t 1 B. 6; C. 178—182.MUNICIPAL Documents. 1616ioMi (not being a freeman) so offending, should forfeit for J"°^^'such offence 31. &. 8rf., and every freeman 40»." Piympton,If any person above the age of 18, who is a free burgess,born of the liberty, should be presented to the borough court, Bon.and after being warned by the bailiff to come to the court tobe sworn as a freeman, should absent himself, and not come Refusal.within three months, he should utterly lose the possibilityof his freedom, and afterwards to be admitted thereunto butas a stranger'*This provision and the following are, in spirit and substance,in accordance with the common law.** If way freeman should have committed any abuse or misdemeanour,and be commanded by the mayor to go to theGuildhall, and refuse to do so, he should lose his liberty,and be disfranchised."'^ All the principal, and other burgesses, commonly calledthe four and twenty men, should attend the mayor in theirgowns, at the annual choosing of the new mayor and bailiffat the law court and sessions, upon pain of being fined, &c.; Leet.the fines to be employed for the common good and profit of theborough*'** In all maimer of debts between any inhabitants within theborough, under Zs. 4d., the mayor might have cognizance,and commit the debtor to ward, until the debt be paid."'' If any sworn freeman should sell any tallow, &c., andthe pease take and require more, he should be presented at ^^°'"the law court** Leet.That the pease should take of every stranger that shoulduse the beam, 4d. for weighing every 20 pounds of wool."That every freeman who should be sued, should afterhis summons have the liberty of three courts without attachment,but the fourth court might be essayed, or in Assign.default an attachment might be awarded. And if the partybe thought to be sufficient to answer the debt by the mayor,he should put in sureties upon his assign as a stranger should stranger.do upon his arrest, and be arrested as a stranger upon oathmade before the mayor by the pease that the freeman isfugitive."1516 MUNICIPAL DOCUMENTS.J^ng*^* A recital then occurs — that the expence for the main'*Plympton. penance of the liberty had wholly fallen upon the/rcc largessesto their great decay, being so few in number ; andpublic ^jjj^^ persons had introduced themselves to dwell and keepshops, to sell wares by retail, not being free burgesses of orwithin the borough.It was therefore ordered by the mayor and common council.Inhabit. -. — " that such persons as should inhabit within the libertyshould repair to the mayor and principal burgesses withinone month after warning, and make agreement and compositionfor their liberties and freedom of and in the borough,and to do all things as the freemen have been accustomedto do."Inmates. « That there should not be any inmate, or more families orholders, householders than one, dwelling or inhabiting in any one house."Another recital states — that " the mayor and commoncouncil were to elect eight men of the better and moresufficient burgesses to be aiding and assisting to the mayor;but that divers substantial and sufficient burgesses and inhabitantshad been chosen, and refused to execute the office.It was therefore ordained, that if any burgess, after beingelected, should refuse to serve, he should forfeit 20/."The ordinances then direct, that all fines should be for thebenefit of the borough.MALTON.1624. In the 21st of James I., there is a petition from thetownsmen of Malton stating, that it consisted of 300families, and for want of order and government therein ithad lately fallen into decay, and was extremely impoverishedby the confluence of poor and idle persons. They thereforerequest his majesty, by his charter, to make the town acorporation, for the maintenance and better governmentthereof, without which it cannot subsist.And his majesty referred the consideration of this petitionto the attorney-general.♦ Sec als before, the Yarmouth Let Rolls, pp. 765, 798.t Harl. MSS.1327, 11.MUNICIPAL DOCUMENTS. 1517^James 1.LEEDS. '~Bat although the people of Malton were thus desirous of i^^«feeing incorporated; those of Leeds appear to have taken adifferent view of the subject; for, in the next year, the iwAa-plants of that place, " being many hundreds of people, desireda stay of the corporation lately procured by some of Corpora-theablest men in Leeds for their own ends, in the name ofthe whole town, without the consent of the greater number, .and to their prejudice: and they requested a reference to SirThomas Wentworth and others, to examine the conveniencyof the grant, and to certify his majesty thereof"* And it wasreferred accordingly.These quotations will suffice for our extracts from the boroughrecords of this reign. We proceed to cite some ofthe cases determined in the same period.CASES.The borough of Colchester, which has before afforded us colchester.much information, was the subject of judicial inquiry in thisreign.Notwithstanding the explicit words of the ordinances ofHenry VI. and Queen Elizabeth, questions and disputes appearin this reign to have occurred at Colchester respectingthe admissions and enfranchisement of burgesses, and themaking the elections by the common council.In this year, a mandamus was directed to the corporation |615.of Colchester, to restore Northen to his burgess-ship ; andthey returned — that the common people had used time out ofmind to elect their burgesses annually ; and that Northen waselected one year, but not the second, and so his office expired.And the court said, that if the usage had been so, theydid not wish to alter it, and could not make them elect anyone.But if they had removed him untfiout cause within theyear, the court would then restore him.+• Hail. MSS. 1327, 9.t I Roe Rep. <^* 3 Bulst. 71, as to restraining the election to the select body.Mandamus.1518 Cases-COLCHESTER.James I. There is also another case about the same time, relative161&. to the election being restrained to the select bodily in which.Coke, C, J. and the whole court are reported to have said —according to the doctrine laid down by the judges, in theirextra-judicial opinion in the " corporation clue'' upon whichwe have already observed, that " if there be a popular electionof the mayor and aldermen in corporate towns, and it happensto breed confusion amongst them, this may be alteredBye-law. by their own agreement, and by the common consent of all,to have their elections made by a fewer number ; but nototherwise. But if by their charter they are to be elected bythem all, then that is not to be altered, but by and withthe general assent of the whole town, and so by that meansto take away confessions"*These cases appear to hare proceeded on the error, atthat time prevalent, and continued even to our own times.Office, that burgess-ship was an office ; and, at Colchester, it wouldseem that a burgess was continued only from year to year.If this really means the common burgess, there is no doubtthat there must have been some erroneous impression as tothe nature of burgess-ship; for it has been already abundantlyshown by the laws, charters, and documents which havebeen cited, that the burgesses were not generally electedannually ; though no doubt their names were annually presentedby the jury at the court leet, as proved by the recordsof East and West Looe. It is also clear, that it was altogethererroneous to suppose that the burgesses were electedAnnual, annually at Colchester, as is proved by the documents thathave been given relative to that particular place. Whether,therefore, any illegal usage to that effect had sprung upafter the Colchester ordinances of the 29th Elizabeth, itwould be difficult at present to ascertain. But upon somesuch practice the court seems to have acted, as they refer toUsage, the " usage," and their unwillingness to alter it : a groundof decision certainly most unsupportable, as well with referenceto this place as to boroughs in general ; inasmuchas in the one case it altered, by a modem usage, the ans3 Bull. 71.Cases-COLCHESTER. 1519cent constitution of the borough ; and, on the other, it had J^*"^ ^'a strong tendency to introduce into the various boroughs 1615.a variety of discordant usages, which in fact has been thereal foundation of the varying and anomalous customs nowprevalent in them ; and of the difficulties which at presentstand in the way of their removal ; though their constitutionswere founded upon the same origins, and in most instanceson charters similar in substance.The second case establishes, that at this time the common Commoncouncil.were endeavouring to confine the right of electionto themselves, excluding the commonalty ; in which theyappear to have been foiled by the decision of the court;which nevertheless seemed well disposed to recognize theauthority of the extra-judicial opinion expressed in *the caseof corporations' although they qualified that opinion by adding,that ** if by the charter the elections were to be by themall, then they could not be altered." And, inasmuch as thecase submitted to the judges, stated that the charters gavethe election to the whole body — this dictum is, in effect,directly opposed to the opinion expressed in that case, aswe have already shown.Nevertheless, the same doctrine is also published, andsaid to be the opinion of all the judges of England, by Jena Jenkins.king,* in his Centuries, where it is laid down that ^' The electionof magistrates by the common council of a corporation,(without the voices of all the commonalty, as some chartersdirect), is good where it has been so practised a very longtime:for the law presumes that in some former age thewhole commonalty assented to it, although that assent cannotbe shown at present. Such election by the commoncouncil is expedient, to avoid confusion, and corporationshave a power to make ordinances for their own government''The following principles are added as authorizing thesepositions : —Ex diutumitate temporis omnia prsesumuntur esse solemnityacta. Consuetudo, et communis assuetudo vincilegem non scripta, si sit specialist ; eit interpreter legemscripta, si lex sit generalis, to stand with the custom.Jeak.273, Case 93.1520 CASES.-COLCH ESTER.James I. But the effect of the opinion of the judges would be to1615. set up usage, not immemorial, as evidence of right, wherethe charters are to the contrary — in truth, confirming usurpation.And as to the presumption of some former bye-law,authorizing the usage, none such could have existed, uponthe plain doctrine laid down in the Colchester case abovequoted from Bulstrode, because it would have been contraryto the charters.The ground of avoiding confusion we have before observedupon. The general power of making bye-laws does notaffect the question. And as to the principles which arequoted, although they properly apply to cases where thepresumption may arise that all has been properly done, theycannot have any application where the law is written to thecontrary, as is the case with the charters.1612. In the case of Sutton's Hospital, in the 10th of James I.,* itinhabitants was Said, ^' that the inhabitants of a town, or other single** persons, who have not capacity to take in succession, but'^ only to their singular heirs, have capacity to take an incog*' poration ; and after their incorporation, they have capacity** to take in succession, any lands, tenements, &c."In a subsequent part of the same case, the essence of acorporation was defined as being — first, lawful authority of^SotIb!*' incorporation, which might be by four means. — By the commonlaw, as the king himself, &c. — By authority of Parliament.— By the king's charter. — And by prescription. — ^Secondly, persons to be incorporated, and that in two manners— persons natural — and bodies incorporate and political.Thirdly, a name, by which they are incorporated. Fourth,a place — for without a place no incorporation could be made.Fifth, by words sufficient in law, but not restrained to anycertain legal or prescribed form of words.The strange language used at this periods with respect tocorporations, and to which we have before referred, may be1614. illustrated by the following logical reasoning, in the 12thJames I., in a case of misnomer of the corporation of theshipwrights of Rederiffe, by Manhood, Chief Baron, whosaid, " that as touching corporations, they were invisible,• 10 Coke, 10. t Tilling v, Poxall, 2 Bulstrode, 233.Cases-COLCHESTER. 1521immortal and that they had no soul, and therefore no sub James I.pcBna Heth against them because they have no conscience 1614.nor soul. A corporation is a body aggregate ; none cancreate souls but God ; but the king creates them, and thereforethey have no souls — they cannot speak nor appear inperson, but by attorney."However, more sound principles of law appear to have beenadopted in other cases ; for in the 10th of James I.,* in another Lynn.case of misnomer, respecting the mayor and burgesses ofLynney where the corporation had omitted the words " Burghregi8,"f the question for the consideration of the court was,whether it was a material variance. It was urged, that fromthe omission of the word ^^Burgiy^ which is the place of in- ^"*'g*corporation, the deed was avoided. For although it provesit was a town, it does not thereby appear it was a borough ;for every borough is a town, but every town is not a borough; and therefore List. lib. 2, cap. 10, of Burgage, says —"That the ancient towns, called boroughs, are the most Borough.ancient towns that are in England ; for those towns whichare now cities or counties in ancient times, were boroughsand called ' boroughs,' and from such ancient towns called* boroughs,' came the burgesses to Parliament, when theking summoned his parliament." " And also for thegreater part, such boroughs have divers customs and usages,which other towns have not, &c." By which there appearsa manifest difference in judgment and law betwixt a boroughand a town; and the opinion of Cavendish chiefjustice, was cited, where he holds " that all the ancientboroughs are of record in the exchequer." It was contendedby the opposite side, " that the grants, &c. of a corporation, &c.need not be idem syllabus et verbis ; but it is sufficient if itbe idem re et sensu'' And that the burgesses of Lynn Regisimplied that Lynn Regis is a borough ; for " burgos et burgessessunt conjugata;" and if the words are of one effect ,the court would enforce the matter , though there might he someseeming differences It was also said in this case, that• 10 Co. 123. t See before, p. 1130, Charter of Incorporation, 27 Hen. VIII . 1524.% 40 Ass. p. 27.5 E1522 CASES.-LYNNE.James I. « till this generation of late years, it was never read in any1612. " of our books that any body politic or corporate, endeavouredor attempted by any suit to avoid any of theirleases, grants, conveyances, or other of their own deeds,nor any other grants, &c. made to them, for the misnomerMisnomer " of their true name of incorporation. But after a windowwas opened to give them light to avoid their own grantsfor the misnomer of themselves ; what suits and troubles(to avoid grants, &c. as well made to them, as by them)have followed thereupon, every one knows." And at thetermination of the report, a difference was taken betwixtancient corporations, and corporations made of late times ;for ancient corporations made by usage, have divers andseveral names: and leases, grants, &c., by any of those nameswould be good. The judgment in this case was, that ^* themisnomer was not material*'This was, no doubt, a correct decision ; and the generalprinciples stated in the case were well founded. But stilltoo much reliance seems to have been placed on the passageLittleton, quoted from Littleton, which, though sufficiently correctfor the purpose of his invaluable treatise, yet is not to betakenas affording the most satisfactory historical accountof boroughs ; as the subsequent development of ancient recordsand returns has abundantly proved.Customs. So, also, although the customs of boroughs may beUsage, properly supported, their usages ought not to be so, unlessthey were immemorial ; nor should be resorted to, except forthe purpose of evidence to raise the prima facie presumptionof right.Neither does there seem at present to be any ground forsaying, that " all the ancient boroughs are of record in theexchequer:" still less can there, properly speaking, be anyCorpora authority for speaking of corporations made by usage'' forit would be a palpable usurpation, and against the prerogativeof the king, who alone has the power of making corporations.Derby. Again, in a case relative to the town of Derby ^ it was .press laid down, " that every borough is a town, but not tconverso " — but when the word " burgesses " is used, itCASES.— LYNN E. 1523proves the place to be a borough — for they could not be bur James I.gesses without.* And it might be added that a burgess is leu.properly " the inhabitant of a boroughs'As illustrative of the doctrine in this reign respecting bye Bye-laws.lawS; it may be desirable to insert the following case of the 1609.7th of James I.The corporation of butchers, in London was confirmedin the third year of James I., and authority was giventhem to make bye4awSjX by virtue of which they afterwards'ordained, that " no butcher, or person being a stranger, shouldsell any veal within the city of London, unless dressed in a** particular manner ; and that if they did otherwise, theywere to forfeit for every time six-pence, and if refused tobe paid, then they were to forfeit the meat." The servantof the plaintiff not performing the ordinance, the defendant,upon behalf of the corporation, seized his meat for hisrefusal to pay the forfeiture ; and for this the plaintiff broughthis action of trespass, and demanded the judgment of thecourt. The defendant pleaded in bar, that he took the sameas forfeited by their ordinance : but did not shew the ordinancein certain.Harris for the defendant — The pleading is good without Certainty.showing the ordinance in certain, being by way of bar — andcertainty to a common intent, by way of bar, is good.Stephens to ^^The contrary — ^^The ordinance ought to beshown specially in pleading ; for that the same lieth properlyin their own knowledge. Also this ordinance is not of anyforce to hind foreigners. Neither can they distrain by virtue Foreigners.of this, because they themselves are parties, and the otherhad no notice of it.Williams, justice. — Of a private ordinance made by thebutchers in their corporation, a stranger is not bound to takenotice. Otherwise it is of an act of Parliament.In this Yelverton, j justice, and the court agreed — as, also,• 2Rol. Rep.p. lis. t 1 Bui. 11.X See HnttOD, 14th James I., where in the Newbury case it was held, that a bye-lawmade by the weavers, that none but apprentices for seven years should exercisethe trade, was unreasonable.5£2it1 524 CASES.-B YE-LAWS.J"°^^* that this bye-law was not good to bind strangers. But the1609. same had been good if made to suppress fraud or any othergeneral convenience used by a foreigner — as corruption orthe likes in the sale of their meat ; and then they ought totake notice of the same, but not here as this case is — and sojudgment was given for the plaintiff.1614. Another case also occurs in the 12th year of James I., re-Bye-law. native to a bye-law made by the masters guardians, and commonaltyof tailors and cloth workers of Ipswich ; upon whichthey brought an action of debt for a penalty incurred underits provision, that *' no person exercising any of the saidtrades within the town of Ipswich, should keep any shopor chamber, or exercise the said faculties or any of them,or take an apprentice or journeyman till he had presentedhimself to the master and wardens,' for the time being,or some three of them; and should prove that he hadserved seven years at the least as an apprentice ; or'^ before he should be admitted by them to be a sufficient'' workman ; and if any should offend in any part thereof.Penalty. " that he should forfeit and pay to the masters, wardens,and society, for every such offence five marks to be levied** by way of distress, or by action of debt, &c."And it was resolved, — 1st, that " at the common law noman could be prohibited from working in any lawfulTrade. " trade." 2nd, that " the restraint upon the defendant, beyondthe statute of Elizabeth, was against law; for suchrestraints are against the liberty and freedom of the subject,and are the means of extortion in drawing money fromthem, either by delay or some other subtle device, or ofoppression of young tradesmen by the old and rich of thesame trade, not permitting them to work in their tradefreely; and all this is against the common law and thecommon wealth. But ordinances for the good order andgovernment of men of trades and mysteries are good — butnot to restrain any one in his lawful mystery"*There are also two important cases at this period — on thechbemen't. subjects of disfranchisement, removal, and restitution.♦ 11 Co. 53.ititituCASES.— DISFRANCHISEMENT. I525The first is that of Baggy of Plymouth in the 13th of James I.James I., who, it appeared, was one of the 12 chief burgesses, 16I6.and had been disfranchised by an order signed by the mayor ^2| *and nine of the masters, for having used contumelious languagetowards the mayor, &c. ; but at the end of the returnit is alleged, he was removed by the mayor and commonalty,*It was resolved, that the cause of disfranchisement Ceuta.ought to be grounded upon an act against the duty of acitizen or bui^ess, and to the prejudice of the public goodof the city or borough whereof he is a citizen or burgess,and against his oath which he took when he was sworn afreeman. For although one shall not be charged in anyjudicial court for the breach of a general oath, which he Oath,took when he became officer, minister, citizen, burgess, &c.yet if the act which he doth, be against the duty andtrust of his freedom, and to the prejudice of the city orborough, and also against his oath, it enforces much thecause of his removal. And there is a condition in lawtacitly annexed to his freedom ; which if he breaks, he may Freedom,be disfranchised. But words of contempt, or contra bonosmores, although they be against the chief officer or hisbrethren, are good causes to punish him ; — as to commit tillhe has found good sureties of his good behaviour : but not todisfranchise him. So if he intends, or endeavours of himself,or conspires with others, to do a thing against the dutyor trust of his freedom, and to the prejudice of the publicgood of the city or borough, but he doth not execute it, itis a good cause to punish him: but not to disfranchisehim. For " non officii conatus, nisi sequitur effects ;"and " non officii affects, nisi sequitur effects." Andthe reason and cause thereof is, that when a man is a freemanof a city or borough, he has a freehold in his freedomfor life; — and with others, in their politic capacity, has aninheritance in the lands of the corporation, and interest intheir goods. And perhaps it concerns his trade and means• u Co. 93.t This appears to be a new doctrine introduced at this time— as being free was nooffice, but only a irate m- condition in society. It is absurd to say, that a freeman hada freehold in his freedom.1526 CASES.-DISFRANCHISEMENT.J"°"^* of living,* and his credit and estimation ; and therefore the1615. matter which shall be a cause of his disfranchisement, oughtIntention, iq be an act or deed ; and not an intention or an endeavour,which he may repent of before the execution — and fromwhence no prejudice ensues. And they who have offices oftrust and confidence shall not forfeit them by endeavours andintentions to do acts, although they declare them by expresswords, unless the act itself shall ensue. And if a contempt(be it of omission or commission) should be a good cause todisfranchise, the best citizen or burgess might be, at onetime or other, disfranchised ; which would be great cause offaction and contention in cities and boroughs.As to the second it was resolved, that no freeman of anycorporation can be disfranchised by theist unless they haveCharter, authority to do so by the express words of the charter, or by^tion"^ prescription. But if they have not authority, neither bycharter nor by prescription, then he ought to be convicted bycourse of law before he can be removed, as appears by MagnaCharta, chap. 29. And if the corporation have power, bycharter or prescription, to remove him for a reasonableFor cause, cause, that will be per legem terse. But if they have nosuch power, he ought to be convicted per judicium pariumquorum, &c. — as if a citizen or freeman be attainted of forgery,perjury, or conspiracy, at the king's suit, &c. ; orof any other crime whereby he is become infamous — uponsuch attainder they may remove him. So if he be convictedof any such offence, which is against the duty and trust ofhis freedom, and to the public prejudice of the city or boroughwhereof he is free, and against his oath — as if he hasburnt or defaced the charters or evidences of the city or borough;or razed or corrupted them; and is thereof convictedand attainted — these and the like are good causes toremove him. And although they have lawful authority, eitherby charter or prescription, to remove any one from thefreedom — and that they have just cause to remove him ; yetSee before, where the incongruity of a person being liable to be fined for trading,not being free, and yet not entitled to be made free, is pointed out — if that islaw, the consequence here stated would, in all probability, follow.t But see the judgment in R. r. Richardson, 1 Bur. 539, contra.CASES.-DISFRANCHISEMENT. 1 627it appears by the return that they have proceeded against ^*'°^ ^'him without hearing him answer to what was objected ; or 1615.that he was not reasonably warned ; such removal is void,and shall not bind the party, " quia quicunque aliquid stag ^^n^'tuerit parte inaudit^ altera, aequi licet statuerit, baud*' sequus fuerit;" and such removal is against justice andright.As to the third question — if they have power bycharter or prescription to disfranchise, and afterwards thejudges of the King's Bench award a writ to them to restorethe party, or signify the cause, &c., and they certify a sufficientcause to remove him, but it is false — then the court Manda-cannotaward a writ to restore him ; neither can any issue betakenthereupon* — because the parties are strangers, andhave no day in court : but the party grieved may well havean action upon the special matter, against those who madethe certificate, and aver it to be false ; and if it is found forhim, and he obtains judgment against them, so that it mayappear to the justices that the causes of the return are false,then they shall award a writ of restitution. R^titu-. Bon.Also, if the party grieved, who is so disfranchised, is, forthe causes of his enfranchisement, committed to prison, orif his shop is shut up, or if with force he is removed out oftheir assembly, &c., in these, and the like cases, he may havean action of false imprisonment, or an action of trespass,quare domus fregit ; or of assault and battery. And inthose actions, the causes of his disfranchisement ought to be Causes,pleaded, and decided according to law.Also it was resolved, that such return of disfranchisementought to be certain — so that sufficient matter may appear tothe court to disfranchise the party, and t^o potius ; becausethe party cannot have answer to it, as is aforesaid.Lastly, it was resolved, that for none of the causes containedin the certificate, Bragg, by law, ought to have beenremoved ; and therefore, by the whole court, a writ wasawarded to restore him to his franchise and freedom. Restore.The reporter adds a note to the reader, that in the argussec now the stat. 9 Anne, cb. 20.mils.Restore.1528 * CASES.— DISFRANCHISEMENT.James I. ment of this case much was said to exhort citizens and1615. burgesses to yield obedience and reverence to the chief magistratesin their cities and boroughs ; because they derivetheir authority from the king, and " obedient est legis essential."And therefore it appears before, how they shall bepunished who commit any contempt against them : but theprincipal question of this case was, what acts were sufficientcauses in law, for the disfranchisement of any citizen or burgess,&c.1619. There is a case, in the 17th of James I.,* of a enfranchisement,in which a writ to restore was refused.Manda Warren, being one of the council of Coventry, was removed,and obtained a writ of restitution. And thereuponthe corporation returned, that " they had a custom to elect^* any to be of the common council, and to remove him adlibitum;" and that Warren was removed. And the courtheld that the return was good. And this difference wasFreeman, taken : that where a man is a freeman or alderman, theycannot remove him from his freedom or place without cause.And in such case a custom is void. Because the party hatha freehold therein. But to be of the council, is a thing collateralto a corporation. The council then surmised, thatAlderman, he was also an alderman, and removed from that office : —and whereupon a new writ was issued to restore him to hisaldermanship.^But the above does not appear to be the proper reason.Office. A freeman is no office, but only a franchise. The real groundas to the aldermen, is as stated in Lighten's case ;X — that itis a judicial office. As to a freeman — liber homo — or burgessthat is a duty and franchise for the purposes of police.And a person is bound to be a burgess, unless he is an outlaw.There are also, in this and the preceding reign, an importantclass of cases, which although they do not applyCommon, directly to the question of the condition of the burgesses,or to corporations, yet they so far affect the rights of inhabitantsand have a tendency to support the opinion,♦ Cro. Jac. 640. f Vide 26 Hen. Vlll. 5. t Vent. 77.Cases-COMMON. •1629that inhabitants could not possess any rights unless incog J"pe»l«ported that it would be improper to pass them over insilence. We shall therefore cite them together, in the sameplace, that the reader may be enabled to take a combinedview of them.The first occurs in the 30th year of Queen Elizabeth. In 1587.a case of replevin, the defendant avowed for damage feasant,by the commandment of his master, the Lord Cromwell.*The plaintiff, in the plea in bar, justified the putting inhis cattle into the land, where, &c., by reason that N. isan ancient town — and that, from time immemorial, everyinhabitant had common for all manner of cattle, levant and inhabitantscouchant, within it.The defendant said, that the house in which the plaintiffinhabited — and by reason of the reliance in which, he claimed Reliance.common — was a new house, erected within 30 years ; andbefore that time, there had not been any house there. Uponwhich the defendant demurred. — For the plaintiff it wasargued, that he should have common there, by reason ofhis reliance in the new house. And it was said, that theTenancy is the causey and not the land, nor the person thereof;and the case of the 15th Edw. IV., 29, was cited. But itwas admitted, that if the lord improve part of the common,he should not have common in the residue for the land whichwas improved, because he cannot prescribe for it — as thebook is in 5 Ass. But here in this case, the plaintiff doesnot prescribe in any person certain, or in, or for any newthing ; but he sets forth, that the use of the town hath alwaysbeen, that the inhabitants should have common there. inhabitantsAnd this common is not common appendant or appurtenant; but common in gross And he said, that if the houseof a freeholder, used to have such common, fall down, andhe erected a new house in another part of the land, he shouldhave common for that new-erected house as he had before. Ilouw.And he took a difference between the case of estovers, wherea new chimney is erected, and this case. And he stoodmuch upon the matter of the prescription.CofiUrd V. Whitfield, 2 Leon. 44. f Needham, 37 Hen. VI. 34 b.1530 Cases-COMMON.•^*"'" ^' On the contrary, for the defendant, exception was taken1587. to the prescription, because it is alleged, that it is antiquavilla ; but not said, that it hath been so time out of mind,&c., as it ought to be.* And then if it is not an ancienttown time out of mind, the parties cannot prescribe, asiniMUunts inhabitants of the town, to have common. And if sucha prescription as this be good in law, that every one whohouse. erected a new house within the town should have commonto such a house, it would be prejudicial to the ancienttown, and to the utter overthrow and manifest impairing ofthe common. And it might so happen, that one who hadbut little ground in the town, might erect 20 new houses,and so an infinite number might be newly erected, and thereshould be common allowed to every inhabitant within thenew-erected houses ; which would be inconvenient and unreasonable.Anderson, chief justice. — He who erects a View house cannotprescribe in the common ; for then a prescription mightbegin at this day, which cannot be: and he insisted upon thegeneral loss which would happen to the ancient tenants, ifsuch a prescription for new erections should be good.Priam, if it should be law, that he should have commonin this case, then all the benefit which the statute gives tothe lord for improvement, would be taken away by suchnew edification, &c., which were not reasonable : and suchwas the opinion of the other justices. Therefore they allagreed, that in the principal case, the plaintiffs should nothave common for the new-erected houses. But the entry ofthe judgment was respited, until the court had seen therecord; and after that they had seen and considered itAnderson and Priam were of opinion as before. Binghamdid incline to the contrary. But they all agreed that hewho set up again a new chimney where the old one wasEstovers, before, should have estovers to the new chimney. Andso if he builds a new house upon the foundation of an oldhouse, that he should have common to his said house newlyerected. So if a house falleth down, and the resiant or• See ISEdw. IV. 29 a.Cases-COMMON. I53Iinhabitant sets up a new house in the same place. And also Jam«sl-if a man hath a mill, and a watercourse to it time out of 1587.Doing, and which he hath used to cleanse — ^if the mill falleth,and he erected a new house, he shall have the watercourse,and liberty to cleanse it, as he had before. And afterwards,the same term, judgment was given for the defendant,to which Windham, justice, had assented.This case is evidently decided upon the ground that theinhabitants as such, could not enjoy a right of common, inhabitantsBut what foundation there is in reason for such a position, itwould be difficult to explain.If a lord of a town should for his own benefit, as well Common.with a view to the advantage of the town, grant that theinhabitants of it (they always being considered with referenceto the general law to be confined to inhabitant householders)J should have a right of feeding their cattle over thelands which he gave for the purpose, what reason is therethat the inhabitant householders should not enjoy that right: —as well those living in houses there at the time, as theinhabitants of new houses, the building of which might beassumed to be a benefit as well to the lord as to the townitself?No satisfactory authority appears to have been cited forthe contrary position ; and there seems to have been muchgood reason for the assertion of the counsel for the plaintiff,that ** the right of common was by reason of the reliance and Reliance.*^ inhabiting in the toion.'*This, therefore, can hardly be considered a decisive authorityupon the point, particularly as the judges appear to havedoubted, and to have suspended their judgment for sometime.It seems clearly to have been new law, and its soundnessmay be questioned; at all events, it proceeds on atechnical distinction, which cannot be felt or understood bythe great mass of the people ; as in opposition to the commonsense of the thing ; as well as placing an embarrassmentin the way of an arrangement so beneficial to a town,as that the inhabitants should have such a right ; and which,in fact, has been, in defiance of all these decisions, exercised, Practice.J 532 Cases-COMMON.James I. and still continues to be exercised, in many parts of the1587. kingdom, which is a most unseemly position for the law tobe placed in, as opposed to the general practice.The next case is in the same year.* In a replevin, thedefendant avowed for damage peasants. The plaintiff pleadedInhabitant in bar — '^ That every inhabitant in every messuage in the townhad used to have common. It was stated that the prescripttion was not good, for want of capacity in the party whopretended interest ; for it is not certain, but applied to amul-Probe latitude. If the kine grants a rent promis omnibus of Islins:-omnibus o o r oton, the same is void; for they are not capable. It wasanswered, the prescription was good; for although it wasgranted that a confused multitude cannot prescribe in amatter of interest, but only in an easement or discharge — asin a way to the church — and that by reason of custom in theland, and not in the persons ; yet in 7 E. IV. 26. it is pleadedthat all the inhabitants within such a town time out of mind,&c. have used to have common there, &c. And a prescriptionfor a township to have a way to the church, was held goodbyDarby. Littleton saying it ought to be pleaded bywayof usage. And in the 18th of Edward IV. 3, it issaid — all the inhabitants of a town may well prescribe.And Bracton, 222, 223, was cited : — Communia quando-cinqueex long usu sive constitution cum pacifica possessioncontinua et uon, intermixed ex scientia, negligentia, etpatient Dominium ita etiam amitti protest per negligentlyet non sum. And he vouched Britton, foL 144. " Commonis obtained by long sufferance, and also it may be lost bylong negligence, &c."Ol»erva- Here the prescription is expressly and properly laid to bein the inhabitant of every messuage in the town, which igthe same as every inhabitant householder, who, as he wouldsustain the burthen — pay the scot, and bear the lot of thetown — so might he reasonably enjoy the privileges of it.And there seems no sound reason why, amongst others, heshould not enjoy the privilege of putting his cattle uponLines given for that purpose by the lord of the town.• 3 Leon. 202.C ASES.-COMMON. 1 533But it was said, that the inhabitants had not the capacity Jamesto take such a benefit ; and that a grant of a rent '^ promis 1587.haminibus of Islington," was void. A strange position, for ^^^•^i^*'which there is no support, except that it has been assertedand assented to.We have seen many indisputable instances of inhabitantshaving actually received and enjoyed such, and many other,privileges. Innumerable precedents could be cited, of grantsto the good men of towns and places in all parts of the presentempire ; and it is making an assertion without reasonor authority, and against practice, to lay down such adoctrine. In fact, there are earlier authorities quoted tothe contrary.*The next case is six years afterwards, in the 36th year of 15^«Queen ElizabethanIn replevin, the defendant made conusance as bailiff ofSir Thomas Hatton ; the place where the cattle had beentaken being parcel of the manor of Benfield.The plaintiff pleaded in bar, that the will of Benfield wasan ancient will, and that, within it there had been a customfrom time immemorial, that every inhabitant in any ancient inhabitantmessuage should have common in the waste for all his beastslevant and couchant within the will, and that he was aninhabitant, &c.Issue was joined upon this prescription, and found for theplaintiff.It was moved in arrest of judgment, that it was a void andtherefore an ill prescription, for every inhabitant to prescribe,&c. And therefore the bar was ill. Yelverton moved forthe plaintiff, to have judgment ; for it is pleaded by way ofcustom and usage, and it is not a prescription, which may bewell enough ; for common might be as well by reason of inhabitancy,as otherwise. And common may well be appended toa house It is said, there is not any difference betwixt House.And see in the case of the College of Physicians v. Salmon, Holt's Rep. 171 ;1 Salk. 1915 ; Mod. 327 ; 10 Rep. 29.t Cro. £liz. 362.t 22 Hen. VI. 43. 10 Hen. VI. 24. 16 Edw. IV. 32.1534 CASES-common.'^"°"^' common appendant, and common by reason of inhabitancy ;1693. so it is there admitted, that there may be common in respectof inhabitancy. It hath been objected, that inhabitants arenot persons able to prescribe. But it was thereto answered,that it is not here alleged to be in the person, but to betheusage of the village.* And though inhabitants cannotprescribe, yet a custom may be alleged, that inhabitants mayhave common.Anderson, — It hath been adjudged lately in this court,that it is a void and an idle prescription, and there is notany colour against it ; for an inhabitant cannot have common,if he hath not any interest or estate therein ; and this is notshown in such a prescription, wherefore it is not good.Also, if he be ousted thereof, he hath not any remedy noraction for it, but the lord who is the owner thereof. Andtherefore the interest shall not be taken from the lord, andthe lord and the inhabitants cannot both have interesttherein.Walmsley. — Such a prescription cannot begin at this day,and therefore continuance cannot make it good. For a grantinhabitants of common " inhabitautibus" cannot be good; because, theyCorpora be not any corporation. And by prescription it cannot begood, for it is in nature of a purchase, and an inhabitantcannot purchase to himself and his successor.Beaumont. — this is not any of the four commons, viz. appendant,appurtenant, in gross, or vicinage : wherefore it isno good common.Owen accord, for they be not any corporation to prescribe ;but a freeholder may allege he is seised, and that he andall those whose estate he has, had right of common ; andthat is a good prescription.Usage. But all the justices held, that usage may be alleged byreason of inhabitancy to have an easement ; but not to havean inheritance.Anderson, — It is the common course throughout England ;• Vide 7 Hen. VIII., 16 ; 11 Hen. VI., 18. Prior of Dunstable's case. 7 Edw.IV. 24 ; 15 Edw. IV. 29 ; 19 Edw. IV. 3 ; 20 Edw. IV. 10. Prescription.Bro. 100.Cases-COMMON. Islandit is absurd and opposite in object, that the common J^mesi.should be in the inhabitants ; for it would be mischievous to 1503.take it by a prescription from the owner of the soil. And it ^°^»J»»^«»is not possible that should be good by usage, which cannothave a lawful continuance ; and custom and prescription areone. But it was adjourned.This case affords an instance how one error is speedily followedby another.The opinion of the court in the last case being against theright of the inhabitant in the newly-erected house ; the pleader ^°^°*in this occasion prescribes for every inhabitant in an ancientmessuage. And it will be seen subsequently that it wasin a few years after assumed to be the clear law, that sucha prescription could only belong to an ancient house.The objection in this case was founded upon the ground,that the inhabitants could not prescribe ; upon which we inhabitantshave already observed. And that doctrine rests on the generalpositions, that every prescription presupposes a grant ;and that a grant could not be made to the inhabitants. Butwe have shown, that such grants were made; and the inhabitantsenjoyed and still enjoy rights and privileges underthem. And Lord Coke truly asserts, that anciently suchgrants were made, and the inhabitants held by them. Sothat this position failing, there is no foundation for the scantywhich is the consequence of it ; and therefore till thepoint was here assumed, there does not seem to be any legalwarrant for the principle, as there certainly is none in reason ;and the practice has been opposed to it.The counsel for the plaintiff seems not to have disputedthis point, but to have acquiesced in it , and therefore, ineffect, gave up the case — only attempting to support his caseupon technical distinctions between custom, usage, and prescription; which, as to the matter in dispute, would havemade no essential difference: — she however justly argued,that " common rights might be as well by reason of inhabit }^f^^'fancy as otherwise;" and it would be difficult to suggestany sound argument against that position.1636 Cases-COMMON.James I. One of the judges appears to have assumed that it had1503. been decided that a " prescription for the inhabitants to havecommon was void." This probably alluded to the last caseinvirhichy however, the reader has seen the judges differed.It was also added, '' that there was not any colour againstthat doctrine." — ewe have suggested that there was no colourfor it ; — certain it is, that the usage and practice have beenagainst it.Mr. Justice Anderson also said, ^* that an inhabitant couldnot have common if he had not any estate or interest therein."Whether his right could, technically speaking, be called aninterest or estate, is immaterial. That the possession of sucha right was essential to the inhabitants — that it was the ancientpractice to grant it, and for it to be enjoyed — and thatsuch enjoyment has continued to the present day is indisputable; and therefore this technical distinction might, perhaps,be disregarded.Remedy. The learned judge, however, having upon that groundstated that the prescription could not be supported, adoptsrather an inverted mode of reasoning, by arguing, that therewas no such prescription, because there was no remedy forit. It would have been a mode of reasoning more consistentwith the general principles of the law to have assumed theprinciple, " that where there is a right, there is a remedy ;"and that the inhabitants being entitled by prescription, as inpractice they were, were entitled to a remedy which therewould have been no difficulty whatever in finding, providedthe inhabitants could prescribe, which was the question ;for the inhabitant might either have had an action upon thecase, for disturbance of his right of common : or if his cattlewere distrained, he might have pleaded in bar his prescriptiveright.The further reasoning of the learned j edge is certainly ex-lord,extraordinary. He states that " the lord is the owner thereof,and that the interest should not be taken from the lord."But the interest is equally taken from him, whether it isclaimed by a corporation, or by an inhabitant. That reason,therefore, is of little avail.Cases-COMMON. I537It is also said, that '^ the lord and the inhabitants could-^^^ i*not both have an interest therein : " and yet the lord, and 1593.a person claiming in a que estate (or a corporation) have interest.both an interest ; the lord to the soil — commoners to the rightof common. This argument, therefore, can likewise be ofno avail.Mr. Justice Walmsley assumed that '' the prescription could*' not exist ; because a grant of common to the inhabitantswould not be good" — but that is the point we have controverted,both in law and fact. He further says, that " it is in'' the nature of a purchase, and an inhabitant could not pursechase to him and his successors;" — which is undoubtedlytrue of an individual ; and with respect to the particularquestion of a purchase to him and his successors. But it isnot true, that Ihe inhabitants of a town could not have a inhabitantsof a town.grant made to them, by way of purchase or otherwise, thatthey the then inhabitants, and all future inhabitants, shouldhave a right of common, or any other right of a similardescription. The fact of inhabiting in a house within theprescribed limits, would always be sufficient to denote theperson who was to enjoy the right; and what is the difficultyin law or reason that a grant should be made to suchpersons ? In truth, they were made and acted upon, notwithstandingall the technical reasoning to the contrary.Mr. Justice Beaumont said, it was not any of the fourcommons, viz. appendant, appurtenant, in gross, or vicinage.What then ? — Commons had not been sufficiently defined —there was a fifth right, by " inhabitancy ;" — this thereforedoes not appear to warrant the conclusion that on this groundthe right of common was not maintainable.By two of the judges it was said, the inhabitants couldnot prescribe, for they were not incorporated.But the history of the country* for many centuries shows, thatAs an instance of the manner in which these rights were claimed and exercised,we find among the Harleian MSS. a testimonial letter, or certificate, signed by 86of the inhabitants of Dunstable, Edinburgh, Whipsnade, Ellsworth, Stanbriggc, and 15 Ed. IV.KemetwoTth, touching the right of romain 0/ pasture claimed by the inhabitantof Houghton and Sewellee, in the fields of Eytone and Totenho. Various debatesand strife had arisen between the tenants, inhabitants, and resists of Eytone and5 F1538 Cases-COMMON.James I. iJig inhabitants could have such a grant made to them, and1503. therefore they could prescribe.Afterwards the still more technical objection was taken,that '' usage might be alleged by reason of inhabitancy toEasement « have an easement, but not an inheritance :" — a distinctionancc." which must be left to the fostering care of the lawyers.Another learned judge roundly asserted, that it was thecommon course throughout England. The contrary is thefact. He added, ^' it was absurd, and opposite in object,*^ that the commons should be in the inhabitants* — which isthe assumption of the whole question in dispute. He alsoadds, '^ it would be mischievous to take it by a prescriptionfrom the owner of the soil." It would be equally so totake it by a prescription in a que estate or by a corporation.In conclusion, it is said, ^' It was not possible that shouldUsage* ** be good by usage which could not have a lawful continueonce." A principle, no doubt, most correct — fit alwaysto be kept in recollection — and particularly applicable to thesubject of our present inquiry ; but inapplicable to the caseinwhich it was cited : for there the right could have had alawful beginning and continuance — and, in truth, always hascontinued.The next case which occurs on this subject, is in the1606. fourth year of James I.; and is the well known case ofGateway's trespass. Smith against Gateward, for breaking and enteringa close at Harrington; in the county of Lincoln, and depasturingthe same with cattle The defendant justified, bypleading that the town of Stixwold is an ancient town, contiguousto the close in question; and that, from time immemorial,there has been a custom within that town, thatthe inhabitants within any ancient messuage, by reason ofTotenho, on the one part, and the tenants inhabitants » and resiants of Houghtonand Sewellee, on the other part, for certain common of pasture which the tenantsinhabitants, and resiants of Houghton and Sewellee ask and claim to have therein fortheir beasts and cattle, in divers places and fields of the tenants, inhabitants, andresiants of Eytone and Totenho. — Liber Irrotulatorius seu Regestrum tartarus Prioratusde Dunstable.— Ilarl . MSS., 1885, 126 b. Similar grants were made to andenjoyed by the inhabitants of Southampton, Cain, and other places.• 4Co.eO,acCro.Jac. 152.case.Cases-COMMON. J 539their commorancy and residence, have ever been accustomed James i.to have pasture for their cattle in the close in question. I6O6.And that he, the defendant, was commorant and inhabitant ^*^SJ^''in an ancient house in the town.This plea began Trin. 3 Jac. I., and was oftentimes* arguedat the bar. And this term, was openly argued at the benchby all the justices.And it was unanimously resolved, by all the judges ofthe Common Pleas, that the custom was against law, forseveral reasons. — 1st. There are but four manner of commons— sic. common appendant — appurtenant — in gross —and by reason of vicinage. And this common by reason ofcommorancy and residence is none of them, and ** argument'turn a division est fortissimum in jure." — 2nd. What estateshall he have who is inhabitant in the common, when itappears he hath no estate interest in the house, but a merehabitation and dwelling, in respect of which, he ought tohave his common ? For none can have interest in common,in respect of a house, in which he hath no interest. — 3rd.Such common will be transitory, and altogether uncertain,for it will follow the person, and for no certain time orestate, but during his inhabitancy; and such manner ofinterest the law will not suffer, for custom ought to extendto that which hath certainty and continuance. — 4thly. Itwill be against the nature and quality of a common; forevery common may be suspended or extinguished ; but sucha common will be so incident to the person, that no personcertain can extinguish it, but as soon as he who releases, &c.removes, the new inhabitant shall have it. — 5thly. If thelaw should allow such common, the law would give anaction or remedy for it ; but he who claims it as an inhabitant,can have no action for it. — 6thly. In these words,inhabitants and residents," are included tenant in fee-simple,tenant for life, for years, tenant by elegit, &c., tenant-twill,&c., and he who hath no interest, but only hishabitation and dwelling ; and by the rule of all our books,without question, tenant in fee-simple ought to prescribe in• See Cro. Jac. 152.5f 21540 Cases-COMMON.J^^^* ^' his own name ; tenant for life, years, by elegit, &c., and at1606. will, &c., in the name of him who hath the fee. And as hecase, who hath no interest, can have no common ; so none thatInterest, hath interest, if it be but at will, who ought to have common,but by good pleading may enjoy it. — 7thly. No im-improvesprovement can be made in any wastes, if such commonshould be allowed ; for the tenants for life, for years, at will,tenant by elegit, statute staple, and statute merchant, ofhouses of the lord, would have common in the wastesof the lord himself, if such prescription should be allowed,which would be inconvenient. But two differenceswere taken and reed by the whole court. — 1st. Betweena charge in the soil of another, and a discharge in his ownsoil. — ^2nd. Between an interest or profit, to be taken or hadin another's soil, and an easement in another's soil; andtherefore a custom that every inhabitant of a town hath paida modus decimandi to the parson, in discharge of their tithesis good ; for they claim not a charge, or profit appended, inthe soil of another, but a discharge in their own land. Soof a custom that every inhabitant of such a town sh&Ilhave a way over such land, either to the church or market,&c., that is good ; for it is but an easement, and no profit.And a way or passage may well follow the person, and nosuch inconvenience, as in the case at bar. — 8th. It was re-Copyhold solved, that copyholders in fee or for life, may, by custom ofthe manor, have common in the demeans of the lord, butthen, they ought to allege the custom of the manor to be'' quod quolibet tenens customarily cujuslibet antique messsuagii customer, &c.," and not '^ quod quolibet inhabitantsinfra aliquod antique messuages customer, &c." Foracopyholder hath a customary interest in the house, &c.,and therefore he may have a customary common in the lord'swastes. And in such case he cannot prescribe in the nameof the lord ; for the lord cannot claim common in his ownsoil ; and therefore, of necessity, such custom ought to bealleged. Vide 21 Edward III., 34. See the fourth Choke'sReports, Poison's Case, 31, 32.Another difference was taken and agreed, between a preCases-COMMON. 1541scription, which always is alleged in the person, and a J^aesi.custom, which always ought to be alleged in the land ; for ie06.every prescription ought to have, by common intendment, ^*SSr^*a lawful beginning ; but otherwise it is of a custom, for Pr^np-that ought to be reasonable. And ex tertii causa rational Custom.bill (as Littleton saith) usitata ; but need not to be intendedto have a lawful beginning; as custom to have land devisable,or of the nature of a gavelkind, or borough-English, &c.These and the like customs are reasonable, but by commonintendment they cannot have a lawful beginning, bygrant, or act, or agreement, but only by Parliament. Seealso, for this matter, Poison's case.But a custom that an inhabitant or resident shall grantortake any profit, is merely void.9thly. It was resolved, that if the custom had been alliedthat '' quolibet pater families infra aliquod antiquemessuage, &c.," it would be also insufficient, for the causesand reasons aforesaid. And if he hath any interest, he mayberelieved as aforesaid. Vide 7 Edward IV. 26 a; 16 EdwardIV. 29 b, and 32; 18 Edward IV. 3 b; 20 EdwardIV. 10 b; 18 Henry VIII. lb; 19 Hen. VIII., reportedby Spelman, that such custom is not warranted by law. Andso it was adjudged in this court, Trin. 33 Elizabeth, Rot. 4,22. See the Book of Entries, Trespass, Common, 6; Vide9 Henry VI. 62 b. ; 7 Edward VI. ; Dyer, 70, Sam's case.Note, reader, the law in this general case, well resolved.And no book in the law is adjudged against it. And herebyit appears how pleaders may safely plead, in these and thelike cases; and observe well, that the custom in the case atbar, was insufficient and repugnant in itself. For it was allegedthat the custom of the town of S was, thatevery inhabitant thereof, had used, &c., to have commonwithin a place in the town of H , which was anothertown. Vide 21 Elizabeth ; Dyer, 363, pi. 27.It will have been seen that this case, like the last, proceedsupon the assumption, that the house, in respect ofwhich an inhabitant claimed his right, must be an ancient1542 Cases-COMMON.'^"°^^' messuage, as it is so pleaded ; and therefore it is not so1606. surprising as it otherwise would be, that all the judges*^^ ' decided against the right.The reasons, however, of the judgment, do not appear tobe very satisfactory.The first is one upon which we have already observed inthe last case, viz., that the right of common by reason ofCommo commorancy or residence, was neither common appendant,appurtenant, in gross, or in vicinage, for which the principleis quoted, that *' argumentum a division est fortissimuminjure," the weight of which the reader will be enabled toappreciate.Estate. The second disputed the estate which the inhabitant hadin the common, upon which we have also previously commented.And it is added, that none could have an interestin common, in respect of a house in which he hath no interest,which is little more than a jingle of words, unless it meansthat the occupier was a mere tenant-twill, which at anytime,was very rare, and in modem times, has been held toenure as a tenancy from year to year ; and therefore, this argumentat the present moment, could have no weight at all.Uncertain Thirdly, it was said that the right would be transitoryand uncertain; but it would not be — excepting only in aslight degree, more transitory than the right of every commonerwho prescribed in a que estate, or of every corporation;and as for certainty, nothing could be more certainthan that it was to be enjoyed by the inhabitant householder,who could in the readiest manner be denoted, whilst, on thecontrary, nothing could be more uncertain than the right ofthe corporator, who, according to the modem doctrine, mightbe an inmate — a lodger — a new inhabitant — or even a nonresident.Eating The fourth reason was, " that every common might besuspended or extinguished, but that this right would beso incident to the person, that no one could extinguish it."Nor was it ever intended to be extinguished, because it wasmeant to be for the permanent benefit of the inhabitants ofthe place.Cases-COMMON. 1543The fifth reason is as to the remedy, upon which we have J**"<» i.before remarked. I6O6.The sixth was, that in the words " inhabitants and resin OBUmaid'scue.dents are included tenants in fee simple — for life — years — Remedy,by elegit — and at will — upon which are founded some purely i'»^»»*>i'»»'«technical objections, which are totally immaterial to thereal question in dispute : and the argument concludes withassuming that the inhabitants have no interest, which wehave already answered.The seventh adverts to an inconvenience which it is said ^?E??/®"ment.would arise, in the difficulty of the lords approving : butif the grant was to the '^ inhahiianis^^ it must be taken tohave been intended by the lord and the grantees, that heshould not exercise such a right.The distinction was also again taken between a chaise in Charge.the soil of another, and a discharge in his own ; and an in- Discharge.terest or profit, or an easement in another's soil. And someinstances were mentioned, in illustration of that point. Butto what do they amount in contradiction to the fact, thatsuch rights of common had been granted to inhabitants, andenjoyed by them.The distinction with respect to copyholders, is also with Copyhold-thesame view, too subtle to require a comment : as well asthat between custom and prescription, which, in the previouscase, as to Benfield manor, are expressly declared tobe all one.As to the other reasons, they are too foreign from ourpresent inquiry for us to dilate upon them. But it is somewhatstrange that Lord Coke should, without a comment,report, '' that a custom for an inhabitant, or resident, to"grant or take any profit, was merely void," when it is clear,that if incorporated, they could do so, and that LordCoke himself asserts, that anciently grants were madeto them, and that they held under them, though not incorporated.*The ninth reason goes farther than any other, and states,that if the custom had been alleged that every housesVide Coke Lit.crs.1544 Cases-COMMON.James I. keeper in any ancient messuage had the right, it would haveieo6. been insufficient."^*Sle^ * Under the particular circumstances of this case, it is veryextraordinary that Lord Coke should expressly draw theattention to it as one well resolved. And he adds, ^* thatno book in the law is adjudged against it," which, however,the cases quoted in argument above, show to be incorrect.Notwithstanding, therefore, the supposed authorityof these cases, and that they have been currently adopted,without sufficiently considering the real grounds upon whichthey were founded, and the principles properly applicable tothe subjects to which they relate, we must, with all becomingrespect — but at the same time, with that confidence,which we trust, a careful investigation of the question willwarrant — venture to dispute the grounds upon which theyrest,VILLAINAGE.We have seen that the practice with respect to freemenas contradistinguished from mllainsy had in this reign essentiallyaltered ; and the original ground of distinction wasfalling into oblivion ; on the other hand, the appellation offreemen was daily becoming more connected with trade thantheretofore ; and the general term of " inhabitants' whichentirely overlooked the distinction between the bond andfree, had come into general use.1607. Yet the doctrine of Villainage was not forgotten, nor hadit altogether ceased in practice. For we find in the fifteenthyear of this reign, an instance in which an action of trespasswas brought against C. for taking his horse, &c.* C. saidthat he was seised of the manor of D., to which P. was villeinregardant ; and that he, and all those whose estate he had,were seised of the plaintiff and his ancestors. The plaintiffsaid that he was free, &c. absque hoc, — that the defendant,&c., was seised of the plaintiff, &c., as villein regardant.And the issue was found for the plaintiff. And upon motionin arrest of judgment, it was ruled that the traversewas well taken And by Hubbard, " if a man hath not• Noy s Reports, 27, C. B. Rot. 1966.— Pigg v. Callcy. t Dyer 283, accordingly.Cases-VILLAINAGE. 1645seisin of a malkin in gross, within six years, he shall be J"'^^^'barred by the 32nd Henry VIII. of limitation in native Six yean.habendo, for liberty is favoured. But yet, of a villein re-*^ gardant, the seisin of the manor is sufficient seisin of the*• villein."We have already stated that villainage was essentiallyput an end to in the reign of Henry VIII. Booth, in his Booth.Treatise on Real Actions, published 1791, says,* that the lastcases in the books, as to villainage, are in the 11th and 44thof Elizabeth ;t but it is clear that he was mistaken in thisrespect, for the above case occurs fourteen years after thedate he assigns for the last.The same learned author has a short chapter on '' the writ** de native habendo," in which he speaks of the lords andthe villains or bondmen, as well as of the circumstances underwhich the sheriff may seize the villain, which he cannot doif he says he is free. He also states that the lord must havetwo of the same blood of the villain ready in court, to confessthemselves villains to the lord. And for his authorityhe cites Fitz Herbert's Natura Brevi; respecting which Brevi.author it should be observed, that he fully enters into thedoctrine of villainage, and the writs and process connectedwith them, which is continued in all the editions of his work,two of which were in the reign of James I. : after that periodthere has been but little alteration in the subsequenteditions.It should also be remarked, that with respect to this case,there is a striking similarity in the English statute, which isquoted as to the limitation of six years, for claiming avillain, with the head of the Scotch law, contained in theLeges Burgorum, in which the period of seven years, as we BuJS^^m-have noted before, is fixed for the limitation beyond whicha villain shall be absolutely irreclaimable.Before we finally close this head of the reign of James I., weshould observe, with reference to another point, material toour inquiry, and connected with the early law, that there was• Page 128. f Dyer, 283; Yelverton, 2; Cro. Eliz. 881.1546 PARLIAMENTARY DECISIONS.^^^^ ^' a decree of the Star Chamber in the twelfth year of the .lowing reign, concerning divided tenements in London.PARLIAMENTARY DECISIONS.We have now, as far as regards England, nothing further toadd in this reign, but some few collections respecting theparliamentary history of the boroughs, which, at this period,forms a striking feature in the progress of our inquiry.For as the king had introduced the representatives ofNew many new boroughs into the House ; against which the commonshad remonstrated, in the reign of Queen Elizabeth. —Charters. And as he had, by his charters, like his immediate predecessors,made many alterations in the constitution of theseveral boroughs : — it became essentially necessary that theHouse itself should interpose, and put some check upon theChanges, changes which had been effected — were then meditated —and which required, for the sake of the future, to be anticipated.1625. This necessity created a jealousy in the House of Com-committee mons, which led to the formation of the celebrated committee,in the twenty-third year of this reign, composed of men ofthe greatest talent and knowledge in the kingdom.They executed the trust reposed in them by the Houseand the country, vigorously, faithfully, and conscientiously ;and it will be our present task to give short extracts of thedifferent resolutions at which they arrived — some few ofthem not altogether free from error; whilst the others containmore of the sound principles of the constitution, than probablyany other work in our language in the same space.NORFOLK COUNTY.1. The Norfolk county case is not material to our inquiry,*excepting for the parliamentary principle which is containedin it — " that the House of Commons is not concluded by'f the opinion of any committee in matter of fact, no morethan in matter of law."Glan. p. 3.GLANVILLE'S REPORTS. 1647James I.SOUTHWARK.2. The Southwark case only establishes that there werecertain watermen and others in that borough,* who had noVoice in the election. One instance amongst many, to showthat the right of election was not generally in the inhabitantsat large ; but in the burgesses who were the inhabitant householders— paying scot and lot, and being duly sworn and J^*^{*^'enrolled : — which were the consequences of their being in- "••habitant householders.Nothing more appears in this case to show who were theburgesses of SouthuHxrh, but its subsequent history, althoughit has been the subject of numerous parliamentary contests,may be shortly stated.In the second year of William III., on a question of ^^^-whether those housekeepers only, who paid scot and lot, hada right to vote ; or the housekeepers and inhabitants generally; — it was determined, that the right was in " the inhabit Right.ants being housekeepers." SjSi.In the first year of Queen Anne, the right of the inhabit 1702.ants at large, was again insisted upon ; but in answer, it was.said, that '^ none of common right ought to vote, but such as^* votre liable to pay wages to their members, and those were** only such as paid scot and lot J*On the other hand, it was contended, that all the housekeepershad a right to vote, and the decision in 1689 wascited; but the committee resolved, that the right was only in Right.'* the inhabitants paying scot and lot''In the tenth year, and also the last, of the same reign, the nil.right was agreed to be as above.At that time, the question was raised, that persons in- 1714.habiting in the Mint, or rules of the Queen's Bench, in theborough of Southwark, and paying a rent of lOZ. per annum,or upwards, had a right to vote, though they did not payscot and lot ; — but it was disagreed to.After that time the right was not disputed, but continuedto be exercised by the inhabitant householders, and this, hoi^choid-ew.Glan. p. 7.1548 GLANVILLE'S REPORTS.Ja"'^^' notwithstanding, as we have seen before,* the property withinSouth Southwark, was held by burgage tenure.^ ' It was originally under the government of a bailiff. It isnow one of the wards of the city of London, being called theCourt Icett. Ward of Bridge Without, and there are several court-leetswithin its limits, so that there can be no doubt but thatthe burgesses were not only, according to the modem decisions,householders paying scot and lot, but also according tothe common law, were sworn at the court-leet.Winchester.3. The next case reported by Glanville, is WiTichelsea, inwhich it was assumed no doubt upon authority of the'^ modus tenens parliament," which was, at that timcjconsidered authentic; that Winchelsea had returned bur-rescriptgesses to Parliament by prescription, — an assumption, whichthe fact of there being no representation of the commons, tillthe reign of Edward I., nearly a century after the time oflegal memory, now clearly disproves.Corpora It seems also to have been assumed, that Winchelsea wasincorporated by prescription, which is also as distinctlynegatived.Freemen. Hh^ freemen, according to the prevalent opinion at thattime, seem also to have been assumed to be the members ofthe corporation, and not the liberi homines of the conunonlaw, as we have shown they ought to have been.In these respects, therefore, this case appeal's to haveproceeded on erroneous grounds; which, however, were notthe points on which the decision was founded, but upon1609. a bye-law of the 7th James I., which assumed the necessityof residence, and declared that no freemen should vote, butsuch as had been inhabitants for the space of three monthsnext before the election; and an objection was made to twoNon-rest. of the jurats, on the ground of non-residence; because theyhad not complied with that bye-law, although they hadempty houses within the town, — had dwelt there withina year and a day, — and had paid scot and lot, and enjoyedSee before, p. 1150. f Glan. p. 12.GLANVILLE'S REPORTS. 1549their other rights as inhabitants and freemen. The mayor had James l.rejected their votes, and claimed himself a casting voice. Winchei-The committee, in the first place, most constitutionallydecided that '* the bye-law could not alter the right of election, Bye-law.*' but way for that purpose, utterly void, for that the freedomof election could not be restrained by any private ordinance*'And, secondly — sin perfect accordance with the true doctrineof the law — that as the two voters kept houses in the place,they might return at their pleasure : and as they had notbeen absent a year and a day, and it did not appear that theyremoved to dwell elsewhere, with a purpose of settling there ;they were, by the common law, such inhabitants as ought inhabitantto vote.The right of the mayor to a casting vote, was negativedby the committee, and there is nothing more in the reportwhich relates to the burgesses.The subsequent history of Winchelsea will show, that theerroneous assumptions of the parties and committees, in theparticulars we have alluded to, afterwards rendered thisborough an instance in which the supposed corporate rightof election led to the greatest abuses.It appears that in the next year, a mayor obtruded himself ig24.into the oi&ce, without any authority, and arbitrarily disfranchisedmany of the freemen.Between 1623 and 1711, many instances of the grossestbribery occurred in this borough ; and two of the mayorswere brought before the House, and severally reprimandedfor their conduct.In the tenth year of Queen Anne, the right was again nil.agreed to be in " the mayor, jurats, and freemen." But — asone of the effects of the right being supposed to be corporate— a question arose whether the freemen were obliged toqualify under the test acts. The committee properly decided,that they were not ; considering that they were not officers,as we have already pointed out, and as had been adjudgedby the courts of law.Another effect of the same assumption, that the freemen1650 GLANVILLE'S REPORTS.•^""^^' of Winchelsea were corporators and to be arbitrarily electedWinchel- at assemblies of the corporation, instead of being presentedCorpora according to the facts of their qualifications, of paying scot^'^* and bearing lot, and inhabiting within the borough, was,that as a contrast to the opposite inconvenience of such apower allowing any indefinite number to be admitted, whichhas been pointed out, the freemen were reduced to thesmallest possible number: and as the other corporate abuseNoD-reu- ^^^^s also introduced of fum^residentSy the entire control ofdents. 'the right of election was altogether by these means, put intothe hands of persons unconnected with the borough. Anda third consequence of the first fatal error was, that the rightQuo war of election was mixed up with questions of corporation law,and in the reign of George Iii,* led to the expensiveand vexatious proceedings which are reported in the lawcases of that time, and which, like the Chester case, involvedin ruin many of those who were engaged in them.STAFFORD.4. The case of Stafford f merely relates to the avoidanceof the election, on the ground of want of due notice andwarning.BLECHINGLEY.6. The next is that of BlechingleyyX which is the first instance,of the burgage tenure right of election being recognizedby the House.It is impossible to suggest any reason why that rightshould have been adopted for this place. There is nothingin its early history to warrant it; whilst, on the other hand,there are numerous places which have been clearly shown tohave been held by burgage tenure, and where there wereancient burgages, and yet the right of election has alwaysbeen in the inhabitant householders paying scot and lot, asthe burgesses.Why, therefore, this right was assumed for Blechingleycannot be explained.• See 2 Bur. Rep. t Glan. p. 2o. t Glan. p. 29.GLANVILLE'S REPORTS. I55IIn the second year of the reign of Henry V., the return was James i.made in the county court, which we have already seen was Bieching-the case with many boroughs, where the right is in the inhalebitant householders; as well as places where other rightsprevailed.On another occasion, in the reign of James I, the right of 1623.the "borough-holders," as they were called, was assumedwithout any discussion or evidence.If, as we have shown before, they had been confined tothe actual householders the right would have been consistentwith the common law. The error was, in treating thefreeholders and not the resiants, as the burgesses ; by whichfunhresidents were introduced, and the whole power overthe elections was delivered into the hands of the owner ofthe lands, who could deal with it as he thought fit.In the course of this inquiry, it appears that, in imitationof the interference which we have noticed in other places. Lady inter-howardwas reported as having said, that, '' she would takeaway twenty nobles a-year from the town, if they did not'' choose as she desired." There is also some reference in thereport to inmates who, consistently with the common law, inmates.were assumed to have no right.The probable error upon which this case proceeded was, .the adoption of the right of the burgage-holders, as a customof election used time out of mind ; which, for thereasons we have given before, could not possibly have beenthe case ; and yet the attempt to vary from it was called an*' innovation."It was truly stated, that Blechingley was never incorpo- Never in-rated ; and yet its right to return members was not in the ed.slightest degree doubted. It is therefore clear from this aswell as oCher cases, that the right of election is not necessarily,as sometimes assumed, a corporate right.Blechingley is stated to be a horavugh hy prescriptionwhich may perhaps be true : but it is not mentioned as aborough in Domesday ; nor are there traces of any earlycharters granted to it.It returned members from the earliest time; and this1652 GLANVILLE'S REPORTS.James I. seems to be the only ground for assuming that it was aBleaching borough by prescription. But the first return it must be*^* remembered, was nearly a century after the time of legalmemory.Burgage Were it, however, even a borough by prescription, it wouldby no means follow that the burgage right of election shouldprevail there ; for we have seen that some of the most ancient,returned their members by the inhabitant householders, payingscot and lot. On the other hand, the principal part ofthose boroughs in which the burgage tenure right of electionis supposed to prevail, are by no means the most ancient.Still the committee, in this instance, seem to have reliedupon the assumption that there had been there immemoriallyburgages, divers burgages or borough tenements ; but that fact was notproved ; and, if it had been, it would have established nothingto the point; for that was the case with all the ancientboroughs. They also further assumed, that the borough hadimmemorially returned members to Parliament, chosen by theburgage-holders ; which we have already shown it could nothave done.It seems that only the burgage-holders attended at theinhabitants election, and not the rest of the inhabitants : although theBailiff. bailiff give notice in the church for the burgage-holders andall the rest of the inhabitants to meet to elect the burgessesfor the Parliament. The next day, the inhabitants met andmade a return.The committee resolved, 1st. That " however of common'' right, in a town which is a parliamentary borough by prescription(of which there are certainly none), where noconstant custom for election doth appear, more persons thanin this case ought to have voice in the election : yet by prescription,or custom time out of mind used, the election*' might be restrained to a fewer number."Here it is evident the committee were in error; for asthere are no prescriptive parliamentary boroughs, so therePrescribe could be no prescription or custom as to the right of election; and that proposition failing, the whole resolution fallsto the ground.itCiLANVlLLES REPORTS. 1553It is well known that Sir Edward Coke, one of this cele- J""^^*rated committee relied upon the authority of the modus BleachingParliament; which he assumed and maintainedwas a genuine work. But as it is now an established factthat there was no representation of the commons before NoCom-the time of legal memory, we have before us both the causeof the error, and the means of refuting it.This case was also distinguished by the committee fromthat of Winchelsea, by the same supposed custom of electionwhich we have already answered.They then proceed to explain some returns which were given Reiuriw.in evidence, of the reigns of Edward VI. and Philip and Mary ;from which it appeared, that the election had been made bycertain burgesses specially named, and all others of the commonalty; it was also inferred, from those expressions, that theothers** must have included the residue of the inhabitants. Another.Bat the committee held, that those terms were not conclusive; and by somewhat artificial reasoning they surmised,that they might mean " the others not specially named."However, they do not appear in any manner to have accountedfor the use of the word " commonalty ;" and not Common-withstandingit occurred in the return, they somewhathastily asserted, that there was no proof produced that anyof the inhabitants not burgh-holders had ever voted.The second resolution was, that the lord's bailiff — the samebeing no corporation, nor the bailiff the head officer therebut only the lord's minister — was not such a person as oughtto have the charge of the election. This was undoubtedlyan extraordinary view of the subject; for the not being acorporation, could have nothing to do with the question,whether the bailiff ought to be the returning officer ornot? And it is strange that it should be questioned,whether the lord's bailiff was the head officer of the town ;for we have seen that the mayors, provosts, and fortresseswere nothing but the king's bailiffs, and the lord must be Bailiffs.Immediatelyor immediately the representative of the king;and therefore, in analogy to every other place, the bailiffwould have been the returning officer. This resolution of5 Q1554 GLANVILLE'S REPORTS.James 1. the committee is the more singular, because there doesBleaching HOt appear to have been any other head officer, and the bailiff®^' had always before that time presided at the elections. It was,therefore, most extraordinary that, there being such anofficer, the committee should still have held that the writwas properly delivered to one of the electors, instead of him.Some constitutional doctrines with reference to the sufficiencyof the precept, as well as of the power of any electorReturning to act as returning officer, where there is none other appointedofficer.by law, are laid down in this case. But as such points, aswell as the resolutions respecting the conduct of one of thecandidates, are immaterial to our present inquiry, we shallpass them by, without any other observation, except that theproceedings on all sides seem to have partaken so much ofTimes, the violence of those times, that the extraordinary decisionsof the committee in this particular instance may probablybe accounted for on that ground.Early We should also observe, that this case, as well as theWinchelsea, appear to have been decided without any referenceto early charters or records ; excepting the two returnsin the Blechingley case, which the committee disregarded.The non-production of any records may, perhaps, be accountedfor from the confused state in which they were kept,as no attempt was made to arrange them till the beginningof this reign.*Calendar. The Calendar of the Charter Rolls contained in threevolumes, preserved in the Record-office in the Tower, andfrom which the Calendars Rotulorum Tartarus was publishedby the record commissioners in 1803, is supposed tohave been written some time during this reign.The summoning some of the ancient boroughs in thereigns of Henry VIII. and Queen Elizabeth — the inquiry intothe right of some of these places to return members to Parliament,to which allusion has already been made — coupledwith the recommendation to James I. to adopt the samecourse, but which was rejected by him as far as related toEngland, though not as to Ireland, might have led to theSee AylofFe's Introduction to the Calendar of the ancient charters.GLANVILLE'S REPORTS. I555foundation of that calendar, for the purpose of referring to J^""^ i-the ancient charters of the different cities, boroughs, and Bieching-- ley.towns.Be this as it may, it is certain that the assumption of aprescriptive right of election, which was adopted in boththese cases, was unfounded; and the committee do notappear to have had before them sufficient documents to enablethou to correct the error into which they had fallen.Blechingley never recovered from the effect of this decision,but always after continued a burgage tenure borough. Burgagewhich placed its election altogether at the disposal of theowner of the borough ; on which account it often became thesubject of purchase and sale, and was, perhaps too justly,suspected of great venality.6. The next case in Glanville* is Chippenham, the historyof which we have already given it does not therefore requirerepetition.DOVER.7. The next report is that of Dover, J which proceeded upontwo petitions, the one by the free barons or freemen inhabit inhabitantstants of Dover, complaining that they were not warned to theelection; — the other by the mayor, jurats, and commoncouncil, alleging, that they had proceeded as had been usualfor above sixty years, ever since the third of Elizabeth.It was in this case also erroneously assumed, that Doverhad sent burgesses to Parliament by prescription or customtime out of mind used.It was stated to be incorporated — which, in fact, tookplace in the 20th of Charles II. 1668.It was truly added, that the commonalty were anciently allthe free barons, or freemen, inhabitants of the port. Butthat at a customary assembly of the court called, " a com- Bye-law.moo Horn-blowing," (because it was summoned by theblowing of a horn), in the third year of Queen Elizabeth, itwas by the mayor and whole commons, or commonalty,Glan. p. 47. t See before. 1 189. t Glan. p. 63.5 G 21566 GLANVILLE'S REPORTS.James I. agreed, that there should be 37 of the most discreet commonsDover, to be chosen by the mayor and jurats, who should havepower for, and in the name of the whole commons, to chooseall officers in the town, as burgesses to the Parliament, andall other officers, which had been accustomed to be electedand chosen by the commons ; and such 37 were afterwardselected, and called the conmion council : and they only forthe whole commons, or commonalty, had joined in the choiceof burgesses to Parliament, and other elections : and theywere summoned for this election; but divers other freebarons, or freemen inhabitants of the port, though notsummoned, came and claimed to have their voices, butwere denied,list Resolve committee determined, first. That ** the ordinance of'' the third of Elizabeth, notwithstanding the antiquity thereof^* ought not to conclude the right of the other free barons or** freemen inhabitants of Dover, nor ought to prejudice the'^ interest of the commonwealth, by restraining the freedom'^ of election to Parliament, for the reasons delivered in thecases of Winchelsea and Chippenham : — However, it might"regulate the election of the officers of the town."2d Resolve Secondly, That " the long and constant usage should notbe considered as showing that the ordinance was declaratory,and a confirmation of a former ancient usage ; notwithstanding,it was inconvenient to disturb a course ofelection so long settled."For it appeared by the ordinance itself, that it was a'^ mere innovation ; for there was no such name or number as37 before :" and it recites, that the former election had beenby the commons; and if there had not been time out ofmind such a qualified number as 37, it was impossible thatany custom or prescription could be settled in them.The points with respect to the warning, or the exclusionof the electors, are not material to our inquiry ; and theother part of the history of Dover has been previously given.It is sufficient, in conclusion, to add, that it is clear theburgesses or barons of Dover were then the free inhabitants.But non-residents have been since admitted.GLANVILLE'S REPORTS. 1667James I.ARUNDEL.8. The next case which is reported is that of Arundel towhich we have before referred ;* and it is only necessary toadd further with respect to it — that it is one of the oldesttowns in England, — that it is a borough by prescription,being so called in Domesday, — and that the right of electionin it has been twice decided to be in the inhabitants paying ^^^'^^^^^^scot and lot who have always exercised it. It must howeverbe admitted, that the Malt-House Club, like the ChristianClub at Shoreham, has given it a notoriety in corruption.Notwithstanding this place is stated to have been incorporatedin the reign of Queen Elizabeth the members ofParliament have always been elected by the inhabitants; anda court-leet has been constantly held there. There is, therefore,no doubt that the inhabitant householders paying scotand lot, and consequently enrolled and sworn at the court^leetj Court leet.were the real burgesses of Arundel.NEWCASTLE-undergone.9. The case of Newcastle-undergone is next reported ;the early history of which it may be proper shortly tostate.This place is not mentioned as a borough, either in theSaxon Annals or in Domesday. The first trace which occursof it is in the second year of Richard I., in the roll of thetalliage of the demesnes and lands of the king : — but the menof the place, and not the burgesses, are spoken of; and,consequently, this document does not show that it was thena borough.The men of Newcastle are again mentioned in the same Men.manner, in the ninth of Edward I., in the grant of a fair.The borough first returned members in the 28th of Returned.Edward III., ever since which it has exercised the electiveVide ante, p. 98.t There is no trace of the existence of a municipal charter to Arundel, in thereign of Elizabeth, among the patent or confirmation rolls, at the Rolls Chapel.1668 GLANVILLE'S REPORTS.J^g^^' franchise. And in the Syst year of the same reign, there wasNewcastle a grant to the men of the borough.*Lyne. The return for this place came before the committee, upon^624. a petition by Mr. Feelings Although the account of thiscase given by Glanville, and that which is contained in theshort entry in the Journal, differ in some respects, each beingfuller than the other on particular points, yet in substancethey nearly agree.Nonce. The report of the case by Serjeant Glanville turns merelyupon the want of due warning, and the undue taking of the^®^'* poll, on which ground the election was declared void as toone of the members returned. But nothing appears as tothe right of election. In the Journals: it is stated, thatthe custom was for the mayor, aldermen, two bailiffs, and24, and all the common council, to return ; which is said tohave been proved by an ancient indenture. A thing highlyimprobable ; for there does not appear to be any indenturewhich would justify such an assertion, and the practice hassince been for the body of freemen at large to vote.Bye-law. But it is further stated, that they had a new charter, andhad made a hye-lady that the mayor, two bailiffs, and chiefburgesses should elect. Accordingly, the chief burgesseselected — none of the commonalty being in the upper room,as we have seen before in the Chippenham case.And it was resolved, as in the Chippenham case, that ^* the*' hye-law could not alter the former customs*Newcastle-undergone was incorporated by a charter ofCharles II. But, as it had returned members to Parliamentfor centuries before, it is clear, from the authority of theChippenham case, that the charter could not have altered oraffected the right of election.1703. After this time, many petitions were presented againstthe returns for this place, but no report was made till thegreed ^^^^^ y^^^ ^^ Queen Anne, when the right of election wasagreed to be in the mayor , bailiffs and burgesses ; a right,resolving itself, as has been observed before, into the right• Prynne, 1074. f Glan. p. 76. \ 1 Journ., p. 761. April 9, 1624.itGLANVILLE'S REPORTS. 1559of the burgesses, which is capable of being extended and <^^>"«* i*in law ought to be extended, to the inhabitant householders. NewcastleBut in this case it was, according to the then notions of Lyne.freemen, limited by the farther agreement of the parties tothe sons of freemen, born whilst their fathers were residentwithin the borough, and those who had served apparentticeships, demanding to be made free within a year after'* their apprenticeship expired." And it was also agreed,that ** the burgesses, being out of the borough a year and a** day, had no right to their freedoms."The observation already so often made, must here berepeated, that the agreement of the parties could not alterthe right of election.The only reasonable mode of accounting for the supposedsuperior right of the sons of freemen and apprentices, hasbeen before explained.But from these agreements, one most material inference Residence.is to be drawn, that it was assumed on all hands, that residencewas necessary, for it is expressly said, that ^* burgesses** residing out of the borough, a year and a day, had no right Year andto their freedoms." And the necessity of apprentices claim ' *^*ing their freedom within one year, seems to have been foundedon the same principles of the common law.It is worthy of observation also, that the doctrine of theyear and a day is borrowed from the law of frankpledge, bywhich a person residing for that period within a borough,even if he were a villain, became free : and, as a consequence,was both bound and entitled to be sworn, and enrolled in thelist of resiants, at the court leet ; such a person, during theyear, if he was in pledge in any other place, was only boundto do his suit where he was in pledge; but after the expirationof the year, he was bound to do it at the place wherehe then resided, and became released from the suit at theplace where he before dwelt ; — as is stated in this agreementof the right with respect to the burgesses of Newcastle.It would therefore seem impossible not to attribute this effect of non-residence for a year and a day to the law offrankpledge, with which it so entirely coincides ; and there is1560 GLANVILLE'S REPORTS.'^"°^^' no ground for thinking that such a provision had any sortNewcastle of connexion with the admission oi freemen into any tradingLyne. corporation or society.Sitting ^ According to the practice of other corporations it appearedcase. that the mayor, on the day of election, made some free whodemanded their freedom.Election ^^ committee declared the election void.1706. Ii ^^ fourth year of Queen Anne, there was another petittion; when it appeared that the right was agreed to be in the^'***^' mayor J bailiffs and burgesses, or freemen resident.The introduction of the term " freemen" in this agreedright, as a synonyme for ** burgess," is a decisive indicationof the attempts which were at that time made to convert theancient common law " burgess" into the " freeman" of incorporatedsocieties, under the control of their immediateheads.Resolution The Committee resolved, that the petitioners were dulyelected.1715. There have been other petitions against the return forthis place, but they do not affect the right of election,excepting that one of the 2nd of George I., speaks of ** bornburgesses' and others who had served apprenticeships.1792. Upon another petition, in the 33rd of George III., themerits depended partly upon the right ; the committee calledsutementoupon the parties to deliver statements according to thestatute, which was accordingly done.For Petit For the petitioners it was asserted, — that the right was intones*the " mayor, bailiffs and burgesses or freemen, whose placeof residence at the time of their giving their votes, was inthe borough, or who at such time had no peace of residenceelsewhere, and who had never been absent from the boroughfor the space of a gear and a day, without interruption, sincethey were admitted to the freedom thereof; or whose families(if they were masters of families) had not been absentfor that period, without interruption, after the time of theadmission of such burgesses or freemen having families,to the freedom of the borough."For sitting « , , .members. For the sitting members, it was said, that the right wastiGLANVILLE'S REPORTS. 1561in the *' freemen residing in the borough, and not receiving JMpe«l-** ans or church bread ; and that persons living a year and Newcastleundera day out of the borough, lost their freedom." Lyne.The committee negatived both these rights, and deter ^n^™*'mined that the right was in freemen residing in the borough.The statement for the petitioners appears to have beendrawn up with reference to the law of frankpledge; ex Frankpledge.meeting that it assumes that the burgesses and freemenwere the same, which assumption has created most of thedifficulties in the borough right of election.Resting the right upon the sound ground of fixing it wherethe person had his real domicile, is perfectly in conformity Domicile,with the law of the leet ; and the sitting member also adoptedthe proper distinction as to the absence for a year anda day.But the committee, by its decision, rejected all thesewholesome doctrines of the common law; — rejected the peculiarlyappropriate term of " burgess," to be met with in allthe writs and returns, from the earliest period ; and adoptedthe newly-introduced term (at least in this sense) of freemenleaving the making of them entirely in the discretion ofthe corporation, whose creatures they must be: — no otherrestriction being imposed but that of residence : — which is,however, so far constitutional, that it confines the right toinhabitants ; but is unconstitutional, inasmuch as it may notinclude all the duly qualified inhabitants.In conclusion, it should be remarked, that notwithstandingthe modem corporate right of election was thus established inthis place, ancient burgage tenements have always existedin it, and are so mentioned in a recent case at law, whichtherefore would appear to justify a burgage tenure right ofelection, if it had any real foundation in law.CAMBRIDGE COUNTY.10. The case of the county of Cambridge is not material toour inquiry.i1562 GLANVILLE'S REPORTS.James I.AMERSHAM, Andover,MARLOW, HERTFORD.11. Nor those of Amerskamf Marlow, Wendover, or Hertford,except for the purpose of observing, that during thedebate respecting them. Sir Robert Heath, then solicitor-general,stated '' that information bad been given to the'' king, that many other boroughs in several parts of the** realm might make the like claim as these, which might,** peradventure, give occasion of offence to his majesty, if•'< they should all come to be restored from this example,** and so cumber the Commons House of Parliament with an** excemve and unnecessary number ;*' following up the declarationof bis majesty, to which we have before referred, thathe was unwilling to have the number of burgesses increased,declaring '^ that he was troubled with too great a numberalready." And it is said that the king commanded the thensolicitor-general, Sir Robert Heath, being in the House, tooppose it what he might; and most of the Onions, understandingthe king's inclination, did their utmost endeavoursto cross it.But it is curious to remark the decisions as to the classof burgesses in these four places, all restored under similarcircumstances.Amenham As to Amersham, in the 32nd of Charles XL, the right1680. was decided to be in the inhabitants only, who paid scotand lot*1698. In the tenth year of William and Mary, the right wasadmitted to be in the inhabitant housekeepers ; and objectionswere taken to persons who only held parts of houses, and tosome who were inhabitants by certificate.1705. In the 4th of Queen Anne, the petitioners insisted that theright was in the householders. The sitting member, on theother hand, stated that the right was only in such housekeepersas paid scot and lot ; the one being called '^ the longpole," the other the " short pole ;" and evidence was given onboth sides ; but the committee decided that the right was inthe inhabitants paying scot and lot only.GLANVILLE'S REPORTS. 1563And it appears that the returning officers were the con J»m« I-Sums. Amenhm.As to Marlow, in the 32nd of Charles II. — the same year Marrow.as the decision relative to Amersham — it was determined that 1680.the right was in the inhabitants only, who paid scot and lot.In the second of William and Mary, the petitioners insisted 1G90.that the right was in the inhabitants and householders — thesitting member in the inhabitant householders, who paid scotand lot. And it was resolved, that '^ those inhabitants who*' paid scot and lot, had a right to vote''And in this instance also, the constables appointed at thecourt leet were the returning officers.As to Wendover, in the first year of Queen Anne, the right andover.of election was agreed to be in the inhabitants, being house 1702.holders Some were objected to, as coming to reside in theborough by certificates from other parishes ; and it was resolved,they had not a right to vote.Some, also, were objected to as not being housekeepers,but living with others. And the returning officers in thisplace were also the constables.The history of Hertford we have already given,* in which Hertford,it will be remembered it appeared that, notwithstanding atonetime non-resident freemen had been made by the corporation,and at another, non-residents were allowed tovote by a committee of the House of Commons — they wereeventually excluded, and the right was at length properlyfixed, according to the common law, in the inhabitanthouseholders ; but the freemen of the corporation, (this beingthe only case of the four at that time restored to the electivefranchise) were allowed to vote : but they were restrainedto residents.Stourbridge.12. Hie Stockbridge case is foreign to our inquiry, relatingonly to the presumption of due warning being given, unless• Vide ante, p. 174, ct seq.1564 GLANVILLE'S REPORTS.JmdcsI. the contrary was proved.* The petition was by the inhabitStock tants ; and we have before shown, that the right was alwaysinhabitants ®^®rc*sed in Stockbridge by them, as well as that there hadCourt leet. always been a court leet held there, at which all the householdersattended, and continue to do so to this day.GLOUCESTER COUNTY.13. The case of the county of Gloucester also, relatedonly to the liability of a member to serve, though elected{^inst his consent]: — secondly, that the departure § ofsome of the freeholders before the poll, could not defeatthe election ; — and, thirdly, that the votes of those whocame after the poll began ought to have been received.CIRENCESTER.14. The case of Cirencester we have also commented uponbefore,|| as far as necessary for our present purpose, andhave also given a short account of its parliamentary HAVERFORDWEST.16. The Haverfordwest case only determined, that a petitionmight be adjourned till the next session**Salisbury.16. From Malmsbury there was a petition by the inhabitants-yf-)^ but the petitioners not appearing to support it,the sitting member was confirmed in his seat.j:j; Hereafterwe may have occasion to mention this borough again.MIDDLESEX.17. The cases also which follow are not material. In thatof the county of Middlesex the question was, whether thepetitioners,^^ being desirous to withdraw the petition, thecommittee were prevented from proceeding with it ; and itwas held that they were not: but as there was no apeGlan. p. 97. t See before, p. 1123. % Glan. p. 99.So also the Cirencester case ; Glan. 108, fourth resolution.11 See before, p. 1281. S Glan. p. 104. *• Glan. p. 112. ft Glan. p. 115.XX Vide post. temp. Will. III. $$ Glan. p. 117.GLANVILLFS REPORTS. 1565appearance of fraud or practice in withdrawing it, the committee-^^"^ ^'permitted it to be done as desired.MONMOUTH.18. In the Monmouth case* the question was, whether anative of Scotland, made a denizen of England, was eligibleas a member to Parliament. And two instances were mentionedof such persons sitting. To which it was answeredby the committee, that in those instances no question wasmade, nor exception taken to. the returns, so that it did notappear to the House that they were aliens ; znA, prima fadeevery one who is returned, is presumed to be capable of sittinguntil the contrary is shown. But the committee decided,that, in this instance, the individual was not capable ofserving as a member. And, as he was incapable at the timeof his election, he could not afterwards, even by beingnaturalized by act of Parliament, be rendered fit to serve.CUMBERLAND.19. In the case of the county of Cumberland one of theknights of the shire was objected to, as outlawed at thetime of his election ; and, after debate, the House resolved,that the party was eligible notwithstanding his outlawry.Record.20. The parliamentary and municipal history of Least Retford we have already given ;;}: and this case, reported inGlanville contains no further matter to which it is at allnecessary for us to refer.POMFRET.21. The only remaining case is that of Pomfret,\\ which isso important, that it will require a particular investigation : —having, at one time or the other, exhibited in its history eachof the supposed rights of election of " burgage tenure," and• Glan. p. 120. t Glan. p. 124. t Vide ante, p. 468, 1258, 1282, 1298.§ Glan. p. 128. || Glan. p. 133.i1666 GLANVILLE'S REPORTS.J""^^' "corporate right;" but it has eventually been decided to bePomfret. in the " inhabitant householders resident**It is not mentioned in Domesday although in the reportof the case respecting this place, in 1791, by Mr. Eraser, itis stated, that it is mentioned as a borough in Domesday,and that the tenants are called " burghers :" in truth, there isno mention whatever of its being a borough ; still less of theburghers. There is some obscure mention* of a castle, butit is doubtful whether it is applicable to this place or not.And it is suggested in Eraser's Reports that the entry of*^ Tatteshalle," in Domesday, refers to Pomfret, which isvery questionable ; and if it does, there is in that entry onlyBurgenaet mention of the " burgesses minutes'' which cannot supportthe inference that they referred to what is called the^ burghers," as descriptive of the burgage tenants.Pomfret returned members to Parliament, as early as the23rd and 26th of Edward I. ;t after which it intermitted tillit had obtained a charter from James I., in the fourth yearof his reign.1403. We have before seen that there was a charter to Pomfret,in the fifth year of Henry IV.,§ but it was not one of incorporation:nor was the borough, in fact, incorporated till the1483. first year of Richard III.1621. In the 19th of James I., having previously received thecharter in the fourth year of his reign, it was moved in theHouse, that it should return members to Parliament : and,on that occasion, it was proved, that in the 10th and 11th ofHenry VI., a return had been made from this place that theycould not send members, by reason of their poverty, and anew writ was ordered.1624. In the 22nd of James I.,|| a petition was presented againstthe return for this borough, the election of one person havingbeen made by the mayor, some of the aldermen andburgesses ; and another by some of the other aldermen andburgesses.Resolutions were made with respect to these returns,Domes. torn. 1. p. 373 b. f I Fraser, p. 417. t 1 Journ. 572, 576.§ Vide ante, p. 793, 1035. 1| Glan. p. 134.GLANVILLFS REPORTS. 1667which are not material to our subject; excepting that by Camel.one of them it was determined that the precept was well Pomfret.directed to the mayor, aldermen, and burgesses.The question upon the double return having been settled,the merits of the election were considered by the committee.The (acts are then stated in the report. But, like many ofthe other statements, some of the assertions are not correct.The fir is, that it was a parliamentary borough by prescription,which we have abundantly shown could not bethefact.It is also stated, that Henry IV. incorporated it, which wehave also negatived before. And in truth, the charter onlygrants the power to assemble in the Mote-hall,* and electfrom themselves thirteen comburgenses, twelve besides themayor, — no doubt, originally, the jury.f Mary.After this, follow the resolutions of the committee, whichare important, and worthy the fullest consideration.It was agreed by the committee, 1st. That '' where no 1st.*^ constant and certain custom appears, who should be the** electors in a parliamentary borough, then recourse must'' be had to the common laws or common right**From the investigation which has taken place since thetime of this resolution, into the records of Parliament, andthe returns which have been brought to light, it is now clear,that there can be no " custom" for returning members to theHouse of Commons, for that body did not exist before thetime of legal memory. And therefore this doctrine, (thequalification being removed,) must apply to all boroughsand, consequently, in considering who have the right ofSee before, p. 793.t A recital occurs in the above charter, nmilar to those we have seen in NorthamptonLeieuUtt and Winchester, That the king had been informed, that the electionof mayor had been made by the greater number of the voices and suffrages of theburgess of the town or borough ; but upon account of that mode of election,controversies had arisen between the mayor, compresses and burgesses, andthat the peace had been disturbed ; that to prevent which, for the future, atthe annual election of mayor, every hurgeu of the town or borough, except theoomlmrgesees, should inscribe his suffrage upon a little scroll of paper, (** inpara pecia papilio*) which he should place in a bag or box, to be provided by themayor and burgesses for that purpose.— Vide ante, pp. 231 , et seq. et 906.Iggg GLANVILLE'S REPORTS.James I. election; or, to speak more definitely, who were the fatr-Pomfret. 9^^^ 9 recourse must be had to thee common lady' (which ithas been the leading object of this undertaking to enforce,)or to ^' common rights' which is defined before in theCirencester case.2ndiy. Secondly, it was agreed, — that the charter of Henry IV.(which is incorrectly stated to be a charter of incorporation),did not in words extend, nor could the matter of any charterbe of force to abridge or alter that common right, in case ofan election to Parliament.This position, like the former, decides the point we havethroughout maintained: for as the common right, in theCirencester case, is declared to be for all men, inhabitants,householders, resiants, within the borough to vote — so, bythis rule, that right cannot be abridged or altered by anycharter of the crown; — the doctrine we have throughoutasserted. And, in truth, as is here also stated, and as wehave shown with respect to every charter quoted, they didnot purport or intend to alter the right of election, but ratherto confirm it ; — and there is nothing to support the contraryposition, except the false constructions which have been imposedupon the charters.3^1 Thirdly, the common right was again laid down as inthe former case of Cirencester.*4thiy. And in the fourth resolution it was again said, that theEicciori *^c"^ " electors" comprehended all inhabitants, householders,residents.')^In the report of the same case in the Journals, j: one of themischiefs attending the arbitrary power of the corporationsto make freemen is recorded ; for it is said, that 40 personswere made burgesses to carry the election.We have before had occasion to remark the abuses andusurpations which arose from the contending parties takingSee before, p. 1281, and Glanville, p. 170.t The limiting the right to the rMtan(«, who were the suitors at the eourt'Ueiis perfectly justified in Pomfret, as a court of that description was held in theborough ; although, in some of the documents, it seems to have been mistaken forthe court baron. — 1 Sound. 134.X See Journal, April Ist, 1624.Glanville REPORTS. 1569upon themselves to fix the right of election by their own James I.offreemeni ; and it is singular, that the House, or the com- Pomfret.mittens should ever have permitted so great an irregularity.Pomfret affords a most striking instance of this — forin the 11th year of William and Mary — only 76 years after 1699.the full inquiry into the right of election, which is reportedglanville; and after the cautious and constitutional determinationat which the committee arrived, of the right beingin the ** inhabitant householders reliant' — the parties agreedthat it was in such persons as had an inheritance in burgagetenure within the borough; — which, if permitted to.prevail, would in point of fact have given to the electors apower which the king could not exercise by his charter, norany other power in the state, excepting the Legislature, bya summary alteration of the constitution — ^which, of course,it would not be likely to make without the most urgentnecessity.Nor can any thing prove more convincingly the unjustifi- Burgageable grounds upon which the burgage tenure right of votinghas been founded, than that the parties to the inquiry in i^^*1699, should have taken upon themselves to agree that theright in Pomfret was of that description.And with reference to that right, it seems that they speedilyintroduced the abuses which have so generally accompaniedit ; — as it appeared in evidence, that " many deeds were madeto enable persons to vote at the election ;" — and the usualfrauds were attempted, of several persons voting for thesame burgage. Some of the deeds appear only to havebeen dated two or three days before the teste of the writ ;and evidence was also given of bribery and treating.The election was declared to be void. ^i^^°"In a report on a second petition in the second of George I., 1715.it was stated, that it was agreed Pomfret was a borough byprescription — and that the right of election was agreed to bein those who had a freehold of inheritance, and paid aburgage rent. And in the course of the evidence it wasproved, that 41 voters had been tendered for the petitioners ;in proving whose titles before the committee, it appeared6 H1670 GLANVILLE'S REPORTS.Jamol. that the consideration-monies had only been paid by notesPomfret. given for them. And on the other side it was contendedthat many of the votes were split votes — some were notburgage tenants— and others had no title — ^and there was afee-farm book of the burgage tenants, in which there were40 or 50 alterations made in the same clerk's hand-writingsdiffering from former books ; the rents being changed to makeor not to make a burgage rent as should favour the sittingmembers*1770. In the 10th of George III., the election at this place was^igain investigated. The return was by the *' inhabitantshouseholders and resiants ;" but the House, misled, no doubt,by the last two agreements of the parties; and evidence beinggiven only on one side ; resolved, that the " holders of bur-geetenures only were the voters"*1775. In the 16th of George III., the right of election was againdisputed ,+ the question being, " Whether the resolution of1624, or that of 1770, was to be considered the last determinationof the House."It was truly stated, in the course of the argument, thatno charter anterior to that of Henry IV., mentioned byGlanville, contained any regulations relative to the rightof election : — ^and it might be added, that the subsequentcharters are also destitute of any clause to that effect. Infact, the charter of Richard III. grants the same libertieswhich were enjoyed by the inhabitants of Stamford, J wherethe election was in the inhabitants paying scot and lot,1783. In the 23rd of George III., the right of election for Pomfretagain came before a committee. The sitting member insistedupon the " burgage right," and the petitioner for the " in-habitants."§The committee resolved in favour of the latter, contrary toall the former determinations but the first.||1785. Two years afterwards, a question arose again as to theright of election :1[ the contest was between the inhabitantsand the burgage right. — The petition of the burgesses• 32Joum. 665. t 1 Douc;.377. t Vide ante. p.270, et scq.§ Journ. April llth, 17ft3. || 1 Laid. 5. f I Lud. 3.GLANVILLE'S REPORTS. 1571stated, that in 1768, the return had been made by the free J^^^-holders of burgage tenure only, agreeably to the constitution Pomfret.and uninterrupted usage of the borough ; but that an attemptwas then first made to overthrow that right of election,and to establish it in the householders inhabitants and resents.Reference was next made to the old entries in theJoumaky and to the evidence given upon that occasion. Theright being finally settled, as we have seen before, in 1776,to be in the freeholders of burgage tenure paying a burgagerent. It then set out the subsequent claims of the inhabitants,which it characterised as an attempt to overturn theancient constitutions of the borough ; and referred to thedecision of the House, that no evidence should be givencontrary to the determination in 1770.The petition also stated the subsequent proceedings in theborough; and concluded by alleging, that in consequenceof the different claims which had been set up by the inhabitanthouseholders and burgage freeholders, two representativesto Parliament of this borough had for some timesat in Parliament, as returned under these two contradictoryrights.Upon the question propounded by the committee, whetherthe entries in the Journals of 1624 and 1770 were to beread ? — it was agreed by the parties that, in order to preventconfusion in the arguments, both those resolutions shouldbe read, without prejudice to the question, and withoutreading the standing order of 1735; so that the whole case(m each side might be considered at once.In the course of the evidence it appeared that, in 1776, 1775.the return of the election which followed the determinationof the House in 1624, was not then found in the properoffice, and therefore was not produced.But it had been since discovered, and was given in evil Returns.hence before this committee, purporting to be made by themayor, aldermen, and burgesses. The return upon whichthis petition was founded stated, the election to have beenmade by the inhabitants and was the first return in whichthat term occurred.5h21572 GLANVILLE'S REPORTS.Jameil. Upon this it should be observed, that, notwithstanding thePomfret. right by the common law was certainly in the inhabitanthouseholders paying scot and lot — yet the term '^ inhabittants'* was never used either in the ancient charters, or inthe ancient municipal documents.Neither in strictness ought it ever to have been used ; forit was not a term known to the law, with reference to thissubject matter.But there inhabitant householder paying scot and lot in aborough, was a burgess ; and therefore the term " burgess"is that which always was adopted by the ancient documents,and ought always to have been continued — particularly withreference to the parliamentary elections, where the writsBorgoees. and precepts, and all the earlier statutes connected with thatsubject, relate only to the " burgesses."inhabitants The gradual introduction of the term " inhabitants'' wehave shown in the progressive stages of our history, andhave endeavoured to explain the causes of it. But, nevertheless,it should always be considered as an innovation; andit is much calculated to mislead, unless the ancient historyis sedulously kept in mind.The mayor and town clerk were called as witnesses, forthe purpose of proving the constitution of the borough. Butamoment's reflection is sufficient to show, that it wouldbe impossible for them to do more than to speak to theUsages, modem usage in their recollection; which must have beenlong subsequent to the time when the burgage tenure righthad been so strangely adopted by the committees; and,consequently, their evidence merely went to their understandingof the meaning of the term " burgesses which theynecessarily described as being " a person possessed of afreehold of burgage tenure."It was admitted, that none but burgage tenants claimedto vote at the elections for the year 1768, as far as any livingwitnesses could prove. But the committee resolved, thatthe resolution of 1624 was a last determination within the2 Geo. II. 2 George II. ch. 24. sect. 4.1791. In 1791, Pomfret election again came before a committee;GLANVILLFS REPORTS. 1573the petition stating :* — that it was an ancient borough of ■^*"^^'burgage tenure, and an ancient corporation which consisted Pomfret.of freeholders of burgage tenure, P^yii^ & burgage rent (adescription of a corporation which has never been met withbefore); and it added, that they only were the personslegally entitled to vote ; — but that, in violation of that right,the mayor had taken upon himself to reject many personshaving freeholds of burgage tenure, and admitting manywho claimed to vote as inhabitants, householders, andresiants.The former resolutions of 1624 and 1770 were read inevidence, and the contest again in this case was — which ofthese should be taken to be the last determination withinthe act of George II. ?The counsel for the petitioners seems to have unjustifiably Petition-stated— that Pomfret was mentioned as a borough in Domesday,and that the tenants were there called "burghers;"both of which we have already shown not to be the fact; andreference was made to the charters of Roger de Lasci, constableof Chester, and Lord of Pomfret, and also to Henry charter.de Lasci, Earl of Lincoln, which do not materially affectthe question as to the class of persons who were the burgessesof Pomfret. If they did, their genuineness might befairly questioned, as they contain the word " successors,"at a period before that term was introduced into municipalcharters in this country. And the committee seem to havedoubted their being the original charters ; and the counselfor the petitioners appear to have fallen into an error, insupposing that the charters made any distinction betweenthe burgesses and inhabitants — the only two classes mentionedin them being the " burgesses" and the " forinseci."The charter of Richard III.+ was also referred to; and thereturns of members to Parliament were quoted, but, in truth. Returns.proved nothing satisfactory.Modem usage was relied upon, and the determination of Usage.1624 was termed " an obscure entry upon the Journals, anda conceit adopted by Mr. Glanville's committee." The1 Fraser, 183. t Vide ante, pp. 422, 439, 528.1674 GLANVILLE'S Reportscounsel for the petitioners discussed the whole merits of thePomfret. case at great length.Evidence. The above charters were given in evidence, and also thoseof Henry IV. and James I., as well as the former proceedingsin Parliament.Parol evidence was also adduced for the petitioner, butwhich, for the reasons given before, could not extend beyondthe decisions in favour of the burgage tenants. It wasfound, that entries in the books of the borough, of 1708,1713, and 1714, frequently described the sites of thetenements for which the votes were tendered ; but this, andthe other evidence to the same point, was perfectly consistentwith the right of the inhabitant householders to vote. Theonly error, as already pointed out, was considering the " freeholders"as the voters, instead of the " occupiers." Evidencewas also given, that the inhabitants had not made anyclaim before 1768, and that they never interfered in theelection of mayor or other corporate elections ; the rightdtn^' of the out-aldermen or non-residents to vote for aldermen,was insisted upon ; but it was said they did not join in thechoice of a mayor, and that the out-burgesses had voted andcarried an election, though their right was denied.In summing up, the counsel for the petitioners properlystated, that the effect of the charter of Richard III., was togive to the burgesses the superadded qualification of a corporation; but he, with less accuracy, spoke of the right ofthe inhabitants as a speculative opinion of the common lawright. But this sarcasm has been effectually answered, byshowing, that the common law right is founded upon theearliest laws and charters, and confirmed by the most ancientdocuments.Sitting The counsel for the sitting members quoted the authoritymembers. . .of Sir Joseph Jekyll, for asserting that " uncertainty in definingthe right of election, would be productive of greatand general hardship," which would be altogether preventedby the universality and certainty of the right shownto be founded on the common law.The learned counsel remarked, that London and CarlisleGlanville's REPORTS. 157£had both of them numerous burgage possessions; and yet Justinneither of them does the burgage tenure right prevail. PomfretHe referred to the Windsor wad Preston cases,* and remarkedas the fact was, that neither in the charter of HenryIV., Richard III., or James I., is the right of returningmembers mentioned.He further justly urged, that the committee ought to havelooked with a jealous eye to an usage which must have takenits origin since the reign of James I. ; and that there weremany instances of returns being made in the names of thelargesses where the right was exercised by the inhabitantsof ike borough.The other learned counsel for the sitting member rightlyobserved, that Roger de Lasci granted privileges to \i\^freelargesses as contradistinguished from his villains; and he Villain.referred to the case of Ilchester, which borough petitionedto be restored to the right of election, and it was exercisedby the inhabitants paying scot and lot.The counsel for the petitioners, in reply, roundly asserted, Reply.that the origin of the right of election in this country, wasterritorial ; this has been negatived by the history of thatright, and the documents which have been quoted. And hestrenuously argued against the common law rights and saidthat none such was known ; but that there was a lex lociin every place, which governed the right. The reader willhave seen, that also is contradicted by the whole tenor ofthis investigation ; and no point can be more material, as itis from this erroneous doctrine of the lex loci, that all thevarying and anomalous usages have arisen and been supported; and the great difficulty and intricacy of this nationalquestion been produced.The counsel also relied much upon the name of the '^ bur Burgesses.gesses ;'' which, it is obvious, is as reconcilable with theright of the ^^ inhabitants of the borough," as any others : heappears more correctly to have supposed that some at leastof the *^ inhabitants" were contradistinguished from the• Vide ante.1676 GLANVILLE'S Reports-JOURNALS.'^"°"^' " burgesses," as villains; for it is clear that only the freePomfret inhabitants were burgesses, and villains were excluded.The case was most zealously argued in favour of the burgagetenure right, and against the inhabitants: but theRight, committee negatived the former, and declared the right to be,as in the resolution in 1624, in the ^* inhabitants householdersresiants:** — the correspondence of which, with the wholetenor of the common law, we have already pointed out.Thus Pomfret, like Windsor, the history of which has beenbefore given, had for a great length of time a different rightof election existing in it, and confirmed by repeated decisionsin the House of Commons ; but yet, after the most patientinvestigation, and the best assistance of the most able counsel,a committee under the new judicature, created by theGrenville Act, solemnly decided that the common law rightprevailed there, and that the inhabitants were entitled tovote.JOURNALS.JoumaU Besides the parliamentary decisions we have cited fromGlanville, there are some few others to be found upon theJournals, which it may be necessary to mention. Howevermuch accurate information is not to be expected in thisreign, because ** the Journals (being for the most partminutes taken by the clerk, and not afterwards transcribed)are in many places incorrect and almost illegible, and*^ are also much impaired by length of time and various*' accidents."Corpora In the course of this inquiry, the gradual introduction of*'°°** corporations has been marked, as well as their general adoptionin this reign. A confirmation of it is found in the Rang's1603. speech to the House in the first year of his reign,* in which,for the first time, the members of Parliament are describedas burgesses of the towns and corporations — neither termbeing warranted, either by the history of our constitution, orby the writs or precepts, all of which are confined to the returnsof citizens or burgesses for cities and boroughs ; and• 1 Jour. 146.ititJOURNALS. 1577this term, " corporation," could not have been adopted had J"""^'it not been for the recent general introduction of them.In the second year of James L, upon an inquiry into the ie04.election for Cardigan the person who was returned is de Reliant.scribed as resiant within the town.And in the 18th of James L, it was determined, that an 1620.election of a knight for the shires not resiant at the day of thesummons, was void in law, and as if there had been no choice.And Sir Edward Coke said, that this question was one ofthe greatest consequence.SANDWICH.In a case relative to the election for Sandwich, in the 1 8th 1620.of James !.,;{; it appears that the borough consisted of a mayor,jurats, and commons, and that by an order by Lord Cobham,warden, and confirmed by the lords of the council, themayor and jurats only were to make the election, and thecommons were thereupon debarred from giving their voices.The committee decided that the election of the person whowas returned by the mayor and jurats only, without the commons,was held to be void.The right therefore of the select body was in this caseexpressly negatived.UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD, &c.The University of Oxford in the beginning of this reign, leon.obtained the only other privilege which was necessary toestablish its temporal importance, namely, the right of returningmembers to Parliament. These institutions being ancientlyaltogether ecclesiastical, the proper place for them tohave been represented was in the convocations, and theirmembers ought to have been ecclesiastics ; but convocationsbeing in effect annihilated it was an apparent hardship onthe clergy not to be represented at all, and therefore a moreliberal interpretation of the election laws led to the admissionof the votes of clergymen at county and borough elections, andalso afforded a just claim for allowing representatives in• I Jour. 170. t 1 Jour. 615, 516. t I Jour. 668. § 1 Peck, 48.1578 JOURNALS.Janet. Parliament to this learned body. There appears thereforeUniversity doubt that tic object proposed was justifiable and reasonable;and it has been properly said that the universities,by reason both of the nature and progress of their foundation,had the strongest claims to be represented in Parliamentand the only material question is, whether the modeof doii^ it was strictly legal"* The grant was not confirmedby Parliament, but was a mere charter of the crown. Themost material clause in it, after a long exordium stating theextent, wealth, and antiquity of the university, directs that itshall have '' burgesses* to Parliament of themselves: — which issomewhat anomalous, because, as the university was not abarcughj they could not have, according to the words of thischarter, two '' burgesses'' to Parliament But it is obviousthat these words were intended to assimilate the universityas much as possible, with the ancient boroughs. The members,in conformity with the ancient writs, were directed tobesom themselves : and the causes of their being returned toParliament are said to be, that they might inform the Parliamentof the state of their university, and that nothingmight be enacted against them without their knowledge.By a clause in the charter, the sheriff of Oxford is directed,whenever he receives a writ for the election of members toParliament, to send his precept to the chancellors, electors,and scholars of the university for the election and return oftoo burgesses.1625. In the 23rd year of this reign, the return for the universitywas declared to be void ; but with that exception theirelections have not been in dispute.This power the university has ever since exercised in themost constitutional and exemplary manner, in one respecteffectually putting a stop to those low arts and expedientswhich are too frequently adopted in elections, by prohibitingthe candidate from canvassing, or even approaching the cityan example highly worthy of imitation throughout thecountry, and probably nothing would tend more to the purityand propriety of elections, if such a course were generally• 1 Feck, 33.CHARTERS. 1679adopted, or be more in analogy with the ancient principles JMnesl.of our constitution.A similar charter was also granted to the University ^^r°oTr?Cambridge which has in like manner, ever since, returnedtwo members to Parliament.These charters were, in the 14th of James I., brought I6I6.before the Court of King's Bench, when their former grantswere also referred to"* and likewise the confirmation by actof Parliament, in the 13th of Queen Elizabeth. It was heldthat the Universities might proceed as they had before.A btfe-law of the seventh of James I. is mentioned in the 1609.case of Dodtoell v. the University of Oxford ;f but beingsubsequent to the statute of corporations of the 13th ofElizabeth, it was questioned by the court, whether it waswarranted by it or not.Besides the privileges given to the Universities, James I., 1605.in the third year of his reign, granted a charter to the cityof Oxford, confirming privileges essentially the same asthose granted to other boroughs at this period.CAMBRIDGE.There is also a charter of the same date, making Cambridgea free boroughs and the men of it free burgesses.And granting that the mayor, bailiffs, and burgesses shouldbe a body corporate, by the name of " the mayor, bailiffs,and burgesses of the borough of Cambridge ;" with powerfor the mayor, bailiffs, and burgesses, of whom the mayorwas to be one, to make bye-laws, so that they were notrepugnant to the laws, statutes, customs, or rights of therealm, or the reasonable and laudable prescriptions andcustoms used in the same borough.Sedley.King James I., as Queen Mary had done in the threeinstances in her reigns of Abingdon, Banbury, and HighamFerrers, granted a charter to Bewdley, in the county ofWorcester, that it should return one member to Parliament.Bestrode, 212. t 2 Vent. 33. X 1 Lutw. 402. $ See before.1580 CHARTERS.J^BieaJ, It had been previously incorporated in the 1 eth year of1472. Edward Iv,* and additional privileges were granted to itifioe. in the 22nd of Henry VIL In the first year of Henry VIII.1509. there is another charter, confirming the former, and recitingthem by inspeximus.1605. It was in the third year of this reign that the charter ofincorporation was granted to it, reciting that it had for sometimediscontinued sending members to Parliament — a factsomewhat doubtful, as it does not distinctly appear that ithad ever sent members before to Parliament. It is certainthat it was not included as a borough in DomesdayIt is stated by an author who has written on this subject,that the charter directed ** the burgesses whether inhabitantsor not, to be the electors." But no such wordsare to be found in the charter upon the Patent Rolls. Itgives a power to the bailiff* and burgesses to elect one member,being a burgess of the borough ; and the bailiff andburgesses are to send him to Parliament! at their owncosts and charges, as in other boroughs and corporatetowns.The constitution of Bewdley has been since in some degreealtered, by charters of Charles IL, James II., and QueenAnne ; but in nothing which materially affects the subject ofour inquiry ; and the charter generally resembles the othercharters we have quoted of those periods.1662. Shortly after the Restoration, the election of this placecame before a committee of the House of Commons and likeRight, the decision in Banbury, the right was held to be confinedto the twelve new burgesses, appointed by the charter ofJames I.The following is an extract from the Report : —Report. Serjeant Charlton reported, that the question arose uponthe words of the charter of the third of James I.,(| whichmentions the former charter, and incorporates the burgesses,by the name of " the bailiffs and burgesses' which burgessesfirst to be chosen, were confined to the number of twelve,• Vide ante, p. 1002. f Vide ante, 211. t Pat. 3 Eliz.See also post. || 8 Jouro.414.CHARTERS. J581and they were empowered to choose other burgesses, and Jam««i.the burgesses were to elect and send a burgess to serve in Bewdiey.Parliament.The question being, whether the old burgesses, before thecharter of the third of King James, or only the burgessesappointed by it, had voices ; they not being sworn burgessesof the corporation.The committee were of opinion, that ** the new burgesses'^ appointed by the charter only, exclusive of all others," hadthe right ; which resolution the House subsequently affirmed.The reader will perceive how contrary this resolution is,to that of the committee in the reign of James I.,"* in theChippenham case, when it was decided that the charter ofthe crown could not affect the right of election : — and mostjustly ; because, as we have pointed out before, although theking could create a borough, yet it would be unconstitutionalfor him to direct that any particular portion of thepersons in the borough should vote ; for that would givethe king the power, indirectly, of controlling the election ofmembers to Parliament.The sounder doctrine is, that if the king created a borough,all the persons who would be entitled by the common law tovote, should be the persons to exercise that right.The only mode by which the authority of the case in Glanvillecould be contended to be inapplicable to this, is, thatthere the borough had before returned members to Parliament;here the right to return a member was given by thischarter. Moreover as there were old burgesses, upon theprinciples we have mentioned above, the right ought to havebeen exercised by them, and not by those appointed by thecrown.In the 31st of Charles II., the election for this place again 1679.came before a committee, and the right of all the inhabitantspaying scot and lot was set up in opposition to that of thecapital burgesses.The charter of James I. is stated to have been referred to,and the committee decided, that ** all the inhabitants hadSee Glanville.1582 CHARTERS.Janet I. « ng^ a right to vote." A resolution in one sense, perfectlyBewdley. justifiable; because, as we have frequently had occasion toobserve, all the inhabitants never were burgesses nor hadthe right of election, — because villains, infants, ecclesiastics,and the other classes we have enumerated, were alwaysexcepted ; and none were burgesses who were not householderspaying scot and lot, and had been storm and enrolled.In that sense therefore, the decision was correct. But if itwas intended to confine the right solely to the twelve capitalburgesses, as the subsequent usage would seem to indicate,then it was not correct, but is subject to the same observationswe have before made with respect to Banbury.1705. The right was agreed as above, in the fourth year ofQueen Anne.1708. A petition also, in the seventh year of that Queen, statedthe right in the same manner, and complained of a charterthen lately granted, which had displaced the former bailieand burgesses, on which ground they had refused to acceptit; and the committee resolved that an humble addressshould be presented to her majesty, to give directions tothe proper officers, that the several papers relative to thatcharter might be laid before the House.The case afterwards proceeded by an inquiry into therights of two persons who claimed the office of bailiff, involvingsubtle questions of corporation law. However thesitting member was confirmed in his seat.1710. In the ninth of Queen Anne, the grant of the new charterwas again disputed, and it was alleged that the burgesseshad not accepted it.The papers relative to the charter were again called for,as well as the records of the quo warranto ; and it was1708. resolved that " the charter, dated the 20th of August, 1708,"^¥oi?' ^^^^ seventh of Queen Anne,) attempted to be imposed on theborough, against the consent of the ancient corporation, wasvoid, illegal, and destructive of the constitution of the Parliament; and an humble address was directed to be presentedto her majesty, that the proper methods might be taken forCHARTERS. 1583repealing and for quieting the borough in their rights and J^n^i*privileges ; which her majesty subsequently directed shouldbe done.TEWKESBURY.James I. also granted a charter to Tewkesbury in theseventh year of his reign empowering it to return membersto Parliament.It does not appear to have been before represented, thoughit was undoubtedly a borough by prescription'; as we haveseen it mentioned in Domesday .fThe earliest charter j: to it, is said to be from William andRobert, Earls of Gloucester and Hereford, in temp. WilliamRofiis and Henry I., and it grants — that the burgesses should Burgage.hold their burgages by free services, viz. — those holding oneburgage, should hold it by service of I2d. a year, to be paid tothe earl, and suit of court, at his three weeks' court: andthat on the death of a burgess, his heir, of whatever age,should hold free of relief or heriot.That burgesses having burgages of their own purchase,should sell, mortgage, or exchange at their own will, withoutany redemption to be made. The burgesses to whom theburgages were so sold, &c. bringing the charter before theearls' stewards at the borough court.Those holding half a burgage to have the same privilegesas those holding a whole one.That they might make their testaments o( burgages of theirown purchase at their own willsThat no stranger should be received by the steward within strangers.the liberty, unless it was testified that he was good and true.That if any stranger should be received, he should findsureties of good behaviour to the earl and his bailifis, and to Sureties.the commonalty of the borough.That the burgesses should be bailiffs or Serjeants, whenelected at the will of the earl and his steward.• 2 Lutw. 1735. t See before, p. 206.i From Mr. Louder's MS. Notes to his Reports in the Inner Temple Library. —App. 25, Note to p. 188. See set forth on Oyer, 2 Lutw. 1332.§ See Lilt. sect. 167 ; and 2 Bl. Com. 84.1584 CHARTERS.James I. That they should have common of pasture according toTewkfls- their burgages as hitherto they had been accustomed.Assuming that this charter is genuine the admission ofstrangers is in perfect accordance with the common law andthe practice of the court leet as we have shown it to beexercised in other places.Even if the charter is not genuine, it is at least proof ofwhat the usages were at the time it was framed. It seems1341. to have been exemplified in the 16th of Edward III.Queen Elizabeth, in the 17th year of her reign, alsogranted a charter to Tewkesbury"* reciting that the burgessesand inhabitants had enjoyed many liberties, as well byprescription, as by letters patent of King Edward III. ; and acharter of Gilbert de Clare, sometime "Earl of Gloucesterand Hereford, in the time of Edward II., to the burgessesand inhabitants; which letters patent had been frequentlyconfirmed by the queen's progenitors.The queen further recited, — that the town was in twomanors, and that inconveniences arose therefrom ; to remedywhich, upon the supplication of the burgesses and inhabitants,and at the request of the Earl of Leicester, the highsteward of the borough, her majesty granted that the townof Tewkesbury, and the abbey fee, and the manor andliberties parcel of the monastery, should be a free boroughIdcotoo- incorporated — and that they should enjoy all the libertieswhich the bailifis, burgesses, or inhabitants theretofore hadenjoyed.Members. There were three charters of James I. — one in the third,and two in the seventh year of his reign ; in the last ofwhich, the clause for the election of members to Parliamentgives the power of electing to " the bailiffs, burgessesand commonalty;" and, in the manner we have seen inother charters of the same date, authority to elect so manyBurgesses, and such persons inhabiting and commorant, as well withinthe borough as without, to be burgesses, as they shouldthink fit for the public good.This clause might appear to authorize the admission of• 1 Peck, 147.CHARTERS. ]585non-resident burgesses which would be giving it a con James i.sanction militating against the whole common law, and the Tewkes-system of municipal government which we have explained. Non-regionthe other hand, it is capable of a construction, that ^^°^'they had the power given to them of receiving as burgesseswithin their borough, persons who had before resided out ofit,* as well as those who had dwelt within it, — which is aconstruction in accordance with the principles of our law,and the history of boroughs.However, it appears, that at the time of the Revolution,presidents were allowed in the borough. *In the second year of James II., the burgesses made a 1686.surrender of their liberties to the kings which was recorded 1688.in the Court of Chancery.This place, however, was one of the boroughs mentionedin the proclamation of James II. — and obtained a grant ofa new charter in the eighth year of William III. igge.It appears from the draft of the new charter, as settled Charter.and signed by Mr. Attorney-general Ward, that he struckout the following words : — " By which same surrender, the'' aforesaid charters of James I., and all things in the samecontained, are become void and determined :*' — apparentlythinking that the former charters were not defeated by thatsurrender.The returns for the borough, from the period of its first Returns.sending members to Parliament, were generally by the burgessesonly, and in one instance by the burgesses and commonalty.But the return to the Prince of Orange's letterwas made by 40 persons, described as " burgesses and^* freemen — being such persons as, according to the ancientlaws and customs, of right oupcht to choose members toParliament."After which time, there was also a return by the burgesses,freemen and commonalty.In the books of the corporation, there was an entry in the27th of Elizabeth, of a person being ^^ discommoned'^ out of 1584.the freedom of the town.• See post., the Tpswirli r^nse. f 2 Liitw. 1335.5 I1586 CHARTERS.James I. Upon an inquiry into the merits of an election from thisTewkes- place, in the 37th of George III., under the Grenville Act,^j^ the petitioners delivered a statement declaring the right tobe '^ in the bailiff, burgesses, and commonalty — meaningby the word ' burgesses,* such persons as were entitledto their freedom by servitude or copy ; and by the word' commonalty,* the inhabitants householders " — introducinga strange distinction between the burgesses andcommonalty.On the other hand, the sitting members stated, that theright was '* in the freemen, and in any person seised of an** estate in freehold, in an entire dwelling house, situate** within the borough:" — a strange division of the burgessesinto two classes — inconsistent according to the modem meaning, as it would appear, the freemen of thecorporation — the other descriptive of a species of burgageRight. tenure right.The committee resolved, that the right was '' in the freemen'* at large and in all persons seised of an estate in freehold in** an entire dwelling house within the ancient limits of theborough*'Burgess. In the course of the inquiry, this still more anomalous descriptionof a burgess was given in the parol evidence ; thatit was understood, in Tewkesbury, that * burgesses ' meant** freeholders of an entire freehold house — that the freeholderswere not considered as part of the corporation, butFreemen. " that they had a right of common in respect of their freeholdhouse ; — that the freemen were exempt from tolls to whichthe freeholders and inhabitants who were not freemenwere liable — and that the inhabitants did not enjoy anycorporate right whatsoever''Thus the burgesses having been, by successive kingsfrom the reign of Edward VI. incorporated, and James I.having given them the power of election, that right was, accordingto the evidence, to be exercised by freeholders, whoInhabitants wcrc uot members of the corporation — and the inhabitantswho were expressly mentioned in the charter of Queen Elizabeth— were not to enjoy the privileges of the corporation ;CHARTERS. 1587but the ^^ freemen " were to do so, who were not mentioned James I.in any of the charters. Tewkes-In such intricacies will these questions naturally be involved,when the simple principles of our constitution areonce forsaken ; and in this instance, a great portion of theseanomalous doctrines are to be attributed to the too hastyadoption of loose evidence of " usage,' which alone could Usage.have produced the strange decision we have stated above.TIVERTON.Tiverton was another borough which James I. empowered 16I5.to send members to Parliament, in the 13th year of hisreign.It is not mentioned as a borough in Domesday, nor isthere any trace of it as such until thereafter of James I., inwhich it is recited that it had been lately burnt.There are likewise no traces of any parliamentary inquiryas to the class of persons who were the burgesses of thisplace, but the right of election was exercised by the select ^^^body of the corporation.Tiverton has, however, been before the Court of King'sBench, with reference to its municipal rights.In the 11th of George I., the mayor of the borough having 1723.absented himself on the charter day from the election of hiessuccessor, no new mayor could bo chosen. And there beingno power for the mayor to hold over, the corporation becamedissolved.The following year, an application was made to the crownfor a new charter, which was referred to the attorney and (meanersolicitor-general, who inquired into all the facts connectedwith the case, and a charter was granted in the 11th year, 1724.reciting, that it was a very ancient and populous town ; andin the woollen manufacture not inferior to any town withinthe western parts of England, whereby many poor and indigentpersons, inhabiting in those parts, supported and maintainedthemselves, &c. And that the Inhabitants of the townhad done divers good services to the king and his predecessors.That the inhabitants had, in the 13tli year of James I., inhabitants5 I 21588 CHARTERS.■^^""^* ^' been incorporated by the name of " the mayor and burgessesTiverton, of the town and parish of Tiverton, in the county of Devon."That they petitioned " that the king would by his letterspatent, restore, constitute, confirm, and of new create theinhabitants of the town and parish into one body corporateand politic ; and grant and restore to the inhabitants ofthe town and parish, all the powers, &c. which were grantedby King James I., together with such other liberties asshould seem most expedient."The king accordingly granted that Tiverton should foreverbe a free town, and the inhabitants and their successorsone body corporate — and by the name of " the mayor andburgesses," have perpetual succession, &c.That there should for ever be within the town one of themost discreet and honest who should be called the mayor —twelve of the most discreet and honest inhabitants whoshould be named capital burgesses — twelve other of the dis-greatestand honestest inhabitants who should be named assdistant of the town ; and that the burgesses and assistantsCommon '-^council, should be the common council : to whom powers are givento make ordinances.The mayor, eight capital burgesses, and eleven assistants,all described as inhabitants, are then named and appointedto their respective offices.It is then provided, that previous to the first of Februarynext ensuing, the mayor, capital burgesses, and assistants,should assemble, and elect four persons of the assistants toburgesses. be Capital burgesses ; and that they should supply the vacanciesof the assistants, to the number of 12, from the inhabitantsof the town.That when a capital burgess died, removed, or departedfrom his office, the common council should supply the vacancyfrom the assistants.That when any assistant died, removed, or departed fromhis office, the common council should supply the vacancyInhabitants froui the uiost discreet and honest inhabitants of the town.A recorder, deputy recorder, and clerk of the peace arethen granted, &c.CHARTERS. 1589The mayor for the time beings and for one year after he J*™®* i*should depart from office and the recorder, were to be jus Tiverton.ticesof the peace, &c. And no justice of the peace, withinthe county, should in anywise intromit within the town,excepting in things touching the king's revenue.A sessions, with powers as justices of the peace — a gaol —a court of record, of pleas not exceeding 300/., are alsogranted. And all charters, liberties, &c., previously enjoyed,are restored and confirmed.We have before seen, that in the charter of James I. toTiverton, there was a clause giving the right of returningmembers to Parliament, as was supposed, to the select bodyof the corporation. But, when the last charter was grantedby George I., in other respects resembling that of James I.,that clause was excluded. And as the select body hadclaimed that right solely under that charter, the acceptanceof the new grant being a surrender of the former, wouldseem to put an end to their right. Nevertheless they continuedto exercise it till the passing of the Reform Act.ST. EDMUND'S BURY.St. EdmuruTs Bury is another borough which was called 1606.upon in the fourth year of James I., to return members toParliament. It is not mentioned as a borough in Domesday,nor is there any reason for thinking that it was a borough byprescription.The being ecclesiastical property probably explains whyboth this place and Evesham, were not made boroughs atan earlier period.We have already seen, in the reign of Edward Iv,* thatit was not a corporation by prescription.There seems to be some doubt whether it ever before returnedmembers to Parliament. Prynne alleges that it didin the 30th of Edward I., but it is questionable. ]soo.The inquiries into the parliamentary right of election havenot been numerous.• See before, 1(K)3.1590 CHARTERS.James L In the first of George L the sitting members were electedSt. Ed by the select number of the supposed corporation : the petittones by the " populace."1714. YoT the petitioners it was untruly alleged, that St. Edmund'sBury was a borough and corporation by prescription,and that the right of election was in the alderman and burgessesresident in the borough paying scot and lot. Thiswas denied by the sitting member, who contended that theright was in the alderman, 12 capital burgesses, and 24burgesses of the common council, to whom the privilege was1614. originally granted by the charter of the 12th of James I.,before which time it was alleged that the borough had neversent members to Parliament.For the petitioners evidence was given of a writ of the first1377. of Richard II., directed to the alderman, commanding himto make a levy upon the inhabitants for repairing the guildhall.1301. In the 30th of Edward I., the sheriff returned that thesteward of the liberty of St. Edmund's had sent him noanswer. Reliance was had before the committee upon proceedingsagainst the " men" of the town, in which the " successors"were mentioned, which was alleged to be evidenceof their being a " community" and a " corporation," andthat they had a prescriptive right to send members to Parliament: — which was, for the reasons we have given before,untrue.Reliance was placed upon the head of the town beingAlderman, styled " alderman ;" and it was said,* that every town inEngland whose head or chief officer was so named wasfounded by the Saxons.1660. And they insisted upon the determination in the 12th ofCharles II., as showing that the members chosen by theselect body were allowed to sit. Those being returned bythe inhabitants being taken off the file.It appeared in evidence, that there was a court leet withinthe borough, and the antiquity of the town was maintained.The committee resolved, the right was " in the alderman,• Set before, pp. 16 to 20, 53, 194, 298.CHARTERS. J59112 capital burgesses and 24 burgesses of the common Jtme«i."council."Rochester.The shire town of Ilchester was also another place calledupon to return members to Parliament in the 19th year of 1621.James I.The borough and its burgesses are mentioned in Domesday*It is also said that there was a charter to this place f inthe reign of Henry 11., found by an inquisition in the reignof King John.It returned members to Parliament from the 26th of Ed Returns.ward I. to the 34th of Edward III., after which it only re-tamed in the reign of Edward IV., and then intermitted tillthe period we have mentioned above.Henry V. is stated to have granted it a charter, and thereare old inquisitions, which speak of the halls of the town.Queen Mary also granted a charter in the third and fourthyears of her reign, incorporating the borough, but not mentioningthe return of members to Parliament.And in the 26th year of Queen Elizabeth, there is a rentalenrolled in the Exchequer, which shows the number ofhouses existing at that time.There has ever been a court leet held in the borough. JIn the second year of William III., the election of this 1689.place came before a committee of the House of Commons,when the petitioners contended that the right of electionwas in the inhabitants paying scot and lot, called potwallers. PotwalleisEvidence was adduced that some were boarders y and notpossessed of any house so as to be called potwallers.In this instance, therefore, contrary to those of Taunton,Honiton, and Tregony, the potwallers appear to have beenconsidered as householders.In 1702, the right of election was agreed to be in the 1702.bailiff, capital burgesses, and inhabitants,• See before, p. 163. t 2 B. and C. 164.t See before, p. 411.1592 CHARTERS.^^^^^' In inquiries in the 16th and 26th of George III., itchichester. appears to have been agreed, upon both sides, to have been1775. the usage of the borough that the inhabitants should be householders,*having a legal settlement :t so that in truth the burgessesof Winchester were considered to be, in substance, thatclass of persons which the common law required.It should be observed, that in some of these places whichwere called to return members to Parliament by James I.,particularly Tewkesbury and Winchester, they had not onlybeen previously boroughs, but also incorporated long beforethey were called upon to send representatives to Parliament.So that, as we have seen, places not incorporated returnedmembers to Parliament, here there are instances of placesincorporated not returning. It may, therefore, certainly beconcluded that the right of parliamentary election is not acorporate right.EVESHAM.The ancient town of Evesham was also called upon toreturn members to Parliament in the first year of James I.at which time, and in the third year of that reign, it receivedcharters of incorporation.We have already seen, that this place was ecclesiasticalproperty,! and was not mentioned in Domesday as a borough,But its burgages occur as early as the reign of Edward I. ;§and it is said to have returned members to Parliament inthe 23rd year of that reign.It also received charters in the reigns of Edward III. andHenry IV ;|| and the court-leet we have seen mentioned asearly as the reign of Edward IV., and again in the reign ofQueen Elizabethan1604. It is said, in the printed report of the Evesham electioncase, that the first return for this place now to be found, isof the 2nd of March, in the first year of James I., the sameday on which the charter is dated. The Parliament, hows3 Doug. 153. $ List. 651 and 791.t 1 Lud. 464. II See before, p. 526.t See before, p. 211. K See before, p. 1004.CHARTERS. 1593ever, did not sit till the 19th of March; but it will be seen J*"^ ^'by reference to the return, that in point of fact it was made Evesham.on the Width of April.At the time of the hearing of the petition, before the electioncommittee in 1808, the strictest search was made todiscover, if possible, an earlier return for this place, butnone was found. Mr. Willis speaks of one as early as thereign of Edward I. : but as most of the returns are extant inthat reign of those places which then sent members, it seemsimprobable that Evesham should have done so at that time.A more minute investigation of the charters of James I. isDot here necessary. We therefore now close the history ofthis reign relative to England.IRELAND.As Queen Elizabeth had made considerable advances towardsthe actual subjugation of Ireland — so, to the praise ofJames I., it should be recorded — that he essayed the noblerwork of civilizing its inhabitants, and obtaining a real influenceover it by the effect of good laws, well administered —and the introduction of habits of industry and good order.This purpose, it is said, he pursued by a steady, regular,and well-concerted plan ; and Sir John Davis affirms, thathe made greater advances towards the reformation of thatkingdom, than had been effected by all his predecessors,from the earliest period of its original conquest.For this purpose the Breton laws were abolished, as wellas the customs of gavelkind and ministry, by judgment inthe King's Bench: and the Irish estates, were made descendibleaccording to the course of the common law.After thus clearing the ground for the introduction of theEnglish customs and manners, the king used his best effortsto effect the substitution, by placing the country under aregular administration both civil and military — ^and declaringall the inhabitants to be free citizens and under his protection.A general indemnity was granted — circuits established —justice administered — crimes punished — and, above all,it1694 IRELAND.James I. means were taken to compel the people, according to theancient English law, to have fixed habitations: and permianwent residence was secured in the towns.*But few human endeavours are without some mixture ofevil. King James, finding that his plans of improvement didnot have their effect so extensively as he desired — and thathe was not supported by the Irish Parliament, was compelledto resort to means for the management of that turbulentbody which were far from justifiable, and too muchresembled the course which Queen Elizabeth had taken forthe same purpose in England.Under The English " Undertakers " were confirmed in their possessions— a measure in itself strong enough, but it wasfollowed by others of a still more decisive nature. Londonembarked in the undertaking — the king saying, that " whenhis enemies should hear that London had a footing therein,they would be terrified from looking into Ireland, theback-door to England and Scotland."But even these circumstances were not sufficient to effectthe purpose of the king ; and he was compelled to displacefrom the ancient boroughs many who were opposed to hiswishes — and, as a still stronger measure, to create manyNew new boroughs and corporations, with the hope of increasinghis influence. As a similar course met with opposition inEngland, so did this in Ireland ; — and we find as early as1612. in the 10th year of this reign, a letter sent to his majesty fromsix of the lords of the Pale, stating — that " his majesty'ssubjects in Ireland, in general, did very much distaste andexclaim against the deposing of so many magistrates inthe cities and boroughs of the kingdom." And they humblyprayed his majesty, that " he would be graciously pleasednot to give way to courses, in the general opinion of hissubjects, so hard and exorbitant, as to erect towns andCorpora <« corporations of places consisting of some few and beggarlycottages ; but that his highness would give directions thatthere should be no more erected till timely traffic and commercemade places in the remote and unsettled countryKcnnct.ItttttIRELAND. 1595fit to be incorporated ; — and that his majesty would benignly ^^^^ !»** content himself with the service of understanding men, to*' come as knights of the shire out of the chief counties to** the Parliament. And to remove the fears and discontents,'^ that the king would be graciously pleased to order, that** the proceedings of that Parliament might be with the^ sure moderation and indifference as the king's pretencessors had used theretofore."This address the king pronounced '' rash and insolent"*And the new boroughs were increased to the number of 40yfof which, however, some were not incorporated until thewrits for summoning Parliament had already issued.Ui^ent, no doubt, were the reasons which tempted KingJames to this extravagant line of conduct — and perhaps theplea of ** necessity" might be urged to justify the use ofthese means, when the king was opposed by the violence ofreligious animosity ; — but still the truth of history requiresthat they should be characterised as unconstitutional; andwhat is more material to the subject of our inquiry — whatevertheir cause or occasion might have been — the facts arenecessary to be here recorded, as some of the circumstanceswhich favoured the usurpations and innovations were commencedby Elizabeth — continued by James — and from himhanded down even to our own times. A plausible pretext wassuggested for these measures, in a letter from Sir ChristopherPlunder to his son, by asserting their object to be, that " as I612.the kingdom was wholly reduced to a shire ground, all theinhabitants of the kingdom — Irish of birth — English ofblood — and even British colonists, and the old Irish natives,were all to meet together to make laws for the commongood of themselves and their posterity." It wasThe example of the king was followed by the lord deputy ; for LordMonntjoy, having occasion to visit Waterford, the citizens offered to receive himwithin the wails, but refused his army admittance, in consequence of theprivileges contained in the charter which they had received from King John. Hislordship observed, *' That with King James' sword he would ruin their city, andstrew it with salter*— Smith's Hist, of Waterford, p. 144.t It is said that King James, in the Parliament of 1613, acquired 80 additionalvotes by the boroughs he created, and the charters which he granted.i1596 IRELAND.•^^"^ ^' said, that Queen Elizabeth had made many counties : andit was triumphantly asked, — " Why should all your old'^ shires have cities and boroughs in them, and these newcounties be without them ? Or, should Queen Elizabeth beable to make a county, and not King James a borough ?"However, notwithstanding all these golden prospects andplausible reasonings, it seems that after these new creations,every art — and promise — threat — and alarm — were employedto gain them who could be of service in the elections. Theseattempts produced scenes of riot and conflict between thecontending parties — the necessary consequence of such proceedings,whether adopted for a good or a bad purpose.The course of the elections produced violence in the deliberationsof the Commons, and even without the doors ofParliament. A disgraceful struggle occurred in the Housefor the possession of the chair, and remonstrances were made,calling for the grants and charters of the new corporations,and that their returns should be investigated.the'pale. ^ petition was presented by some of the lords of the Pale,to the privy council, in which they say,* — " In declarationof the naked truth, your lordships shall understand, thatwe, the knights, citizens, and burgesses of the counties,cities, and ancient boroughs of this realm, coming accordingto our bounden duties into the Parliament House,we find there fourteen counsellors of state, three of thejudges having before received writs to appear in the higherHouse, all his majesty's counsel at law, and the rest ofthe number for the most part consisting of attornies, clerksin courts, of the lord deputy's retinue, and others hishousehold servants, with some lately come out of England,having no abiding here ; and all these, save veryNew cor *< few, were returned from the new corporations erected, toportions.*' the number of forty or thereabouts, not only in places ofthe new plantation, but also in other provinces, wherethere be corporations of antiquity ; few or none of themhaving ever been resident, and most of them having neverseen these places ; the rest, u ho possessed the room ofDcsui. Cur. lib. pp.202, 203.aaIRELAND. 1597knights of shires, save four or six, came in by practice ^^""^ ^'and dishonest devices, whereunto themselves were not'strangers; and some there were from ancient 'boroughs,who intruded themselves into their places by as undue and'* unlawiiil means ; as the knights and burgesses duly elected,** were ready at the Parliament door to prove and avouch ; forredress whereof, we of the ancient shires, cities, and towns,to whom no exceptions could be taken, are desirous totake the usual and accustomed course. What outrageousviolence ensued by the fury of some there, we humbly leaveto your lordships to be informed by our declarations, whereuntoa schedule, by direction of my lord deputy, subscribedwith our hands, is annexed. And forasmuch, right honoursable, the strangeness is such as we cannot think his majestyand your lordships will hardly be induced to believe, theybeing in the likelihood of impossibility."There was also another petition from some of the temporallords, the knights, citizens, and burgesses of some of thecounties, cities, and ancient boroughs,* which stated, — " that** they were faithful and obedient subjects. The greatest** number of the temporal lords, together with the knights,'' citizens, and burgesses of the counties, cities, and ancientboroughs underwritten, assembled to the Parliament, do inmosthumble and submissive manner, by our agents abovenamed, offer to your highness 's most deep consideration this** annexed schedule, containing some particulars of miscarryrages and abuses in the election of knights, citizens andburgesses of several cities, counties, and boroughs, andthe corrupt and false returns of divers sheriffs and officersto the Parliament, whereof we formerly complained in** general terms, according as the same hath been com-** planned upon, and delivered unto us from the inhabitantsof those places. By which indirect proceedings (it beinga matter very dangerous, that the sheriffs should, at theirpleasure, make the loiter House of Parliament to consist ofwhat persons they pleased to return J,^ and by means of other• Desid. Cur. Lib. pp. 212. 213.t Vid.post., temp. Will. 1 1 1. —Brady's History of Boroughs.1698 IRELAND.James 1. " strange and unwarranted courses, now also held in the'* Parliament which your suppliants are ready to lay openupon the further hearing of this cause."And they further state, that " by the statutes, the knightsought to be of the nativity of the country, which have beeninfringed, as stated in the petitions of the inhabitants ofseveral of the counties, complaining that the persons whohad been returned had no residence there."And in another statement of the miscarriages, errors, andabuses in Parliament, complaint was made to the king, ^' thatIreland was divided with thirty-two shires, seven cities,and very many ancient boroughs, of which ancient boroughsthere were not warned to this Parliament,* throughoutthe whole kingdom, above the number of thirty orthereabouts, which, as it appeareth, was done of purpose,and not of negligence, in that divers of the sheriffs ofMeath and Kildare, being desired to send precepts todivers ancient boroughs in their counties, refused so todo,alleging they had special directions to do the contrary.Some sheriffs, likewise — as namely, the sheriffs ofthe county of Wexford and Westmeath, having formerlysent warrants to divers ancient boroughs in those counties,and burgesses being chosen upon those warrants,the sheriffs refused notwithstanding, to accept the returnsof the officers of those boroughs, and so none appearedfor them in this Parliament.Of the other side, there appeared in this Parliament forportions. " ^^^ Corporations, never before heard of by us, to the numberof four score persons or more, of whom very few werenatives of the country, but for the most, captains, lieutenants,and commanders of soldiers, which did daily oppressthe poor country; many clerks, attornies, and officers ofcourts and places, who with excessive fees continuallyextorted upon the subject; divers servants to great men,and others that made their benefit by following intrusionsand concealments to the great impoverishment of the ancientgentlemen and freeholders ; so as these being the• Uesid. Cur. Hib. pp. 219, 2*20.IRELAND. 1599greatest enormities and grievances in that poor common Jameii.^ wealth, the inhabitants (who expected redress thereof by^ laws to be enacted in that Parliament) seeing so many in'' number of that sort people, as these that joined with them'* were able to oversway the whole House by the multitude oftheir rnnces, were in despair of any good remedy to be'' provided by their means, for those things which they most** desired.** Few or none of these had their residence (as bylaw they Residenceought to have) or being in those places for which they apefeared many of them having never seen them, and some ofthem scarcely knowing the names of those places ; yea,'^ some of them being but lately come into that kingdom, had'' no determination of abode there, to make themselves ortheir posterities liable to those laws they would thereenact.These new erected corporations also, for the most part, arebeggarly and poor, being neither inhabited nor able to sendburgesses of their own, or go upon their own charges toParliament ; and whereas in the ancient boroughs there bedivers freeholders holding by burgage tenure, so as the'' inhabitants are not immediate dependents altogether uponone man, it is otherwise now in these new corporations, forthat the freeholders of each of them, for the most part, is*' altogether in one man ; so as he being able to commandhis tenants at will, or for years, may have by their meansthe nomination of those who are to give voice in Parliamentwhere the inhabitants of a whole county can haveno more.We conceive, if it may please your highness, that yourgracious intention and direction for granting a liberty tothose new corporations, that they should have voice in Parliament,was upon suggestion made, and argument urged** that it were hard to bind those people by new laws orstatutes, who had no means to give or deny their consents inenacting of them : but that suggestion was not altogethertrue, for they being within the counties and shire-ground (asall the kingdom of Ireland is) they had voice by two knights1600 IRELAND.James I. "of every one of the shires wherein these corporations aiseerected, which might as well satisfy them, as Wales is suppliedby one knight, and one burgess only for every shire.And whereas in some of those counties there are now** erected six new corporations in many several shires of thisyour highness's kingdom of England, (being far betterpeopled and stored with towns and habitations, than there•* is likelihood the other will be for many years yet to come,)there is but one borough alone that sends burgesses to theParliament ; yea, in Rutlandshire, there is not one city orborough that hath voice in Parliament, yet those in Irelandare not satisfied with a convenient number or proportion,(as doubtless your highness's intention was they should be),but have made up so many as they do seek to prescribe*' laws thereby to the whole kingdom besides : and manyof these new erected corporations are in shires and counties,where there were before sufficient number of cities andancient boroughs.There are also new charters sent to some ancient boroughs,without the request of the great number of the inhabitants,and of these charters some few, as to the number of 12 orthereabouts, are only selected, and enabled to send burgessesfor the Parliament,* excluding thereby the residue ofthe inhabitants, who, by the laws and statutes of the kingdom,ought to have voice in the election. And upon someof these new charters, this selected number do choose two ofthemselves for burgesses, contrary, as we conceive, to thevery charters, whereby it is limited that the 12 burgessesshall concur in the election of burgesses."There are many other complaints, which it would be tootedious to mention, excepting that it is further added, thatthe king had directed by his commission, that the lordsspiritual and temporal, and the knights, citizens, and burgessesof cities and boroughs, and others whatsoever of thekingdom which had used to come to the Parliament, shouldbe summoned according to the custom theretofore used;and therefore the authority being restrained to the ancientSec the Dungannon case, Co. UreauIRELAND. 1601usage must be strictly pursued ; and so there was no warrant James I.or ground to assemble burgesses out of any other but the Ancientcorpora-ancientcorporations. tons.Also, in the counties of Armagh and Cavan, the sheriffsreturned four persons who had no residence in their counties ^dcnS*"although four others were elected who had.*In the 11th year of James I. another remonstrance wasalso issued, which recited that the kings by sinister andundue course of information, had been induced to give way tothe erection of sundry corporations within the realm of Ire Ncwcor-lands well in counties where there were no boroughs, as inothers well stored of them ; inasmuch as the agents fromthat kingdom are ready to make proof of the poverty ofmost of those places, and to give his majesty other goodsatisfaction, why those corporations should not be multipliedinto so great a number, that the same course maybetaken for the counties newly made, which have noancient boroughs, as was taken for giving of liberty toWales, in sending knights and burgesses to the Parliament Wales.in England ; that is, to give liberty by Parliament for oneborough in every such county to send burgesses to the Parliament,which, besides the knights for that shire, may suffice,considering that in England itself there be divers shires thathave but one burgess to give voice in Parliament ; and thehabitation of that part of Ireland is not comparable to eitherWales or England, and hardly can any place be found inthose counties, fit to be endowed with such liberties.It appears also, that many persons whose turn it was (for Turn.that seems to have been the term adopted in Ireland, accordingto the strict rule of the old law in England,) to bemayors, were excluded.It was after all these complaints that the king, in the12th year of his reign, delivered a speech in the council 1614.chamber at Whitehall): in the course of which he said, "Asto the complaint of the new boroughs therein I would fain New bosfeel their pulse, for yet I find not where the shoe wrings.• Desid. Cur. Hib. p. 215. t Desid. Cur. Hib. p. 228, 229.t Desid. Cur. Hib. p. 306, 309.5 K1602 IRELAND.James I. « For first, they question my powers whether I could lawfully1614. '^ make them ; and then the wisdom of myself and my council,*^ in that they say there are too many made. It was never besfore heard, that any good subjects did dispute the king's'^ power in this point. What is it to you, whether I makemany or few boroughs ! My council may consider the fitness,if I require it. But what if I had created forty noblemeUy and four hundred boroughs! * The more the merrier ^the fewer the better cheer.''' But this complaint, as you made it, was preposterous ; forin contending for a committee before they agreed of aspeaker, you did put the plow before the horse, so as itwent untowardly, like your Irish plows. But because the'^ eye of the master doth make the horse fat, I have used** mine own eyes in taking a view of those boroughs, and'* have seen a list of them all. God is my judge, I find the^' net boroughs except one or two to be as good as many of theold boroughs, comparing Irish boroughs new, with Irishboroughs old ; for I will not speak of the boroughs of*^ other countries ; and yet, besides the necessity of makingthem, I find them likely to increase, and grow better daily.I find, besides, but few erected in each county, and in manycounties but one borough only, and those erected in fit andconvenient places, near forts or passages, for the safety ofthe country. Methinks you that seek the good of thekingdom should be glad of it. / caused London also to erectboroughs there, which when they are thoroughly planted,will be a great security for that part of the kingdom;therefore you quarrel at that which may bring peace to thecountry.For the persons returned out of those boroughs, you corn-residence" plain they have no residence. If you said they had nointerest, it had been somewhat ; but most of them haveinterest in the kingdom ; et qui habet intercessors, liketo be as careful as you for the weal thereof. I seek not'^ mendicant suffrage. Such boroughs as have been madesince the summons, are wiped away at one word for this time,I have tried that and done you fair play. But you that areiftiIRELAND. 1603"of a contrary religion must not look to be the only law James I.makers ; you that are but half subj acts should have but half 1614.privileges ; you have but one eye to me one way, and oneto the pope another way ; the pope is your father in spiritualized,and I in temporalities only ; and your bodies are'' tamed one way, and your souls drawn another.You that send your children to the seminaries of treason,strive henceforth to become good subjects, that you mayhave cor unum et via una, and then I shall respect youall alike. But your Irish priests teach you such groundsof doctrine, as you cannot follow them with a safe conscience,but you must cast off your loyalty to the king*'At length the king directed the House to be informed, thathe desired they should take example from his forbearance,and not call in question any former contempt or misdemeanour:to the end that all the members of the Housemight be reunited in concord and amity ; and that particularexpostulation might not give impediment to the generalbusiness.After which follows a statement of the real grounds andmanner in which these strong measures were attempted to bejustified,"*^ and eventually acceded to — and that in consequenceof the members who departed from the rest, havingacknowledged the king's lawful power and prerogative to incorporate,as well as to enable the same to send burgesses toParliament, he had thought it fit and convenient that theburgesses returned from eight boroughs, which were erectedby charters there since the writs of summons to Parliamentwent forth, viz., from the boroughs of Tillage, Gilmore, boroughs.Catkerlogh, Clonkiltie, Feathers Agger, Belfast and Claremont,should forbear to sit in the House of Commons duringthat Parliament only.And that the burgesses returned from the boroughs ofKildare and Cavan, having been found by the certificate ofthe commissioners to be falsely returned, do likewise forbearto sit in the House, unless they be again duly elected. That• Did. Cur. Hib. p. 324, 325.5 K 21604 IRELAND.'^^"^ ^' the certificate of the clerk of the office of the rolls being,1614. That the towns and boroughs of Clog her, Alone, and Groan,borough. have no lawful power, by charter or prescription, to sendburgesses to Parliament, the burgesses for those three townsshould also forbear to sit in Parliament ; but that all therest of the burgesses should be admitted to sit as lawfulmembers.1613. In answer to the commission which was issued by theking, in the 11th year of his reign, as to the returns concerningthe matters of Parliament; amongst other things, theproceedings at the elections for some of the boroughs werementioned.Trim. As to the town of Trim, the election was stated to be at anassembly of the townsmen before the port reeve, and the Serjeantswere commanded to warn all the inhabitants — and themembers are stated to have been elected by the burgesses andinhabitants.Wicklow. As to the town of Wicklow it is stated, that at an assemblyof the inhabitants, which the port reeve had summonedfor no other purpose than to keep a court baron ; they weremoved to proceed with the election of burgesses to Parliament,but the port reeve was objected to — because the townbeing no corporation before, nor enabled to send burgessesto Parliament — and having been newly incorporated some fewdays before the writ was sent to the sheriff, another personwas appointed port reeve by his majesty,Cavan. In Cavan, the assembly for the election was stated to beby the sovereign and inhabitants — and a second meeting beingheld for the same purpose, the inhabitants also thenattended.Charters. The complaint against many of the new corporations was,that their charters bore date some time after the date ofthe commission for holding the Parliament, and some afterthe summons.Dublin. As to Dublin, it appeared that at this election much tumultarose between the freemen of the city and the inhabitants,1614. In the 12th of James I., it seems, that at the Parliament,one of the members argued, that those persons returned forIRELAND. 1606the boroughs newly elected — and such as were not resident J*™«« !•and dwelling in the boroughs for which they were returnedwere not members of the House.By this resistance, so long continued against the measuresof the king, he seems at last to have been driven to desperateextremities; and in the 14th year of his reign, we find 1616.him directly requiring the destruction of the boroughswhich opposed his views; and, like his predecessors, hediscovered that their increase, though made with the view of Newsupporting his influence, had, in fact, the direct contrary "*'"*effect.Thus, in an order of this date,* to the lord deputy, his majestyrecites, " that finding, by experience, that neither admonitionnor moderate invective doth work the ends which heaimeth at, he is pleased that some lawful proceedings be nowhad to overthrow the charters of one or two principal cities ortaumSy by scire facias, quo warranto, or otherwise, as his majestydid prescribe in his instruction, under his hand andsignet, to you the Lord Chichester, about two years since ;of which towns the first which we wish were proceededwithal are Limerick and Kilkenny; but forasmuch as this J^*^'®"^''*course of scire facias, quo warranto, &c. will require a timebefore it can effect a full forfeiture of their liberties we thinkit very requisite that the magistrates, and the electors ofrecusant magistrates, be generally proceeded against roundly,(as his majesty hath formerly prescribed, J by fine and imprisonment;which being as much as we shall need to say,at this time, for your direction, we do leave the executionnow to your care and discretion."What had been the previous intimations of the king to SirArthur Chichester, may be collected from the following letters: the first transmitted by the king in the 4th year of his ieo6.reign, addressed to the lord deputy in Ireland, which commencesby observing, " that having found great benefit fromthe farming out of customs and impositions upon merchandisesin England and Scotland, &c., he thought it convenientto make trial of the increasing of the revenues by like means• Harl. MSS., 4784.1606 IRELAND.J*"^ ^' in Ireland — and therefore required the lord deputy, &c. to1606. take a due examination of all points contained in the annexedmemorials,That he might compel all persons to make their personalCharter. attendance, and to bring with them their charters grants,and evidences whatsoever, whereby they claim any title toreceive sums of money for custom, &c., or exemptions frompayment of the same. And such charters, grants, andevidences, to show and deliver up to the lord deputy andcouncil, or to such persons as they should appoint."That copies of all grants and charters, with the accomptof his majesty's office for the last seven years, be sent to theprivy council of England to be considered of. And that theymight examine the parties concerning their grants, as to theirunlawfulness, inconveniency, and hindrance to his majesty;and that their answers should be transmitted to England.That the lord deputy, &c. should consider what words areof absolute necessity to make them good in law, and whatomissions make them weak and void ; likewise for mistakesrecitals. ^"^ mis recitals. — What circumstances in the passing, enrolling,confirming, or such like are necessary ; whether allhave been done accordingly, when, where, and by whom.In the causes alleged for such grants, whether they weretruly alleged at the time of the grant, and whether true insuch sort and manner as was then alleged ; whether suchcause continue still or cease ; and whether there be not nowgreater cause to the contraries.Whether any grievance at any time heretofore have beenfound, or complaint made against any of those grants, or theparties executing them ; by whom, what, when, and forwhat causes. What sums of monies or duties have beenclaimed by virtue of any grant ; what of townsmen and freemen,and what of strangers and foreigners, Sfc,^'1607. The next letter was in the sixth year of the king, to SirArthur Chichester, to this effect: —We have of late received from you, the copies of diversCharters, charters granted by sundry kings and queens of England,his majesty's progenitors, unto several cities and towns inIRELAND. 1607the kingdom of Ireland, together with several suits of yuo J*™«« ^•warranto and pleadings thereupon, concerning the customs : 1607.all of which, his majesty's learned counsel in England have ^^][^'given us to understand, the privileges of such towns as havealready pleaded, are not only insufficient in law, but theirgrants also of no validity to give unto them the subsidy ofUmnage and poundage which they claim by the same ; andfor those other towns which have not pleaded, the charters &c.up<m which it seemeth their claims must be founded, willnot serve to give the subsidy of tonnage and poundage untoyou; so that it appeareth unto us, that none of them have anyground, either to free themselves from paying unto hismajesty the said subsidy of tonnage and poundage, due bythemselves, nor to enable them to take the same fromstrangers to their own use. In regard whereof, they havingfor many years taken the same as their own, it would not beamiss they be made known they are in arrears to hismajesty in great sums of money, which if he should withseverity exact, as he may, must be very heavy and burdensomeupon them; nevertheless, because his majesty has ameaning to deal graciously with them, is pleased that youshould summons them together, to come before you, andthen to let them know the weakness of their pretensions andclaims, with this further offer, in case they would guildthemselves from henceforward to pay subsidies of tonnageand poundage, and refrain the receiving of the customs ofstrangers, that his majesty will be pleased to remit andpardon all the past concerning the same : — which graciousoffer, if they shall wilfully contemn, and only stand hazardand trial of the law, it shall then be fit for them to advisethemselves how easy it will be unto them when his majestyshall be £gainst his will constrained to make use of that whichlaw and justice will afford him. Lastly, because we hear ithath been spread abroad that his majesty means to bestowthe benefit of the customs in that kingdom on some of hisgreat servants or subjects, we have thought good to letyou know, that although his majesty is to give no accountto any what he doth with his own, yet that is far from his1608 IRELAND.'^*°*^^- intention to grant the benefit of that which shall arise by1607. the custom of the whole kingdom, though his majesty hathbeen served by persons of great and meaner quality, to lookinto the wrong detention of that which is due, and thereforewe pray you use your best means to make the sameknown."Quo war While the quo warranto proceedings were pending forjudgment in the King's Bench in Ireland, the king speciallydirected that Waterford and the other corporations shouldsend over their agents to England with their charters inorder that the question of customs might be heard before thejudges there. And in Mic. T., 6 James I., the lords of theprivy council referred the question to the judges, who heardcounsel and agents for the corporation, at Serjeant's Inn,Chancery Lane ; and afterwards signed a certificate of suchcustoms and duties as they considered payable in each corporation.W22. The king also, in the 20th year of his reign, issued a corn-commitsmission of inquiry as to the state of the church, the law,"®°' revenue, and corporate property in Ireland, giving the commissionersthe most extensive powers. As the commissionis of considerable length, and may be seen at the RollsChapel, we shall only quote a few passages.It commences by reciting, that the king's object was theadvancement of religion and justice, the removing of grievances,increasing of trade, settling of plantations, and thesecuring of the kingdom.The commissioners were empowered to examine all witnessesupon oath, or without oath, and to compel the productionof all documents and records, Sf'c,Charities. That they should inquire what lands, rents, &c. had beengiven to any college, free school, or to the maintenance ofany corporation or other charitable or public use or uses,where they lay, and their value ; what lands, rents, &c. hadbeen, since the first year of Queen Elizabeth, converted tothe use of any private person, or to any other use contraryto their original institution, and to consider what meansshould be adopted for their restoration, &c.IRELAND. 1609That they should inquire whether trade or commerce had ^^^^ ^*been hindered by means of any charters, letters patent, &c. Trade.DUNGANNON.The manner in which the courts of law dealt with the newboroughs in Ireland, may be collected from the followingcharter to Dungannouy which we give as a specimen of thosegrants, and upon which a case was decided in the 18th yearof James I.The charter is in the 10th year of this king. 1612.And it recites, — that at the request of the inhabitants of themileage of Dungannon, in the county of Tyrone, in the provinceof Ulster, the king had ordained that the village ofDungannon, and the three parcels of land known by the followingnames of Crosse, Drought, Temeskeile, and the precinctsof the same, (except the castle of Dungannon, and Castle.500 feet of land circumjacent thereto) should be one entireandrew borough of itself, by the name of the borough of Dun ^^^ ^cannon ; and that within the same there should be one bodycorporate and politic, consisting of one provost, twelve free Corporate,burgesses, and of the commonalty ; and that the inhabitants Common-withinthe village and lands, should be a body corporate inhawunuand politic, by the name of " The provost, free burgessesand commonalty of the borough of Dungannon."The usual corporate powers are then granted. And thatthe provost, free burgesses, and their successors for ever,might have full power and authority to elect, send, andreturn two discreet and useful men to serve and attend inany Parliament in Ireland to be held, &c.And to the intent that in future this new incorporation —now first composed — should consist of good and honest mentheking did constitute and name the provost and the twelvefree burgesses ; and that the inhabitants of the village, andso many and such men, as the provost and the burgesses of theborough for the time being, should admit into the liberty of theborough, should be the commonalty, a?ty.°°That the provost should be elected from the free burgesses; and upon the death or removal of a free burgess,lei IRELAND.JanMi L the vacancy should be supplied by the election of the provostDongan- and the rest of the fire burgesses, firkin the better and same1612. ^^^^^ inhabitants of the borough.That the provost, free burgesses, and commonalty shouldhave a court of record of all pleas happening within theborough.Bye-Uwi. That the mayor, burgesses, and contumacy might makebye-laws for the government of the borough and inhabitants.A guild merchant is then granted to the provost, freeburgesses and commonalty; also a common seal; and powersto make serjeants-al>-mace, for the better govemmeiit of theborough and inhabitants.This charter makes Dungannon a free borough in themanner of the English charters, and expressly incorporatesthe provost, free burgesses and commonalty, and the inkor'bitants, by the name of ^* the provost, burgesses and commonalty."The vacancies are to be filled up by elections from the inhabitants,in the same manner as the English charters of thisdate ; and there are also other provisions like the English.With reference to this grant, the following case occurred1614. in the 12th year of James I.Cue. The king constituted the town of Dungannon to be a freeborough, *^ et ulterius volumes, declarant, et statius,'' quod inhabitantes villsB predicts sint unum corpus corps'' natum, per nomen preposition, 12 burgensium et conwmnir** satis Dungannon, et per idem nomen placitare possint : et^* quod ipse praedicti preposition et burgesses et successes** sui habet potestatem eligendi duos burgesses, &c. ad'' Parliament, &c." And the doubt was, whether thisgrant of election of burgesses of Parliament was good, becauseit was granted but to parcel of the body— soil : to theprovost and burgesses, and not to the provost, burgesses, andcommonalty.And the chief baron thought, that, forasmuch as this wasbut a nomination or election, it was sufficient to make theprovost and burgesses only to have it.IRELAND. 1611And he took a diversity betwixt nomination and other Jm^I'inheritance. Doogan-But this was denied by all the justices and barons ; for this xgi4,power to elect burgesses, is an inAm^ano^ of which the provostand bai^esses are not capable, for that it ought to bevested in the entire corporation — scil : provost, burgesses,and commonalty.And it seemed to Hobart, chief justice of the CommonPleas, that the king may grant to the inhabitants of Islingtonto be a free borough ; and that the burgesses of the sametown may elect two burgesses to Parliament: and itshould be good, although the burgesses were not incorporated; for there are many burgesses which are not incorporated,who elect burgesses to Parliament. But it was resolvedby all, that such a grant made by the king should be void ;for the inhabitants have not capacity to take an inheritance,as in 15 Edward IV., to have common. And the passagefrom Littleton, cited before as to burgage tenure, was quoted.And it was said that, it should be intended, that at the firstthey were incorporated. Also, plus valet ssepenumero vulgarisconsuetudo, quam regales concession.But it was resolved by Hobart, Mansfield, Waltham, Winch,Nichols, and Houghton, quod volumes, was a good word ofgrant, as Piggot was of opinion, in the 21 st of Edward IV.And this shall be an implied grant to all the corporation,that the provost and burgesses should elect, &c. and regularly,when the grant is indefinite — scil: first, conceding anuncertain thing, et ulterius quod pi^aepositus, et burgesses, etsuccessors sui elegerint ; this shall be within the first con-dedimusto all the body; which party shall choose.But the chief justice of England, and Coleridge, thoughtthe contrary ; for, in this case, there was but an ordinance toerect the corporation, and no grant altogether to any person,so that this clause, et quod, &c. is idle and vain.And note, all the new corporations were of the same form,and in none of them is there any clause to elect new burgesses.So that when those of the modem burgesses die,this power to elect burgesses is gone.]gi IRELAND.James I. The real question in this case seems not to be propertyDviigvii- stated.^^ The substantial doubt must have been, as subsequently inNewvk. the Newark case in England, whether the king had thepower, for the purpose of procuring an ascendancy Parlorme»if of creating a number of new boroughs.That the king by his prerogative could, whenever thepopulation of any place or other circumstances rendered itnecessary for the public good, that there should be a separatejurisdiction exempt from the sheriff, direct that it should beaborough, there can be no doubt.On the other hand, that the king could not do this withoutsuch cause, and for the purpose of interfering with Parlerment, is equally clear in a constitutional point of view.But if the king should grant such a charter for the publicgood, then aU the consequences would constitutionally followof its separation from the county; and the sheriff, on thereceipt of the writ for parliamentary elections, would directhis precept to the head officer of the place, as a borough, toreturn members to Parliament.It is also equally clear, that if the king conceded such acharter, he could not constitutionally grant that a part onlyof the burgesses should elect the representatives, becausethat would in effect be giving an exemption to the others,which upon principle, as well as the express authority in the4th Inst. cap. 1, he could not grant.In truth, the king could not legally make any charterdirectly respecting the return of members to Parliament, forthat would be to interfere with the other branch of the legislature; although he might do it indirectly by the exercise ofhis prerogative as the head of the executive government,and having necessarily the power of directing within whatdistricts, whether of counties or boroughs the law should beadministered.Therefore the question should not have been put, whetherthe grant to the free burgesses only was good. But thatpart of the charter should have been treated altogether asvoid ; and the election considered as belonging to the wholeIRELAND. 1613body of the inhabitants under the name of commonalty ; as ^*°^^'justified by the charter, and the practice which we have seen DuDgan.above of other places. jgi^'^The only proper question was, whether Dungannon andthe other places had been made boroughs with a view to thepublic good and the better administration of the law, consideringthe extent of the population, and other circumstances :or whether they had been so made for the purpose of influencingParliament.If for the former, they were good. If for the latter, theywere, by the principles of the constitution, unjustifiable andvoid.With all due submission to the j edges who interposed inthat case, such constitutional principles would seem to bemore pertinent to the question — than the technical point,that the grant was good as a nomination or election ; which,in truth, is not a very intelligible distinction. And thediversity betwixt a nomination and other inheritance, maysafely be asserted to be fit only for the comprehension oflawyers.The position of the other judges, that the power to electis an inheritance, is also, to say the least of it, not so plainand simple as the constitutional position, that it is a dutycast upon every free inhabitant householder, who has swornto his allegiance.But the position, that the power ought to be vested in thewhole body, is most correct ; — as well as the doctrine, that Burgesses.the burgesses might elect, though not incorporated — whichwe have shown to be supported by the earliest principles ofthe law ; as well as proved by fact.The following part of the judgment exposes the errors resultingfrom the adoption of the unfounded assertion — thatthe right of election was an inheritance ; because it is followedby the still more erroneous position, that inhabitantswere not capable of taking an inheritance : — a doctrine whichis shown, by the earlier cases and charters, not to be true infact; and applied as it is here, is most absurd: — because itmilitates with the known circumstance, that the inhabitants inhabited1614 IRELAND.^^^' of the counties did vote generally till the statute of Henry^^^"'f^^ VL; since which also the yreeAoUerf, though a limited class1614. of the inhabitants, can only vote in that rightComoBOD. The cases respecting the right of common we have beforecommented upon, as well as the passage from littleton.But the court said, it should be intended that at first theboroughs were never incorporated.In fact we have shown, that they never were so.The concluding resolution, that it should be implied to beagrant to all the corporation, is much more reasonable, and,in truth, gives a fit construction to the charter consistentwith the general law and practice, — shad not the chief justiceand the other judges thought the contrary, on the technicalground that it was an ordinance, and not a grantThe note at the bottom of the case is clearly inaccurate,in saying, there is no clause to elect new burgesses ; for, ifthat term applies to the 12 free burgesses, there is an expresspower, upon death or removal, to elect others from theinhabitanU; — and if the term is applied to the burgessesgenerally, there is direct authority to the provost and fineburgesses to admit such and so many into the liberty, to beof the commonalty y as they should think fit.»Thus, not intending disrespectfully to dispute the decisionof the judges of the land — but called upon by the authorityof truth and reason to investigate the real grounds of theirdecision, we trust we do not err in contending that, althoughthe peculiar circumstances then existing in Ireland, and particularlywith reference to these new boroughs, might at thetime have tempted the great authorities who decided thiscase to yield in some degree to the necessities of the times —yet, at this distant period, we may not only be warranted,but compelled to aver, that in the particulars to which wehave referred, it is unsupported by principle, and unfoundedin fact.Besides the grants so much disputed to the new boroughsand corporations in Ireland, new charters were likewisegiven to some of the ancient boroughs. But as their provisionsso much resemble those which were granted in theIRELAND. 1615same reign to the boroughs in England, little more will be-^*°^ ^'requisite than to give their dates, and some short extracts,to show the nature of their contents.LIMERICK.Limerick, in the sixth of James I., received a charter, lee.which commences with a recitals stating the great servicesthe citizens of Limerick had rendered the king against therebels, — and that they might be bound further to renderhim assistance, granted that Limerick should be for ever afree city — that the mayor, bailiffs, and citizens, and thecitizens and inhabitants, should be one body corporate and Corporate,politic, by the name of the *' mayor, sheriffs, and citizensof the city of Limerick." The usual corporate powers thenfollow; and that they should enjoy all previous charters, &c.by whatsoever name of incorporation, or whether incorporatedor not. Certain boundaries are then defined, to becalled the county of the city of Limerick, and to he from thecowityfar ever distinct, &c. &c.That there should be one of the most honest and discreetcitizens of the city, who should be called the mayor, and thathe should be chosen and elected as the citizens had hithertobeen accustomed.That in the place of the bailiffs, there should be twosheriffs. That the mayor, sheriffs, and citizens yearly shouldelect two of the most discreet and honest men of the city to Men.be elected sheriffs, &c. ; — that they should have the samepower as all other sheriffs of the county had, and shouldhold their courts from month to month, having the return ^^^ ^^of all writs — and that no other sheriff should interfere.That all other officers of the city should be elected in themanner accustomed therein. That they should have an admiraltyjurisdiction — cognizance over all real and personalactions, &c. — that they should have all amercements, fines,profits, &c.Powers are then given that they might assemble, as thoseof the cities of Dublin and Waterford did, or could do ; —♦ Pat. 6 Jac. I. p. 12, n. 9.1616 IRELAND.JamctL and that they might elect fipom among themselves a mayorand other officers, — and make rules and orders for the goodgovernment of themselves.ATHBOY.1609« Xhe king, in the seventh year of his reign, granted tothe free burgesses and comus of the town of Atkbojf, bywhatever name the resident inhabitants were called or known.Corporate, that it should be a free borough corporate by itself, by thename of the town or free borough of Athboy.That the then provost, and twelve other persons who arenamed, and described as *' lately burgesses of the town orborough," and those who were then the commons and inhabitantsof the town, as well as those who should be made freeburgesses and commons of the town, were to form the bodycorporate*That the free burgesses and commons, or the major partof them, might annually elect of the free burgesses a fitPrarort. person to be provost. And that as vacancies occurred in thetwelve burgesses, the provost and other free burgesses, thecommons or the major part of them, from time to time,might elect another fit person in the place of such fireburgess.Oaths. That every free burgess and freeman, who should beelected and admitted into the franchise of the town or borough,should take before the provost of the borough, suchoaths as were of old used and administered to the burgessesand freemen in the town or borough.A recorder and two serjeants-at-mace, are then appointed.And it is directed that the provost should be a justice andwarden of the peace, with powers to hold a court in allpersonal actions not exceeding lOZ. That there should be aStrensera. fair, with a court of pie powder, and that no stranger orforeigner, who was not a free burgess, or one of the commonsof the town or borough, should enter within the town to sellany wine, &c. except by the license of the provost.IRELAND. 1617James I.KILKENNY.This king in the seventh year of his reign,* granted a ie09.charter of incorporation to Kilkenny, which, after commencingwith a recital of the love and affection he bore the ^^nts!'"inhabitants, kc, granted that it should be one entire and freecity, and that all the free inhabitants within the high townof Kilkenny and the Irish town, as well those who are nowfree, as those who shall hereafter be admitted or electedshould, by the name of the mayor and citizens, be one bodycorporate and politic. The usual corporate powers thenfollow. And it is directed that there should be within thedty, one of the most wise and discreet inhabitants, whoshould be named the mayor ; that there should be, 18, 17,16, 15, 14, 13, 12, 11, 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, of the most worthy anddiscreet citizens, who should be called the aldermen, and beof the common council, and assistants to the mayor in allmatters touching the city, with power to make ordinancesrespecting the government of the inhabitants, artificers, &c.And that the mayor should be the escheated.Certain boundaries are then described, which are to beincorporated and belong to the city of Kilkenny, and to be County ofitselfcalled the county of the city, and to be separated from thecounty.That there should be two sheriffs to execute all preceptswithin the county of the city, with the same powers as allother sheriffs, and that no other sheriff should intromit.That the mayor and citizens might yearly elect two citizensof the city, to be the sheriffs. That two of the mostworthy inhabitants should be coroners. And that the aldermen,after having seised the office of mayor, should be justicesof the peace.Jurisdiction is given over all real and personal actions — Separatethe punishment of felons. — None of the citizens were to luJn. "^'be compelled to appear, or serve upon any inquisitions,assises, &c., without the city. The charter then closes with• Pat. 7 Jac. I., p. 40, n. 16.5 L1618 IRELAND.J- a grant to the merchants of the staple, and a general confirmationof all previous charters.WEXFORD.James I., in the seventh year of his reign, granted a charterto Weafcrdy which recites, that at the petition of thesuperior bailiffs and burgesses, he had granted to them, oriDbabi- by whatever other name the dwellers or inhabitants of thattown or borough might be called or known, that it and itssuburbs, for ever thereafter, should be a free borough corporateby itself, and be called the town or free borough ofWexford; and that within the town or borough, one bodyincorporate and politic should be of the dwellers and inkorhints of the same, consisting of one mayor, two bailiffsfree burgesses, and commonalty.That there should be 24 free burgesses in the borough, ofwhom the mayor and bailifis for the time being should bethree.The mayor and two bailiffs are then appointed, anddescribed as being of the town or borough ; and 21 personsfree burgesses, who were of the better or more discreet menCommon of the town or borough ; all constituting the commoncouncil.That all freemen, then dwelling or thereafter to dwellwithin the borough, were to be the '^ commonalty" of the townThe free burgesses and commonalty were to elect yearlyMayorand from among the free burgesses, a mayor and two bailiffswho should take their oaths of office before the free .gesses and commonalty, in the '' Those" of the borough:and every freeman who might be elected and admitted intothe franchise of the town or borough, should take beforethe mayor and bailiffs so many and such oaths as of oldwere used and ministered to there burgesses and the/re*-men in the borough.That the mayor might call assemblies (comitia) in theThose of the town, to make laws for the government of thetown, &c.IRELAND. 1619That there may be within the borough a guild of mer J"°"^'chants with all liberties thereto, &c. And that no one who Wexford,was not of the guild, any merchandises within the town or ^borough should sell, unless at the pleasure of the mayor,bailiffs, free burgesses and commonalty ; and that they maybeable to divide themselves into different guilds or fraternitiesaccording to their several arts and mysteries ; using theseveral vestments and insignia, as marks of their fraternityand mystery, and might have a hall within the boroughwhere the brethren might be able to congregate, and yearlyconstitute one guardian or prefect.Certain laws, liberties, &c. are then granted to the mayor,bailiffs, free burgesses and commonalty y to be held by burgageservice rendering yearly lOZ., notwithstanding thestatute of mortmain, &c., and that the village and lands ofMiddleton and Lillian shall be reputed within the libertiesof the borough of Wexford, and exempt from all taxes, &c.,leviable upon the county. All previous charters, &c. grantedto the burgesses or inhabitants, by whatsoever name orincorporation, are then confirmed.Kindle.James I., in the eighth year of his reign, confirmed to the 1610.sovereign and commons of Kinsale,* all the charters, privilegesand customs which they had ever thitherto enjoyed,but directed that the corporation should not interfere or exerciseany jurisdiction within the castle or fortress of CastlePark, or within the precinct of land, or peninsula whereonthe same is erected, or within the port of Kinsale, or withinany bay or creek thereto belonging, that the full powershould remain in the constable of the castle for the timebeing.NEW ROSS.James I., in the ninth year of his reign, granted a charter 1611.to the town of Rosspont, otherwise New Rossi which commenceswith a recital that it was an ancient borough, anda convenient place to render aid to the faithful and liege,• Egerton MSS. 76, 17. t Egerton MSS. 76, 3.5 l21020 IRELAND.^•Bml. dwelling in those parts; that the bwrgesfei and inkaKiamfiNewBoH. had Tendered services to the king's progenitors, and .withstood the attacks of the rebels, and therefore the kingbeing willing to '' refresh the burgesses and inhabUoMis in'' the fountain of his favour and grace ;" and also upon thepetition of Richard Archdeacon, esquire; the king grantedto the sovereign, burgesses and community and to the settledInhabitants and inhabitants ; that the free burgesses of the borough mightfor ever be one body corporate, &c., by the name of theSovereign and free burgesses of New Ross'That the sovereign andre burgesses, and also the tiiAiiM-tants and all other freemen of the town, might exercise allthe franchises as the sovereign, burgesses, and community, orthe inhabitants had ever enjoyed, by whatsoever name ornames of incorporation.AA^Hkm The election of sovereign, recorder, coroner, &c., are thenof fkvcnm. i <• iprovided for. And that the sovereign and free burgessesmight choose and admit so many and such of the inhabitantsand residents of the borough, as well aliens as natives, whomor which they please, to be freemen of the borough, so thatsuch inhabitants and residents mag use free commerce throughall the liberties of the same, &c.BELFAST.1613. The king, in the 11th year of his reign,* granted thatIncorpo- Belfast should be a borough, and incorporated, to consist ofa sovereign, 12 burgesses and commons. That the sovereignand burgesses should send two members to Parliament. Thatthe sovereign should be chosen out of three discreet andsufficient burgesses, to be nominated to the sovereign andburgesses assembled for that purpose, by Arthur LordChichester, of BelfiBLSt, and his heirs ; and in default of suchnomination, the sovereign and burgesses should make theirown free choice. That the sovereign and burgesses mightBye-laws, make bye-laws, with the advice and consent of Arthur LordChichester and his heirs, being lords of the castle. Noinhabitant to plead or be impleaded out of the borough for♦ Egerton MSS. 128.IRELAND. 1621any demand within the same. That no person should sell J»«»«* I-or expose any goods by retail within the space of three Belfast,miles of the town, without the consent of Arthur Lord ^^^^*Chichester, or be resident in, or inhabitants of the borough,under forfeiture of their goods. The sovereign to be ajustice of the peace within the borough — and the burgessesto have a mediatorial guild, &c.CARLOW.Carlow also received a charter from James 1., in the 11th 1613.year of his reign, making the town a free borough, intrustingthe government to one port reeve, 12 burgesses, the commonly.And that the inhabitants should be a body corporate, inhabitantsby the name of " port reeve, free burgesses, commonalty, &c."That the port reeve and free burgesses might elect twomembers to Parliament.That all the inhabitants, and all others admitted by theport reeve and free burgesses, should be the commonalty.And that the free burgesses should be elected out of theinhabitants.As the charters which we have above quoted satisfactorilyestablish that the grants of the crown to the ancient boroughsin Ireland, were in substance the same as to thosein England: — So the municipal documents would show thatthe practice and usages in the Irish boroughs, continued thesame as they had been from the earliest times ; — resemblingthe customs in England : and, like them, founded upon thecommon law, and the principles applicable to freedom andvillainage, which we have before so frequently explained.CORK.Thus, as one instance will suffice for the rest, it will be seenthat in the city of Cork, in this, as well as in subsequentreigns, persons were recognized as of free condition, andwere admitted as freemen, on the ground of their being theiOM of freemen, and having served apprenticeships, and bymarriage, as in England.1622 IRELAND.[• Whether accident or design may be the cause, the oorpo^Cork, ration of Cork do not possess any records respective the^^^' internal regulation of their city, or the rights of the burgesses— the class from whence they were taken — immt theform of their admission, previous to this reign*leon. The first entry we find, is an admission to the Jr^edmm ofthe city, in the 6th of James Lf^SSL '' sward Good Fitz Edward is admitted to his freedom,in consideration of his pains taken for the city and corporationcauses in the King's Bench in Dublin, and to continuetheir attorney hereafter."After which, we find the following entries : —1617. " John Fleming, who served his apprenticeship with John^SS!^ Matthew Fitz James, merchant, above seven years, wasadmitted to his freedom for 3L"1620. '^ Walter Good Fitzwilliam, was admitted to his freedomMayor's upon payment of 10^., in r^ard that he is the magnet#Ofl.1631. « Richard Danville was admitted, upon payment of IQi • toApprentice chamberlain, in r^ard he served his apprenticeship inthe city seven years, and promised to marry in the city or topay according to the bye-law."1651. « Philip Hare was swam a freeman in this city, uponpayment of four nobles ; he was also sworn, that if he didnot marry in this town he should perform the contents of thebye-law."I6d4. *^ Jonathan Tressilian was admitted free of the corporationMarriage, by the right he claimed, as being married to the eldestdaughter of 9l freeman'*1715. '* Richard Daunt Merchant, having married a freeman'sMarriage, daughter y was admitted rec."1715. " Mr. William Nicholson, having married the daughter ofMarriage, an alderman (Joseph Franklin,) was admitted to his freedom'*1615. A document occurs in the 12th year of James I., whichshows that Ireland, at this time, resembled England in otherrespects, and that bribery had made its way into the municipalelections. But notwithstanding all that the king hadIRELAND. Ig23done with respect to the boroughs — notwithstanding the J»n»«Lmunicipal offices had become objects of desire, and there Cork,was an inclination on all hands to interfere with and controlthe municipal elections, yet it will appear by thiscase that the right of election was still left in the ** com- Commons.mons** of the city.The following case was submitted for the opinion of SirGerald Aylmer, C. J. of the C. B. and other judges inEngland:* —Here followeth the case hanging now in variancewherein we desire your advice. And to the intent you maybetter understand and assoil the same, you shall know,that the mayor, and both the bailiffs of Cork for the timebeing, according to the use and customs of the same, oughtand must choose and elect three good able men ; that is tosay, every of them one man. Of which three good ablepersons the whole commons of Cork aforesaid, shall electone to be their governor and mayor. So the case is this, —(me of Cork, aforesaid, came to one of the bailiffs, andbargained, and covenanted, and delivered unto him a certainsum of money for the electing and choosing of him tothat purpose ; and so he did ; and was elected and mademayor by the whole commons of the same that year, bythe means of the said bailiffs six year agone. Now, whetherthe same person so elected, and made mayor, ought to haverestitution of his money so delivered, in manner aforesaid,or not."To which the judges gave the following answer : —In our hearty manner, this shall to advertise you how Answer ofthat John Coppinger has desired us, upon the case aforesaid,to certify you of our opinion therein, least that you upon thesame to be sued before you, in fault of knowledge, shouldordain the same other then the order of the king or sovereignlord's laws. Wherefore we do certify to you, thatthe person which did give the money aforesaid to theother, cannot have action to recover the same money again,• Roche MSS.1624 Ireland.JtmctL nor other recompense, therefore be the order of the saidCork, law ; so knoweth our lord, who preserve you.'' Your loving friends,Gerald Aylmer, Justice*** Thomas Eutzell^ Justice.*' James Bath, Baron.Thomas Cusacke, mr Rotlor/*WALES.One specimen will suffice to establish, that the royalgrants to Wales continued in this reign as in the former, onan equal footing with England.The following charter to Cardiff will show that it wasgranted to confirm the previous provisions which had beenenjoyed by the burgesses and inhabitants.CARDIFF.1609. King James, in the sixth year of his reign, granted acharter to Cardiff, which commences by reciting that it wasan ancient and populous town; and the burgesses and instants,by several names, from time immemorial had enjoyedliberties, Sec. from charters and prescription. And that thebailiffs, aldermen, and burgesses had besought, for the bettergovernment of the town, that they should be created anewby whatever name or names they were then incorporated, orhad been thitherto incorporated, into one body corporate andpolitic, by the name of " the bailiffs, aldermen, and burgessesof the town of Cardiff."The king, in consequence thereof, and for the better go-inhabitantsvermont of the people and inhabitants, then granted that itshould be a free town — that the bailiffs, aldermen, and burgesses,should have perpetual succession — be a body corporate,&c., with the usual corporate privileges. It then providesthat there should for ever be twelve burgesses to beAldermen, called aldermen, of whom two should be the bailiffs ; andtwelve burgesses to be named chief burgesses ; all of whomwere to compose the common council of the town.WALES. 1625Powers are then given to the common council to make J ^"*^ ^'ordinances for the government of all the officers, ministers, Cardiff.artificers — inhabitants and residents within the town. ^®^*All fines and amercements, &c. were to be applied for thebenefit of the bailiffs, aldermen, and burgesses.The aldermen are then named, and described as burgesses :and powers are given to them, as vacancies occur, to electother burgesses of the town.That the election of bailiffs, chief burgesses, and otherofficers, should be made in the same manner as in timespast.A steward is appointed — the constable of the castle ofCardiff, bailiffs, and elder aldermen, were to be justices,with jurisdiction over misdemeanours; and to keep theweights and measures. The bailiffs were to be coroners andescheats — a fair was granted, with a court of pie powderand a court of record, to be held before the bailiffs. Aconfirmation of all previous privileges and exemptions fromtoll, &c. concludes the charter.SCOTLAND.With respects Scotland, also, we may make the same observation— that the charters to that portion of the kingdomin the reign of James I., were in substance the same as thosein England, being granted to the burgesses and inhabitants, inhabitantand incorporating them, as well as giving them the powerof making burgesses and freemen, a grant which was moregeneral in that reign.As to the other provisions, they mostly resembled thosewe have given in the reign of Queen Elizabeth.CONCLUSION.We have at length concluded the documents of this importantreign, in which we have seen the king, in the firstinstance, pursuing the steps of his predecessor, and increasingthe members to Parliament, by summoning new places tomake returns ; but after some time, finding the inconvenienceof such a course, it was abandoned, and the more effective1626 CONCLUSION.^^^ method resorted to of controlling the boroughs which alreadyexisted.In some respects the courts of law were subservient tothe views of the crown, but at length, towards the close of thereign, the celebrated committee, to which we have so frequentlyreferred, with great moderation, but at the same timewith firmness, laid down those sound constitutional principleswhich seared as a check on the crown upon the one hand, anda restraint upon the irregularities of the people on the other;by restoring the ancient class of burgesses, under the denominationof the inhabitant beholden reliant — from whichall the other essential consequences follow, o( local retpcnmhiereticence, where the party is knawnj and his character dulyappreciated — of liability to all burdens, pecuniary and personal— scot and lot — and of responsibility to the law, bybeing sworn and enrolled as a reliant.It is one of the distinguishing characteristics of oarconstitution— our system of government — and the nature andhabits of the people ; that whatever may be the encroachments, or violent acts of the crown upon the one hand, orthe more dangerous violence and inordinate desires of thepeople on the other ; — yet if the temporary excitement is allowedto subside, and time is permitted leisurely to do itswork, our institutions will correct themselves — the vessel ofthe state will right — and the constitution, through all itsdangers, be safe and inviolate.Thus it was during the violent reign of King James ; andalthough he did all in his power to further the plans of influencewhich had been before commenced — and was aidedin his endeavours by circumstances, both within and withoutthese kingdoms, yet was the substance of the constitutionleft unimpaired ; although he had laid the foundation of futureevils and usurpations which have gone on increasing tothe present day ; and which will leave us, in the succeedingreigns, little more to do than to record the gradual progressof those mischiefs which had been so unfortunately commenced; and in the increase of which, the law and thepeople themselves have been too instrumental.CHARLES I.Charles I. auspiciously began his reign with the constitutenational and wise measure of summoning a parliament, which 1649.he seems not to have adopted reluctantly or misgivings, buteven with eagerness, and a sincere desire of meeting the twoHouses, who assembled on the 21st of June : — less thanthree months after the death of James I. No dispositionwas shown to influence their proceedings, but, on the contrary,restraint is said to have been placed on those connectedwith the court, to prohibit their making any effort to guidetheir judgment.Happy would it have been for England if that dispositionhad continued, and been fostered by a cordial inclination inthe Parliament to meet their monarch half way in the measureshe meditated; and for both to have co-operated inseeking honestly the good of the country.Unfortunately the contrary was the conduct of both parties— each exasperated the other. The king's disposition toassert his prerogative, aided by the offence given by his favourite,had a strong tendency to indispose the Houses ofParliament to allow the necessary claims he made uponthem : and, on the other hand, the severe course adopted byParliament to resist the improper extension of the prerogativeby the king, and to restrain the baneful power of the favourite,drove the monarch to measures far beyond what mightotherwise have been necessary for him, or justifiable.It is at this period but of little importance to consider whatmight have been the effect if a different temper had governedeach party ; the only application we can now make of theterrible scenes which followed, is to shun the dangerouscourse of driving matters to extremities.The great men who had so strenuously, yet moderately,protected the constitution, and maintained the cause ofnational freedom, in the last reign, continued in the House ofCommons in the first Parliament which Charles I. summoned ;1628 STATUTES.Chariot I. [j^|. unfortunately, for the reasons we have mentioned before,they did not continue the same line of moderate conduct theyhad previously adopted.They began to act as a party, and from the untoward circumstancesof the times — agitated by political and religiousexcitement — they by degrees were drawn into measures,which probably they would not otherwise have adopted;and endeavoured to obtain, by artifice and management,those advantages for their party, which neither the interestsof the country required ; nor would a direct pursuit of thepreservation of the constitution, or the protection of civil orreligious freedom, have suggested.The king's necessities, both foreign and domestic, weregreat and pressing ; but no disposition was shown to relievehim from the embarrassment.Statutes. The statutes which were passed during the first Parliamentshow the tone and temper of the time.The first was for punishing divers abuses committed onthe Lord's day, and prohibiting assemblies for unlawfulpastimes on Sunday.The second enabled the king to make leases of lands,parcel of the duchy of Cornwall, as one of the numerousmeasures at that time permitted for the purpose of enablingthe king to provide for some of his necessities out of hishereditary property. A course apparently sanctioned by theparty formed against the king, for the purpose indirectly ofreducing his power; with which object the third statuteseems also to be framed, as it was to facilitate the obtaininglicenses of alienation.The fourth statute was for the further restraint of tipplingin inns, ale-houses, and other victualling houses.The fifth and sixth gave three subsidies by the spirituality,and two by the temporality — the scanty pittance whichthe Parliament allowed the king to carry on the war whichthe country and Parliament had sanctioned.The conference with the lords, and the violent debateas to the subsidies granted to the king, which close thePARLIAMENT. 1629;session — seem to have justified him in the course which Charles I.he took of appealing to the country by dissolving the Parliament.The last message which the king sent to the House ofCommons before the dissolution, thanked them for theirgood intentions; but desired them to consider, that hisaffairs required a speedy dispatch. And he pressed for apresent answer about his supply ; which, if it was granted,he gave his royal word, that in winter he would meet themagain at what time they chose, and hold together until theyhad perfected all those things for the commonwealth andthe king, which were then in conception.In the debate, on the one hand, the great necessities of theking were ui^ed, as well as the sums of money which hadbeen raised by the sale of places and otherwise ; and it wasin vain pressed upon the House to abandon their fears,jealousies and disgusts, and to rely upon the king's promiseto reform those disorders, which had not happened in histime, and which he had assured them of his desire and resolutionto reform.On the other hand, the danger of bad precedents and ofgranting subsidies in reversion were pointed out. It waseven suggested, that his majesty might obtain credit for40,000i. without any grant from Parliament; and Sir EdwardCoke, using scraps of Latin to give points to his arguments,and citing the punishments which in former timeshad been inflicted on those who had pressed for more subsidies,offered to give rather out of his own estate 1,000/. thanto grant any other subsidy.Religion was, according to the spirit of the times, drawninto the discussion; and two days afterwards. Parliamentwas dissolved, upon the alleged ground of the raging prevalenceof the plague.A Parliament was summoned again in the winter of thesame year, as the king had promised, although he had notobtained the supply for which he had asked. But the Parliamentseem to have considered that they might compel thismeeting by withholding the supply.1030 PARLIAMENT.^**'**^* Though go little was granted at the last meeting of Parliamentthe first act which appears in the Jonmala after theassembling of the House, was one brought in for ministeringan oath to make true account of all public rates, taxes andcollections — an indication, at least, thus early in the session,of their suspicion of the misapplication of the. public funds.Two days afterwards, the chancellor of the exchequer delivereda message from the king, taking notice of the orderfor sending out writs upon the double returns ; and addingthat Sir Edward Coke, being sheriff of Buckinghamshire,had been returned for the county of Norfolk, contrary tothe tenor of the writ, and therefore he hoped the Honewould do him that right as to send out a new writ.The commons proceeded to the consideration of thesupply — the relief of their grievances — the king's estatethe accompt of the subsidies and fifteens, granted in the21st of James I. — and the misgovernment — misempl oy menof the king's revenues — and miscounselling.A few days afterwards, an act was brought in for the dueelection and free choice of the knights of the shire ; and ofthe citizens and burgesses of cities, boroughs, and tawtu oor-^^[|P^^ l^ora^e; which latter expression, from the circumstance wehave before abundantly shown, was inapplicable to the subjectfor which the bill was intended, for no corporate totussuch, had a right to return members to Parliament; andon the other hand, boroughs not incorporated had that right.The same term, however, occurs in the title of anotherbill, in which it was not so inappropriately introduced as inthe former. It was an act for avoiding the increase of cottages,in cities, boroughs, towns corporate, and marketInmates, towns ; and also an act concerning inmates.*It seems to have been an indiscretion on the part of thecommons, that they constantly persevered in bringing underdiscussion the fundamental principles of the government.The state of the king and kingdom — the king's settled revenue— formed subjects of inquiry before committees. Anda discussion arose whether the ancient mode of describing• 1 Journ. 820, 830.Parliament. 1631the House as '^ the poor commons " should be continued in Charles I.the petitions.The king however took these matters in good part, andthanked the House for their care in examining his estate,and gave leave to enter into it ;* and sent to the House anaccount of the customs of Ireland, which at that time let for13,000/.A committee reported to the House that they had consentedto the subsidies — the bill to be brought in for themas soon as the House had presented their grievances, andreceived the king's answered But it appears the king wasafterwards frequently obliged to make application to Parliamentfor a supply.The session passed on without any material businessbeing done — the House of Commons, however, still drivingmatters to extremity, by calling for the commitment of theDuke of Buckingham — interfering with Cambridge in theelection of their chancellor; and in every other respect,though apparently with an honest view, towards the good ofthe country, yet marring the success of the measures theycontemplated by a want of temperance and moderation.Another Parliament was called upon the 17th of March, 1627.the commencement of which was not more auspicious thanthe former. It began with an objection upon the part ofthe House, that the message sent to them to attend hismajesty at the House of Lords was not sent by the knightof the black rod ; and it was recommended, that the speakershould not stir until they had received a message throughthat channel ; however, the House at length agreed to go tothe king, who was waiting for them.The lords and commons soon agreed upon a petition tothe king, into which they introduced Magna Charta, andthe early statutes against the levying of taxes, without theassent of the archbishops, earls, barons, knights, burgesses,and other the freemen of the commonalty of this realm.They complained of commissions which had been issued,and oaths which had been imposed upon the people, as well• 1 Joumn. as. f 1 Joum. 842.1632 Parliament^^^'*^^' aB, amongst other things, the quartering of soldier upon1027. the inhabitants of divers counties in the realm, and the-enforcingof martial law ; as well as the exemption finnpunishment which had been allowed to many offenders bythe forbearance of the ministers of justice. And in contusion,they prayed that all these grievances should be redressed.To which the king answered, that ** right should bedone as was desired'Nevertheless the House still continued to press complaintsof grievances, both civil and religious; and unfortunatelytheir conduct was met by equally unjustifiable conduct bythe king.It is needless to pursue this inquiry further ; the rest ofthis reign being merely a continuation of the same conducton both sides.Stttntat. It is only material to refer to the statute which passedduring this period, and the few occurrences in the House ofCommons which will illustrate the history of the municipalbodies.The statute next after the petition of grievances, vias forthe further reformation of abuses committed on the Lord'sday.Another, with reference to the great subject which occupiedmuch of the attention of Parliament, prohibited thepassing or sending of any to be popishly bred beyond theseas.A third was for the better suppressing of unlicensed alehousekeepers.The fourth was a highly useful enactment for the continuanceand repeal of divers former statu tes affecting manysubjects of general importance; and the session closed withthe grant of five subsidies by the spirituality, and five bythe temporality.COVENTRY.1627. In the third year of Charles I., a question arose as to thereturn of citizens for Coventry;* one sheriff having returned• 1 Journ. 874.CO Vent Y.-EXETER. 1 633two gentlemen of the county elected by the major part, and Charies I,the other sheriff returning two others resiant in the city.* 1627.The former two gentlemen not being either resiant or according to the statute of the first of Henry V. whichwas referred to, the committee most extraordinarily resolved,with one voice, that the two non-reliant and non-freemencandidates were duly elected.Sir Edward Coke appears to have taken up the argument,and strangely to have contended, that though the act wasin the negative, yet if they elected a non-resign, it wasgood. And the sheriff who refrained from returning them,was called before the House upon his knees, and chargedby the speaker to acknowledge his error in not returningthe two non-resents ; which he accordingly did, pleadinghis ignorance: stating that he was misled by the statute ofHenry V., and the House, upon an acknowledgment of hiserror, was pleased to remit any further punishment.body.EXETER.In the same year, a report of the election for Exeter, shows Selectto how great a length the usurpations of the select bodieshad at that time proceeded .fMr. Lynn and Mr. , were returned by one indenture,and Mr. Lynn and Mr. Jordan by another. It was allegedthat by prescription, the mayor and common council nominatedfour, out of which the burgesses chose two. That the mayorand 24 nominated Mr. Lynn, Mr. Martin, and two others,but not Mr. Jordan ; but that Mr. Jordan was chosen bygreater numbers than Mr. Martin.That the sheriff, upon the nomination of the four had said,they might choose another.Upon the question, whether the election and return of Mr.Jordan was good, it was decided in the affirmative.And it appears afterwards,;}: that the magistrates, beingdefeated in their election, refused to pay the wages of themember who had been chosen by the commons, out of the• I Joum. 880. t 1 Joums. 875. X 1 Joumn. 994.5m1834 £XET£ILr^COUCHESTER.-LEWES.Cli«ittl> lands given to the city for thai purpose, although ih^ paidliny* the other burgess.The consideration of this matter was referred to the coafr^mittee. And it was resolved, ** thai the mayor of Bzelsitshook be sent for to the House, by a letter from the speaker."COLCHESTER.^2^ The anomalous election attempted at Exeter, as we haveseen above, and the usurpation of the common council bangset aside, we find the same done by the House <^ Commonswith respect to an attempt made at Colchester, to return bythe select body ; who, assembling together in an upper room,to the number of 42, the bailifis, aldermen, and common-council,elected two members, whilst the '^ common sort d-burgesses," (as the Journal states it*) assembled* in a lowerroom, and elected one of those before chosen by the commoncouncil, and a third person.The House decided that the two latter were duly elected ; —again n^ativing the usurpation of the select hody^ whoclaimed a r^ht to elect by prescription : but the evidenceshowing that there was no common council till the time ofEdward IV., the prescription was held insufficient.LEWES.1628. The following day it was agreed, that the election at LewesInhabit ^as to be made by the inhabitants :+ — ^which in truth de-ants.. . -^ 'scribes the night too shortly. For subsequently, in the 10th1736 of George IL, the right was according to the common law,decided to be in the inhabitants paying scot and lot : — whoBurgesses. must therefore be taken to be the burgesses.Bridgeport.Select In the case of Bridportj% also, the bailiff and twelve capitalburgesses claimed the sole power to elect by prescription,and gave in proof an usage for 40 years ; which, however, wasanswered by a prior usage to the contrary; and by the productionof a return of the sixth of Edward VI. " per Balliol• 1 Joura. 87S. 1 1 Journ. 877. | 1 Journ. 883.BRIDPORT.-YORKSHIRE, fcc. 1636fer assensum communicates'* to which it was replied, that Charles I.the addition of the ** commonalty " was made because it was ig28.the name of the corporation ; that the leases were made in thatform, but the commoners never meddled with them.Objections were suggested to the testimony of the witnesses;— ^and that the commoners had been called to theelection in the first year of James I., because they contributedto the members' wages. However, the committee resolved,that " the commonalty in general ought to have voices in the Right.election, and that no warning having been given to themthe return was void."YORK COUNTY.In an inquiry respecting an election for the county ofFori,* it is expressly stated, that the persons who claimed tovote had 405. freehold, and were resiants within the county Resiants.upon the day of the date of the writ.AMERSHAM, &c.We have seen before, in the reign of James I., that threeplaces in Buckinghamshire, Amersham, Marlow and Wen BoroughsJ 1 rr i* 1 restored.wer, and also Hertford were summoned to send membersto Parliament, upon proof of their having anciently retainedburgesses. The same occurs in the fourth year of '628.this reign upon similar proof, and it was said that " boroughs** did sometimes send, and sometimes forbore, in respect of*' poverty not being able to pay the burgesses* wages. By thewrit, every ancient borough ought to send ; and thebounds of these were like ancient boroughs, and they paidburgage rents — and tenths as boroughs, and not fifteenths,and therefore ought to send burgesses." The committeedecided accordingly ; and that the long discontinuance wasno loss of the right : — for it was not a franchise which couldhe lost J but a service pro bono publico; and thereupon writsissued, and the elections were by the inhabitants : — which is Inhabitparliamentary usage to show that the inhabitants were theblesses.• lJourn.884.5m 21636 Boston-WARWICK.Ctorkil.BOSTON.1^^' A question occurred in the same year,* with respect tobody. Boston, whether a select number or the commonly ought tochoose, and it was agreed by the committee, " that the ceo'tian of burgesses to Parliament in all boroughs did of cam'man right belong to the commoners, and that nothing could'< take it from them but a prescription, and a constant usagebeyond all memory J*Rii^t. And it was decided that the right at Boston rested in thecommonaUy,^ and not in the mayor, aldermen, and commoncouncil ; . and the member who was elected by a majorityof the commonalty was seated.Burst. Here again the commoners, and the commonalty, who arethe inhabitants, are declared to be the burgesses.WARWICK.1628. An inquiry also occurred with respect to the election forWarwick's[' whether it ought to be made by the mayor andSelect common council, or by the commoners in general. Two'* hundred of the commoners disclaimed to have any right ofelection ; but it was refused to be accepted by the committee.Right, because if but one commoner appeared to sue for his rightthey would hear him — and the committee again decided,that the right of election belonged to the commonalty.Tonnage, Xhe disputes as to tonnage and poundage between the kingand the House of Commons ; and the strong measures adoptedby that body, brought the sessions to a close: — and the king,who had suffered so much from the conduct of the Parliament,seems to have determined not hastily to summon it.This drove him to the necessity of finding other modes,than by the supplies, of raising money; and those which headopted, unfortunately, wanted the sanction of legal authority.Some funds were raised by granting indulgences fromthe necessity of being knighted, for which compositions werepaid. Monopolies also were revived by the erection of new• 1 Journ. 893. f 1 Journ. 907.PARLIAMENT. 1637companies and corporations, under the exception made in the Charles I.statute of James against monopolies, in favour of new inventstions ; but it is said, by Lord Clarendon, that from all thesesources the king obtained no more than 1500/.The court of Star Chamber also extended its authority, andsome revenue is said to have been raised by heavy fines inflictedby that tribunal. Loans were adopted from the ministersand courtiers, and from the city of London : — nor wasthe coining of base money omitted. And to sum up all thegrounds upon which the commons and country took offence,though, considering its application, no injury, beyond thatimportant consideration of infringing the principles of theconstitution, was inflicted — " ship money " was imposed.With these precarious, illegal, and unconstitutional sourcesof revenue did Charles succeed in supporting his governmentfor many years.The king at last was driven by his necessities to call a 1640.new Parliament ; and after eleven years' intermission, andthe trial of many irregular methods of taxation, in the 16thyear of his reign Parliament was summoned.The king directed the Houses to be informed that he hadcontracted a debt of 300,000/. for the support of the army,and which he had charged upon his crown lands.* Hetherefore urged the necessity of an immediate grant ofthe supplies, alleging that he had not expended any moneyuselessly, by unnecessary pomp, or any other kind of magnificence;that what had been levied on his subjects, hadbeen employed for their benefit and preservation ; and thatthough he was desirous of obtaining immediately these suppliesyet he had no inclination to preclude them from theirright of inquiring into the state of the kingdom, or to presentto him petitions for the redress of their grievances.He added, that the Parliament of Ireland had twice confidedin his good intentions, and, granting him a large supplyin the beginning of the session, had experienced the goodeffects arising from the confidence reposed in him.These topics, however, made but little impression on the• 2 Journ. 13.1638 Mitchell. GR1N8T£AD.CliirlM I. Houfle, which, confuting of gentleman over whom Ae blown1098. had no influence it was extremely difficult to manage.Few days after the meeting parliament,* three headsgrievances were stated, which embraced the leading pointsof the liberty of Parliament — the preservation of religion —and the conservation of the liberties of the kingdom.However, we shall again quit these subjects of generalpolitics, and adhere more closely to the precise object of ourinquiry.Mitchell.^^^ soon after the meeting of the Houses a question arose asbody, to the election of Michel, in Cornwall, whether the burgessesalone had the right of election, or the burgesses and inkabt'tanis. The report is not very distinct as to the dedsicm1700. between the parties, but in a subsequent inquiry the right"^^^ appears to have been fixed in the burghers and inhabitantspaying scot and lot.The port reeve was chosen at the court leet, where theelinor and jury appointed him the returning officer.In substance, this decision also declares the inhabitantArgues. io^g^^oUl^g \jq be the burgesses.EAST Instead.hol^f As to Least Chinsteadj the petitioners contended, that theright of election was to be in the burgage holders only.^li Onthe other hand the sitting member affirmed, that the inhabit^^^^g jj^j ^j^^ ^jgj^^ ^ ^^u ^^ ^jj^ burgage holders, andproduced indentures to prove it. The committee were ofthat opinion, and confirmed the sitting member.The right of the inhabitants was again established in the22nd of Charles II. Notwithstanding which, however,at subsequent periods the right was limited only to theburgage holders.1640.Another place is reported at the same time, though itsname is not mentioned, as having a right of election in the• 2 Journ. 6. ^2 Journ. 10.t 2 Journ. 10. § 1689. 1695, 1769.HONITON. &c.— MALTON. 1639inhabitants paying scot and iot, and that it wad not con Charles I.fined by prescription to the ancient burgesses.*HONITON.-ASHBURTON.Honiton and AshburtoUj neither of which were mentionedas boroughs in Domesday were this year restored to theright of sending members to Parliaments The latterhaving before retained in the 26th of Edward L, and it tisstated they were still boroughs, and paid the charge ofboroughs — tenths and not fifteenths-as Great Marlow did.MALTON.The history of Malton is peculiar. It sent burgesses toParliament from the commencement of the returns by boroughs,in the 26th of Edward I., but it intermitted for 1297.many years, until the order of the House for Malton aswell as Allerton to send members. Its usages and customs Customs.were compiled in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, and arestated to have been used from time immemorial. Fromthem it will be seen who were the burgesses ; and that theyassembled twice a year at the court leet, where the " com- Leet.monalty " of the suitors elected all their officers, and regulatedall the concerns of the borough, with the assistance ofMalton being one of the burgage tenure boroughs, willjustify the insertion of a short history of that place, and of8<Hne of its customs, the similarity of which with the cussof the Cinque Ports,;}: and the privileges of Manchester,cannot fail to strike the readersThese customs of Malton were claimed by the burgesses Customs.in 1596, as granted to them from the first foundation of theborough by their lord.That there was granted to the burgesses a piece of waste 1506.ground, oil either side of the town of New Malton, to the intentthat the burgesses and their successors should always thereinget stone and earth, for buildings within the town.2 Journ. 14. t Sec before, p. 532, et seq.t 2 Journ. 36. $ See before, p. 541, etseq.1640 MALTON.ClwriiiL That they should have {ofxt parts; — that is to ay, tom1506. gates ; — and the walls of the borough, together with all profiteof the walls, towards the mending of the same; aad theburgesses have evermore been accustomed to feed their beastsin those wastes.That the largesses should have common pasture tar alltheir beasts, without any stint, with free entry and going outto the moor, by a large open way, the which is called ** theautgang/^ and the pasture and the outrage was grantedand given to the burgesses.That the burgesses should have a free court, to be holdenwithin the borough ; and that they should have two bailiffsand two under bailiffs, and one burgess clerk, residual sidbeing thin the borough, for the holding of the court, andJury, the burgess clerk to be of their own free election, bjf 12sufom burgesses, by their faith that they made to the lord andto the commonalty of the borough ; and that no other bailiffshould make any attachment or summons within the concludesrough, without the bailiff of the borough that is sworn. Andthat no distress made within the borough should be removedwithout the liberty thereof.Courts. That the burgess should make out two suites by the yearto the court, that is to say, at the great court next after thefeast of St. Michael, and at the great court next after St. Hilaryday; except they have prisoners to deliver, or judgment to begiven on any plaint : and they should have their eight daysof summons ; and at all the aforesaid courts the burgessesmight essoyne once or twice ; and if they made a default,and appeared after the second essoyne, they should be amerced4d. and no more.Burgage. That there should no other court be holden within theliberty of the burgage, except the court of burgage.That no burgess or other man who dwelt within the borough,should sue another, but only in the court of the borough.And if any burgess of the borough be sued by any man ofthe country, or by any neighbour of the burgess, the burgessshould have his eight days' respite. And if so be that heThese are clearly the court leets.MALTON. 1641come into the court on the first day after he be attached, ctmriei i.and ask eight days from that day, he should have his delays, lSd6.that is to say, two essoynes after every appearing. And thesame should extend as well to the plaintiff as to the defendant,in all manner of plaints, whether of debt or trespass,or plea of land.And if any burgess of the burgage sued his neighbour of thetame toum, not being a burgess or any man of the country,they should have court from day to day with delays, that isto say, two essoynes, as well the plaintiff as the defendant.And if so be that he appeared not after the second essoigne,then should the essoigne be turned into default, and heshould be amerced by the affecting of 12 men.That if any man who dwelt within the borough, as well aforeigner as burgess, should be summoned or attached toany court without the borough, or to the wapentake, thebailiffs or sub-bailiffs of the borough, or any minister of thelord, having letters patent of the lord, should come to themthat hold the court or wapentake, on the first day of summonsor attachment, and ask the privilege of the borough,and he that held the court of wapentake should grant it, sothat right judgment be done to every man.That judgment of all manner of plaints and considerationsin the borough court, should be given and judged by thesuitors of the court ; and all amercements offered, except Suitors,only the amercements of the commons, and assise of breadand of all other transgressions that touched the lord'sperson.That all burgesses of the borough should be free of all Toll.toll of the lord, in all manner of merchandise ; but if theybe associate with any foreigner or stranger, then theforeigner and the stranger should give toll, as well for theburgess as for himself, &c.That they should have a free prison for all manner of evil PrUon.doers that are taken within the borough, in order that intheir court, by the commonalty * of the suitors they mightjudge the prisoners or misdoers, and deliver them. And theI. e. The commonalty of the suitors at the court leet.1942 Salton.ChniH I. bugesaea should ordain a pUIary and wioekif lawfiiL aadThat the bnigeaaea of the borough ahoald answer biblethe natives of the peace in all sermons and inquiries with12 chosen of the same. And also before the sheriff in hiaTom. Umn^ holden within the liberty of the borough, and in noother place : and that the burgesses should there make aPtDoel. pond of the 12 men which pannel should be prtitnUiand delivered before the justice or the sheriff, by the battffor sub^bailiff of the same burgage.That the burgesses should hare liberty to grind flieir eonand their malt at the lord's mill.That they should have in the mill two millers and %mtpage, chosen by the assent cfthe eommaiutUy of the b&hmgh;the which millers should be^t^omin the court at two tines inTwo the year, that is to say, at the two head eomrt$ of tie e0siNmendUg of ike borough.Also it is used, that all manner of measures of the last,wherewith they take matter, should be proved in the saidcemrtofthe borough, by the bailiff, two times in the year; aadthere should be no miller removed from the mill withoutCommon the cuscHt ofthe commonalty of the borough ; and no millershould be put into the mill, without the assent ofthe com'monaUy ; nor any minister be put in the mill before that hebesworn to be true to the commonalty.That all the burgesses of the borough, and all that dmeUwithin city might grind their corn and their malt which theybuy in the country, or in the market wheresoever they will,without any impediment, so that their com and malt beconsumed within their houses.That the burgesses should have the standard of weightsand measures proved before the bailiffs and the commonaltyof the boroughs and marked, and the standard sealed withComm the commun seal,* and the mark should be kept under the8CU* /» ■■seals of four burgesses chosen for the same tent.Two That all manner of bakers and butchers should be sworncourts.Common seal ; and yet Moo does not'appcar to have been the incorporated.MALTON. 1643twice in the year to the commonalty of the boroughs tint Charles I.is to say, at the two great courts. 1596.That the burgesses should choose in their court, two ale' Theproper•^ duty of thetasters. leet.That every burgess should give to the lord one time in the Shows thatyear, a fee farm rent for his tenement, called gassteage ; gessesthat is to say, for every tenement that hath one door, a house-penny;if so be it be letter to farm to the court of the ^ ^^'borough, after the feast of St. Michael ; for every housethat is letter to farm that hath two doors, two pence in theyear to the court ; and for every toft that is not builded, onepenny by the year, except they be tenements of the knight'sfree, or of the prior of Malton, the which give nothing to thelord. And if so be that a burgess appropriate tenementslying together, or hold them to his proper use he shouldgive but one gassteage to the lord, as it were for one tenement.That any burgess having divers tenements to his own usem divers places, or if he make of one tenement divers tenements,with divers tenants dwelling in them, he should Dwelling.give a whole gassteage. And it is lawful to every burgessto sell his tenements, or to give them, or to will them in histestament, without impediment of the loitl, or of the bailiffs.And the lord of the fee should not have, nor never had, theward of the heritage of any burgess of the borough : andshould never claim any thing of the inheritance, but only thesith of his tenant for his tenements on his land, after thedecease of his predecessors.In the 28th of Charles II. there was a petition by the i675.inhabitants of the town.And in the first of James I., there was another petition by i685.the bailiffs, burgesses, and inhabitants.There was also a petition by which the burgesses who were noe.electors, complained that several persons were polled, whodid not pay scot and lot, and that others, King without the Scot andborough, pretending to be freeholders, were also allowed to ^^^^PqI]^ residents.Notwithstanding the numerous petitions from this place,1644 MALTON, &c.Charles I. there is no resolution with respect to the right of election.By some contrivance, however, notwithstanding all theusages and customs of the place, as detailed in the reign ofl^ct. Queen Elizabeth, which referred to the " court leet" wherethe bailiff or returning officer was then elected, yet the rightBurgage was only exercised by the burgage holders — an usurpationno doubt founded upon the mistake we have pointed outbefore, of confounding the resiant householders, or actualoccupiers of the houses with the tenants in fee.Seaport AND COCKERMOUTH.Seaford also, in the county of Sussex, was in like mannerrestored in 1640, as well as Cockermouth, in the county ofCumberland.*WINDSOR.1640. We have before seen several changes in the right of electionfor Windsor. X It was in this year, the 16th of Charles Lthat it was decided — upon the question whether the inhabitantsin general, or the particular choice of the mayor, bailiffs,and some few of the town, should prevail — that " allRight, the inhabitants have generally the right of election :" — thecharter of Edward IV. being treated as an incorporation ofthe inhabitants And it will be remembered, that charteris in the same form as many we have quoted in the subsequentreigns of Queen Elizabeth and James I.||MALTON AND NORTHALLERTON.These places, in Yorkshire, like Honiton and Ashburtou,in Devonshire, were also restored to their right of returningmembers, upon an inspection of the records which relatedto them.Thus, notwithstanding the experience of James I., and hisdeclaration of the difficulty he had found in managing theboroughs which then returned members to Parliament,• 2 Journ. p. 78. t 2 Journ. 47. t Sec before, p. 131, et scq.\S See before, p. 127. || 2 Journ. p. 49.BOROUGHS. 1646Charles I. had at this time, either sanctioned or submitted Charles I.to the restoration of no less than eight boroughs ; two in 1640.the fourth year of his reign, and six in this year ; of thelatter three were in the north, and three in the south : —adding altogether 16 members to the House of Commons.This course had been first adopted by Henry Vii, andafterwards followed by Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth, andJames I., in the beginning of his reign. Those however,which were now restored, appear rather to have beenadopted by the commons themselves, owing to the practicewhich the crown had before sanctioned, for the purposeof increasing their own power against the crown.*In six of the eight boroughs, the burgesses were definedto be the inhabitant householders; the right of election beingdecided to be in them. In the other two cases, Maltonand Northallerton, the right was determined to be in theburgage holders; and in the latter the inhabitant householderswere joined with them. Upon these two decisionswe have before remarked.STATUTES.In the same Parliament in which these transactions 1627.occurred, seven and thirty statutes were passed : — one sud 37 statutesdeny brought in and carried through its stages with greatunanimity and rapidity, to prevent the inconveniences bythe adjournment of Parliament. It was only temporary, butit unconstitutionally provided, that the Parliament shouldnot be dissolved, prorogued, or adjourned, without their ownconsent. Another for granting the subsidy of tonnage andpoundage ; and another for the speedy provision of moneyfor disbanding the armies, and for settling the peace of thetwo kingdoms of England and Scotland.The 10th chapter was for the important purpose of reeii- . ^^^7*^ ' ^ o chamber.hating the privy council, and taking away the Star Chamber.This statute recited some of the clauses of Magna Charta.The 5, 15, 28, 36, and 42 of Edward III., the 3rd of HenryVII., and the 21st of Henry VIII. ; and on the ground that• PaTl.Hi8t.vol.xxi. p. 212.1646 STATUTES.Charity I. all matters examined in the Star Chamber might be redressedhy the common law, the Star Chamber, and the Courtof the President and Council in the Marches of Wales wereabolished, and no other court was to exercise their jurisdiction; and neither his majesty nor his privy council were tohave any jurisdiction over any man's estate, but that thesame ought to be tried and determined in the ordinary courtsof justice, and in the ordinary courts of law.inhaintantfl There was also another statute for securing the monies tothe inhabitants of the county of York, and other adjoiningcounties, for the billeting of his majesty's army, &c.Ship Another act declares the proceedings touching ship-money,to have been unlawful and void : and vacates allproceeds and records concerning it; specially reciting theproceedings against Hampden.Another statute provided against the encroachments andoppressions in the Stannary Courts.Another fixed the limits and bounds of the forests.And another regulated the clerk of the market ; an office ofwhich such frequent mention has been made in the charters.Knight And to prevent for the future the exactions of any compos' nations for exemptions from taking knighthood, it was providedthat none should be compelled for the future, to takethe order of knighthood, nor be fined for not doing so.Some provisions for the better government and regulationof Ireland close the sessions.1640. The important bill for triennial parliaments, which is notprinted in the statutes at large, passed in this session, aftertwo conferences between the lords and commons,* and theyboth thanking his majesty for giving his assent to it.Gaston.It has been before remarked, upon the decisions of the committee,reported by Glanville, that the qualification, as to thecommon hiw right of election in favour of prescriptions, was untenable,inasmuch as no such prescriptions had ever existed.In the case of Gatton,t which occurred in the 17th of• 2 Journ. 286. t 2 Journ. 3()3.Gaston. 1647Cittrles I., that question arose. The point in dispute was, Charms i>whether the burgesses by common right, had the power of I64i-action ; or the Freeholders, dwelling out of town, who badfreeholds in the town, by virtue of a particular prescription.The committee were of opinion that there was. in this a prescriptionswhich was good against the common right.It appeared in evidence that a return, in the 33rd of HenryVniw, was made by Roger Copley, who is described in it asahayes and inhabitant who, by virtue of a precept to himdirected, had made the return, and therefore was, in his ownperson both the returning officer and the elector.It was also given in evidence, that in the first and sixth ofEdward VI., the returns were made by the inhabitants andlargesses; but in the tenth of James I. a precedent wasshown on behalf of the ^eeAo/der*.Some other matters, not material to our inquiry, were discussedbut it was resolved that there was no sufficient proofof a prescription against the common right, and therefore thecandidate who had at the election the smaller number ofvotes, was declared duly elected ; and the contrary was decidedas to the other candidate who had a majority of votes,but the greater portion of them, were freeholders dwellingout of the borough.In this instance, therefore, we see the decision of the committeeagainst that prescription which had been resented toin the decision in Glanville's Reports, in the time of James LAnd most properly, because Gatton clearly was not a boroughby prescription. It is not mentioned as such inDomesday; there are no other documents to show that itwas a borough before the time of legal memory, and it returnedno members to Parliament till the 29th of Henry VI.,in the 38th year of which reign, and in the 7th and 12th ofEdward IV., it had. It also returned members ; as well asin the 27th year of Queen Elizabeth; at which time the cir- 1584.substances connected with this borough are somewhatcarious.• Harl. MSS., 703, 9.1648 Gaston.Chariaii. The following letters are to be found amongst the Hadrian1684. Manuscripts : —^ After my very hearty commendations. — whereas thereare to be returned by you, against the Parliament, two burgessesfor Gatton, in that county of Sorry, which heretoforehave been nominated by Mr. Sophie, for that there are moburgesses in the AorouyrA there to nominate then Forasmuchas by the death of the said Mr. Sophie, and minority of hisson — the son with his lands are within the survey and rule ofthe court of ward whereof I am his majesty's chief ofl&ow,you shall, therefore, forbear to make return, of and for thesaid town, without direction first had from me therein,whereof I pray you not to fisdl, and so I bid you heartilyfarewell.** From the court at St. James's, this 13th of November, 1684.Your very loving friend,*' W. Burghley.'' To my very loving friend, Walter Covert, Esq., sheriffof the county of Surrey and Sussex, and to his under-sheriff,or to other persons."And a few days afterwards the following: letter was alsowritten:*-'' After my hearty commendations. — Whereas in the indenturereturned for the borough of Grafton, in the county ofSurrey, Mr. Francis Bacon, and Mr. Thomas Bushoppe,are nominated burgesses. Forasmuch as Mr. Francis Baconis returned also for another borough, and so certifiedand sworn, you shall appoint in his room and place EdwardBrowne Esq., and so to certify him with Mr. Bushoppe ;so fare you well.From the court, this 24th of November, 1584.Your loving friend,W. Burghley."1587. In the 30th of Elizabeth, the return was by the burgessesand inhabitants.• Harl. MSS. 703, 10.Galton. 164ftIn the 18th of James I., the case of Gatton was before a Charles .committee of the House, and a report was made, from which ^^^it appeared that the precept had been sent to the constable,the principal officer of the town, but was delivered to theminister, who announced the following Wednesday for theelection.Mr. Copley and some of his lessees made their choice theTuesday before — the freeholders making their choice on theWednesday; and this being confessed to be true, all thecommittee were of opinion that it was not a true election, andthat the return was void.A heated discussion, in which Sir Edward Coke held aconspicuous part, afterwards took place, in the course ofwhich it appeared, all the freeholders except one dwelt out oftie town, and only held of the manor within it ; that the.election was made at Ryegate ; and, upon a division, therewas no voice in support of the election, but a general voteagainst it ; and there was a proposal that there should be nonew election, in respect of the danger from the lord of theborough ; but, in conclusion, the two candidates who stoodon the votes of the freeholders were confirmed in their seats.It is also stated, upon the Journals of the 18th of James I.,*that the writ for Gatton was directed to the burgesses, anddelivered to Mr. Copley — that the town consisted only ofscFen houses — and that all but one were his tenants — thatthe election by them was good, and that they agreed upontheir election in Gatton, and sealed it casually in Ryegate.However, the reader has already seen what was the decisionof the committee in the 17th of Charles I. on thispoint, which militates against this determination, but was,in effect, supported by that which occurred in the fourth ofCharles I., about eight years after the inquiry in king James' 1628.time. Upon that occasion, Mr. Hackwill reported from thecommittee of privileges,^- that there were two indentures forGatton — one by the inhabitants, the other by Mr. Copleysolely; — that Mr. Owfeild and Sir Charles Howard were• 1 Jouni. 512. t 1 Journ. 876.6 N{1060 Groton.CfcMfatX^ retained by the tuAoittoiif— Sir Thomas Lake and Mr.Iq Jerome Weston by Mr. Copley, who insisted that, an ableinhabitant, he was entitled to retnm,. as had been done-b^foie in the 33rd of Henry Vii, and in the first, second andthird of Queen Mary.On the other part it was insisted, that in the seventh EdwardVI., Mr. Copley, ** et omnes inhabitantes," retained.And in that of the 28th and 43d of Elizabeth and the finiand 18th of James I. the return was made by the im halnUm i i :And that in all the latter parliaments Mr. Copley joinedwith other inhabitants in the return.Mr. Copley in reply urged, that it had been resolved bythe former committee, that those who had lands in their own-ignorance,although they dwelt out of the burgh, wenentitled to vote. The return of Sir Charles Howard andMr. Owfeild was held to be good ; and the other <^ SirThomas Lake and Mr. Weston was void, and to be taken offthe file ; so that the return by the inhabitants was supportedagainst that by Mr. Copley.1007. In the eighth of William III., the election of Oatton wasagain before a committee. It was insisted for the petitioner,that the right of election was in the inhabitants not recdvmgabmif and in the freeholders of the borough, having suchfreehold in their own occupation ; and that upon the poll thepetitioner and Mr. Evelyn had each 1 1 voices : but it wasinsisted on behalf of the petitioner, that several who votedfor Mr. Evelyn were not qualified ; and that four who hada right to vote, and would have voted for Mr. South, weredenied.For Mr. Evelyn it was insisted, that the right of electionwas in the freeholders of the borough, and inhabitants payingscot and lot.And the committee resolved in favour of Mr. Evelyn.Prwcrip- Thus, even taking the qualification in favour of prescripttioiif as laid down by the committee in the reign of James Lto be correct, yet in this instance the prescription was decidednot to exist. Nevertheless the freeholders were heldGaston. 1651entitled to vote, contrary to the common right, but the Charles i.hkahitant householders were likewise permitted to share 1696.with them in the election.The right thus established — or in other words, these „ ^ , ,qmificatiansfor burgess^skip — are open to many objections ««•First. — ^^The freeholders' right was contrary, as we haveshown from the commencement of this inquiry, to the principlesand practice of the common law.Next it introduced non-resident burgesses, which was con Non-residuaryto the whole principle and object of our municipalinstitutions ; as well as to the law connected with parliamentaryrepresentation.Again it placed the whole control of the borough in thehands of the owner of the soil, who, by creating non-residentfreeholders, had the means of entirely out-numbering theinhabitants of the place.There was also another objection, which might indeedbe made in all places where the inhabitants had the right of 'ni»^*M»teelection, were there not in the constitution some principlewhich would operate as a correction of the abuse.It Would be in the power of the owner of the borough todestroy the houses to such an extent, that the inhabitantsmight be reduced to the smallest possible number.In this instance of Grafton there existed only one. In OldSarah, there were none.*It is impossible to conceit ve that this could be any part ofthe constitution of England. It therefore becomes necessaryto ascertain what is the principle which would prevent soobvious an abuse. The history we have given affords aneasy explanation of the corrective principle. Jurisdictionseparate from the sheriff was the real foundation of theborough. Whenever, therefore, the number of inhabitants borough.in the place was so reduced as to take away the necessityfor such a jurisdiction, and there were not means of carryingit on by a sufficient number of inhabitants to fill the offices,It appears from the Indentures of Return at the Rolls Chapel, that in theinst fear of Queen Mary, Sir Nicholas Throckmorton, and John Throckmorton, Esq.,Burgesses de Castro Veteris Saruro, " elected themselves *' pro nobis et nomineH nomine socius burgi predicts*5 n21652 Gaston.C^teL and person its functions — as bailiffs — ^portreeves — juron —constables, &c.y then the borough, by operation of law wasDiMohitkm dissolved, and became again a part of the county. So easy asolution may be afforded of the apparent paradox in ourconstitution, in the existence of such places as Gatton andOld Sarum.oidSttiiiii. With respect to the latter place we find that it was ofgreat antiquity, having been a British settlement prior to thetime of the Romans, and was the residence of some of theSaxon kings. Alfred strongly fortified it, and in 960, Edgarheld a council, to deliberate upon measures for the preventionof the Danish aggressions. In 1076, the episcopal seeof Overborne was removed to Old Sarum, and BishopHerman founded the cathedral, which was completed byBishop Ormond in 1092.In 1095, William Rufus held a council here, and Henry I.made it one of his places of residence. From the time ofStephen to that of Richard I., so serious were the disputesbetween the clergy and the castellans, that Bishop Herbertobtained permission from the pope to lay the foundation ofanother cathedral at Salisbury, where the episcopal seevras removed, which caused the immediate decay of OldSarum.But it is not mentioned in Domesday, nor does any charterappear to Old Sarum prior to the 13th year of Henry III.,when a grant of only five or six lines, giving to the burgessesa merchant guilds and all the liberties and customswhich the citizens of Winchester had, confirm charters ofHenry I., Henry II., and John, to which it refers; but theydo not appear on the charter rolls. It returned members toParliament in the 23rd of Edward I. : — intermitted till the 34thof Edward III.: after which it constantly returned. Itsmembers were, like those of many other boroughs, returnedin the reign of Henry V. in the county court.1688. ^^ ^^ Revolution, the right of election was decided to bein the freeholders being burgage-holders which, for the rea-right.sons we have given before in the cases of Malton and others,was not justified by law; and in truth, was the real foundSARUM. 1663tion of the subsequent abuses in this borough, under which Charles I.the right was exercised by non-resident freeholders, althoughthere were no inhabitants to be the burgesses of the place.In 1705, it was agreed, that the right was in the purgatory, ^^^*it probably being the interest of both parties on that occa- Interest.sion, as we have frequently remarked before with respectto other places, to support that right ; and therefore it was Right,again decided, that the right was in the freeholders beingthe burgoyne-holders of the borough.It appeared that one of the voters had taken possessionof his freehold on the day of his election, which may beremarked as one of the abuses arising from the burgagetenure right of voting. The party had received no rent, andhad only given his note for the purchase money. And tracesaji^ared of the burgages being split ; though in a subsequenttime it appears that the policy was to keep the freeholds inas few hands as possible.In Lord Lovelace's case* it was said, that " no place could 1632.be exempt totally from the king's laws ; and that a grant"from the king to exclude his officers from such a place is'Word, if the king do not appoint some to do justice there"This principle shows, that the observations we have beforemade, with respect to Gatton and Old Sarum, were correct,that when they ceased to have a sufficient number of inhabitantsto constitute a court, they could no longer be boroughsor places with distinct jurisdiction exclusive of the sheriff.We have before seen, from the reign of Edward IV. upwards,the interference with the elections by some of theconsiderable men of the country .+ And the commons hadlately, in opposition to the king, resorted to the measurebefore adopted by the crown, of summoning ancient boroughsto send members, to increase the numbers in theSir William Jones, et etiam, 283.f See before, p. 1008. Andinthe26th Elizabeth, it appears in the indenture of re-tony at the Rolls Chapel, "That the wardens and burgesses of St. Ives sith the consentof Uie Right Hon. William, Marquis of Winchester, and William, LordMoantjoye, chief lords of the town and borough," elected the burgesses for this boroughin Parliament.itu1864 OLD sarum.■ Cfcwfati. Hoiifle. But the oonunonB, who had taken this oooiaey fae^came jealous of the bterfiBieuce of the peen with the ele&-1641. tioQ of their members and therefore, in the 17th of Similes L^made the following order : * '' Whereas the House of CSom-''xnons has received information that letters from peers an'' directed to boroughs that now are to make elections of membersto serve in this Parliament ; they conceive that all letters''of that nature, from any peers of this realm, do necessarily'' tend to the violation of the privileges of Parliament, and the** freedom of the election of the members that ought to serve in'the House of Commons. And do declare, that notwithstandingsuch letters, all persons to whom elections of knights andburgesses do belong ought to proceed to their elections withthat freedom which, by the laws of the realm and of right,they ought to do, and do expect, that's any such letters fromany peers of the realm shall hereafter be sent unto them,that the parties receiving the same shall certify the contentsthereof, or bring the letters themselves to the speaker of theHouse of CommonestGovt leet We have shown, in a previous part of this work, themanner in which the pure practice of our ancient constitutionwas by degrees superseded by tie neglect of the eamrtleet — by the substituting for it the court baron, with theintroduction of abuses in its administration, which the lawmight with the greatest ease have prevented, repressed, orpunished. But, on the contrary, they were allowed to proceedunheeded, and the following extract from the Journalswill establish, on the one hand, that the court leets werestill in practice at this time — that the abuses were graduallyincreasing; and the courts of law had so long neglected theirprogress, that Parliament at last, to a certain extent,usurped their functions, and made this order, which mighthave been more appropriately issued by the Court of King'sBench.• 2Journ.337.t The interference also by warrants or letters to high constables or other officersto be communicated to the freeholders or other electors, or threatening the electors*was also, in 1670, declared to be unparliamentary, and a violation of the right ofelection.— 9 Joum. 191.PARLIAMENT. jg55'the humble petition of the mayor and burgesses of Taunt Charies I.^ concerning some misdemeanours and abuses committed 1642.by the steward of the leet court of that town, (the manor Taunton.thereof belonging to the Bishop of Wanton,) in nominatingaad packing of juries.*'' Upon a complaint made to this House, that the stewardof the leet court of the manor of Taunton Deane had committedsome misdemeanours in requiring the bailiffs of thattown, by his warrants, to return at the lastleet the names ofsuch persons only as were nominated by himself, by meanswhereof a jury was compacted of unfit persons, the whichcourse may favour of an ill precedent, and of ill consequenceto the peace of the kingdom. It is ordered, that the stewarddo issue out his warrants at the next court leet in the usualmanner, as by the custom of the place he ought to do. Andthat the bailiffs do make returns of the jurors in the ancientQiaal manner. And that the steward do forthwith attendthis house to answer for his former misdemeanours''In the 19th of Charles I., one return was made for Tewhes '^^^^bury by the bailiffs under their seal, and another by the in ^'^^^habitantsThe committee avoided the election of the member whowas returned by the former, and seated the one who was returnedby the latter.The house also took upon themselves to make an ordi- 1646.dance j: for disfranchising several aldermen and commoncouncilmen of the city of Bristol, for having nominated a Bristol.mayor and a committee for settling the government of thecity; as well as for maintaining the garrison of Bristol ; andsettling the militia there• 2 Journ. 756. t 3 Journ. 378. X 4 Journ. 319.In the S3rd of Charles I. (1647), the speaker was directed to write a letter tothe several cities, boroughs, and corporations, to require such places as had electedany delinquent to be mayor, to proceed to a new election.— 5 Journ. 317.Id the next year, the House allowed the choice of a 'person to be one of thebailiffs of Aldbarougk in the county of Suffolk.— 6 Journ. 35.And also directed an oath to be taken by every freeman in London and othercities, boroughs, and towns corporate, which it is clear nobody could impose butthe king or the legislature.— 6 Journ. 137. Though the speaker, in an answer to a1656 Abutment..Cha rtoL ]n the year preceding, it had been also resolved that1644. John Morlqr should be forthwith disabled from beingNewcastle ^^ alderman of the town of Newcastle ; and the Hornnamed and approved of another person to be mayor, and directedthat he should be restored to be an alderman of Neilcastle.*They also nominated another alderman, a recorder and msheriff; and a committee was directed to consider-of fitpersons to be aldermen in the place of those who had beenremoved and disabled.Thus, in these instances, we find again the House of Commonsusurping, and even exceeding, the jurisdiction of theCourt of King's Bench ; and adopting that course of interferencewith the municipal elections which every personknowing and revering the constitution could not but havedeprecated in the crown; and which was much more dangerouswhen usurped by such a body as the House of-Gom>mons than it ever could have been if exercised by theking.But the House of Commons were at this time rapidlyapproaching to the unrestrained exercise and abuse of theunconstitutional powers they had assumed.At the beginning of this year, it was referred to a committeeto consider of the orders and ordinances made forthe restraint of any persons to go to or from the king'squartersAnd in the summer of this year they had recognizedcommittees of association and counties ;j: and had directedthem to consider the names of the lords and other personswho were fit to be excepted from pardon ; and those whowere fit to be removed from his majesty's council, and to bepetition from the inhabitants of the county of Buckingham, stated " that the Loire*' was resolved to maintain the liberty of the subject, and to avoid and preventwhat-'* soever might tend to tyranny or confusion." — 6 Joum. 141. With regard to theimposition of oaths not warranted by the law, the mayor of Bristol, in 1680, wascharged with a misdemeanour, because he had called upon the electors to swearthat they were freemen, and had not given their oaths before.— 9 Journ. 654.• 3 Journ. 714 ; 4 Journ. 87 : see also as to Bridgewater ; 6 Journ. 407, andHull, 7 Journ. 178.t 3 Journ. 442. ♦ 3 Journ. 694.PARLIAMENT. 1657disabled from bearing any office thereafter in the church or Charles I.commonwealth — a most unjustifiable interference with theking's prerogative.Nor is it possible to read the proceedings of the House ofCommons at this period, without being satisfied of the dailyencroachments which were made by them upon the constitutionof the country.In this same year, the commons took upon themselves to 1645.direct,* that a sum of money should be taken out of therevenues of the dean and chapter of Durham, for the maintenanceof a preacher at Newcastle-upon-Tyne.The lords and commons ordered the lord mayors aldermen,and common council of London, to present the nameof a fit person to both Houses of Parliament, to be lieutenantof the Tower of London.The House of Commons also, who had in these numerousinstances encroached upon the prerogative of the crown, andwho had themselves added 16 members to their House,upon the pretence of summoning ancient boroughs, stillmore unjustifiably interfered with the undoubted prerogativeof the crown in this respect.We have before shown that the king, as the head of theexecutive government, was entitled by his prerogative to Prerogativedefine the districts within which the law was to be administered; and on that ground, had the power of makingboroughs, and separating them from the jurisdiction of thesheriff; the consequence of which would be, that they wouldhave precepts directed to them by the sheriff, to returnmembers to Parliament.Nor could there be any danger in this prerogative; normeans of its being abused without a prompt remedy for thecorrection of the abuse.The proper ground of a charter for such a purpose, wouldbe the necessity for a local jurisdiction, in consequence Boroughs.of the accumulation of population in any particularplace. If honestly granted, it could produce no mischief;if that were not the object, or if, on the contrary,4 Journ. 113. f 4 Journ. 120.1358 PARLIAMENT.CiHuritsl. it was with the view of interfering with the privileges of Che1645. House of Commons there is no doubt that the advises ofthe crown would be responsible for such a breach of duty;or the sheriff for any misconduct in the exercise of hisfunctions. Thus the prerogative would be reconciledwith the safety of the public, by these plain practicalprinciples of our constitution.But the House of Commons of this period were notsatisfied with so reasonable a protection. They took uponthemselves the legislative authority, by resolving, that forthe time to come, ** no new power should be granted by^' the king to any city or borough, to send any citizens or'' burgesses to the Parliament of England, saving only by*^ act of Parliament, upon the petition of the House of Com-^' mons assembled in Parliaments'*From which, this practical suggestion may be drawn,that as nothing is more desirable for the welfare of thestate than that all the functionaries, both public andprivate, should act together in harmony and good understanding,for the public good: — so it would be desirablefor a minister at all times, to take care that this undoubtedprerogative of the crown should never be exercised, but uponthe petition of the House of Commons ; by which means theprivileges of the House would be protected from all possibilityof undue interference; and a good understandingwould be maintained between these two important branchesof the legislature.Soon after this period, the House of Commons so entirelyassumed to themselves the king's prerogative, and therights of the House of Lords that it is in vain to look forprecedents or principles to illustrate the subject of our^ . inquiry ; and it is impossible not to consider the constitution*>o° sj*- of England as suspended for the fifteen years which immediatelyfollowed. The violent and melancholy facts whichoccurred in that interval had better be passed over in silence.The detail of circumstances even connected with thesubject of our inquiry, at this time, would be of no avail.• 4Journ.372. t 2Clar.4l5.PARLIAMENT. X^gQWe shall therefore content ourselves with adding extracts Chariw I.from a few of the law cases which occur in the earlier part i645.of the reign — some few charters and municipal documentsas specimens of this period, and with them close our observationsupon this reign, as far as regards England, Scotlandand Wales.CASES.That the court-leet was still in use at this time, may be Leet.collected from the following case, in the 16th of Charles I.:* — 1640.Sir William Hicks was seised of the manor of RihoU, inthe county of Essex, in which he prescribed to have a leet;and Alderman Abbey, one of the aldermen of London, wasan inhabitant within the precinct of the leet, at which hewas presented by the homage to be constable. And thispresentment being removed by certiorari into the court ofKill's Bench, the alderman was discharged because he washound as alderman to be present in London for the governmentcfthe city'sIn this case the same error is committed which we have80 often pointed out, of confounding the function of thecourt-leet with the court-baron. The appointing a constableis clearly the duty of the former ; but the homage which ishere mentioned by mistake for the jury belongs to thelatter.So also from a case in the same reign, about eight yearsbefore, the officers requisite at the court-leet may be ascer- ^^*'tained.:{:George Tottershall, Esq. within his manor of Finchamp- ^®^-stead, claimed a leet. And the attorney-general desired thatit might be inquired first, if he had used it.Secondly. If he had an able steward to discharge the office. Steward.For the want of that also is a cause of seizure.Thirdly. If he had officers and those things which are for Officers,the execution of justice, as constables, ale-tasters, &c., andpillars, and stocks, and cuehingstool, (cc.• Sir William Jones, 462. Sec also, 280. t Sir W. Jones, 283.t S«e Rex v. Ponder, 1 Barn. &c Cres. 178,1660 CASES.Charing I. Fourthly. If he punish bakers more than three timely and1632. do not set them in the pillory ; all these are causes of seizuretill he pay a fine for the abuse and replevy his franchise.Mr. Tottershall himself being called, and asked concerninghis leet confessed that he had not used it a great while,nor were there officers or other things for the execution ofjustice; but he said, that it appeared by ancient rolls thatthere had been a leet there ; and being asked to what leetI our. his tenants went, he said they went to the sheriff's iaum,and paid head-silver there : upon which Mr. Attorney saidthat Mr. Tottershall could have no leet, for all leets weredrawn out of the sheriff s toum, which is the leet in the king'sCcriuQ) hand. And head-silver is certum lets, and no man shall belei vn.subject to two leets, and therefore there can be no allowanceof the leet, unless the king should be put out of that (whichfor ought we know) he hath ever had. So judgment wasgiven against the leet and strays.It should be also observed with respect to this case, thatit establishes the fact, that when a leet ceased to be Jteld,the place which was before under its jurisdiction, becameagain subject to the sheriff* s toum, as part of the county.1629. In the fourth of Charles I., a quo warranto was brought in^n-r^^!" she Court of King's Bench, against the mayor and burgessesof the town of Newcasth-upon-Tyne, to show by what warrantthey claimed to be incorporated — by what name to havea common council — make ordinances — by penalties tax theburgesses inhabiting that town — take money for admittinginto their companies — disfranchise — hold a court of record —have cognizance of felons — and a recorder — eight — fairs — and markets — and exclude foreigners fromselling there — have a clerk of the market — new of frankpledgefrank — and correction of the assise of bread and wine — examina-pledge..tion of weights and measures — tumbril and pillory — withallthat belongs to a view of frankpledge, &c. &c. &c.lg32 ^^ 3- case also, in Bulstrodc,* in the eighth of Charles I.,the reader may find a confirmation of the connexion whichwe have before noted between the poor laws and the ancient• 2 Bulst. 349.CHARTERS. 1661common law doctrine of inhabitancy ; for it will be there C>»r>e« l>seedy that a pauper is described as dwelling in the place towhich he belonged. And a child is directed to be kept inthe parish where it dwells.And in the 10th of Queen Anne, there is also a case in nu.which the mother of a bastard child is described as aninhabitant* of the place in which the child's settlement isalleged.CHARTERS.— BRISTOL.Charles I., in the fifth year of his reign, granted a charter i'>29.to the citizens of Bristol, which recited the charters of the47th Edward III., and the 34th of Henry VIII., and thatthe Castle of Bristol was the king's ancient demesne, andthough contiguous to Bristol, the officers' of that city hadno authority or jurisdiction within it, wherefore it hadbecome the resort of thieves, &c. Therefore at the requestof the queen, he had separated the castle from the county ofGloucester, and made it part of the city of Bristol ; so thatthe magistrates, officers, and citizens should have the samerights in the castle as in the city ; and that no sheriff ofGloucester should intromit. " And that the men who dwell welt.within the castle and precincts for the time being, andwho abide in the same place, shall have and enjoy for ever Abide.all the liberties, &fc, had or enjoyed by the citizens or bythe burgesses of the city,f and shall be had, holden and'' reported in all things as citizens and men of the samecityFrom this charter it is clear that the castle was before Castle.distinct from the borough ; and that the persons who dweltand abode in it, were to enjoy the same privileges as thecitizens or burgesses had before enjoyed. From which inhabiunuit is impossible not to infer, that the persons who beforeenjoyed the privileges as citizens or burgesses of Bristolwere the inhabitants.The consideration for this charter was 969/., paid by theRex V. Deform, 1 Sess. Ca. 32.t See before, charter of Edward IV., adding Southron to Dartmouth.1662 CHARTERS.Charter. mayor burgesses, and commonalty of the city of Bristol.And the castle was to be holden in fret stages at a rent of40/. per annum, with powers to distrain for the rent, andforfeiture for non-payment, &c.1036. In this year, 46 burgesses attended and elected the mayor,sheriffs, and other officers.SOUTHAMPTON.1626. In ^^6 second year of the reign of Charles L, a newcharter was granted to Southampton upon a forfeiture ofthe town's rights, by a quo warranto. But on what particularaccount these proceedings were had, does not appear.It is only entered in the journals of the corporation, thatone of the aldermen should ride to London, to solicit therenewing of the charters; and that some of them, concerningthe cognizance of pleas, had been in the .citor^neral's hands on the 21st of September, 1640. It is1641. entered that the new charter was openly read in the House. —It commences with reciting, that it had been a town incorporatedbeyond the memory of man, (which we have beforeseen was not true,) and that the mayor, bailiffs, burgesses,and inhabitants had besought the king to confirm all theirliberties and customs. Whereupon the king grants thatthe town should' be for ever incorporate, of one mayor, twobailiffs, and of burgesses by the name of " the mayor, " ''^^' ^"^ Jwrgres^e^ of the town of Southampton, kc,"The charter then proceeds at great length to grant arecorder — coroners — define the limits of the town — and grantthe town at fee farm, with the port of Portsmouth ; — and thatthe burgesses should not pay petty custom — that Southamptonshould be a county of itself, with a sheriff — countycourt — a staple for recognizances of debts — and that theporters, packers, coiners, &c., should be yearly appointedInhabitants out of the inhabitants of the town — that the mayor shouldhave cognizance of pleas, assise of ale, &c. And that burgessesagainst their will should not be put in any jury, orserve any office without the liberties, &c. That the mayor,&c. should have an admiralty jurisdiction. That no mer-charters.1663chant, foreign from the liberties, &c., should sell any mer Charles I.chastise within the town to any foreign merchant, &c. 1641.That the mayor, bailiff, and burgesses, and their successors,inhabitants and residents within the town, and all other free Resents.bwrffessea, who thereafter should be inhabitants and residentswithin the town; and during the time they should beinhabitants, dwellers and residents thereof, should be dischargedfor ever of rendering or paying prissy, &c. Thatthe mayor, recorder, aldermen, bailiffs, and sheriffs, &c.should be the common council, with powers to make bye-laws,&c.This charter appears to state, contrary to the fact, thatthe town had been incorporated beyond the memory ofman.It is true, that Southampton was a' borough long beforethe time of legal memory,* and that the bailiffs and burgesseshad enjoyed many liberties as well by charter as byprescription, but they were not incorporated till the reign ofHenry VI.PORTSMOUTH.There is also a charter in the third year of this reign, to 1627.the mayor, burgesses, and inhabitants of the borough of inhabitantsPortsmouth; which recites that they had been known bythe name of the " good men of Portsmouth," " burgessesof Portsmouth," " men of Portsmouth," &c. That theyshould be a body corporate, by the name of " the mayor, corporate.aldermen, and burgesses'' That one of the more honest anddiscreet aldermen of the borough should be mayor, and12 other honest and discreet burgesses aldermen. Andthat they should have the power of making bye-laws, andhold within the borough a court-leet ; and that the burgessesand inhabitants, as well '' present as to come," should beface of toll ; and that they should not be impannelled onjuries without the borough.Vide ante, p. 110.I1064 CHARTERS.ClwrlM 1.ROCHESTER.163D In the fifth year of this reign, there is a confirmation by ^inspeximus of all the previous charters to rochester : — whichrecites that certain ambiguities existed in their previouscharters ; and it was granted that it should be a free cityCorporate, and that the mayor and citizens might be one body earporaie,and politic, by the name of '' the mayor and citizens of.the city of Rochester, in the county of Kent'' (The osiudcorporate powers then follow.) And that there should befrom the more honest and discreet citizens, one mayor 11aldermen, and 12 assistants — all of whom were to constituteand be called '' the common council," with powers to makeBye-last. laws for the gOYcmment of the city, &c.A recorder is named who was in future to be appointed byPortaioie. ^^ mayor and aldermen. A court of Promote is theagranted ; and that all writs within the city should be directedto the mayor, &c.^ and that no justices of the county shouldintromit.NEW SARUM.1631. ^^^ Santa also received a charter in the sixth year ofCharles I./ reciting and confirming the charter of James I.,and granting additional powers and regulations for theelection of the corporate officers.HUNTINGDON.igjjQ The borough of Huntingdon received a charter from theking, in the sixth of his reign, which commences by arecital that it had been an ancient and populous borough,and in the time of King John had received many libertiesand privileges, and was always the only borough-merchantof the county of Huntingdon incorporated. And that thebailiffs and burgesses had besought him to ratify their ancientcustoms.The king then proceeds to grant that Huntingdon shouldbe a free borough — that the burgesses and inhabitants byCorporate. whatsoever name or names they had been theretofore incurCHARTERS. 1665parted should be one body corporate and politic, in deed, Charles 1.&c., by the name of " the mayor, aldermen, and burgesses 1630.of the borough of Huntingdon." The usual corporatepowers then follow.After which, a recital, that from time immemorial it hadbeen used and accustomed within the borough that 24 meUfinhabitants of the borough, should be burgesses, and of thecommon council ; all of them having a voice in the business Co™™®"o council.of the borough. And, that at the humble petition of the bailiffsand burgesses for the better governance of the borough,to prevent and remove all occasions of popular tumult j* and toreduce the elections and public business of the borough intocertainty and constant order, it was ordained that 12 of thebetter burgesses of the borough should be called aldermen, Aldermen.one of whom should be named mayor. That the mayor, recorder,and aldermen should be called the common councilof the borough, and that the residue of the burgesses shouldbe assisting to the mayor and aldermen, whensoever theyshould be summoned or called. Powers are then given forthe making of bye-laws. Jurisdiction is given over allreal and personal actions arising within the borough. Andit is directed that the mayor should be the coroner andclerk of the market. That the mayor, aldermen, and burgesses,should hold all lands, &c. whereof they were thenseised, to the use and advantage of the burgesses. A confirmationof the courtS'leetf views of frankpledge, courts of Leet.record, with all customs, liberties, &c., by whatsoever name Frankernames they had been theretofore incorporated, closes ^ ^^'the charter.Entries are extant in the borough books, shortly after 1633.this charter, when it appears that three persons were admittedto the freedom and liberty of the borough at the court-leet,and were then sworn free burgesses. LegsThere is a similar entry in July in the same year; and inthe next, two others are also admitted at the leet. In thefollowing year, five others at the same court, then called the• Similar recitals to the charters of Winchester, Pontefract, Leicester, Northampton,&c.5oIQQQ CHARTERS.Ciiarlci I. view of frankpledge : — and in the following year, five otheiBare similarly entered.It should be observed, that these admissions are madeunder a charter which is in form and substance precisely thesame as all the other charters we have quoted.CAMBRIDGE.18S9. The borough of Cambridge received a charter in the seventhyear of this king,* which commences with a recital that itwas an ancient and populous borough ; that the mayor, baits,and burgesses, had enjoyed divers liberties, &c« fromcharters and prescription ; and that they had petitioned theking to create them by what name or names soever they werethen, or were theretofore incorporated — or whether they hadbeen incorporated or not — into one body corporate and poli->tic, by the name of '^ the mayor, bailiffs, and burgesses of'^ the borough of Cambridge."Corporate. The king then proceeds to incorporate them granting theusual corporate powers — that one of the burgesses should becalled mayor; that 12 capital burgesses should be calledaldermen, and should be of the privy council of the borough,as anciently accustomed. That 24 of the other discreet burgessesshould be the common council, to be assisting andaiding the mayor.Also that it might be lawful for the mayor, bailiffs, andTax. burgesses, to tax and assess, &c. upon all persons whomsoever,inhabitants or indwellers of the borough, (privilegedpersons of the university excepted) such sums of moneyas might be necessary for supporting the expences of theborough, &c.LONDON.1638. Charles I., in the 14th year of his reign, granted a charterinspecting and confirming all those which had been previouslygranted by William the Conqueror, and subsequentkings of England, to the city of London.Justices. And also granting that the mayor, recorder, and aldermen,• 1 Lut. 403.CHARTERS. 1667who had passed the chair, and the three senior aldermen Charles I.who had not passed the chair, should be justices, &c. 1638.That the mayor and commonalty should have all recognizanceforfeited, concerning inmates dividing their dwelling inmates,bouses into several habitations — with a grant of all fines, &c.,except those that were royal.That the widows of freemen might carry on their husbands' Widows,arts and occupations in the city, notwithstanding the statuteof apprentices.* That no market should be kept within sevenmiles of the city ; that the customs should be certified bywordof mouth by the recorder ; that the mayor shouldnominate to the chancellor two aldermen, one of whom shouldbe justice of the peace for the county of Middlesex, and theother for the county of Surrey.The citizens of London likewise received another charterfrom the king, in the 16th year of his reign, granting themsavage and water bandage.DEVIZES.Tie king, in the 15th year of his reign, granted a charter 1640.to Devises, which confirms the charter of James I., butnmkes new provisions for the election of the municipalofficers.KIDDERMINSTER.Pursuing the plan we have adopted in the former reigns, 1637.we shall also give one specimen of a charter, to a place whichdid not at that time return members to Parliament.It is the following grant to Kidderminster, which is preciselysimilar to those to places which returned members toParliament. And it will be difficult to explain why Kidderminster,which was a borough, and had a court leet, had notbeen summoned to return members since the reign ofEdward I.This borough received a charter in the 12th year of thisreign, which recites that it was an ancient borough, and that• 5 Elizabeth.5o21668 CHARTERS.Charles I. the good men of the borough had enjoyed liberties from .ters and prescription.That the inhabitants for the good government of the boroughshad petitioned that the good and lawful men, inhabittants there, might be created anew into one body corporateand politic. Whereupon the king proceeds to grant thatthe village and borough of Kidderminster should be a freeborough, and that the good men and inhabitants should be^Sm! one body corporate and politic, by the name of ** the bailifisand burgesses of ^^The borough of Kidderminster'' — ^^The usualcorporate powers then follow. And that there should be onebailiff, 12 of the better and more honest burgesses of the boroughto be capital burgesses, all of whom were to be thecommon council, with powers to make bylaws, &c.That the bailiffs and capital burgesses might elect 25 menlahabiuaits of the more honest and better sort of inhabitants residingwithin the borough, who should be called assistants or aidersto the bailiffs, &c., in all things touching or concerning itThe charter terminates by reserving all the rights and pii-leet.villages of the lords of the manor to the chart leet, &c. — fairs,lands, tolls, markets, customs, &c., which the burgesses andinhabitants, or the bailiff, burgesses, and inhabitants of theborough had held, by whatsoever name or names of incorporation,or by custom, or by reason of charters, &c.MUNICIPAL DOCUMENTS.Cinque The Cinque Ports, which still retain many of their documents,afford also a few for the illustration of this reign.Ports.SANDWICH.1627. In the third year of Charles I. the annual rent of Sandwichwas increased to 10/., and in 1653, it was further increasedBye-laws. to 20Z. ; and it is added, that the corporation had also at alltimes exercised the right of making such decrees, as itAdmitting judged reasonable and proper, for regulating the admissionof freemeiij as appears by extracts from decrees taken fromthe records of the corporation.One of which was in the second of Charles 1. — the year be-charters.1669fore — stating, that at an assembly of that date, by general Charles I.consent of the whole house, it was fully concluded and 1627.agreed : — that whereas there was a decree formerly madethat a purchase of 5/. per annum should make the purchaserfree of this town, and which was found inconvenient, unnecessary,and incommodious — because many persons hadpurchased houses of a small value on purpose to debar the Houses,town from having a greater sum of money for the same.Now it is therefore ordered and established that no man,hereafter, shall be made free of this corporation by purchasingany houses or land in this town, except the purchase be ofthe value of lOZ. per annum.It is upon entries of this description that the freeholders of Free-sandwichwere supposed to have a right of election there.We have previously shown how inconsistent such a suppositionis with our ancient history, and the common and statutelaw. This entry is easily explained, by assuming that thepurchaser was, according to the common law, to be the occupierof his purchase, and an inhabitant householder within Inhabit-theborough, which is consistent with the entry, and would holder,reconcile it with the common law — whereas the other construction,in favour of the freeholders, renders it inconsistentwith the general principles and practice of our municipalinstitutions.The following curious entry also occurs in the 16th of 1641.Charles I., among the papers of Sandwich, relative to theadmission of a foreigner : —At an assembly, Jacob Costlebar of this town, gardener,a Dutchman of the first birth, did humbly petition to beadmitted to enjoy the freedom and liberty of his purchase,for40«., or such other reasonable sum as the assembly shouldthink meet ; and for as much as it is against the ancient andlaudable customs, ordinances, and constitutions of the town,that any Dutchman or Frenchman, or of any other foreign Foreigners.nation, should enjoy the freedom and privilege of this townby purchase, marriage, or apprenticeship, — it was thereforeabsolutely denied to admit him to enjoy the same by purchase— yet, nevertheless, the house offered him to enjoyJgTO Municipal DOCUMENTS.Clues I. the freedom and liberties of this town by redemplwn, if heR«i*mi.- would give 20/. for the same: which he refused, and was,therefore, not admitted to the freedom of this town, butdenied it."Ailminioa In the sanie year, there are also entries of decrees, withrespect to the admission offreeinen, in which the reader willperceive, that the form and shadow of the ancient law was insome degree still preserved, though some modem innovationshad been incorporated with it. It will be seen that they areI'un.-iKiK''*- particularly directed against the foreigners mentioned in theformer entry.1641. " There are decrees, customs, and constitutions of thetown and port oi' Sandwich, expressing that the freedomand privileges of the town and port ought to be enjoyedMjuri»g«. and gained, by reason of marriage with any freeman's daugfa-Furciuw. ter — by purchase of tenements or lands in Sandwich, ofStirring, (he yearly value of 10/. or upwards — and by serving anddwelling with a freeman of this town, as an apprentice,by the space of seven years. And fur as much as in thedecrees, customs, and constitutions, no express mentionForeign' is made whether they should extend to Englishmen, Dutchmen,or Frenchmen, or any foreign nations; for the betterexplanation thereof' it Has by most voices, by pricking accordingto ancient custom, ordained and established ; thatthe decrees, customs, and constitutions, should not be taken,or expounded, in any manner to extend to Dutchmen,Frenchman, or any persons of any foreign nation, but toEnglish born subjects only. And that no Dutchman, Frenchman,or any other person of any foreign nation, should haveor enjoy the freedom of the town, any decree, custom, orconstitution, to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.Provided always, that that decree should not extend toDutchmen or Frenchmen of the second birth, born in thetown and port of Sandwich. But they might have and enjoytheir freedom by redemption only, and by no other ways, ifthey agree and compound with the corporation.MUNICIPAL DOCUMENTS. 1671Charlw I.HYTHE.There are ako some entries relative to Hythe of this reign,which it may be material to quote.In the fourth year of Charles I., it was ordered by the mayor, 1628.jurats and commoners that all those persons who had formerlypaid any money towards the effecting or obtaining ahaven here, which were since that time dead, or had removedtheir dwellings out of the towHy should absolutely lose theirmonies, in regard of the manifest great impositions and burthenslately imposed and put upon the inhabitants who nowreside.At an assembly in the same year it was also ordered, that j^^fo^aMr. Browning, having of late departed the town, andneglected his office and service of a jurat here, and only Jure.upon set pui-pose to avoid the office of a bailiff to the townand port of Great Yarmouth the next fishing season, as it Yareappear by relation of many in this house, which wasdone by an ill example, to the great prejudice of the portsin general, it is thought fit, and agreed upon by this assemblythat Mr. Browning, for his offence and neglectof service, shall forfeit the sum of 10/., to be paid to thechamberlains, to the use of this township, if he at anytimehereafter require his place of jurat again; before heberestored in statu quo''And also in the ninth year of Charles I., at an assembly 1633.K f 130 bholden by the mayor and jurats and commons of Hythe, it is * 'entered, thatWhereas William Symons and William Deeds, warnedto appear here this day to take the several oaths of a freeman. Freemen.viz. to maintain the charters, liberties, immunities, &c. of theCinque Portes in general, and of this town of Hythe in particular,have made their appearance accordingly, but absolutelyrefuse to take the said oaths, therefore it is ordered, that Wil Oath,lias Symons and William Deeds shall be fined 10/. a pieceto the use of this town*'1672 MUNICIPAL DOCUMENTS.Charles.LYME.Wages. The following entry from the books of Lyme will showInhaling that the wages of the members were paid up to this time,and by the inhabitants.1642. In the 18th year of Charles I. an order was sent from theHouse of Commons to the mayor, aldermen, and commoncouncil of Lyme to require them to pay to Mr. Toll and Mr.Percival their burgesses in Parliament, the same allowanceas formerly; being 5^. per day.In answer, the mayor, &c. acquainted the House, thattheretofore no parliamentary wages had been paid before theParliament ended : nor then out of the town stock ; but byInhabited freemen and inhabitants : — saving of late, of mere bounty,the burgesses were diversely rewarded by the representativebody. Also the impossibility of performing the order, thereTown being no town stock, the revenues not being sufficient todefray the necessary charges in common ; besides extraordinaryexpences unavoidably falling upon them daily, for thesafety of the town and kingdom.POOLE.1645. It appears from an entry in the books of Poole, of the20th of Charles I., that " It was agreed at a public meetingin the Guildhall of the town, that no free burgess should anyResin longer enjoy his privileges, than during his residency in theCICIICCtown. And that every such person should be deemed astranger to them the mayor, bailiffs, burgesses, and inha-bitants.'^NEWCASTLE.1644. And, to conclude our extracts by a document of this reign,which will distinctly show that the guilds and fraternities,were distinct from the municipal bodies, there is a petitionof the governors, wardens assistants of the fellowship of merchantadventurers of Newcastle, to Parliament, in the 19th ofCharles I., in which it is set forth, that they have been anancient company of merchants ever since King John's time,and have been confirmed by several grants of his majesty'sIRELAND. 1673ix)yal predecessors, a distinct corporation of themselves ; add Charles I.ing, that the merchants of Newcastle are an ancient guild of Corpora*merchants ever since the 17th of John, a year before thegrant was given to the London merchants.*IRELAND.Ireland Aoe^ not appear at the beginning of this reign tohave been the object either of direct interference by thecrown, or of legislative regulation by the Parliament.Indeed, with one exception, no statutes appear to have Statutes.been passed respecting it, till the 10th year of Charles I. ^®**The exception to which we refer is a document in theHarleian MSS.* of the date of the first of Charles I., which isa draft of the act of the privy council in Ireland, commencingwith a recital, that in several cities and other corporatetowns, great complaints had been made to the lord deputyagainst the unreasonable and exorbitant bye-laws made Bye-laws,therein, to the great oppression of his majesty's subjectsand all others trading there. And that for the future preventionthereof, it was proposed to ordain, that " true andperfect documents of the same should be brought in fromall the corporate towns" in order that they might receiveconsideration.It does not appear that this afterwards passed into an act,but it is sufficient to show that the same arises had arisenin the same manner in Ireland as in England, from the corporatebodies taking upon themselves to make illegal and injuriousbye-laws ; an evil which had been much aggravatedin both countries by the opinion of the judges in the case ofcorporationsCHARTERS.The king, however, in the commencement of his reign,granted a few charters to some of the principal towns inIreland, of which we shall give one or two specimens, for the• There seems to be a mistake in this latter assertion,t Hail. MSS. 2105, 131. t Vide ante, p. 1447.Ig74 IRELAND.cinrlei I. purpose of establishing, that tke charon ba Irdtmdthe same in substance as those of England.Waterford.In consequence of a commission which James I. issued in1617. the 15th year of his reign, all the liberties in Waterford1636. were seised into the king's possession. Charles I., however,restored them to the citizens, but previously exacted a fine(as appears by the original charter) of 20,000 marks.Hie king, after reciting the charters of the third of John,16th Heniy III., 38th Edward III., first and second Heniy ¥.26th Henry VI., first Edward IV., third Henry VII., Filth,16th, and 2dth of Elizabeth, and seventh of James I., proceedsto state, that the citizens from time immemorial, ftc*,had enjoyed divers liberties, &c. ; that James L, in the15th year of his reign, had seised the city and liberties intohis own hands, and that they had remained so until hitdeath, and that they were then in his hands, but that thecitizens had petitioned him to re-admit and restore them totheir former state.That countenancing his subjects residing in the city —and recollecting that it was an ancient city — ^and that theinhabitants and citizens had ever been intent upon the artof merchandising — that they were sprung from Englishstocks, and at that day retained their English shames —that in ancient charters it had been called the UntouchedCity, and chamber of the king — and that the city had thendecayed from its ancient flourishing condition, granted (afterparticularly describing the liberties and precincts,) that itCounty of should foF evcF thereafter be a count distinct of itself, anditself. ^separated from the county of Waterford, and from the countyof Kilkenny, and from all other counties whatsoever, by thename of the county of the city of Waterford.That the citizens of the city of Waterford, as also themayor, sheriffs, and citizens of the county of the city, andall and singular the citizens, inhabitants, and residents withinthe city, or within the towns, villages, hamlets, and precinctsIRELAND-charters. 1675aforesaid y and their successors, by whatsoever name or names Charles I.of incorporation they were theretofore incorporated; or \e26.whether they had been theretofore incorporated or not, mightbe for ever one bodi/ corporate and politic, by the name of ^"""p**"^^®J tr r ' J name.** maycTy sheriffs, and citizens of the county of the city ofWaterford, in the kingdom of Ireland."The usual corporate powers then succeed.Restitution of the liberties and lands are also granted todie mayor, sheriffs, and citizens which they or their predecessorsby the name of the *' citizens," or by the name of " provost,bailiffs, and citizens," or by the name of " mayor andbailiffs," or by the name of " mayor, bailiffs and citizens,"or by the name of " mayor and commonalty," or by anyother name or names whatsoever, or by any incorporationor incorporations whatsoever, or under pretence of any incorporationwhatsoever theretofore enjoyed, or ought to havebeen enjoyed.That all the inhabitants, tenants, and other residents whatsoeverwithin the city, town, villages, hamlets, and precincts,within the county of the city, should remain under the ordinancesof the city, and under the government of the mayor, Mayor.sheriffs, and citizens of the county of the city in like mannerto all intents and purposes, as the inhabitants, tenants, andresidents of the county of the city ever theretofore were,or for the future ought to be.That there should be a mayor, two sheriffs, 18 aldermen,and 19 assistants elected from the most honest and discreetcitizens. Citizens.That the sheriffs, aldermen, and assistants, for the timebeing, might be called the common council of the city. Commonto be aiding and assisting the mayor, for the time being, inall matters concerning the government, or of the courts of thecity.The first mayor, two sheriffs, 18 aldermen, and 19 assistants,are then appointed and named.It was also directed that the election of mayor should Mayor,be by the mayor and common council.That of the sheriffs by the mayor and common council.1376 ^ Relax D.-C HA RTERS.ChirlM I. That the aldermen and assistants should be removable by,4»« ^^6 common council.That they might have a recorder, sword bearer, comiiMmclerk, and coroner — and to hold a court of record every Moiday and Friday before the mayor and recorder, or theirdeputies.That the mayor, sheriffs, and ciUzefU of the county ofthe city of Waterford, might have and hold within the cityor within the liberties or precincts of the county of thecity, a court leet and a view of frankpledge and all thingsLet. that do belong, or ought to belong to a court leet and viewof frankpledge, of all the inhabitants and residents withinthe city or county of the same, twice in the year, &c.That the mayor, recorder, and four elder aldermen, shouldbe justices of the peace.CHiMiis. That the mayor, sheriffs, and citizens, might have an admiraltyjurisdiction : — and no other ministers were to intromit.That the mayor, sheriffs, and citizens, and their successors,inhiiiiiteiits and all the inhabitants, and their successors, who should befree citizens and inhabitants of the city, by right of birth,marriage, or apprenticeship, and not otherwise; for all theirgoods and merchandises within the city of Waterford andFree from kingdom of Ireland, should be for ever freed and dischargedfrom all toll, &c.That the mayor, sheriffs, and citizens, and their successors.Guilds, might have all their reasonable guilds, as the mayor, .gesses, and commonalty of the city of Bristol have had —but that they should make no statute, law, ordinance, &c. tobind any citizen or inhabitant, unless they first have authorityand power, &c. from the mayor, sheriff's, and citizensfor the time being, under their common seal.That no citizens should be troubled out of the city for anyaction, &c. arising within it.That they should have power to dispose and devise theirlands ; and that no stranger should be a wine vendor, unlessit be in a ship, &c.Ireland-CHARTERS. 1677Charles I.CORK. 1631.This king granted a charter to Cora, which commenceswith an inspeximus of the principal previous franchises, andthen recites that he had granted to 'the mayor, sheriffs, andcommons and their successors, all lands, forfeitures, &c.,custom of fairs, markets, pye-powder courts, view of frank pledge.fledged return of writs, &c., which they or any of their pre R^urn ofdecessors had — by whatsoever name or names they were in-corporate or by what other incorporation or by reason ofany charter theretofore granted, or by custom or prescriptturn.That the burgesses had petitioned him for a confirmationof their charters, with additional privileges; and inconsequenceof the mayor, sheriffs, and commons, having by thedirection and request of two of the privy council acquittedhis engagement for the sum of 2000Z., laid out for the countytowards the relief and sustenance of the soldiers and officers,the king granted, that the mayor, sheriffs, and commons of thecity, by what name or names theretofore they were incorporated,should from thenceforth for evermore be one body corporate Corporate,and politic in deed and name.That there should be of the most honest and discreetcitizens one elected to be mayor, and two to be elected and St'y?'-called sheriffs.The first mayor and sheriffs are then named and appointed.And it is granted, that yearly the mayor, sheriffs, and coiw-nuns should elect one person of the commons of the city to bemayor, and two of the commons to be sheriffs.A recital then occurs that the city of Cork, consisting oftwo parishes within the walls and county thereof, had, withinthe ancient liberties and franchises of the city and county,four abbeys lately dissolved, in which merchants, tradesmen. Abbeys,and artificers resided.The king then commands that the possessors of any parcelof the possession of the abbeys, dwelling within or near Dwelling,the franchises, liberties, and government of the officers ofCork, should continue under the government of the officersIRBLAND.-CHAHTERS.*'''"'"' • of the city, and to that end should freely contribute town1631. the public charge of the city, as often ae occasion slionld nThat the sheriffs might hold a monthly court for the encaution of what to a sheriff's office appertained, accotdn^ Ithe laws and statutes of Ireland.That the mayor, recorder, and four of the elder antennaJuHiMt. ^^ jjgj discharged the office of mayor, should bt J^Hiaof the peace, with powers to hear and determine all fekntiei&c. committed within the city; with a noa-intromtttaiclause as to county justices. And they are also to be judgeof gaol delivery,^i*^- All fines, forfeitures, &c. of any of the citizens and inhabitantsdwelling within the city and county of the same, argiven to the mayor, sheriffs, and citizens.ATdcnnen. That every mayor of the city after the time of his mayorally, should be reputed one of the aldermen, and should ballowed in the number of the mayor, shells, and commonof the common council of the city, provided that the commoncouncil rikould not exceed 24.That DO merchant or other person, not free of the cityshould sell any merchandise within the same to thefreemtiOR inhabitants of the city (victuals at fairs excepted), otherwisethan at the quay of the city, SiC.Major. That the mayor should be the chief commissioner in alcommissions to be executed in the city.Clauses then occur respecting the election of clerk of thtcrown and notary public, who were to be citizens.That the mayor, sheriffs, and cotiiDioiialty, should have allthe petty cugiotns issuing ont of all merchandises, &c.Vii-fancies That the mayor, sheriffs, and commonalty, should elect(as vacancies occurred) six aldermen of the city, who were,and should be called severally, aldermen of their several\V»nis. wards, to hear and determine within their several wards allcauses happening betwixt party and party, for any sum nolexceeding 40s.That no person should be tolerated to administer physicwithin the city, though etincatrd in any academy or famousIreland-CHARTERS. 1679college, unless he be allowed by the mayor to exercise media Chart I.lines or physic, under the penalty of 405. per mouth. i63l.That the mayor sheriffs, and commons, should havepower to erect and incorporate the several arts, mysteries, Mysteries*.and trades, exercised within the city into several corporations,in such manner as to them should seem meet, for thebetter government of the artificers and inhabitants; whichartifices, being so incorporated, might exercise their severalmysteries in such sort as the commons of the city of Dublin Dublin,used, and were accustomed to use, according to the ancientcustoms of any corporation within the kingdom of Ireland.The society of the merchants staple are then incorporated ;and the provisions relative to them are very numerous. Thecharter terminates with a general confirmation of all previouscustoms, charters, &c.STATUTES.We have already observed that, till the tenth year of this 1634.feign, there are no statutes applicable to Ireland.The two first statutes in that year relate to subsidies,granted by the temporality to the king.The third relates to the confirmation of letters patent, tobe made upon his majesty's commission of grace, for theremedy of defective titles.From which time the statutes in the second sessions relatechiefly to the introduction into Ireland of many of the Englishstatutes, passed in the reign of Henry Vii, QueenElizabeth, and King James — six and twenty acts beingexpressly for that purpose.In the following sessions, the statute with reference tothe confirmation of the king's letters patent is repealed.Another is passed for securing the estates of the undertakers.Another for the naturalization of the Scotch ante nati. Afourth for the confirmation of leases made by the lord primateand other bishops in Ireland. After which, fifteen actsin succession were also passed for the introduction of previousEnglish statutes.The next makes the nobility of Ireland, dwelling in Eng- Absentee.1680 IRELAND.— CHARTERS.Charity. land or elsewhere out of that kingdom, liable to the genes1634. public charges.In the next year, the 10th and 11th of Charles L, tl^statutes which were passed were for the same object: — ^^'meeting one for the purpose of preventing the barbadoscustom of ploughing by the tail, and pulling the wool <'^living sheep. Another for the suppression of cosherers ai*^idle wanderers: and another to prevent the unprofitablecustom of bringing com in the straw.1M1. No other statutes occur till the 15th of Charles I., whenthe greater part are also introductions of the English lawi^*'There are no other Irish statutes from that year till the Iste*of Charles II.Mr. Grace, in the work which he has published to Ulnartrade the history of the municipal institutions of his nativecountry, has given an Irish statute which is not to be foundin the published collection.As further illustrative of the doctrine we have hithertomaintained, of the distinction between the merchant gildand the municipal government of boroughs, we shall givethe following extract from it : —It is of the 17th of Charles I., and is an act respectingbye-laws and ordinances ; which commences by reciting.Corpora that many and divers private corporations or bodies corporate,within cities, towns, and boroughs, have been establishedcontrary to the king's prerogative, &c. It wastherefore enacted, that no masters, wardens, nor fellowshipsof crafts, mysteries, trades, or occupations whatsoever, norany of them, nor any rulers of guilds or fraternities, shouldfrom thenceforth take upon them to make any acts, bye-laws,or ordinances, &c., unless examined by the lord chancellor,&c., under lOZ.:-t^6t^iUcr1646 TO 1660.During the suspension of the constitution for 14 years,from 1646 to 1660,* the House of Commons, amongst otherusurpations of the prerogative of the crown, formed a committeefor considering how the corporations could be settled, Corpora-andhow their charters might be altered and renewed, to beheldunder the authority of the Commonwealth. And in1656, a committee was appointed to prepare a bill to prevent^ the election of denounced persons into corporations InI664,t ^^^ ^^^^ w^s prescribed by the House of Commonsto be taken by a member of Parliament, to be faithful to thelord protector, and that he should not propose, or consent toAlter the government in one person and the Parliament.And the meaning of the oath is declared.In 1669, the House proceeded to the extent of dissolve Chester.ing and dis incorporating the city of Chester and orderingthat it should have no distinct county jurisdiction, butshould be laid to the county at largessAnd it was afterwards resolved, that if any bill should betendered at any time thereafter, to alter the foundation andconstitution of the government of the commonwealth from asingle person and a Parliament, to such bill the single personshould have a negativesCromwell also took upon himself to create two barons,11 baronets, and 28 knights, including one of the foreignambassadors, and some of the aldermen of London. AndHenry Cromwell knighted three others.LYNN.Amongst the records of the borough of Lynn, we find thefollowing extraordinary document, dated 1st of September,1649, subsequent to the " ordinance'* of the Commons fortaking away the House of Peers. Although some lords• 7 Jouni. 178. t 7 Journ. 461. J 7 Journ. 368.« 7 Journ. 780. || 7 Douro. 385.5p1649.1682 1^ n.WO.1649. were still to be admitted to Parliament and to have freeTOte there, if thereunto elected.'' Ordered, that a letter be written to the Right Honor.able the Earl of Salisbury, by the mayor from this hoofle,to give him knowledge that this house has granted In ikefreedom of this borough, and that the commonly of tUsburgh have elected him a burgess of the Parliament ofEngland.THE EARL OF SALISBURY'S LETTER.Gentlemen, —'* As the precedent you have made in choosing me to beyour burgess is unusual, I believe, if not the first a mo m geiyou, so does it lay the greater obligation upon me ; neitheris that favour a little heightened by my being so much astranger to you as indeed I am; and as you havehere a free acknowledgment from me of your open andkind and good affections, in so unanimous an electionof me to serve you in Parliament, as your letter dothexpress, so cannot they merit, or you expect mmethanks than I do really return unto you for them. Youhave been pleased cheerfully (as you say) to confer yourfreedom upon me. I shall ever be as zealous in maintainingyours ; and as I am not ignorant of the great trust you haveplaced in me, so shall you never be deceived in it, for theaddresses you are to make to me (as your occasion shallrequire) they shall not be so many as cheerfully received,and whatsoever may concern the public good or yours, shallever be pursued with all faithfulness by him that is,Your very loving friend,Salisbury."1655. In 1655, Cromwell also directly assumed another importantprerogative of the crown, and granted a charter to Swansea,which is said to be a borough by prescription, and to havehad a charter in the reign of Henry II. ; but this lacks proof.In the reign of King John, we have already seen,* that a• Sec before, p. 419.1646 TO 1660. 1683charter was granted to the burgesses and their heirs which Heir.was not a charter of incorporation.Henry III., Edward 11., and Edward III., are said tohave given them charters of confirmation.That of Oliver Cromwell recites it was an ancient porttown ; and adds the unfounded statement which we haveseen before in so many previous charters, that it had beentime out of mind a town corporate for which there is no pretence.That at the petition of the " port reeve, aldermen,and burgesses J ^ he had granted that Swansea should be afree town and borough, and that the people therein dwellingand inhabiting, and thitherto known by the name of " port Corporate,reeve, aldermen, and burgesses," should be a body politic,by the name of" the mayor, aldermen, and burgesses."The usual corporate powers then follow.And it is directed that the mayor and common council Admit.should have power to calls and admit into the guild andbigness-ship of the town, so many able and discreet per-Knit as to them shall seem fit, and upon just cause todisfranchise them.That the common council should consist of one mayor, onehigh steward, one recorder, twelve aldermen, twelve chief orcapital burgesses. And the mode of electing these officersbears the strictest analogy to that practised in other boroughsat this period.That the common council might tax the inhabitants and inhabitantsoccupiers of land, to defray the necessary expences of thetown.That the mayor, high steward, his deputy, the recorder,and the port reeve of the year past, and the last year, withone of the aldermen, should be justices of the peace.A non-intermittent clause — view of frankpledge — a court frankfort— return of writs — that no foreigner or stranger to the 'Leerliberties should use any stall, &c. in the fair without leave ofthe mayor and aldermen ; — and exemption from bearing anyoffice, or serving on juries out of the borough, unless at thegrind sessions, close the grant.• See before, Cinque Ports, " advocate."5p21684 1646 TO ]oa>.This is the only charter we have been able to disorderupon the rolls at this period ; and it will be percent thatit is in substance the same as others, and requires no particularobservation.ORDINANCES.The '^ ordinances " which have been published* as madeduring this period, also contain but little matter worthy ofremark.They commence with the act for triennial Parliaments —and the king's name is used in them for the 37 first chapters.1648. But in the year 1642| the ordinances were by the lordsand commons in Parliament — they sequestered the delhiquents' estates — they ordered the levying of taxesand duties —horses and money for the support of the army. — They letthe lands of the members of Parliament who were absentfrom the House — they directed the appointment of preacherand ministers ; visitors were named for the Universities, aswell as for Westminster, Winchester, Merchant Tailors andEton Schools; and unlicensed publications were prohibited.1648. 1^11 1648, the '^ ordinances " were made by the ''loidsand commons," after which by the ** commons" alone,till 1649, when that description not being thought sufficientlyauthoritative, they adopted the name of Parliament," — apparentlywithout any authority or justification for doing so.And it was ordained, amongst other things, that it shouldbe high treason to declare ** that the Commons in Parliamenthad not the supreme authority."1563. In 1653, Oliver Cromwell took upon himself the title ofLord Pro \lector. " lord protector of the commonwealth of England, Scotland,and Ireland :" and described himself as having the exerciseof the " chief magistracy and administration of the government."And he took to himself the appellation of " highnessesan act being made for the security of his person ; andthe House of Commons were induced to request him to appointhis successor, and to call a Parliament, to consist ofSee Coheirs Collection of the Acts and Ordinances.t Scobell, 2nd part, 275.1646 TO 1660. 1685two Houses ; and the numbers and proportions of the memberswere to be defined. Before this there had been a dissolutionof Parliament, and another appointed for the 3d ofSeptember following. And then the acts were passed in hisname.*During this period, a statute was created for the pacificationof Scotland, for uniting it with England, and erectingcourts baron there.Nothing further material to our purpose occurs in theseordinances.CASES.In this period also of our history there are but very fewcases to illustrate the subject of our inquiry ; — such as theyare — though scanty — we shall extract.Thus, in 1651, the court was moved for a writ to swear one 1651.into the office of mayor j^ to which he was elected for the boroughof Trevenny in Cornwall, because the old mayor didnot swear him in in due time, but adjourned the court.Roof chief justice. — There is no precedent to swear suchan officer ; yet ordered that notice should be given to the town,and precedents to be brought into court, if any were, towarrant it.In this case we see the jealousy of the Court of King'sBench, in enforcing the administering of any oath unless it Oaths,was warranted by law.And in a case in Keble's Reports: in 1651, against the 1651.mayor of Bristol, who was brought in upon attachment fordisfranchising an attorney for refusing to swear (as is used inLondon) not to sue another freeman at common law out ofthe town, because he had taken a latitat against him — thecowrt conceived that part of the oath was illegal; though in Illegal,regard that it had been before used, the present mayor wasexcused of contempt.In 1655, Yates and others, freemen of the town of King 1666.8ton-upon-Thames,§ having been disfranchised by the bailiffs, Disfranchisement.• Scobell.378. X lKeb.698.♦ Styles, 299. § Styles* Rep. 477.1686 Aims rQ 1800.1651. ^. of that place, moved for a writ of restitution, which wastina. * awarded ; and the substance of the return was, " that a^ difference had arisen amongst the corporation aboutRetnm. *' making an attorney of the court And at a oonrt held tat'' that purpose a tumult arose, upon which the bailiff mir** joined the court ; and commanded every person to depart** But Yates and others persisted in remaining in the town'' hall, saying, * they were a court,' and made several** in the court book."Ezcep- To this return many exceptions were taken; onethat it did not show that the customs of the corporationranted them in disfranchising any persons for such offences;nor showed that any person had at any time been disfranchisedfor such causes.To which it was answered, that '^ it was a high contempt'' and just cause to disfranchise the parties, for they ccnm-'^ mitted an act of a high nature, tending to evert all goveiiH'' ment, in hindering the proceedings of justice, and the pratt'' and welfare of the town."Judgment. But the chief justice said, that ** custom was the main cause** of disfranchising any person — for by the disfranchisementthe party loses his freehold, and therefore not to be put in'^ practice but upon very good warrant. And yet in some^* cases, for the advancement of government, one may be'' put out of his freehold without a legal proceeding against'^ the party, as Sir James Bag's case is ; but there must be acustom or statute to warrant it."The parties were all restored to their freedom.Ditfrui. I^ is difficult to conceive how the right of .just could depend upon custom only ; or if the body ofburgesses could not by the general law have that power,how it could on principle be supported by custom.It seems from the history we have before given, as well asfrom the general principles and the usual practice of thelaw, that such a power would necessarily be inherent in thebody of the burgesses.If they had the power of receiving a person into theirburgh — if they were responsible for him, and therefore had1664 TO 1660. 1687the necessary right of considering whether he was a fit ^®^person for them to admit — they would likewise have, as aconsequence, the right of rejecting him, or disgracinghim if he should act in such a manner as to be unfit to continuein the place, or to be a member of their body — for if heshould be convicted of treason — felony — or any infamousoffence; if he should act in defiance of the authorities of theplace, or against its general interests — it would be absurdnot to give them this power of removing him. Reason,therefore, also supports this right — and there is nothing ofexpediency which militates against it — but, on the contrary,expediency would also justify it. Nothing is so importantto society, as that character, either good or bad, shouldhave its full influence; and as it would be contrary to justice,for a person of good character to be excluded ; it wouldbe equally contrary to the interests of society that a personof bad character should be permitted to continue one of theimpresses. Nor can anything be more desirable, than thatthese matters should be settled by the people themselvesupon the spot ; for character can only operate locally, andtherefore it would be essentially beneficial that the burgessesshould have themselves, in the first instance, thesettlement of these points; and if they act unjustly orunfairly, (which would be more rare in matter of characterthan many people are prone to believe,) the superior courtswould, upon application, correct the abuse, and do justiceto the injured party.There is one other case in the year 1656,* respecting the 1656.corporation of soap makers, in which it is stated that inthe Cinque Ports, the inhabitants had a privilege to be impleadedthere and not elsewhere.That those bye-laws were good in law, which served for Bye-laws,the good government of a societyTliat a bye-law made in a leet, that none should receiveany to inhabit there, that was not born in the leet, or had Leet.not inhabited there for the space of three years, unless hebrought a testimonial of his good behaviour, and showed itHardness Rep. 56. t Mic. 6 James I., Bonner's case.Inhabitants.1688 1^ ^ io.lOM. to the constable, under a certain pain, was a good bye4mw;and yet it was, to some extent, against the general libertyof the subject, by which any man might go and live wherehe pleased: — but these restrictions are necks s mary for thepublic good, and are fully justified by the principles towhich we have above referred.1610. In 1649, Lord Fairfield, with the council of officer* bekmg^ing to the army under his command, presented a petition tothe Parliament, ** for an agreement of the people, togetherwith some regulations for new-modelling future Parliaments."The number of members was reduced to 400 ; and dividedamongst the counties and principal boroughs in certain proportionsThe elector were to be natives of England; not servants^^lll^i 'receiving wages, InU housekeepers dwelling within their respectivedistricts.All the elections were to be on the same day.Cromwell afterwards added a qualification for the votersof 2002.SALISBURY.1654. The following are cited as examples of the indentures ofreturns to Parliament at this period, extracted from theoriginal documents at the Tower. For New Salisbury theindenture is between the high sheriff of Wiltshire, and thecitizens and inhabitants of New Salisbury of the other part,who elect Edward Tooke and William Stephens, Esquires,who were to act for themselves and all the people of the samecity.YARMOUTH.The indenture of Yarmouth is between the sheriff ofInhabit Norfolk, and the bailiff, burgesses and inhabitants, who electthe Honourable Colonel William Cough and ThomasDunne, who were to act for themselves and all the people.And the same form, mutatis mutandis, for Lynn, Marlborough,Devises, and other boroughs.From these returns it will be seen, that the opposite1646 TO 1660. 1689error which had been for some time adopted, increasing in i^^*its effect from the reign of Henry VIII., to the middle ofJames I., was resorted to at this period of our history.The unrestricted voting of the inhabitants seems for some ^^I^^**time to have been permitted, without any admission enrolment,or swearing — or the usual requisites of being householders,inhabitant, and paying scot and lot.This was an innovation upon the principles and practiceof the constitution, and obviously unreasonable, and irreconcilablewith the principles of our institutions, whichhave been traced through our preceding history. And thereforeit was soon found to be impracticable; and thoughapparently referred to in the triennial bill, which we havebefore mentioned, yet it was partly abandoned at a subsequenttime by Cromwell himself, and altogether set asideupon the Restoration.CHARLES II.The nation, disgusted with the violence they had wit 1660nessed after the Parliament had commenced their encroach 1685.ments upon the crown — harassed by the convulsions in thestate, and the incessant changes from the uncertainty ofpopular government, and the harsh tyranny of the House ofCommons, followed by the severe government of a suspicioususurper — ardently longed for repose; and, in the words ofMonk, " All ranks of men, in all places, were in earnest expectationof a settlement after the violent convulsions towhich they had been exposed."One of the invariable misfortunes attendant upon allchanges of government — particularly those which have beenaccompanied with violence — is, that the strong acts adoptedon the one side, are sought to be remedied by stronger inthe opposite extreme.1690 STATUTES.chMiwi i. Thus it was with those which followed soon after the1660. restoration of Charles II.Those which immediately succeeded partook of the temperand moderation which characterised the conduct of Monkand the real patriots who acted with him.But afterwards, when the minds of men began to acquirea momentum in the opposite direction to that which theyhad recently left ; then intemperate and oppressive acts ensued,and the happy restoration of the king was followedeventually by circumstances which are painful to detail.STATUTES.1090. T^^ &c^ which were first passed will be found to partakeof the wisdom and moderation to which we have alluded.They were enacted in the old form — ^by king, lords andcommons. They continued all judicial proceedings. Thesubsidy of tonnage and poundage was again granted : andthe excise was continued.*An act of free and general pardon, indemnity, and oblivion,was passed ; reciting, *^ that the king's most excellentmajesty, taking into his gracious and most serious consistderation the long and great troubles, discords and warsthat have for many years past been in this kingdom; andthat divers of his subjects are by occasion thereof, andotherwise, fallen into and be obnoxious to great pains^* and penalties : — out of a hearty and pious desire to putan end to all suits and controversies that by occasion of^' the late distractions have arisen, and to bury all seeds of^* future discords, was pleased that a general pardon might^* be enacted."There was also a statute for the confirming and restoring ofministers.Wards Another was passed for taking away the courts of wardsLiveries, ^^d liveries, and tenures in capite and by knight serviceand purveyance ; and for settling a revenue upon his majestyin lieu thereof, upon the ground that they had been more• See also Charles II. c. 11, 12; 16 & 17Charlea II. c. 4 ; 22 & 23CharlesII.C.5.STATUTES. 1691burdensome grievous and prejudicial to the kingdom than ^^"^ "'beneficial to the king. ^^*^"This act is said to have been drawn by Lord Chief Justice Tenure.Hale:* and it provided amongst other things, that alltenures to be thereafter created by the king, of an estate ofinheritance at the common law, should be in free and commonsocage. But there is a proviso, that the act should not extendto prejudice the customs of the city of London, nor of London,any other city or town ; nor Berwick : nor to discharge any(apprentice from his apprenticeship. And it has been held, ^^c^""that it does not affect burgage tenuresActs were also passed for levying the arrears of the assessments:and for the paying and disbanding of the army andnavy.An act of severe but necessary justice, was passed forthe attainder of those who had been guilty of the murder ofCharles I., which in the preamble, charges them with havingplotted and contrived the ruin and destruction of themonarchy, and with it the true reformed Protestant religion,under which it had been so long protected and flourished.That they had thrown down all the bulwarks and fences ofthe law, and had subverted the very being and constitutionof Parliament. And the lords and commons protest againstthe murder of the king ; and it is declared, " that by the** undoubted and fundamental laws of this kingdom, neitherthe peers of this realm, nor the commons, nor both together,in Parliament or out of Parliament, nor the people collectivelyor representatively, nor any other persons whatsoever,ever had, have, hath, or ought to have, any coercivepower over the persons of the kings of this realm."In the next year, an act was passed for the safety of his 1661.majesty's person and government, in which it was again declared,that there was no legislative power in either or bothHouses of Parliament without the king; and certain orders andordinances made by them were accordingly declared void.Another act was passed against tumults and disorders,upon pretence of preparing or presenting public petitions« 3 P. Wil. 125. t Co. Lit. H. & B. 106 a.1692 STATUTES.^^^1^^ or other addresses to his majesty or the Parliament, whichISBI. commences by reciting, that it had been found by sad ex*perienccy that remonstrances and declarations and otheraddresses to the king, or to both or either Houses of Parliamentfor alteration of matters established by law, for theredress of pretended grievances in church or state, laye benimade use of to serve the ends of factious and seditiouspersons, gotten into power, to the violation of publieIt was therefore enacted, that no persons after the first ofAugust 1661, above the number of 20 or more, shall presentany petition, &c* for alteration of matters established by law inchurch or state, unless the matter have been first consentedunto and ordered by three or more justices of the county,Omne or the major part of the grand jury of the county where thematter arose.Another statute declared the sole right of the militia to bein the king.*The second statute in the same year, contains an act of considerableimportance for the well governing and regulation of^d^'^' ^^^^T^^^i^^^t ^^'^ ^^' ^'^ doubt, intended to obviate those illegalmorals and appointments by the commons to which wehave referred It recited that questions were likely to ariseconcerning the validity of the elections and removals duringthe late troubles, contrary to their charters — and to the endthat the succession in such corporations may be the mostproperly perpetuated in the hands of persons well affectedto his majesty and the established government ; it being toowell known, that notwithstanding all his majesty's endeavoursand unparalleled indulgence in pardoning all that ispassed, nevertheless many evil spirits are still working —therefore it was enacted, that commissions should issue forEngland, Wales and Berwick ; that no charters should beavoided for any thing that had passed — that an oath shouldbe taken and declaration subscribed by all the officers in thecities, boroughs, corporations and Cinque Ports; and thatall who refused to take the oaths or subscribe the declarationSec also the 13th and 14th Charles II. c. 3. f See before* p. 1684.STATUTES. 1693were to be removed by the commissioners : who had power cities ii.given to them for that purpose; as well as for the restoring 1661.those who had been illegally removed, and placing othermembers, or inhabitants there in the vacancies which shouldbe made.It was this statute which produced so great a change inmany of the boroughs, and of which traces are to be foundin the books of several of them.Whether it took place during the usurpations of the ^J|^|j[j|*House of Commons — or of Cromwell — or occurred at thetime of the passing of this statute; certain it is, that inmany boroughs most of the books previous to this date aredestroyed : and those now existing commence with the actsdone by the commissioners under this statute ; which, generallyspeaking, were for the removal of the greater portionof the officers of the corporation, and substituting in theirstead the principal officers of state for the time being, togetherwith some of the principal inhabitants of the place.The acts done by the commissioners appear to have ^662.required subsequent support from Parliament, for in 1662, acommittee, in their report to the House of Commons, questionedwhether the proceedings of the commissioners couldbe overruled in the King's Bench ? and whether it was themeaning of the House that it should be so ? If not, that itwould be fit to provide for the quiet of the commissioners,and the security of the persons placed by them, by anotherbill for that purpose; and to prevent the inconveniencesarising to corporations by the better sort of the membersand inhabitants evading the offices and services incident totheir places by refusing to take the oaths j Sc, and so leavethe burden and charge of the government upon mean men notableto bear it.* And in 1680, leave was given to bring in abill to repeal the act for the regulation of corporationsIt is possible that this was done with good faith at thetime, and might not have immediately produced any evilconsequences. But in after times it led to great mischiefs,particularly as it afforded an excuse and precedent• 8 JouFD. 446. t 9 Journ. 692.1694 Statutes.chMtwiL fer Bon-residence, fbr which purpose these instances wwnMB. subsequently cited.C^>.4. The act for the uniformity of prayer was also passed.Cap. 10. Another for establishing an additional revenue upon UsCap. 11. majesty. Another for preventing frauds in the cottons;Cap. 13. and an important act for the better relief of the poor, inwhich the settling of them is first mentioned, and it is statedPoor, also to be for the prevention of rogues and vagabonds. Theobject of the provision being, that poor persons shonid beretraced from gdngfrcm one parish to oiio^Aa-, which fhejdid in order to settle themselves in those parishes whenthere is the best stock — the largest comus or washes, andthe most woods for them to bum and destroy — provisionsC^NDBBon which are a legislative recognition of the ** common Block'to which we have before so frequently referred, as well asinhabitants of the right of the inhabitants to have and enjoy rights of^n^^ common. So that this declaration is directly against theauthority of the cases we have before quoted, denying theinhabitants right to an easement of that description.The time prescribed by this act, within which a person40 days, is removable, is 40 days; which, the reader will remember, isthe period assigned by the ancient law, within which a personcoming into any new place is bound to give notice to theking's officer of his arrival, upon which he would be compellableto give his pledges — to be sworn to the law — andto be enrolled. The previous settlement in the formerplace of residence is described to be as a native — householder— sojourner — apprentice or servant — for the space of40 days; and they are to be removable, unless they givesufficient security for the discharge of the parish.Qualification this description the reader will perceive, that all thequalifications by the common law, to which we have beforereferred, as the qualifications for burgess-ship are here mentioned,with reference to a subject altogether distinct andseparate from any corporate right y with which it cannot possiblybe confounded; and yet they are all grounded upon thefoundation of inhabitancy, which we have shown by authorSee before, p. 1528.STATUTES. 1696cities of all descriptions to be the essential qualifications for ^^'"'**^^burgess-ship. ^^®*Thus, in this enumeration, we find a " native*' mentioned — Native.that is a person (according to the case we have lately quotedrespecting the city of London) born in the place, and there Birth.fore belonging to it.A ** householder*' which has been sufficiently explained to Housethe reason why an inhabitant was to be sworn and enfMedy and give his pledges, and pay scot and lot; and hewas irremovable, because his house was his castle, and noBrian could be removed from it.A ^* sojourner " was a person who had come to live in the Sojourner.place, but who, when he had resided there for a year and aday would, according to the law of the leet, which has been Leet80 frequently explained, be irremovable.An " apprentice " would also, for the reasons before ad Apprenticed*be entitled to remain in the place.And a " servant " who had been hired for a year, which is Servant.the rule as to the settlement of the poor, borrowed from theancient common law, would come, like the sojourner, withindie law laid down in Granville, as a fixed and permanentinhabitant.The 15th section of this statute is also satisfactory to show Sec 15.that courts leet were then in existence, though in some Leet.places they had been omitted to be held ; as it provides,that in case a constable, scarborough, or ty thing man should Constable,die or go out of the parishes any justice might make or sweara new constable, until the lord should hold a court leet, orimtil the next quarter sessions.An act was also passed for preventing the unnecessary Cap. 21.charge of sheriffs, and for ease in passing their accounts ; as Sheriff.it was stated that in the late times of tyranny and oppressionthey had been great sufferers, and thereby much impoverishedin their estates and fortunes.• Sec before, p. 762.t There is no doubt that the leaving the parish would in this instance create anictaal vacancy in the office :— and why should it not do so in the cases of corporatepincers ? See Rex ». the Mayor of Truro— 3 Bam. & Aid. 590, and Rex r. the Mayorof West Looe, 5 Dow. 6c Ry . 414.1696 STATUTES.f^^"*^^' In the 25th of Charles II. there is an act to enable tha1072. county palatine of Durham* to send knights and bmrgegget to*^ ' Parliament which recites that the inhabitants of the ccMDUityhad not before exercised that privilege, although they wereliable to all subsidies granted by Parliament, equally withtMiti/ the inhabitants of other cities, boroughs, and counties, whohave their citizens, burgesses, and knights in Parliament; —wherefore it was enacted that the county should send twoknights, and the city two citizens, to be burgesses far thecity ; — the election of the knights being by the freeholderof the county, and the election of the burgesses to be by themayor, aldermen, and freemen of the city — the first authoritativeinstance in which the election is directed, by anyfnsama. statute or charter, to be by the ** freemen" and not in theBargtMi. usual language by the *' burgesses."1077. In the 30th of Charles XL, the important act for the better^'^ security of the liberty of the subject, and for prevention ofimprisonment beyond the seas — commonly called the HabeasCorpus Act, was passed ; the difficulty complained of being,the delays made of the returns of writs of habeas corpus ;and therefore, for the future, they are directed to be returnedwithin three days, unless in cases of treason or felony.There are many other statutes of importance passed in thisreign, but they have so little connexion with the subject ofour inquiry, that it is unnecessary to specify them.CHARTERS.Whilst the legislature were passing the statute we havequoted, and all men seemed to concur in submitting to theking's lawful prerogatives, and in cherishing the just privilegesof the people and of Parliament, the king grantedcharters to many of the cities and boroughs in England.LONDON.London f as usual, was the early object of the bounty ofthe crown.Charles II., in the third year from his restoration, after• Harl. MSS., 7017. 502.CHARTERS. 1697inspecting the charters which had been previously granted to ^^*^«* ''•the citizens of London, confirmed to them in the most amplemanner all their privileges.NORWICH.Norwich also received nearly at the same time,* that which ^®®'is now the governing charter. It commences with a recital,that it was an ancient and populous city and community byitself incorporated by the names of the '* mayor, sheriffs, ^"^^'ciHzenSf and commonalty of the city of Norwich" — " thecitizens of Norwich" — " the citizens and commonalty of Citizens.Norwich '* — ^' the citizens and inhabitants in the same city" inhabitantsand had received and enjoyed various liberties by chartersand customs; — that the then mayor, sheriffs, citizens, andcommonalty of the city of Norwich, had petitioned the king Communityto confirm their previous liberties, and to give them suchadditional privileges as might seem expedient.The king accordingly granted that they should be incorporated; with all the usual corporate powers.The then municipal officers are confirmed in their respectiveoffices.And it was directed, that the mayor, recorder, steward,and aldermen, as long as they continued in office, should bejustices of the peace — that they, by the oaths of good andlawful men of the city, might hear and determine all mannerof felonies, trespasses, &c.That every alderman should be a justice of the peace,through the whole ward of the city for which he might be respectivelyelected an alderman.After which provisions are made for the punishment of personselected in any ward to be of the common council orIveery of the city, not attending to be sworn into office after Livery.notice given to them ; and that if any person elected by thef^iizms from any of the four great wards to be of the common citizens.council should refuse, or be exonerated from such office, theroayor should warn the citizens inhabiting in such ward,• Pat. 15 Car. II. paw 6.5q1698 CHARTERS.^^'"'^"- that they might name and elect another fit citizen of theNorth. ward to be of the common council.1066.It was also directed, that the mayor, sheriffs, and aldermenshould yearly elect one sheriff: and that the mayorCitiieot. should yearly cause all the citizens of the city and county,dwelling therein, to be warned to appear at the guildhall ofthe city, and there freely in like manner elect and prefer oneother sufficient person to be elected as the other sheriff.That when any of the 24 aldermen should die or be le*Cities. moved, &c., the mayor should cause all the citizen inhabit'Wild, ing within the ward for which they were aldermen, to bewarned to meet at the guildhall, to elect others of the moreworthy and sufficient citizens or freemen to be aldermen ;^^^^f^*^ and that if any of the aldermen should depart from ike ctljfinto another place to inhcJnt, or should neglect the duty ofhis office, or should not return within six months after requestmade, he should be fined, &c. by the mayor, sheriffs,aldermen, and common council.Bye-laws. That it should be lawful for the mayor, sheriffs, and aldermen,with the assent of their 60 fellow citizens of the comImon council, to make ordinances, &c. for the government ofthe citizens.A court of equity is then granted — and that recognizancesof statute, merchant, &c., should be taken in as ample amanner as the mayors were accustomed to do of the citiesof London, York and Bristol.Freeman. That HO freeman of the city should be a partner or factorForeigner, with any person who should be a foreigner and not a freeman,in buying or selling any woollen cloths, &c.Various provisions as to the grant of the goods of felons,&c., with an ample confirmation of all previous franchises,conclude this charter.IPSWICH.1665. A charter of nearly the same date recites, that Ipswich wasan ancient and populous borough, and had for many ages^ion.'* been a corporation, or body corporate and politic. That theCHARTERS. 1699burgesses and inhabitants by the name of the " bailiffs, bur ciuriw n.guesses commonalty 9 and their successors," and other names Ipswich.had held liberties, &c., as well by charters and confirmations inhabitantsof Charles I., as by prescriptions and customs : that thethen bailiffs, burgesses, and commonalty had besought theking to confirm their body corporate, and ancient liberties,&c. — and to grant such other as might be deemed expedient: — which the king granted accordingly.And that there should be a high steward, 12 fortressesof the town, and the 24 chief constables, commonly calledthe 24.That when any vacancies occurred amongst the fortressesand chief constables of the town, the members of the respectivebodies were to supply the deficiency, &c.GLOUCESTER.Gloucester also obtained a charter in this year, which was 1664.afterwards surrendered in this reign.Bridgeport.This king granted a charter to Bridport, which commentedces by reciting, that the burgesses and inhabitants of theborough, by the name of " the bailiffs, and burgesses of the ^"^Rewcs.borough of Bridport, in the county of Dorset," and by othernames, had enjoyed divers liberties, &c. by charters and prescription,and also by virtue of a charter of James I.That the bailiffs and burgesses had petitioned him, for thebetter government of the borough, to confirm their body cor Corporate.joratCy and to grant such additional liberties, &c. for thepublic good as might be deemed expedient.The then bailiffs are confirmed in their offices — and infuture, the bailiffs and capital burgesses were yearly to electtwo of the fifteen Capital burgesses to be bailiffs.The then fifteen capital burgesses were likewise confirmed,and were to be called the common council. If any vacancies Vacandea.spurred, the capital burgesses were to supply them fromthe more worthy burgesses and inhabitants of the borough,or from the more honest and discreet of the inhabitants of5q21700 CHARTERS.^^^*''*"' some of the village lying in the county, but within two milesBri4»ort of the borough, who should be willing to take the office.A general confirmation follows of all previous cha etonand provision is made that no writ of quo warraiitoshoahlbeissued for any thing previously committed — and all the otherswere to take the oaths prescribed — and no recorder ortown clerk was to be sworn into office without the a{q[noifalof the king.YORK.^^^ The king also, after confirming all former charters Id ikemayoTf and commonalty of York, granted that other hbtreasurer, chancellor, barons of the exchequer, attorney norsolicitor general, should prosecute any writ or summons ofquo UHxrranto against them or their successors, for any causes,or offences by them done.^^^y^* The mayor is appointed the hinges eeeheator, and ehrk ofthe market.And the mayor, recorder, and aldermen, are directed to beJwticflB. justices of the peace, and the city's counsel, provided theydo not exceed the number of two at one time.It is also provided, that five of the justices might hold sessions.That the mayor, recorder, senior aldermen and city'scounsel, are to be of the quorum. That three of the quorumshould be present at the gaol delivery, &c. That no citizen,sheriff, or other officer within the city, should be put to anyrecognition, jury, or inquisition, without, &c.That the repairs of the walls, bridges, and king's staith,^^2]^°**" should be upon the commonalty y and the money to be raisedby a tax upon the inhabitants &c.^T"5** That the common council of the city should from thenceforthconsist of 72 persons and that upon the deathly removal,or secession of any common councilman, a new one shouldbe elected within the space of \5 days after such deaths &c.Residence. It was also provided, that the alderney and such as hadbeen jfAm^^ of the city, should he constantly resident in it.Families, with their families ; and for absence above the space of 60days in any one whole year, without the license of the wholeCHARTERS. 1701commonalty, should pay scot and lot, and all other taxes and ^^^'*'^"'assessments ; and every alderman who should so absent him York,self, should forfeit 5^. a day above the 60 days ; and everyperson that hath been sheriff, 2s. 6d., &c.And no recorders nor common clerks should be thereafterelected, nor admitted without the approbation of the king,though chosen by the whole commonalty, &;c.CINQUE PORTS.Charles II. also granted a charter to the Cinque Ports, 1668.which commences by reciting, that the towns and ports ofHastings, New Romney otherwise Romene, Hythe, Dover,Sandwich — shad from time immemorial been the Cinque Ports.That the towns of Rye and Winchelsea had been ancienttowns, within their liberties.That the town and livery of Pevensey, Seaford, Buller livery,hitbe. Petit Sham, Sidney, Beaksboume, and Grange, hadever been members of the town of Hastings.That the towns of Bronchial, Lydd, Old Romney, Deniesand Sandstone, had also been members of NewRomney.That the town of West Hythe had ever been a member ofthe town of Hythe.That the towns of Folkestone, Faversham, Margate, St.John's, Godsend, Burlington Wood, and St. Peter's in theIsle of Thanet, Kingstown and Ringwolde, have ever beenmembers of the port of Dover.That the towns of Norwich, Deal, Walter, Ramsgate,Storer, Carr, and Brightlingsey, had ever been members ofthe port of Sandwich.And the town and hundred of Tenterden a member of Rye.That the barons and inhabitants having: by charters, pre Barons..,.«,.«, InhabitantsicnptioQS, and customs, enjoyed various franchises, &c., thelung desired that the navy of the Cinque Ports and membersBlight not perish or fail ; and in consideration of the serviceswhich had been rendered to him, he confirmed all the charterswhich had been granted to the barons of the CinquePorts and their heirs — to the men of the Cinque Ports — or to Heirs.CHARTERS.Gbirivu. any calling themselves of the liberty of the same, &c. Ac. Ac,Cinqiifl or by whatsoever incorporation, or by pretext of incorporation166B. they had been known or named, and all liberties they hadpreviously enjoyed.That there should be in the ancient towns and members,&c., a court of record, with the same powers as every Inmrnghor city in England enjoyed.Justices of the peace are then appointed. Also that twoor more of the mayors, bailiffs, jurats, &c, should have powerOaths, to inquire by the oaths of good and lawful men of theCinque Ports, of all manner of felonies, &c., and that etmayor, jurat, and commonalty, should receive, to their ownFines, proper use and commodity, all manner of fines, issues, kcScot and That the barons of the Cinque Ports, and the towns oflot* . . .Rye and Winchelsea, might impose, as often as it shall seemreasonable, rateable taxations, as scot, shot and ht, tillage,and other reasonable taxations, commonly called commonfines, &c., upon the goods, &c., of all and singular the imkoi^bitants wit residents, or occupiers, or tenants, within theports or members of the same. Provisions then occur thatthe charter of Henry VI. to Faversham, should be exemptedfrom the confirmation contained in this charter, and that theelections of recorders or common clerks should be void, ifdisapproved of by the king.POOLE.1668. A charter was also granted at this period to Poole, which,after confirming all former privileges to the mayor, bailiffs,burgesses, and commonalty, recites that the town had beenof old incorporated by the name of mayor, bailiffs, bur-inhabitantsgcsscs, and commonalty, and that the burgesses and inhabitantsthereof, as well by that name as by other names, hadused and enjoyed divers privileges; incorporates them, andgives the power of choosing a recorder, to the mayor, bailiffs,burgesses, and commonalty.1675. Seven years afterwards, a quo warranto issued against thecorporation, and their franchises were seised into the handsof the crown.CHARTERS. 1703Three years after which, the burgesses and inhabitants Ch>riw ii.presented an address and submission to the king, praying 1678.that they might be restored to their franchises.GLOUCESTER.Gloucester, which had received charters in the reigns ofHenry IL, John, Henry III., Richard III., Henry VII.,Henry VIII., by whom it was created a city, Edward VI.,Elizabeth, James I., and Charles I. — received another fromCharles II. in the 23rd year of his reign, which after reciting 1672.that the charters given to the citizens by him in the 16thyear of his reign, had been surrendered, granted that the Surrender,citizens, burgesses, and inhabitants, who at the time of the ini»awtanusurrender were burgesses or freemen of the city, should beincorporated by the name of the mayor and burgesses of the ^°^?J5*^city of Gloucester, with all the usual corporate powers, &c.A recital then occurs, that ever since the memory of manthere was a custom within the village, borough, or city, thatcertain capital burgesses, in number sometimes more, sometimesless, who by the rest of the burgesses were thought mostdiscreet, fere chosen into the common council of the borough. Common. council.That at the petition of the mayor and burgesses, intendingand designing to reduce the number of the capital burgessesto a greater certainty, the king granted, that for the future,there should be 30 capital burgesses at the least, and not Thirty.more than 40, who should be named the common council;that 12 of them should be named aldermen, and one of the Aldermen.12 be called the mayor, &c.That Richard III. had ordained, that there should be ayearly election made, as well of the mayor as of the otherofficers, by four and twenty electors, viz. by the twelve alder Leet jurymenand twelve other of the most loyal and discreet burgesses;which words being subject to an uncertain anddoubtful construction, the king granted that the mayor4c., should be elected upon Monday next following the feastof St. Michael, &c.That if any one or more of the aldermen or burgesses ofthe common council, whether he be inhabiting or resident1704 Charters.ohBtoi u. within the city or without should be elected to the office o^OkmoM- mayoTi alderman, bailiff, chamberlain, kc, and ihoiild iefiis01614. to enter upon the duties of such office, that then the mayiMValdermen, and common council should inflict such fine woAimprisonment as they might deem expedient.The reader will perceive in this charter a direct confined—tionof the doctrine, that the select bodies were appointed b^Ddcgiued. the delegation of the body at large.Nor will it be overlooked, that this is the first time nwhich the non-residence of the aldermen is expressly noog-sized by charter: and it must be remembered that this issubsequent to the statute of corporations, and to the vicJeiitremoval and admission of officers — first by the House ciiCommons, and afterwards by the commissioners under thatstatute. And, in the latter instance, many of the persons introducedinto the corporations were the officers of the stateand non-residents. We have also before seen, At theclauses for the appointment of officers by the approval ofthe king had been introduced into the charters.LIVERPOOL.]077^ The king also granted a charter to Liverpool this year, whichCommon appointed a common council of 60 persons, therein nominated »council. 3Q ^f whom, together with the mayor and bailiffs, were tohave power to elect and name the mayor, bailiffs, commoncouncil, and freemen of the town — thereby placing the wholepower in their hands.The burgesses at large protested against this charter, andseveral of the common councilmen nominated refused toact under it, and tumults took place in the town. But thespirit of the times stifled all opposition ; and the commoncouncil continued to exercise the whole authority till thecharter of William III. introduced other regulations.1679. The proclamation for the restoration of corporations byJames 11., in the fourth year of his reign, seems to recognizethis as a period in which great irregularities in the grantingof charters were introduced. Indeed, it was about this periodCHARTERS. 1705that the clause for the removal of the officers of the corpora chwriei ii.tion at the will of the king began to be inserted ;* and there 1679.fore King James, in order to satisfy the people in this re-Spect, annulled those charters and incorporations, and inpursuance of the power therein reserved — by order in counciland under the sign manual — removed and discharged allthe officers in those corporations from their offices.Hume says of the parliamentary elections at this time, Hume,(though not with strict accuracy,) that they were, perhaps,the first in England, which, since the commencement of themonarchy, had been earned on by a violent contest betweenthe parties, and where the court interested itself, to a highdegree in the choice of the national representativesHowever, he is perfectly correct to this extent, that it wasin the close of the reign of Charles II. that all municipalrights and privileges were swallowed up in the general doctrine,— that they depended upon charters of incorporation :and these charters were seised, surrendered, granted, andannulled, as pleased the king to answer the purposes of theelections.Wotton BASSET.A charter, in 1679, was also given by the king to the i679.borough of Wootton Basset, which commences by reciting,that it was an ancient and populous borough, and that themayor, aldermen, and burgesses had enjoyed liberties, &c Burgesses,by charters, prescriptions, and customs.The king then proceeds to grant, that the borough shouldbe a free borough, and that the inhabitants of the sameshould be one body incorporate and politic, and by the name Corporate,of *' the mayor, aldermen, and burgesses of the borough ofWootton Basset," should plead and be impleaded and havethe other usual corporate powers. The then mayor, aldermen,and capital burgesses are named and confirmed in theirIn the 25th of Charles II. it was said in a case at law, that " it had been betterto adjudge the king deceived, than let in a deluge of mischief." — Thomas v.Sorrel, 3 Keb. 146.t Homes Hist. of £ng* viii. 93.irrespective offices, &c. A general confirmation of all libertiesWoowon Ac, aud that the common clerk of the borough should beista. approved of by the king, closes this charter.In this place the right uf election has tilwayti been exei^Scniand cited by the inhabitant paying scot and lot, although acorporation from this time existed in it.WELLS.1883. TTiia king, at the petition of the late mayor, masters andBarges. burgesses of the city or borough of Wells,* granted, that itshould be a free city or borough of itself; and that the bur |gesses, by whatsoever name or names they or their predecessorshad been incorporated, might be from thenceforth one bodyCorpariie. corporate and politic in deed, fiict and name, by the " nameof the mayor, aldermen and burgesses of the city or boroughof Wells, in the county of Somerset."The usual corporate powers, with provisions for the electionof the municipal pincers, are then granted — and that theI Privy Council should have power to remove any of the corI pirate officers.That every person admitted into the liberty of the city orborough should before his admission, take certain oaths, &c.before the mayor Jur the time being — and that the mayor,aldermen, and burgesses, and their successors, should haveall gists, grants, liberties, &c. theretofore lawfully grantedto the mayor, masters and burgesses, or citizens, bui^esBes^and inhabitants of the city or borough, &c.SANDWICH16B4. Received a charter in the 32nd of Charles II., which commencesby reciting, that for the improvement of the port andtown, and for the good government of the people there dwellingand resorting; the king granted, that it should for everbe a free town of itself, and that the mayor, jurats, andCorporate, inhabitants should for ever be one body corporate andCHARTERS. 1707politic, by the name of " the mayor, jurats, and common c h»i»ii.ally of the town and port of Sandwich, in the county of Sandwich.Kent ;" have perpetual succession, &c. &c. &c.That there should for ever be one good and discreetman, who should be named the mayor, with twelve of theinhabitants of the town, who should be named the jurats. ^^^^'That the high-steward, recorder, town-clerk, land treasurer,water treasurer, common warden, and 24 men should be Commoncouncil.named the common council.That the common council might yearly assemble and nominatethe mayor for the town, and also two of the then existingjurats; and after such nomination the jurats, common *^°''council, and freeholders of the town (of whom four jurats,and eight common councilmen should be twelve) might chooseone from those persons so nominated, to be mayor.That when any vacancy occurred among the jurats of thetown, the mayor, jurats, and common council, should appoint ciel.a successor from the common council.That the mayor, jurats, and common councilmen mightnominate from the inhabitants of the town, any persons tofill vacancies that might arise among the common council.And that the mayor and jurats should elect all the futurehigh stewards and recorder.That the recorder should elect one good and honest man,inhabitant within the town, to be the town clerk.That the mayor should yearly elect from the commoncouncil the land treasurer.That the mayor, jurats and common council should yearlyelect the water treasurer, and an honest man as commonwarden, &c.A provision is then inserted, that all the officers of the Inhabitshould be nominated and elected from the inhabitants;and that the mayor, deputy mayor, jurats, recorderand deputy recorder should be justices of the peace.A sessions with criminal jurisdiction is then granted. Anda provision occurs, that all the officers of the borough shouldbe removable at the pleasure of the king in privy council.A grant is added of two fairs, with all tolls &c. ; court ofCHABTEBJS.=* "■ pie powder, kc. : and thiit the mayor, jurats and commonrich. council might make bye-laws. Also of a court of record —and that the mayor, jurats, might hold lands to theamount of 200/. per annum, notwithstanding the statute ofmortmain. And that no person, unless he was mayor, jurat,common cornelian, or a freeholder within the town, shouldhave a vote in any election concerning the body corporate ;with a general confirmation of all previous liberties.ee- In consequence of this charter, the freeholders of this rough have been treated as burgesses, and therefore allowedto vote in the parliamentary elections.CAMBRIDGE.•*■ It appears also at this period,* that King Charles It.granted that the burgesses and inhabitants of the borough ofCambridge, should for ever be one body politic and corporate,and by the name of the mayor, bailiffs and bui^csscs of theborough of Cambridge have perpetual succession, &c.SOUTH Milton.As an instance also of a charter granted in this rcig;n to aplace not returning members to Parliament, the followingextract from that to South Molton is added.The king recites, that for the melioration of the boroughlapland parish, and hoping the men and inhabitants will be morebound to his service — and at the petition of the late mayor andburgesses, — he granted that it should be a free borough ; andCorpora. the inhabitants of the borough and parish a body corporate,&c. That they should have one mayor, a recorder, and 18burgesses of the inhabitants, &c. to be the common council,who should have power to make bye-laws.That the inhabitants and residents should not be forced toserve as mayor, capital bui^ess, or common councilman,without their consent.And if any mayor, recorder, capital bui^ess, common councilman,or common clerk, remove from their offices, the mayorand burgesses might nominate others of the inhabitants.I,ul«>cli. 40-Z.MUNICIPAL DOCUMENTS. 1709Charles II.MUNICIPAL DOCUMENTS.During the period, of which we have already given thelegislative enactments, and the charters of the crown, thefollowing facts connected with the municipal institutionsshould be recorded.POOLE.We have before pointed out interpolations made for thepurpose of giving colour to the right of the select bodies.* ifi^*-The books of Poole present a similar appearance. Singularerasures and alterations being made in them; — some ap Erasures,parents during the commonwealth.In 1654, an order respecting the internal regulations ofthe town was originally entered, as made by the " bailiffs,burgesses, and commonalty ;" but the word " burgesses" isstruck through with a pen, and the word " commonalty "imperfectly erased ; the word " burgesses " being writtenover it.Another passage of the same date appears to have been originallyentered, as made with the consent and advice of the^ bailiffs, burgesses, and commonalty ;" but the words ^^ andcommonalty " are partially blotted out, and above, betweenthe words " bailiffs, burgesses," the word '* and " is interlinedin different ink and hand-writing-^making the entry toread as made by the bailiffs and burgesses.In the 13th of Charles II. there is an entry of an order by * •the mayor, aldermen, and burgesses of the town then present,on the day of the election of the mayor and otherofficers in full assembly, which seems originally to have stoodthus — ** that no person whatsoever should from thenceforthbe ' made ' a burgess, without the consent of the mayor, three^Mermen, and eight burgesses, of the inhabitants of thetown, to be then and there present."The word ** other " is intertwined between the words 'height"and "burgess," and "of," written after the word "burgess," isstruck through with a pen ; after the word " town" there isanother obliteration, and then follow the concluding words.• Vide East laye, Winchester, Colchester, Queenborough, &c.1710 MUNICIPAL DOCUMENTS.chMtoii. ii jg difficult now to trace the design of these alterations,Poole, or the means by which they were effected ; — but the probabilityisy comparing this alteration with the former, thatoriginally the entry required the consent of eight burgess cftheinhdbiiijaUs ; which has since been changed to support theright of the select body, by making the '^ burgesses ** appearto be of the same class as the ** aldermen* simply describingthem as '^ inhabitants'im. In another entry it is expressed, that the mayor ^ aldense»flargesses and commonly obliged themselves to pay a salaryto Mr. Hardy, their then minister ; but the words ^ and gocd-monalty/' are partially erased, and the entry signed byfourteen persons.LIVERPOOL.Promote. It appears in the books of Liverpool that the ancient part'mote courts which ought to have been held after Christmas1647. 1647, was adjourned, in consequence of sickness and infectionexisting in the town.In the year after the passing of the corporation act, severalof the aldermen and common councilfiien, together with thecommon clerk, were removed from their offices by commis1682. sinners appointed under the statute of the 13 Car. XL, forrefusing to take the oaths therein prescribed.Common The common council, thus purified by the commissioners,COttDCil. . .seem to have formed a plan for vesting in themselves andtheir associates all the powers of the corporate body, independentlyof the burgesses, which they accomplished by obtainingfrom Charles II., in the 29th year of his reign, thecharter of which we have before given the substance.*It appears, from the proceedings at Liverpool at this period,that the common council took upon themselves to orderthat a levy of 60Z. should be assessed on the inhabitants ;so that the select body, constituted by the charter, appearto have assumed the power of taxing the inhabitants : —which, to say the least of it, is very questionable, both in alegal and constitutional point of view.• See before, p. 1704.MUNICIPAL DOCUMENTS. 1711A few years afterwards it was ordered, " that foreigners chariw n.should not be made free of the town without the consent of lAser^wA.the corporation :" — from which the inference would be, as Foreignhave urged with respect to other places, that the rightsof Liverpool were intended to be enjoyed by the inhabitants, ^^^'and not by strangers. And it should be remarked, that theconsent here referred to is that of the burgesses at large, orthe commonalty, under the name of the corporation. Fornotwithstanding any general opinion, or any practice to thecontrary, it is impossible to assert that the burgesses at large,or the commonalty were not the corporation— and to contendthat the common council were, is something so unreasonable,and so directly in opposition to the general law and practice,and the words of the charters of this particular place, thatit is impossible it can for one moment be maintained —but we shall have occasion to refer again to this pointhereafter.Whether it was on the ground of the whole corporation of 1684.the burgesses of Liverpool claiming a right to interfere inthe business of the town, or upon what other ground, wouldnow be difficult to say; but it seems that Liverpool wasthought not to be sufficiently dependent upon the court :and in this year Chief Justice Jefferies demanded on the partof the king, a surrender of the charter, which was deliveredup to him, but soon after returned to the mayor: — withwhat understanding or promises, cannot now be discovered.ROCHESTER.At this period there are some bye-laws respecting the 1673.city of Rochester, entered in the proceedings of that corporation,from which a few extracts may be desirable. Theyprovide, amongst other things, that if an alderman or commoncouncilman should solicit a freeman to give his voicefor any particular alderman to be mayor, he should lose 40^.,and be dismissed from his place. And if a freeman, or otherinhabitant of the city did the like he should forfeit 20^. ; Inhabitant,if a freeman, should lose his freedom. If any aldermanshould set himself up to be mayor, and be chosen, he should2712 MUNICIPAL DOCUMENTS.chariot II. bear the charge of his mayoralty, but have no beneJU ofRoches tnakinff a freeman*1673. ' No freeman was to give his voice for more than one alder-inhabited.™^^ ^^ ^^ mayor, and none but such freeman acts inhabitedin the city hundred and liberty should give such voice.No one was to be elected mayor, alderman, or commonDwelt, councilman, unless he commonly dwelt within the city andliberties. And if any person not being an inltabitoMishould be elected into any of the offices; or, being an inha-Remove, litany at his election, should remove from thence, or wilfullyabsent himself from the city three months together, or shouldnot attend at the courts and meetings, he was to be removedfrom his office.No person was to be admitted to the freedom of the citywithout the consent of the mayor and major part of thealdermen and assistants then present; all other electionsbeing declared to be void.Foreign And no foreigner was to use the trade of a tailor, shoe"'maker, &c. &c. or any trade, mystery, or occupation for hire,gain or sale, within the city and liberties, except at fairs andmarkets.Another bye-law also, apparently in imitation of the usagesLondon ^^ London, mentioned in the case before quoted,*f- recited,that by an ancient custom, no person could be admitted to thefreedom of the city, unless he had served as an apprenticeApparent ^^^ ^^^ term of seven years to a freeman inhabiting ;times. ^j. ^j^iess he was the eldest son of a freeman inhabitingwithin the city ; or had purchased the freedom of the city, toinhabit and dwell there, and to take upon himself the executionof such offices within the city as he might be electedunto, and to pay such public asscssjtientSy scots and duties y asthe other freemen and inhabitants,Non-resin That many persons of quality, and clergymen, not inhabitingwithin the city, had been admitted to the freedomThis appears to allude to a usage m which lind sprung; up in some places ofallowing the mayor to make a freeman, without his paying any fine. It is obvious,that such a usage could have no pretence of legality, and, therefore in many placesit has been set aside ; — London, Portsmouth, 6»:c.t See before, p. 832, et sq.MUNICIPAL DOCUMENTS. 1713by the mayor and aldermen, with many others, being /o- charles ii.reigned and strangers and not inhabitants; and during f Ae Rochester.time of the late civil voarsy and since, had unduly been admitsgratis to the freedom of the city of purpose and outof design to qualify them to give their voices for the electingof citizens to serve for the city in Parliament, And thereforeprovisions were then made to confirm the privileges of thefreemen inhabiting in the city ; and to negative the right ofthe eldest sons and apprentices of freemen who had not constantlyinhabited there. It also restrained the mayor, underpenalties, from admitting any freemen, after notice had been Freemen.gUfeu of the intention of the king to call a Parliament.These bye-laws clearly proceed on the assumption that allthe officers of the city, as well as the freemen, should be re- Residence.sidenL But it seems an illegal provision, that no freemanshould be admitted without the consent of the mayor andmajor part of the aldermen and assistants : because, as the ^®^-freemen or burgesses might be admitted at the court leet,which is not a corporate meeting, it is indirectly taking awaythat power, and limiting it, by the modem rules of law, tothose corporate meetings, only, at which the major part ofthe aldermen and assistants should be present; for unlessthey were so, they would not be good corporate assemblies.The last bye-law seems to allude to the qualifications forthe freemen of London, by apprenticeship — birth — and redemption.However, it speaks of the privilege as givingthe right of inhabiting and dwelling in the city, and imposingthe burden of payment of all scots and duties. It alsorepudiates the admission of non-residents, foreigners, andstrangers ; and refers the admission of such persons to the Strangers.irregularities which accompanied and succeeded the civilwars, justly attributing them to the intention of giving suchstrangers voices for members of Parliament. To preventwhich the rights of the inhabitants are confirmed ; and thosewho had not constantly inhabited within the city are ex Inhabitantseluded, notwithstanding they were eldest sons or apprentices.The mayor is also properly restrained from admitting any5r1714 MUNICIPAL DOCUMENTS.CbMiw II. freeman, after the intention of calling a Parliament is knownRocfaeder. — a provision which is in perfect unison with the many determinationswe have before cited from the Journals, by whichthe votes of persons so admitted were rejected.HUNTINGDON.^'ifflo"" Constitutions, also, for the government of the borough ofHuntingdon arc to be found at this period, which are saidto have been made in pursuance of the charter of Charles I.They commence with the unfounded recital, that therateS. borough had been, time out of mind, incorporated, by thename of " baihffand burgesses," who had been accustomedto make constitutions for the good government of theborough. The charter of Charles I., appointing the mayor,*'^^'J""'' recorder, aldermen and common council to make bye-lawsis then stated, and provisions are made, that if an aldermanshould leave his habitation, and not reside within theborough for the space of six months, then every such personshould lose his alderman's place.Let. That no man should be created a burgess bat at a cmtrt Let,nor unless he be sworn at the same, upon extraordinary occursons; and every one that should be received as a burgessIwiaiB. should be of honest condition, and of sufficient estate.*Son. That the sons born of burgesses should not be sworn burgessesbefore the i^e of 21, or till after their marriage ; norunless they were persons of honest condition in the judement of the greater part of the common council, and AoKie-keepers paying scot and lot.That if any alderman or burgess used any contemptuouslanguage in any ket courts, or other public meetings, beshould be fined.That if the pavements were not properly repaired, presentedment of the default was to be made at the next leet.That no inhabitant of the borough, whether free or foreign,should suffer the streets before his house to be unpaved.inmmici. That no inhabitant was to take any person likely to bechargeable to the parish to dviell with him, as tenant or in-It Ump. Charles I., before.MUNICIPAL DOCUMENTS. 1715mate, without license from the greater part of the common Cbwiwa.council. Hunting-thatno person should bring in any foreigner to inhabit 1680.who might be chargeable to the parish, without giving .security to the overseer of the poor to save the parishharmless.That no foreigner who had no right of common, shoulddig any ground upon any part of the common, without licensefrom the mayor or chamberlain.A recital then occurs, that the free burgesses of the corporation,when they had attained the age of 21, and becomehousekeepers and none else, had, from time out of mind, Housekeepers*common of pasture for commonable cattle, within the wasteground belonging to the mayor, aldermen and burgesses, butof late years the lands had been inclosed, wherein of rightthe burgesses could not make good title for their common.It was therefore ordained, that every such sworn burgess, Swornand widows of such burgesses, should for every year, solong as they continued housekeepers, and paid scot and lot tothe borough, and no longer, keep three milch cows upon theland whereof the borough or corporation were seised in fee.That the mayor, aldermen, and burgesses of Huntingdonhad, time out of mind, paid to the king a fee-farm rent forthe borough, the greatest part of which was paid from thewater-mills. That from time out of mind all the inhabitantswithin the borough had been accustomed to grind at themills, but that of late some inhabitants had forborne so todo;and it was therefore ordained, that they should all carrytheir com to the mill, under pain of forfeiture.There are various other provisions in these bye-laws — butthey are not immediately applicable to our present investigation.It will be observed, that they expressly recognize the Leet.jurisdiction of the court leet, and the swearing the burgessesthere. And according to the practice of the ancient law,they require that the burgesses should be of honest conditionand of sufficient estate. The provisions of the law also with Este.respect to inmates and foreigners are embodied in them; inmttaft.5r2>*"- and the rights of the burgesses appear, according to AeHauling general common law, to depend upon their beingleo. keepers,kevpen.DOVEIl.The records of Dover establish that watch and ward wasin force ot this time within that borough, — for it waa oideRd,that any freeman wilfiiUy neglecting to watch should forhis freedom.iffn. And that the mayor, jurats, and common council wen toBct the tenlck hj turns every night.16TS. The common assemblies were attto still summoned by theHorn hon-blowing, according to the custom which was resent\o in Serjeant Glanville Reports, in the reign of James I.PORTSMOUTH.1563. 1)1 confirmation of the observation we have before madeas to tht" proceedings upon the statute of corporations, — itBooks, appears that Portsmouth has no books relating to the boroughor court leet, from 1568 to 1662,* at which latterperiod the books re-continence with the commission issuedunder the statute of the 13th of Charles II.; the removalof many of the officers of the borough ; and the substitutionin their stead of the principal officers of stale, and peers andNod others, not residing in Portsmouth.From hence, notwithstanding the nature of the charter,KoiwnrT.upoQ which we have before commented, non-resident honorarybui^eeses appear to have been gradually introduced intothe borough, and were allowed to be enrolled and admittedas burgesses, — but as it was directly contrary to the importof the charters, it was not until, comparatively speaking,modem times, that they were allowed to act as burgesses,or to interpose in the parliamentary or municipal elections.To which effect there is an entry in the borough book of1689, by which it is directed, "that their names should notbe called at elections."Carairm. T||g commission commences with a recital, that upon theSec caM of Monmouth, temp. G«o. I.MUNICIPAL DOCUMENTS. 17178th of May, in the 13th year of this reign, an act of Par ^^"^^ "•lament had been passed for the well governing and regulating ^^^of corporations, — that in consequence thereof a commission 1662.had been issued for the purpose of ascertaining fit and loyalpersons to be intrusted for the carrying on of his majesty'sservice and interest in the corporation of Portsmouth, andfor expunging such as were, and had been disaffected to hismajesty and his government. The names of the mayor, fouraldermen, and 92 other persons, are then ordered to be expungedand expelled from the corporation, and persons arenominated to discharge the duties belonging to the respectiveoffices of the former.The following account of the books, and the extracts fromthem, will show the nature of the proceedings in this boroughat that time.James Perse, surgeon to his royal highness James Duke of 16G2.York, was sworn a burgess before the mayor and five aldermen.George, Duke of Buckingham — the Earl of Oxford —Francis, Lord Hawley — Henry Tichbome, Kent. — Robert 1G68.Townshend, Kent. — Matthew Wren, Esq. — thomas Whitley,Esq. — Henry Lowell, Esq. — and some others, were sworn andadmitted burgesses before the mayor and four aldermen.It may be observed that both of these last elections werebad, not being by a majority of the select body, whichconsists of 13 or 12, and the presence therefore of sevenwas requisite.At an assembly holden at this date at the guildhall itwas put to the question, whether Mr. Henry Perry n should, 1670.according to his request, be discharged from his aldermanship;and he was accordingly released therefrom, in regardhe had settled himself to live in another place, but was continueda burgess of the borough.The entries in the books exhibit lists of the new corporation,beginning with the mayor, after which are added the i662.limes of noblemen, baronets, &c. according to their rank,then the aldermen, esquires, gentlemen, and afterwards thenames of many persons, included in a general circumflex^ under this description, " burgesses infra burgum predicted,"as if distinguished from those mentioned above.And the aldermen (who appear by the books to have beensubsequently appointed) are, with one or two exceptions,elected out of this last description of burgesses.Id the subsequent entries there appear the names of somenon-residents, though the generality of the persons electedburgesses, are not described by their residence at all,Richard Funshawe, knight and baronet, ambassador tothe king of Spain, is admitted a burgess.Captain John Cox, of Chatham ; Captain Richard Younof Chichester; and Francis Rolle, Esq., high-sheriff of thecounty ; were also sworn burgesses.James, Duke of Monmouth, was pleased to accept of aburgess-ship qf the town, and was made a burgess, — as wasalso William Lord Bouncer.George Stroud, Esq., one of the benchers and reader ofLincoln's Inn, was sworn a bui^ess at a sessions of the peaceholden the 14th May, 1674.Thomas Hancock, one other of the burgesses of the ho-rough,hearing Paul Richards disfranchised, stood up, and inamutinous way, in open court, began to question theirauthority to disfranchise any burgess without the consentof all the others; and slighted the authority of the court;for which offence Thomas Hancock was likewise presentlyin court disfranchised.It seems that the borough of Portsmouth had surrenderedtheir former charter to Charles IL; in consideration of whichthat king made a new grant to the mayor and burgesses.But the surrender was never duly enrolled, and was consequentlyvoid.The charter however, will still afford a specimen of thosegranted in this reign, particularly subsequent to the forcedsurrenders : — the substance of it is therefore added.It commences by reciting, that it was an ancient borough,as well by divers names of incorporation granted bycharters of divers kings, as by prescription, &c. ; and hadMUNICIPAL DOCUMENTS. 1719enjoyed divers liberties, &c. ; particularly by a charter fix)m ^''"'""-Charles I. Port.mouth*That doubts and disputes had arisen concerning the elect 1682.tion of the mayor and other officers of the borough, by reasonof an amorous expression in the charter, whether all theinhabitants, who were not burgesses, ought to elect them ^^^*"from time to time, or not.That the mayor, aldermen and burgesses had surrendered Surrender.into the king's hands the charter of Charles I., and alllands, &c., and all other charters and privileges ; which surrenderhe had accepted and approved of; and that they hadhumbly besought him to create them anew into a bodypolitic, &c.The king therefore granted, that the borough of Portsmouthand town of Gosport should be a free borough ; andthe several persons thereinafter named, should be the mayor,aldermen and burgesses, and a body corporate and politic ; and Corporate,by the name of *^ the mayor, aldermen and burgesses of theborough of Portsmouth, in the county of Southampton,should have perpetual succession," &c.That there should be within the borough one of the most Mayor,honest and discreet aldermen to be mayor.And there should also within the borough 12 other honest Aldermen.and discreet burgesses, who should be named the aldermen.That the aldermen should be called the council.That the mayor, recorder and aldermen should have thepower of making reasonable laws, &c. for the governance ofthe burgesses.The mayor and 12 aldermen are then named : — and James,Duke of York — Edward, Earl Conway — Daniel, Lord Finch Burgesses.—Edward, Lord Nell — Anthony, Earl Falkland — LionelJenkins, secretary of state — Sir Francis North, knight, chiefjustice of the common pleas — Edward Seymour, esq., privycounsellor — George Legs, esq., master general of the ordnance— ^Wrothesley Baptist Noel, esq. — Sir Thomas Were,knight — Sir Richard Beach, knight — Richard Norton, esq. —Edmund Saunders, esq. and John Salisbury, gent, were nominatedas the first and modem burgesses of the borough.MUNICIPAL Documents. ^""^'" " • It wan further granted, that the mayor, aldermen and buPort* ceases should assemble yearly, and nominate iwo aldermen16W. of the borough, one of whom should be mayor.Aldermen. In case iiiiy of the aldermen should die or be removed, theremainder of the aldermen should appoint other burgessesto the vacancies.That the rnat/ur and aldermen should nominate as manyBi»[gc««i. persons only to become but^eases aa they should please:hind that no other person should be reputed a burgess of theborough, unless he should be in such manner elected.That the recorder should be elected by the mayor andaldermen.That the mayor, recorder ind aldermen should hold acourt of record weekly; also a court Uet and view of jraiA-I pledge of all the inhabitants and resiants, to be holden bofoC^^^L thei mayor or recorder.^^K That the mayor, lecoi-der and three aldermen should br^^H j justices of the peace ; and that their future election should br^^H by the mayor, aldermen and burgesses.^^H That the town clerk should be nominated by the mayorand aldermen.Hiuntnil. Power is then reserved to the king to remove any of the officersof the corporation hy letters wider his signet.This unconstitutional charter closes by grunting the assiseof bread, &c. — all fines, &c. — goods and chattels of felons, &cThat the burgesses and inhabitants should be quit of toi, andnot compellable to pay any light-house duties : with grant*of fairs and markets — powers to take recognizances on thestatute merchant— to purchase and receive lands, &c. notexceeding the value of 100/. per annum ; and free passagefrom Portsmouth to Gosport, and to Ride, in the Isle ofWight, &c, — with groundage and anchorage for all ships, &c.The borough was to be holden of the crown at fee-farm, atthe rent of 13s. 4rf, ; with a reservation of all the rights of theBishop of Winchester.The real object of this charter appears to have been toinhabit exclude the inhabitants as burgesses; and to restrain thecorporation to the mayor, aldermen and burgesses mentionedMUNICIPAL DOCUMENTS. 1721in it. Express power being given to them to nominate such ch^iM ii.persons only to be burgesses as they should think fit ; and Pom-thatnone others should be reputed burgesses. 1682.All the powers appear to be given to the select body. But ^^^still some semblance of the ancient constitution is preserved,for the aldermen and all the other officers are described aswithin" the borough, according to the language of theformer charters.The court leet and view of frankpledge are also preserved. Let.Nevertheless, in modem times, notwithstanding this charterwas repudiated, and not acted upon in other respects, yetthe non-resident aldermen, and other officers were allowed, r^dcnu.and the burgesses, the greater number being non-residents,were reduced below 50, although there was a population ofupwards of 60,000 persons.And on a recent occasion, a committee of the House ofCommons confined the right to these persons, notwithstandingthere appears upon the books an entry very shortly afterthe granting of this charter, excluding those who were appointedunder it from voting.It is as follows, and is directed to the town clerk :Whereas we are advised, that no person or persons that 1689.were made burgesses during the charter granted to thisborough by King Charles II., ought to have their vote forelection of mayors or any other magistrates within this place.These are therefore to direct and require you, so often asany election shall be for mayor or any other magistrateswithin this town, that you omit the calling of all such personsas were made burgesses by that charter."Thomas Hancock, mayor."The names of five other persons then follow.CASKS.Besides the legislative acts — the royal charters, and themunicipal documents — which we have extracted, there arealso some few law cases of this period which may serve to 1660.show the doctrines then prevalent in the courts of law uponthe subject of our inquiry.1722 CASES.^^^'*''»"' A mandamus was directed to the mayor of to109(^ restore one Tidderley* to the place of a burgess in the corporation.The mayor returned, as a cause of his amoTal,that he had requested the mayor to be dismissed from theRcngM- place of a bui^ess, which was done accordingly. Baldwintook an exception to this return, because it did not appearwhether the corporation commenced by letters patent or byPrMcrip- PRESCRIPTION, nor whether the mayor, &c. had any power todisfranchise. But the court said, that although the returnwas insufficient, the party had no cause to be restored ; andit was held by Hale, the chief baron, that every corporation,as such, can take a resignation.The court seem in this case to have assumed, according tothe then prevalent opinion, that there could be a corporationby prescription. The reader has had an opportunity of seeinghow that fact really stands. The same point was alsotaken for granted with as little foundation in the followingcase.Farnham. In a quo warranto against the town of Famham,f for usinga fair and market, and taking toll, &c. It was said by Hale,PrMcrip- chief baron, that a corporation by prescription may beknown by two different names, as of " burgesses," and ofballiol et burgesses." But if the name of balliol et burgessesbe a name which they have received within the timeof memory, they cannot then prescribe by it, but by theirancient name.The subtilty of this distinction does not seem calculatedto increase the simplicity of the law. And well might it beranked among the abuses of the time — as we read in the introductionto Jenkins' Centuries — that " the king's chartershad been construed too subtilty."A case in Keble, J shows that the freemen or burgesses ofOxford were admitted at " the court day;" which might,without any strained inference, be assumed to be the courtleet. And yet the King's Bench held, even without precedeRoy v. Tidderley, Siderfin, 14.t The Attorney General v. The Town of Farnham, in Surrey, Hard. 504.X Townshend's case, Keble, 458.CASES. 1723lat the officers of the borough had a right to refuse ^'^*'^"'m to an apprentice who had served his seven years, ^j™**standing, it was justly observed, that such a right Apprenticethem the power of engrossing the freedomssaid that there was one precedent of a mandamusnchise the son of a freeman in Norwich.exhibition was prayed on a custom alleged,* that " all 1663.who had lands in such a village, but inhabiting out ^^^'will, should pay Ad. per acre only in satisfaction ofAnd that the defendant sued him, inhabiting out offor tithes in kind in the spiritual court. But theion was denied, for the custom is unreasonable togreater privilege to foreigners than to inhabitants, whogreater charge, in respect of their resiancy, to repairstents for the church.ext cases will establish that the court leet was still in Leet.in this reign ; and also some parts of the ancient lawrise ; particularly as to the decennas.sentient was made at a leet for the erecting of a 1669.^use,*!* which was said to be ad magnum nocumentum ;as held ill, because it should have been ad communenum ; and it was further said, that the leet was theour — that leets were granted to the lords as derived.he toum, for the ease of the resiants within its juriswas imposed at a court leet for not sending a con 1670.nor any inhabitant as december to make suit, accord Deccnncr.custom, to discharge the rest. Jaction of debt was brought for a fine for refusing to Exeter.5 oath of office of steward of the city of Exetert is an ancient court held before the mayor, bailiffs,they have not averred that before their charter it wasage to swear the mayor and bailiffs in that court.le shire and ancient court are both mentioned in thisawdrey v. Bushel, 1 Levin, 116. t 1 Ventris, 26.n V. Riddle, 2 Keb. 739. § Mayor of Exeter v. Stare, 2 Shower, 158.1721 CASES..chttiwii. ^^^g^ there can be little doubt but that the court referred to^^SSF' was the cawri leet, at which the steward is the proper judgesi^ec particularly as the party was fined for not taking the oath ofoffice of steward at that court, which a person could not becompelled to take at a court baron; for there it must beoptional with the party whether he would take the office ornot ; but at the court leet, which is the Jung's court, a penonmight be compelled to take the office, against his will or not ;for every one is bound to serve the Ung.ByAum. f£^^ ^^ ^^ ^^ action of debt for breach of a bjfe4ammade at hJeet,* which claimed a custom to make bye-lastfor using and regulating their common.It was said, that although the ket had nothing originallyCommon, to do with the common, yet by custom it might have suchjurisdiction, and that the judges ought to support and IkYOiirit, because else they strike at a fundamental principle. As^n fines, which had common usi^ in most leets. And if atcommon law they could not make bye-laws, custom migfatmake it good ; it having a reasonable commencement ; for atthe first purchase and settlement of the common, it might beintended all parties agreed. That leets in gross could notmeddle with common ; but that leets which appertained tohundreds, with privilege by custom to govern, is sufficient togive jurisdiction.It was ui^ed, that the custom was not good, because leetswere to meddle with keeping the peace only ; and a court baronmight as well be entitled to pleas of the crown — ^and if aUet. Uet could make one, a court baron might make another.But the custom was affirmed.In most of the charters, from the earliest time, we haveReturn of seen the privilege granted of the return of writs, upon whichin truth, the exclusive jurisdiction of the boroughs wasmainly founded. The following case will establish what theopinions of the court were upon this point, in the reign ofCharles II. ; and how much the real grounds and nature ofthese privileges were then forgotten. It is, nevertheless, a• Earl of Exeter t". Smith, 2 Keb. Ji67.CASES. 1726clear inference from this authority, that the privilege of the ^^^ "*return of writs was a distinct proof of a borough being se *^}gj?*^'parted from the county. Separate.In an action brought by Sir Robert Atkins v. Oxford,*Lord Chief Baron Hale said — " Return of writs I alwaystook to be one of the most pernicious liberties to the com- •men justice of the kingdom."That return of writs was a superadded liberty though thehundreds were granted, yet the sheriff might, and must stillreturn the writs executed there.That a grant to have return of writs in a county is void,for in effect it taketh away the oflBce of sheriff. And in thecase of the town of Berwick, a grant to them that they shouldbe a county, without a grant of having a sheriff, was adjudgedto be void, because there would be no officer to execute anddo justice.The object and nature of exclusive jurisdictions may, in Kxciusivcsome degree, be learnt from the case of Fisher r. Batten 'ion.Sir William Jones stated, that counties palatine had theiroriginal from a politic reason. And Lancaster, Durham, andChester, were made so because they were adjacent to enemies'countries, viz., the first two to Scotland; and the lastto Wales, So that the inhabitants having administration ofjustice at home, and not being obliged to attend other courts,those parts should not be dismissed of inhabitants, thatmight secure the country from incursions.The following case as to Rt/e, one of the Cinque Ports, Rye.may be useful to show the confusion in which the inquiriesrespecting municipal officers, and the burgesses of boroughs,had at this time been involved ; and it will illustrate thecommon error to which we have before alluded, that therecould legally and correctly be two classes of burgesses existingfor different purposes.It will, however, be observed, that the freemen are re- Freemen,quire to join in making all bye-laws, and in all assemblies,• 1 Ventris,399. t Fisher v. Batten, 1 Ventris, 155.1726 CASES.CiMllMlI.and it is expressly added that all the inhabitants arejrte. It^j^ is true that a distinction is afterwards attempted to be madebetween the different classes of freemen ; but which, for TCa>sons previously given, cannot be supported.An information was filed for a riot committed at Rye TheMtyw. question was, whether the defendant was legally elected wm/or;which depended upon this. Four who had given their TOlefor the defendant, had been put out upon the act few regulatingcorporations rand whether they were incapacitated tovote according to the custom of the place, was the dispute.The custom being, that the mayor is chosen by the majornumber o{ freemen ; but if they be equally divided, then bythe jurats.The freemen choose the freemen, and not the mayor orjurats; only the mayor hath the prerogative to choose onePiMBMo. freeman, who is called '^ the mayor's freeman'' The freemenmust join in the making of all bye-laws ; nor can an assembly(as they call it) be holden without them. All theinhabitants of Rye are free there, and pay no toll; but thefreemen, so called, only choose the mayor and burgesses ofparliament, and assent to bye-laws ; so that, though they arecalled freemen, yet they are common countrymen in their fio-tore; and this privilege they have by election or descent, forall the sons of freemen are freemen. Now the question uponevidence in this trial was, whether this privilege of beinga freeman is such an interest or trust for government as iswithin the statute of Charles II., for regulating corporations.And it was ruled on a former trial, and likewise upon this,that it was not ; but that such persons as have not taken theoaths, &c., prescribed by that act, may, however, vote.The next two cases will show the nature and extent ofthe jurisdiction of the Chancellor and Vice-chancellor ofOxford. Oxford : — which being considered at this time upon aCouple of constance in the Exchequer, in a cause betweenCastle and Litchfield, the decision was in favour of theuniversity.• The King and Tolney, Skinner, 116. t 13 Car. IT. c. 1.CASES. 1727In the case of Dwell against the University of Oxfardy^ chiiri«ii.which occurred this year in the Common Pleas, on a prolix ^J&[^'ambition to the Chancellor's Court, it appeared that his jurisdictionextended as well over the laymen, as the members L»y™«°-of the university. And a bye-law as to night-walkers wasmentioned as having been made in the time of James I., andit was questioned whether it was warranted by the charter ofthe 13th of Elizabeth or not.In another case it was held,t that matters of freehold 1683.were excepted out of the patent to the university of Oxford :and that their court had not jurisdiction as to lands inCk)mwall.The following case, though somewhat long, may serve toillustrate the nature of exclusive jurisdictions.In an action of trespass: it was found by special verdict, ^^^^that letters patent had been granted to the defendant, of anhundred in the county of Leicester, and the offices and profits Hundred.thereunto belonging, with the execution of all writs for21 years, upon which the question was, whether they weregood to the exclimon of the sheriff from his duty and office sheriffexecuting writs in his county.Mr. Lovel, for the plaintiff, argued that all grants ofhundreds before the time of Edward II. were good; butthose since were void. And he said it would not be amissto observe the original nature of hundreds and sheriffalities.It appears in the books, that in King Alfred's time thekingdom was in gross ; and then divided into counties andhundreds, and all persons then came within one hundred or Origin ofanother ; and then the king's relations had the government of &c.them, and therefore they were called ensanguined — and soaie the earls, lord lieutenants, &c. at this day. And afterwards,when the office became troublesome, there wereordained vicecomes, which name remains to this day ; and Viscount.the others continue to be called ensanguined, but haveno power in the county, having only the honorary name ofearl or counts of such or such a county, &c. And for the2 Vent. 43. t Vernon's Cases in Chancery, Stephens v. Dr. Berry.t 2 Show. 96.1728 CASES.Cbtomu. better government of the counties the vicecomes had tiroMBl. courts ; but out of those the king granted lees and tornbaron ; but ike tam of tke sieriffhad yet a n^peri$Ueitdmiipower — tkejf being derived (mi of it, 9S in Dyer 13. And tlM*afterwards the king granted away some hundreds in 6asimple, and some franchises ; and tke kut excluded tke Masutterly; but the hundreds granted in fee were not whollyexempt.On this arose some confusion, and the Parliament thereupontook notice, that the execution of justice was by thismuch interrupted ; and therefore came the statute of the suiEdward XL, '' that sheriffs should be sufficient persons;** and have lands in the county ; and so to be able to answer'' both the king and the country. And that bailiffs and'' farmers of hundreds should be sufficient men." And atthat time hundreds were grantable for years. Then camethe statute of 2 Edward III. cap. 4 & 6, '' that sheriA''' should continue but for one year'' But this took notaway the whole inconvenience ; for the crown still grantedaway bailiwicks and hundreds for lives at rents, on sack*excessive dear rates, that made them endeavour to make uptheir money by unlawful means, and thereon came the statuteof the 2nd of Edward III. c. 12, and the 14th of Edward III.c. 9. By the first it was enacted, that all hundreds and wa-partakesgranted by the king, should be again annexed to thecounty, and not severed. And by the other statute, that allshould be annexed ; and the sheriff should have power to putin bailiffs, for which he will answer ; and no more should begranted for the future. And one reason of this was, becausethe king granted away hundreds, and abated not the sheriffsfarm.Now this grant contains all profits of courts, and theofficers and bailiffs thereof. I conceive the grant of courtsis not good; for the statute of the 31st Edw. III., c. 4. callsit the sheriff's tourn ; and in the 6th of Henry VII., fol. 2,it was adjudged not to be the hinges court. In Mittens case,4 Rep. the county court is said to be the sheriff's court ;and the king cannot grant away the office of clerk of theItCASES. 1729county court ; but the sheriff ought to have the disposal ^^^'^ "•thereof. And in all writs to the sheriff for making proclaimsnations they say '^ in comitatu tuo.'' And so is the styleof the court "curia comitatus: vicecomes," &c. and so it iscalled in the statute of the 32nd of Henry VIII., c. 13. ; thereforethe king cannot grant them from the sheriff. For theoffices ; if the courts be the sherifTs, then the offices mustlikewise be his.*The fines and other profits of his court, I conceive, cannot Turn.be granted from the owners. We find in the first of EdwardIII., c. 2, that amerciaments in the tourn shall be to the useof the sheriff, although the entreat be not returned till the Sheriff.year be out : — for they are the cause of his being answerableover.As to the bailiff, his office is not grantable away — for all Bailiff,escapes by the bailiff are escapes by the sheriff, and he isresponsible, unless in case of franchises and liberties ; he isanswerable for bailiffs in fee.fIn this case the king hath granted the bailiffship fortwenty-one years, — and the sheriff cannot engage him to giveany security, and yet he is bound to answer for him. Bythe statute above-mentioned, a bailiff is not to continue inoffice above one year.The last thing is the custody of the hundred, and this is Hundred.a branch of the highest concern in the whole patent. Nowthis grantee hath not the means or power to keep thehundred as the sheriff hath, who can raise the posse of hisvole county in his aid of any one part thereof; this granteecannot do so without warrant of the sheriff: — so that it isnot in his power to preserve the peace, as it is in the sherifFs,who hath by his patent the custody of the whole county.1 agree, the ling may determine the office of a sheriff as to Sheriff.the whole whensoever he pleases — but he cannot determinethe office as to part ; because it is entire ; unless he dividethe county and make more sheriffs, which he may do.;}:By the statute 14 Edward III., all hundreds (except such Hundreds.• Scrogg's calc. Dyer, 175. t Bro. French. 24, Dyer, 24, Fitch. 22.t 4 Inst. 267 j Sir John Found's case, 1 Car. 1. 18.1730 CASKS.chMift I I. ag sere then granted in fee) are rejoined to the bailiwick1680. of the counties : and all grants of the baiUwichs cf hundredsmade since that statute, are void; and the making bailiffsthereof belongs to the sheriffs, for the better execution afjustice and of his office. And so it is resolved in Sir JohnFortescue's case. And for these reasons — and on thosecases — I conclude the grant is void.Mr. Biglandy i contra. — For the validity of this grant, Ithink it good ; the reason of Milton's case in 4 Rep., is particular,because of the entry and custody of the rolls, for theembezzling whereof the sheriff is answerable.Separate But to consider what the kinsc's power was at the commoncounties. . orlaw as to the constitution of a sheriff — see 1 Roll. Rep. 1 18 —he can make two sheriffs, as he did for Buckinghamshire andOxfordshire, which had formerly but one sheriff; and so forLeicestershire and Warwickshire.turn of The king may grant the return of writs to a will, whichwrits. ^^takes not away the sheriffs general jurisdiction, but only hisimmediate jurisdiction. The king hath granted court haremsand hundred courtly which by his letters patent are derivedout of the tounif and so diminish the sheriff's profit, 2 Inst. 1 1.And the courts have settled in Westminster Hall, that hemay grant to one to hold pleas within a certain precinct.*By the common law the hundred belongs to the king ofcommon right; and whosoever will claim it must derive itfrom the crown.-f-Now for the statutes : Those which concern this matterare found in the special verdict, — and the penning of themwill determine it.Hundreds. The first Statute extends only to those hundreds let byKing Edward II., and leaves the rest at liberty. As for the14th of Edward III. it is thus, ** all wapentakes and hundredswhich be severed from the counties shall be annexed, &c." —and this is relative to the former. Upon the reading hereofit plainly appears it cannot extend to all.And it is a general rule : where ancient grants are dubious,But as to an handled, see 8 Hen. \'n.fel. 2; 13 Hen. VII. fol. 2 ; 1 & 2 Hen.\ni. fel. 167. til Hen. IV. 90. 2 Roll. Abr. 73. 13 Hen. IV. 9.CASES. 173 [they shall be construed and expounded according to usage, chariw ii.And here is no damage to the subject: — for the sane 1680.remedies are by the statute made for bailiffs as for sheriffs ;* ShenfKand if there be any defect in them, the sheriff hath still apower to superintend it.Where no grant has been made since these statutes, youwill intend they were let by Edward II., and so are annexedto the counties by those statutes; but those which havebeen granted since, are not within it : and this was grantedby Edward IV. — The case was adjourned, and in EasterTerm, 34 Charles II., the grant was resolved void.To conclude these cases we shall add only two, for thepurpose of showing how much the Court of King's Benchat that period yielded to the times ; and adopted, in supportof the unconstitutional extension of the prerogative of thecrown, the practice of supporting the select bodies, andarbitrary removals, which the House of Commons had unjustifiablyassumed during its usurpation : — and two others toestablish that the citizens of London continued the sameclass of persons as they were described to be in the case ofWaller and Hanger, in the reign of James I.Thus it was held, that the election of magistrates by thecommon council of a corporation, (without the voices of allthe commonalty, as some charters direct,) is good where ithas been so practised a very long times for the law presumes,that in some former age, the whole commonaltyassented to it, although that assent cannot be shown atpresent.Such election by the common council is expedient to avoidconfusion. And corporations have a power to make ordinancesfor their own government.That a practice which has existed, even for a long time. Practice,should give a r^ht, is, to say the least of it, a very loose andunsatisfactory doctrine : and cannot be the law ; unless it ismeant to be assumed, that the charters were doubtful, in2 Cro. 561 ; 1 Roll. Abr. 349.t Jenkins, 6 Cent. 273 ; 4 Co. 77 ; Daw. 446; Lane. 21 ; Hob. 15; 3 BuUt.71.5s21732 CASES.chmftetii. which case usage might explain them, and to that extent beevidence of right.Nor can the other position, as stated above, be supported. *Bye-late. Pqj. ^^ whole commonalty could not have sally assentedto a bye-law for such a purpose, if it was contrary to thecharter — they might delegate the power pro tempore, or provice, but not part with it altogether, if granted to them.1609. In Braithwaite's case,* to which we have already referredit was declared by three of the judges, '' that the king and'' council might disfranchise any member of a corporation"lees. In the case of Sir William Waller v. Sir Giles Travers J; itwas said that " he who enjoys tl)^ privileges of London must*^ be civis et liber homo— free of the city and an inhabitant'' within the city, and a pater familias.**^1068. And in another case, it was, that ** a liber homo must be an'' inhabitant of London"16B6. And a person was committed to custody]) because, beingan inhabitant of one of the wards, and elected an alderman-torit, he had refused to take the oath.PARLIAMENTARY CASES.In addition to the legislative acts, in which the House ofCommons concurred during this reign, there are also someproceedings connected with the return and election of itsmembers, in which they acted alone, and which are necessaryto be inserted — as proving who, by parliamentary usage,were treated as the burgesses; which ought to have correspondedwith the municipal practice of the boroughs,lee. At this period the indentures of returns of members toParliament for Worcester, Lincoln, East Retford, and otherboroughs were made between the sheriff of the county of theone part, and the mayors and burgesses of the other ; the membershaving powers to act for themselves, and the commoditiesof the boroughs. The word inhabitants not being used as inthose of 1654.• 1 Vent. 20. t P. 246. t Hard. 30.2 Keble, 372. || Swallow v. Citizens of London, Sid. 287.IT From the indentures of Returns at the Tower of London.PARLIAMENTARY CASES. I733And the course of the House appears to have been to ^^^^ "•reject returns so made ; for in the case of Bury,* an indenture. Bury.Signed by the inhabitants, was directed to be withdrawn andtaken off the file : — the House going into the contrary extreme,of confining the election to the alderman, capitalburgesses, and common council men.Edwin.In the case of Bedwiriy-f the committee properly determinedagainst the right of the inhabitants in general to vote, butcorrectly found that " the burgesses *' at large had thatfranchise.We have seen that Bedwin was a borough by prescription ;|SIS the borough and the burgesses are both mentioned inDomesday, the entry being similar to that of Cane; yet in Cane.the latter place the right of being and making burgesses wasclaimed by the corporation, though they had no charter, andthere had been a judgment in quo warranto against them.In Bedwin, in the 16th of Charles I., the right was 1640.claimed to be in the bailiffs, portreeves, and ancient burgesses,but which was contradicted on the other side, it beingurged that the inhabitants paying scot and lot were the burgesseswho ought to return.The committee " not being satisfied that it belonged to Right,the ancient burgesses by prescription, remitted it to theinhabitants paying scot and lot."To reconcile therefore, these two decisions as to Bedwin,it must be assumed that they each correctly meant to givethe right to the '* burgesses'' who were the inhabitant householderspaying scot and lot, and who in that character would•be enrolled and sworn at the court leet, of which the portreevewould have been one of the officers.But in the sixth of Queen Anne, contrary to these legal 1707.and constitutional decisions, the right was agreed to be " in Right.*the freeholders and inhabitants of ancient burgage houses""being another instance in which the agreement of theparties appears to have led to a usurpation, which was subse-8 Journ. 25. t 8 Journ.3d. X Vide ante, p. 1478.1734 Parliamentary Gases.<^'"^"- queenly confined in the third of George IL, by a detenninar1730. tion to the same effect.YARMOUTH.lam. In the case of Great Yarmouth, there was also a canst t iHnational decision, rejecting the right of the select number, andproperly confirming it in the harge$ie$ at larye/^ The onlydetermination which could have been correctly adopted inaccordance with the numerous documents we have bcfimgiven from that ancient and important borough.CHICHESTER.In the case of Chichester, a decision was made^f as insome other instances, by which the uncertainty and confusionintroduced into this subject by connecting it with corporateprivileges is distinctly manifested.Right. The right was declared to be, not in the free cirijioifalone, but that the commonalty had the right tether withthem ; and the mayor having, contrary to precedents andadvice, excluded the commonalty from voting, was committedto the custody of the serjeant-alarms.This determination appears to assume, that there were twoFree classes of persons who were entitled to vote — the freeCommon citizens and the commonalty. We have already shown that^' such a thing could not properly exist. The only personswho could be entitled to vote, were the *' burgesses,*^ And theterm *free citizens" or " commonalty" might either of them beBurgesses. used to describe the burgesses ;" but both could not, if theywere separate classes, be included under that name. . Someconfusion therefore must have arisen in the use of theseterms, which it would not now be material or useful tounravel ; it is sufficient to say, that this determination oughtto be treated as confirming the right of the burgesses ingeneral to vote, and that they should be taken to include,according to the common law, the inhabitant householderspaying scot and lot, which, in fact, was the practice afterwards.8 Joum. 3.5. r Bedouin. 40.PARLIAMENTARY CASES. 1735Carte II.TAVISTOCK.In the case of Tavistock,* the committee were led into the p,]^i<i.nor, that the freeholders had the right of elections from its *"•not being contested between the parties. The one sidecontended that the freeholders alone had the right of election: whilst the other insisted upon the right of the freeholdersand inhabitants at large : — and the committee decided infavour of the latter; but having once assumed that theTight was in the freeholders, (the inaccuracy and ill consequencesof which right we have before pointed out, asprevalent in Tavistock;) they were led in the succeedingyear, to determine that the freeholders of inheritancealone had the right: — excluding altogether the inhabitants,and only deciding the question between the freeholdersgenerally, and those of inheritance.Nevertheless, this right thus commencing, was confirmed ^'s**^*at subsequent periods, as in the third of William and 1691.Mary : and in the eighth year of the same reign, inhabit }^:fancy and actual possession were added to the qualification in the bookfreehold inheritance. In the next year, the further 1G96.requisite was added of their being presented by the jury ofinquiry, at the law court. But in 1702, the right of elect i^^*tion was determined to be in the freeholders of inheritancein possession, and inhabiting in the borough.The necessity of presentment by the jury at the law court, Lawbefore the steward, was again insisted upon, and was foundrequisite by the committee, but rejected by the House.Taking these decisions altogether, they might, in a greatdegree, be reconciled with the common law. An inhabitantfreeholder — in actual possession of his house — presented bythe jury at the court leet, would undoubtedly be entitled tovote. But the error in these decisions consists in confiningthe right, in consequence of the mode in which the question8 Journ. 42, 334.^ Intricate questions of title arose before the committee ; with the ordinary circumstanceso( splitting the property into minute divisions-joint titles — and conveyances,immediately before the teste of the writ.cou rt.FARLUMSNTAET CASES.\ aiti\e» II. erst arose, to the freeholders, to the exclusion of the other'Ttviiiitck. inhabitant householders, who paid scot and lot.There is no reason why in this place the right should beconfined to freeholders; it stands much in the same positionas all other boroughs ; excepting indeed that it probablyis not a borough by prescription : not being mentionedas such in Domesday. It was originally ecclesiastical property; it returned members from the earliest time, and inthe 27th of Henry VI., they were returned in the countyPorUeevB. court, The presiding officer was anciently the port reeve iand as early as the reign of Edward I., it appears the ubbol*'"""'"'■ claimed court leet; and it has never been incorporated.*H»6. \ particular determination of the committee, with referenceto this place in the year 1696, should be noted.Upon the former decision of the last year being quoted uconclusive under the statute, and not allowing any furtivecontroversy, it was answered, " that the act did not bind thaParliament, but only appointed a rule for the officer tomake a return by, for that, probably there might at sometimebe v^feignt defence, or they whose right was concernedmight not be parties, nor heard." Of the soundnessreasonableness of which argument there can be no doubt,med JandLUDUEHSHALL.As to Lvdgershall, which is not mentioned as a borough inDomesday, nor is there any charter to it now to be found, batwhich returned members beyond all question, in the r^gn ofEdward II., and with some intermissions, probably to beattributed to their poverty, from thence to the present time,1660, when it was decided, upon a question arising whether theinbihiiuiu freeholders alone — or the freeholders and inhabitants had theright — that it was in the latter's1698, In the tenth of William and Mary, there was an agreementat the election, that non-residents should not vote, and thecommittee first resolved that the right was in the freeholdersand inhabitants; but afterwards an amendment was carried,• See Afore, p. 522. t 1 Joum. il.PARLIAMENTARY CASES. 1737that such persons having an estate of inheritance or free ^^^^ behold,or leasehold determinable on life or lives, within the L^dMre-borough, had the right," — to which the House assented.In the fourth year of Queen Anne, the right was agreed to ^^^'be in the " freeholders, or leaseholders for life or lives."In the 32nd and 34th of George III., this decision was 1791.confirmed, and it was determined, " that the right was not 1793.confined to ancient houses, or sites of ancient houses"*No evidence appears to justify the determination that theright in Ludgershall was in the freeholders — the objectionsto that right we have before stated ; and the inconveniencesresulting from it; two of which — non-residents and splitvotes, having actually occurred there.The variation in these rights also affords a strong inferencethat they were not founded upon any distinct evidence orprinciple : and it has been seen that some of them are to beattributed to the agreements of the parties.The reader will remember that the decision as to the term"Jwrgre^^e^," meaning, in the charter of Abingdon ^^the inhabit Abingdon.ant householder Sy'\ and not the select body, occurred in thisyear — although, at a subsequent period, an opposite determinationwas made upon the same word in the charter toBanbury, XEXETER.As to Exeter, upon a question arising whether i\\e freemen 1660.alone, or the freemen and the freeholders together had theright, the committee resolved that it belonged to the ^^ freemen;" and the member who had the greater number of themwas seated. §As the history connected with the burgesses of this placeis somewhat peculiar, a short statement of it is added.Exeter is one of the most ancient towns in England, anda borough by prescription, as wc have seen it mentioned inDomesday, as well as its burg esses ^ and their houses ; their• 1 Peck. 377. 386. t See before, pp. 110, 1204, 1210.X Sec before, pp. 110, 203, 1181, 1201.i 8 Journ. 55.1738 Exeter.0^"**"* residence therefore, within the city may be inferred fromimportant document.*ciMrtar. A darter was also granted to it in the reign of Hcmy 11.,and confirmations by King John, Richard IL, and succeedingkings.Henry III. gave the city to his brother Richard, Earl ofCornwall.'^•^™* It sent members to Parliament from the first retains ofEdward I., and has continued to do so ever since. One return,in the reign of Henry VL, being made by the sheriff ofthe county.Portreeve. The ancient presiding officer is said to have been, likemost other places in the West, the portreeve.In the 27th of Edward III. the writ requires, in the uaoalBa rg e iM . form, that the burgesses should send two members fw lbscity, and the return is made by the mayor, bailiffs, and eimh9umalty, stating that they had elected two burgesses. Thencan be, therefore, no doubt but that the bureau formed thecommonalty.fn^B^^" It is true that the freemen of Exeter were, as in other boroughs,connected with the borough ; because the being e§free condition was a necessary previous qualification for aninhabitant to be a burgess.1301. Consistently with which it is said, that in the 28th year ofEdward I., the mayor was chosen by the voices of four andtwenty persons, described as freemen and citizens.''f1347. In the 21st of Edward III., a dispute having arisen re-Mayor, speaking the election of mayor and other officers, for avoidingthe Uke for the future, it was ordered, that from thenceforthno person should be chosen mayor but one who had beentried for the office of steward for one year. That officer,generally speaking, presided at the court leet : which, inall probability, was the case in Exeter, because he is describedas sworn by a double jury; that is, by four andtwenty persons, who were to make their election of him uponoath.Jury. The reader will not fail lo remark the confirmation which♦ Sec before, p. IW. t I/ark's Hist, of Exeter, p. 31.EXETER. 1739this affords to the observation we have before made, that the chwiw ii.common council were originally the juries at the court heel ^^^^»In the sixth year of Henry VII., there is an irregular ad dismissionof persons, as men of the city, who did not re- ^5°'^^"'side within it. And who, although they might have beenof free condition, could not, properly speaking, be freemeno/'that place, because they did not belong to it. And thatthis was an irregular proceeding, and was probably one ofthe earliest introductions of non-residents, is to be collectedfrom this circumstance, that the admission is followed with adeclaration, that if they did not inhabit within the city, theyshould not vote for the mayor or any other officer.Henry VII., in the thirteenth year of his reign, issued amandate to the citizens of Exeter, similar to those we havepreviously seen in Leicester,* Northampton, Winchester, andPontefract, respecting the election of their municipal officers :which commences with a recital that great inconveniencesand strife had arisen respecting the election of mayor, fourbailiffs, four and twenty of the common council, and fourseijeants-at-mace, and that the citizens and inhabitants had inhabitantscomplained to him thereof.The king then orders, that there should be four and twentyof the most sufficient and discreet citizens and inhabitantsof the city to be of the common council for their lives, &c. ;mind that when vacancies occurred, the remainder should Wander.elect other citizens most sufficient and inhabitants of the city,Ac, according to the custom of London for the election ofthe twenty-four aldermen. That yearly the mayor for thetime being, his brethren and commons that then should befranchised men, should assemble in the guildhall, and the fourand twenty, upon their oaths, should elect two of the mostable citizens of the four and twenty for a mayor ; which twonames should be shown to the commons who were to elect one Common.out of them. Provisions of a similar nature are then madefor the selection of bailiffs and Serjeants, &c. : and in the followingyear, with respect to the service and enrolment ofapprentices ; which, for the reasons we have given before,See before, p. 2*20, ;end the observations there.1740 EXETER.^^'"**'"' affect the right to freedom under the general law as to villains.iflW. Henry VIII., in the 28th year of his reign, granted to theCowitf of city bf Exeter a charter, making it a county of itself, anddividing it from the county of Devon, giving all the privilegeswhich belonged to a separate county.1644. In the 36th year of the same reign, an ordinance was madeMen. that all the men of the city ought to be present at themayor's election, and give their voices there, otherwise,without a reasonable excuse, they should be disfranchised.This bye-law appears to show the real nature of these respectiveduties : that they were compulsory and not arbitrary :and that a person was bound to attend and vote, was notat liberty to do as he wished in that respect : which latterwould be in accordance with the notion of corporate piivi-.^'^^ leges ; and the former with the law of the court leet, to whichalone the compulsory power must be attributed.Ifi68* In the first year of the reign of Queen Mary, there is anMefflben. ordinance according to the spirit of the statute of Henry V.,that none but freemen and inhabitants should be chosoi toserve as citizens in Parliament : and accordingly two yearsafterwards, a person was admitted to the freedom andliberties of the city, and afterwards chosen one of the representativesin Parliament.Disfran- Instances of disfranchisement are said to have frequentlyabatement. - n •occurred ; and the right of cognizance for matters determinablein the court of Exeter was enforced in the reign ofQueen Elizabeth.1640. In the 16th of Charles I. it is said, that any personMarriage, marrying an alderman's daughter, might freely claim hisfreedom.1683. In the 35th of Charles II., the king required a surrenderSurrender, of the charters of Exeter, which was accordingly given; anda new charter was granted, appointing a set of new officers.And at the same time, the Earl of Bath, who was so instrumentalin procuring the surrenders of the charters in theWest, was admitted to the freedom of the city.1687. In the third of James I., an order was made by theEXETER. 1741privy council for the removal of the mayor, some of the c>»»^ "-aldermen, one of the sheriffs, some of the conmion council Removals.and the sword bearer. And the deputy recorder, aldermen,common councilmen, and the men of the corporation, wereordered to elect certain persons named to them in the room ofthose who were removed, without administering to them anyoath but the usual oath for the due execution of their offices.In the fourth year of James II., the king, by an order in 1688.privy council, recites the proclamation he had made for therestoration of corporations, and that Exeter was one of theplaces excepted, upon the ground that the surrender had beenrecorded ; but on further examination it had been found thatthe assumption was erroneous. It was ordered, that all theofficers of the city should be removed, and all those who werein those offices should take upon them the execution of theiroffices, and make such other elections as should be necessaryas if no such deed had been made.In the reign of William III., non-residence had become frequent, that it was extending itself to the officers ofmost of the boroughs : who, however, could not dischargethe duties of their offices if they were not living within thebounds of the borough.An alderman of Exeter had left the place, and absented Alderman,himself from the duties of his office, for which he was removed; and he applied to the Court of King's Bench for amandamus to be restored :* but it was held that he was properlyremoved, for the nature of the office imported that theperson holding it should be both a citizen and an inhabitant :and a return that he had removed from the place, and desertedhis habitation there, and that he and his family lived withoutthe city, was held to be sufficient.In the course of the argument it was said, that '' commo-fancywent through the whole of that case ;" and that theparty ought to be an inhabitant, and therefore his departurefrom the place took away from him his qualification to be analdermanRex V. City of Exeter, 4 Mod. 33 ; 12 Mod. 28 ; Show. 258.t See Truro case, post. temp. George IV. 3 Barn. &c Aid. 590.1742 EXETER.<^^''^"' And it was ruled, that the nature of the office evan aUkr^Man, and his lunae, imparts that the party holding ii dkamhlbe both an inhabitant and citizen. And Holt, C. J., said, imconformity with what we have before ui^ed, that "ifieb^^ removed away with his family he ceased to be a etftsai,'' though he continues to be a freeman*' for which he citedMoore, 833, Sir Thomas Waller 9. Hanger.*And Eyre, justice, said, that '' it was incident to thepleue** and duty of an alderman to assist in the government eftks*^ city, and to be resident therefor that purpose**And if such residence is necessary upon that account itmust be remembered, that it would be equally so for a^'Bnm^ terjreif, who has to pay scot and lot — to do watch and ward —and execute other personal services within the borough.■j SS i^u ^ entirely was a non-resident considered in that case tohave deserted his offices in the borough, that Lord ChiefJustice Holt held, that '' it was not necessary to summon suck'' a person. For having ceased to belong to the place, he had'' no right to expect a summons** And in truth the officers ofthe borough could not summon him, for they had no jurisdictionwithout the borough; and a summons beyond thelimits would in itself be nugatory, and incapable of beingenforced ; because no fine could be levied, nor committalmade, for neglecting to obey the summons. So entirely doall these matters properly depend upon the strictly localjurisdiction.1^28. In the 14th year of Charles I., the election for Exeter cameunder consideration, and it appeared that the common council,consisting of 24, insisted upon a prescription that theyshould have nominated four, one of whom the burgessesshould choose. — that the mayor and 24, nominated one ofthe candidates, and the commons another ; the House seatedthe former, and rejected the latter, who was elected by the*' magistrates," as they are called in the Journal ; and itappears that the magistrates, thus defeated in their object,refused to pay the wages to the member whom they hadopposed, out of the lands given to the city for that purpose.See before, p. 1478, et seq.EXETER. 1743The decision quoted above, at the Restoration, excluded ^^^^^^"-the freeholders ; and, as far as appears, without any legal Freemen.warrant, principle, or evidence, gave the right to the freemena class unknown to the constitution, except as the ^^ liberi^' homines" of the common law ; and did not give it, as theyshould have done, to the '^ burgesses' whose class, con Burgesses.edition, qualifications, and duties, the general law would haveprinted out.After this period, no other decision has occurred respectingthe right of election at Exeter, excepting that in thesecond year of William and Mary, it was agreed, that '^ nofreeholder who lived in the out-county should vote." Free-fromwhich it might be inferred, that the freeholders had,subsequent to 1660, notwithstanding the determinationagainst their right, by some means or other exercised it, andthat this agreement was made only to exclude the non-residents.And from that time the freeholders have made their claimto vote, but their right has been very rarely exercised.There can be no doubt that their supposed right wasfounded upon the fact of their being made a county y andthat under the statute of Henry VI., they would be entitledto vote. But it must be remembered, that if that statuteapplied to Exeter, all other persons but freeholders wouldbe excluded, as we have observed before.Thus has Exeter afforded us in its history, a series ofambiguous, disputable, and intricate facts, all arising froma departure from the simplicity of the common law. If, inaccordance with the charters and the returns to Parliament,the ** burgesses"* only had been always mentioned, the law Burgesses.would have defined who they were ; but by adopting thename of ^* freemen'' at one time — which only described one ofthe qualifications of a burgess — ^and of 'Inhabitant" atanother — which also denotes only a second qualification —the whole is thrown into confusion, and there is no modeIt has been truly said, that there can be no borough without a burgess : nor aburgess without a borough. 10 Co. 125. Corporation of Lynn v. Pain, 1 Roll.Rep. 118.1744 EXETER.^|^;^ |'; of escaping from its intricacy, but by uniting the two teinutogether, and taking a free inhabitant, that is, a penkm offree amdiHan, inhabiting in the place, and therefore belongingto it, to be the person described individually by the nameof *^ burgess," and collectively by that of '' commonalty'TRURO.1600. In this year, the return for the borough of Truro in Cornwallwas made by the mayor and capital burgesses (thecommon council) ; and they were for themselves and all tiipeople of the borough, to have fill power to consent untothose things which the Parliament should ordain.* Gibemayor and capital burgesses putting their hands and sealsto the "return, and the common seal of the boroughsThere are fifteen signatures.Against this return by the common council there was apetition ; and the question was, whether the mayor and 24,or all the freemen, had the right of election?Right And the resolution was, that ** the mayor and 24, withoutthe freemen, had the right."freeoMD. There is no pretence for saying that theyr^^m^n ever beforehad the right : — for no such body are mentioned : — exceptingmerely for the purposes of trade : — which class ofBurgesses. freemen might be resident or not : — the burgesses, that isLeet. she inhabitants who owed suit at the court leet, were thosewho had anciently the right and exercised it:— consequentlythe committee decided correctly, that the rightwas not in the freemen : — but they determined erroneously,as has been shown by the previous documents, that theright was in the 24. However it must in justice be observed,that the question of the right of the 24 was broughtbefore them, only as opposed to the right of the freemen.1661. In this year, there was another petition. The membersreturned by the mayor were ordered to sit until the meritswere heard, as being returned by the proper officer.The question, and the resolution upon it, were in effectthe same as those on the former occasion.• 8 Jouni.69. t 8 Journ.306.TRURO. 1745About twenty years afterwards, there was a petition of the charles ii.burgesses and inhabitants, - 1680.In 1684, the last year before the termination of this reign, 1684.the mayor and burgesses granted all their messuages andrents to the king, and surrendered all their franchises and Surrender.charters ; accompanied with a petition for a new grant, withsuch alterations and additions as his majesty should thinkfit ; and they authorized John, Earl of Bath, to present thesurrender to the king.In the first year of the next reign, the Earl of Bath, as 1685.attorney for the mayor and burgesses, enrolled the surrenderin Chancery.Notwithstanding Queen Elizabeth had granted a charter 1660.to this place by which the inhabitants were incorporated by inhabitantsthe name of the " burgesses'' and it appears also from thedocuments relative to the history of it before that period,that the liberties and privileges were enjoyed by the samebody : — and notwithstanding the writs and precepts from theearliest times required the election of members to be madeby the burgesses, yet it will be seen that on the restorationof Charles II., — when such violences were committed againstthe constitution, the usurpation of the right of election bythe common council, which body was first created by the Commoncouncil.charter of Elizabeth, was in a great degree confirmed ;contrary to the decision of the Chippenham case, in thereign of James I.How opposed this encroachment was to the constitutionof that borough, may be collected from the following shorthistory.No return of Truro purporting expressly to be by thecommon council of the borough, is to be found till 80 yearsafter the charter; and at this inauspicious period of ourhistory, when a precedent is more likely to throw discreditupon the act, than to give it any authority. Although we haveseen in other cases that the usurpations of the select bodieswere, generally speaking, annulled, yet they were continued inTruro; and in their subsequent progress seem to have beenaccompanied with strong marks of fraud ; — for in the sucT1746 TRURO.^^^'*'^"' feeding return, some word stood before that of " bnrgeMy"loo. which has been erased. However, the returns at the closeof the reign of James II., and likewise to the a>nYeDtioiiParliament, were made by the co-burgesses; and the latteris signed upon the back by the mayor and 14 Jmrgeum;though in others the persons sign themselves as c^iitilburgesses.It will appear from the substance of the return of the13th of Charles II., that although the election was by the'' common council'' the burgesses were elected for '' all thepeople of the borough."It should be observed, that the question in 1660 wawhether the select number of the mayor and 24, '^ or thefreemen" should vote, and the decision was in favour of theformer.^^iJl^ It is a curious fact with respect to Truro— Salisbury—and other places — that for many years past, for the purpose ofmaintaining the right without question in the select number,there has been no body either of the burgesses, freemen,or commonalty, — notwithstanding the charter expressly mentionsthe '' burgesses, inhabitants, and commonalty."Northampton.The decision relative to Northampton in this year, gavein effect,* the right to the " commonalty," who fouryears afterwards are declared to be the " inhabitant householders:^^ so that the determinations with respect to thisplace are in accordance with the common law, for theresult of them is this : — that the right is in the body or*^ commonalty' of the burgesses, viz. the inhabitant house^"^^^^^^ holders paying scot and lot, who, by the law of the land, oughtholders, as " resia7its,*' to attend at the court leet, and be there swornand enrolled as belonging to the place, and which beinga " borough j^ they are its " burgesses.' ^fThe reader should contrast the simplicity of the resolutionas to Northampton, with the intricacy of those for Exeterand Truro.• 8 Joum. 71. Vide ante, pp. 203, 245. t See before, p. 1743.Nelson. 1747Clauses II.Nelson.Double returns being made for Hehton^ one signed bythe mayor, returning Mr. Robinson and Mr. Godolphin ; theother by the sheriff y returning Sir Peter Killigrew ; the Rightformer were reported as returned by the proper officer, andthat they ought to sit until the merits were determined.The question as to the election was, whether it should beby iki!^ freemen alone or by all the inhabitants: and the com- inhawtanumittee reported in favour of the latter. The matter was,however, afterwards ordered to be recommitted,^ and it wasagain reported, that the mayor and inhabitants at large had R>?'»t.the right ; but the House disagreed with that resolution. JA striking instance of a repeated correct finding by acommittee superseded by the House, probably from sometemporary political influence.ST. IVES.In St. Ives the question was, whether the right belonged 1690.to the port reeve, twelve burgesses, or the freemen at large. Freemen.The committee decided, and the House confirmed, that thelatter had the right to elect, or in other words that theywere the burgesses In the next year it was determined,that all the inhabitants " had the right of election," which in1702, was quoted as a decision that it was in the " bur Burgesses.gesses " at large.St. Ives, like the other Cornish boroughs, is not mentionedin Domesday, nor does there appear to be any trace when itfirst became a borough.It did not return members until the reign of Queen Mary,and there is only one other determination respecting theright of election.The select body,|| who had been defeated in their attempt to Selectquod Vobtain an exclusive right in 1660, repeated it in the reign ofJames II., by obtaining from that king a charter, giving theright to the mayor, capital burgesses, and assistants.• 8 Joumn. 76, 115. f 8 Joumn. 177. % 8 Joum. 203.§ 8 Journ. 97. || 8 .four, 336.O T 21748 ST. IVES.^^'"''*"' But that charter was repeatedly objected to by theinhabitants, and the right of election was contested inthe first year of the reign of Queen Anne ; on which occasionit was most extraordinarily stated, that St. Ives wasboth a borough and corporation by prescription : — the formerimprobable — the latter without doubt untrue.B fg MM t, The question was, whether the right was in the hw r g e aminhdittnte or inhabitants at large, or the capital burgesses.The petitioner insisting on the former, and the. sittingmember pn the latter.Usage. Some unsatisfactory parol evidence of a recent usage wuadduced; and two returns in the 13th, and one of the 18th ofCharles II. by the mayor and burgesses ; stating that theyhad unanimously elected the members.SttiBg It was contended for the sitting member, that the ten** burgesses," could only be construed to mean the '' freemenof the corporation." And that those who voted for thepetitioner were only '' inhabitants." They produced manyreturns in the reigns of Elizabeth, James I., and Charles. LSome by the warden and burgesses, and others by the pocoreeve and burgesses ; and signed only by a few persons, whowere proved to be capital burgesses. The charter of James II.was also given in evidence.inhabitants The committee resolved, that the right was in theinhabitants ;" to which it was proposed to add the qualificationof paying scot and lot ; but it was rejected by the House.It appears almost a perverse error in the committee andthe House, that when all the charters speak of the burgessesas the objects of their gent, and the parliamentary writs aswell as the statutes require the return to be made by theburgesses, that they should declare the right to be in the " freemen,"or the " inhabitants :" using those new terms insteadof the ancient and appropriate name which the law sanctioned.However in substance they are, as here explained,the same. The decision in 1660, for the 'freemen'* — is bythat of 1661, explained to mean the ^'inhabitants;*^ andjustly so, because villainage having ceased, the more correctdescription of the burgesses of a borough is by the termST. IVES. 1749inhabitants ;" and if the House had been contented to add Cities ii.to that description, which, for the reasons we have givenbefore, is too general, the further qualification of paying scotand lot — the decision would have been in complete accordancewith the common law, and would have been restrainedto the inhabitants resiant doing their suit real at the courtleet,MICHEL.As to Michel, the question, who were the burgesses, was 1660.raised upon the point, whether the right of election belongedto the commonalty at large, or to the 24 claiming by custom :and they were stated to consist of two editors, and 22 freemen,chosen by the editors. The committee determined thatthe 24 had the right.* Right,This case is somewhat peculiar; the right of the 24 isasserted upon " custodis" which, for the reasons we havegiven before, could not be applied to such a claim. However,it is obvious who the 24 were, as they consisted of twoeditors," who were two persons nominated at the court leet EHiore.to elect the jury — a name and a course of proceeding usualin Cornwall. The 24 together formed a grand jury, who,it is stated, were selected from the freemen.The history of this borough may be concisely stated. Itis not mentioned in Domesday ; nor is there any reason forassuming that it was a borough by prescription.It has no corporation. It did not return members untilthe reign of Edward VI. The presiding officer in theborough is the port reeve : and the steward of the court leetis mentioned in the Journals.In the 16th of Charles I. a question arose, whether theburgesses had the right of election, or all the inhabitants.But the point does not appear to have been expresslydetermined, because the sitting members, who were confirmedin their seats, had not only the majority of the 24, but it isadded, that all the inhabitants also condescended to their inhabitantselection.• 8 Journ. 92.1760 MICHEL.^^''"*""' It is, however, clear, that the 24 persons who in 16(101640. are called the "* freemen were in 1640 called the "^ hmrgk^hers;" either of which names it is absurd to suppose couldbe confined to them alone, but there must have been otherfreemen, and burgesses.16B9. In the first year of William and Mary, the right was determinedto be in the lords of the borough, who were liable tobe chosen portreeves, and in the householders; which latterpart of the determination was in accordance with the ancientlaw, and was no doubt correct.The lords. That the lords could have any distinct rights is tooabsurd to be supported for a moment. If they were iiiAo-biiani householders, they of course would have a right withthe others, otherwise they could not; for one class onlycould be entitled.In the course of the inquiry in the time of William IIL,although the resolution is, that the inhabitant householdershad the right, the evidence all tends to show, that the per-How Bons so described were '' housekeepers" who necessarilymust be inhabitants, and therefore, although the term isgeneral, ** householders" it must in truth mean ** inhabitant1700. housekeepers." Therefore, about 11 years afterwards, itRight, was properly decided, that the right was in the " inhabitanthouseholders paying scot and lot." The last qualificationbeing only added as a necessary consequence, under the commonlaw, of the former. And from the same source the otherqualifications of being sworn and enrolled at the court leetwould necessarily ensue.COVENTRY.1660. The election at Coventry was declared void on accountof the uncertainties which arose from the circumstances ofmany of the voters being polled twice ; and many strangers,persons unknown kinsmen, and those that paid scot and lot,being placed upon the poll.* And, for nearly similar circumstances,a like declaration was made in the next year as toHereford. +8 Journ. 106. f B Journ. 308.CAMELFORD. 1761Charles II.CAMELFORD.Respecting Camelfordj it is stated Id the Journal* — and isisan instance of the inaccuracy with which these termswere often used — that the freemen arid inhabitants had theright of election. Right.We have before shown that it could not be in two bodies.The subsequent facts of this case prove, that the committeedetermined, notwithstanding the above statement, that theright of election — or, in other words, the right to be burgesses— was in the inhabitants paying scot and lot. For itappeared in testimony, that one candidate had a greaternumber of votes oi freemen than the other. But for theopponent it was shown, that the voters for the former candidatedid not pay scot and lot, and therefore had no rightto vote. The committee were of opinion, that the latterhad the greater number of such as paid scot and lot, afterdeducting from the former the votes of those who did notpay ; and he was accordingly seated.HASLEMERE.We have already seest that the right of election for 1661.Haslemere was at this time determined to be in the " inhabit Right,tant householders.":]:VVAREHAM.The class of burgesses in Wareham was discussed upon 1661.the question, whether the right of election was in themayor, magistrates, and freeholders only, or in them andall that paid scot and lot'' It was determined by the com- Right.mittee to be in the latter, with the magistrates and freeholdersIn 1690, the right was agreed to be in the "inhabitants 1690.paying scot and lot, and the freeholders."In 1747, it was resolved to be only in the mayor and 1747.magistrates, and such of the inhabitants as paid scot and lot,♦ 8 Journ. 110. t 8 Journ. 254.t Sec before, p. 1388. i 8 Journ. 271.1762 Markham.ChMiw u> and in the freeholders of lands and tenements who hidRight, been bon fide, to their own use, in the actual oocopirticHiy or in the receipt of the rents and profits, for a year nextbefore the election ; except the same came to them by descentsdevise, marriage, marriage-settlement, or promotionto some benefice. A strange mixture of the common lawright of election for a borough with the statute law retireto the election for counties. Nevertheless, the only actualerror of this determination is, that it omits the qualill-Occupation of actual occupancy as necessary for the fieehoM'' owner of a house, as observed before in the r^gn ofSandwich. James I., with respect to the bye-law of Sandwich. Theeffect of this omission being, that nonrresideni freeholders,Exeter. as in Exeter J might be thought entitled to vote, which wasfollowed by the ordinary effects in this borough.Wareham is a borough by prescription, being mentionedwith its burgesses in Domesday; and in the reign of EdwardI., it had a view of frankpledge ; and has returned membersfrom the earliest period.POOLE.1661. The merits of an election for the borough of Poole werealso canvassed before a committee at this period.Report. It was reported, that the first question was, whether theout-burgesses of the town had voices, as well as the in-largesses: — and the opinion of the committee was, that they hadequal voices with the in-burgesses.The report is very short, mentioning only some of the evidenceupon which the decision was founded. Neither is itGut-burg stated who the out-burgesses were: — whether they wereburgesses who lived in the suburbs jn^t without the walls —whether they were burgesses who lived out of the boroughfor some temporary purpose — or whether they were entirelyand absolutely non-resident. If the first, it is open toexplanation — if the second, it is not unreasonable, providedthey had still a domicile in the borough — if the last, it isunreasonable, and illegal.It does not appear that the books were produced : theyPOOLE. 1763clearly existed as shown before, from at least the 10th of ^^^^^"*Elizabeth.It seems impossible to infer that the out-burgesses alludedto, were persons absolutely non-resident, — because all thedocuments afford the strongest inferences that the burgessesshould be resident.* The grant in the reign of Richard I. 1190.to the burgesses of a right of common, is very strong toshow that they ought to be so ; because such a right couldnot be enjoyed but by resident householders, as appurtenantto their houses.The charter of the 1 th of Henry VI., containing the license 1432.to fortify, speaks of Welcome as not a port of inhabitants ; inhabitantsand of Poole on the contrary, as inhabited by a great multitudeof people, and on those premises the license is granted,^which also raises an inference against non-resident burgesses,who could never have been contemplated by such acharter, made with the consent of Parliament. And anothercharter also of Henry VI. is granted with the like consent *^^'of Parliament to the burgesses and inhabitants — whichseems equally strong against the non-residents, whateverhypercritical inferences may be drawn from those terms.The vice-admiral's charter in the reign of Henry VIII. is i^^.to the same effect, j: And the recitals and provisions of thecharter of Elizabeth, some of the clauses of which are solelyfor the benefit of the inhabitants, seem considerably to supportthe same conclusionsEither therefore, this determination must be capable of *someexplanation from the evidence given before the committee,or from the borough books : — or it is contrary to thecharters and records, to reason, and to the general law.The return on the above occasion was made by the mayor Returns,aldermen, and burgesses, inhabitants. And in that, andanother of the same date, the term " commonalty" isomitted.It appears from the records of the town, that the corpora less.• Sec before, p. 367.t And see before, pp.657, 854, 1125, 1230. 1242, &c 1246.t See before, p. 1125. $ See before, p. 1239.1754 POOLE.^^^'*'**"' tioiiy about this period, began to exclude the inkabiiamtg fipomtheir rights, the erasures indicative of which dispositionhave been already given. It will not be forgotten, that itwas nearly at the same date that a similar usurpation andexclusion by the corporators commenced in the borongfa ofWest Looe.Danton.1661. The question as to Downtan was — whether the oat-livenhaving freeholds, but no houses within the boroogfa, hadvoices, or, in other words, were the burgesses.* The coolmittee decided in the affirmative. But some memben inthe House insisting that divers inconsiderable freeholderswerefraudulenily created whereby a majority had been obtained— the House divided upon the question, whether theyshould agree with the committee ; and it passed in the negative.Which appears to have been a well-founded deism,not only on the constitutional ground suggested, of a contrarydecision tending to encourage the splitting of freeholds: but also on the ground before explained with respectto Sandwich and Wareham, and alluded to on this occasion ;that if the mere freehold gave the right, there might be nohouse upon it, and consequently no householder who couldbe the burgess.WINDSOR.leei. As to Windsor ^ we have before shown that the right wasdetermined at this time to be in the freemen saying scot andlot; though at a subsequent period it was decided to bein the inhabitants paying scot and lot.PRESTON.1661. In Preston the question arose, whether the mayor and 24burgesses only had voices, or the inhabitants at large. TheRight, committee decided, that " all the inhabitants had voices,"and the House confirmed the decision. J♦ 8 Journ. 288. t 8 .Touin. p. 292, s-lc before.X 8 Join. p. 336.PRESTON. 1765This decision differs slightly from others in using the tenn cbiiw ii.^^aUj^ from which the absurd inference was afterwardsdrawn, that every inhabitant had the right without any other inhabitantsqualification: this being the only borough in England inwhich such a right prevailed.We have before shown how inconsistent this is with thegeneral law ;* and it is peculiarly inapplicable to Preston,which is a borough by prescription, and the charter wasbefore time of memory granted to the burgesses and confirmedto them in the reign of King John and succeedingkings.The burgesses also returned members to Parliament fromthe earliest time ; and had a charter of incorporation in thereign of Queen ElizabethanGuilds are held every 20 years, for the admission and lego.regulation of freedoms ; and in the intervals burgesses are Guilds.admitted by copy of court rolls.The merits of the election being heard at the bar of theHouse, the candidate who had been returned by a majority ofthe corporation was defeated. tion.In 1768, the election for Preston was before a committee, 1768.and the counsel for the sitting members insisted, that in thedetermination of 1661, the words J " all the inhabitants,"meant such " in-burgesses of the last guild, or those admittedsince by copy of court roll, as were inhabitants of the place." inhabitBut the committee would not permit them to give evidencefor that purpose, and the petitioner was seated, upon proof ofhis having the majority of the" inhabitants at large'The same point was again raised in 1781, and the com- 1781.mittee then allowed the petitioners to go into evidence torestrain the right to the " in-burgesses then resident." §The proof consisted of returns to Parliament, entries inthe borough books and papers, and the charters of the borough,together with the testimony of some old persons,natives of the place.The sitting member also offered some evidence from the• See before, p. 356. t Sec before, p. 389.t 32 Journ. 27, 79. ^ 3 Lutes, 2Z5.1766 Preston.^*"^ "■ corporation books, in contradiction to thai of the otherside.Bight. The committee decided that the words '' all the inhabitants''did ** not ** mean the in-burgesses inhabitants wolf .The committee expressed their opinion that the ri(^ of10S1. election in 1661 was too indefinite; and resolved, that 'the** chairman should be directed to ask for leave to bring in a'^ bill to ascertain the description of in h habitants who shouldfor the future have voices in the election ; humbly recoilmending to the House that the right should be confined te'' all burgesses resident, and to all other inhabitant hams'** holders paying scot and lot*The report was ordered to be taken into consideration at afuture day. The minutes of the proceedings of the committee,and of the evidence, were directed to be producedbefore the House, which [was done accordingly ; but on theday appointed for the consideration, it was put off for threemonths, and no other step was afterwards taken to resumethe subject.The learned reporter of the Preston case states,* that thein-burgesses inhabitant, were apprehensive of somethinginjurious to their claim if the matter were further considered ;and previous to the day appointed for its consideration, theydistributed a printed case, in which the merits of their claimwere stated in objection to the bill proposed. The reporteradds, *f perhaps this case, and the opposition of the parties,may have occasioned the order which afterwards passed,and the subsequent neglect of their resolution."1785. The same point was attempted again in 1785, when it wascontended that the right under consideration, and establishedin 1661, was the right of the in-burgesses, inhabitants atlarge ; and that all the municipal elections before that periodwere by the " in-burgesses, inhabitants."They pointed out the absurd result from the general constructionput upon the determination of 1661, that it wouldlet in every man who slept a night in the town ; and even awhole regiment of soldiers marching through it. The Poole• Ludcrs, 228.PRESTON. 1757case and many others were also cited ; and they stated ^tf>«n .the right for which they insisted, to be in the " in-burgesses'^ inhabitants admitted at the last guild, or those by copy ofcourt-roll, admitted since the last guild."The counsel for the sittings member objected to the ad Sitting. member.possibility of the evidence which was attempted to beadduced ; and cited many cases in answer to those quoted onthe other side.The committee negatived the admissibility of the evidence,and the sitting members were confirmed in their seats.Thus, contrary to the reasonable and judicious resolutionof the committee in 1781, the indefinite and unconstitutionalright of ALL the inhabitants seems to have prevailed, chieflyowing to a jealousy of the corporate burgesses of havingtheir rights discussed; which in all probability would haveled to the establishment of the exclusive right of the inhabitanthouseholders, by which means the non-resident corporateburgesses, as well also as the mere temporary inhabitantsand lodgers, &c. would have been excluded.It should also be observed, that the guild which was Guild,held once in 20 years, was only a customary mode of overlookingand correcting the proceedings of the annual courts.And that the. court roll upon which the burgesses wereto be annually entered, was in point of fact, the roll of theresiants at the court leet, for it could not legally be anyother.ST. Allan's.The general history of St. Alban's we have before given.* leei.It is only necessary to remark here, that at this time aquestion arose whether the albumen had voices, and strange Albumen.to say notwithstanding there is scarcely any determinationof the right of election, which does not exclude the alms-men; and it is so clear by the general principles of thelaw, that we have always omitted that part of the determinationas unnecessary, yet the committee in this case decidedthey had a right to votesSee before, p. 186* et seq. t 8 Joum. 350.17fi8 ST. Allan's.ChMif II . j^ '^ ^^^ ^^ evidence is reported upon which this determinationproceeded ; which might perhaps be accountedfor by some peculiarity in the nature of the alms.Without some such explanation, there is no doubt itis a detennination at variance with the general law mdpractice.CLTTHEROE.We have before stated with respect to ClUheroe/^ thai the'^^i^ right was decided '^ to be in such Freeholder$ only as hadestates for life."SUDBURY.As to Sudbury, the general history of which we have alsopreviously investigated upon the question arising whetherthe mayor, six aldermen, and 24 chief burgesses only, hadthe right of election, or the common burgesses at large;"^M^^* the committee determined in favour of the former — andthe House confirmed that determination.LUDLOW.Ludlow, the burgages of which, and their connexion withthe liberty of the town, as well as its charters of incorporationin the reigns of Edward IV. and Queen Mary, have^^^' been mentioned, j: obtained, in 1661, a better fate than SudburyThe question arose, whether the right was in the selectnumber of 12 aldermen, and 25 others of the commoncouncil, or in them and all the common burgesses resiantin the town; — and the committee were of opinion, thatRight, ^ji ^j^g common burgesses resiant had a right of electionwith the 12 and five and twenty ; to which the Houseagreed.This, in effect, is a decision founded upon the commonlaw ; for a resiant who belonged to the borough must be aninhabitant householder, and as such be sworn and enrolled at• See before, p. 1356; 8 Journ. 357. t See before, p. 527.t See before, p. 1373 ; 8 Journ. 360. § See before, pp. 968, 1181.LUDLOW. 1769the court leet, and would pay scot and lot ; and being such ChMriwH.an inhabitant of the borough, would be a burgess." 1661«From a document preserved in the Harleian Manuscripts,*there appears to have been, before this period, some distinctionbetween the burgesses and freemen. However, nonesuchcould have existed, excepting to the extent beforeshown; and therefore the committee, in 1661, properly confinedthe right to the single class of the " burgesses reliant" Burgessesparticularly as it is stated in the same document that therehad been an attempt to introduce foreigners as well asresiants.It is also stated in the same paper, that the 'M2 aldermenand 25 common councilmen began in the time of James I."in this place, as well as in divers other towns, to reduce theelection to themselves ; which seems to have been the usurpationabolished by the decision in 1661.The reader will no doubt recollect the numerous placeswe have before shown in the reign of James I., in which theright was reduced, as stated in this document, to the selectbody*In the same paper, mention is also made of some of 16G0.the burgesses not having complied with the law, in takingthe oaths of fidelity ; and also, that some burgesses had Oaths.been made by a charter of James II., whose right wasdenied ; because it had been resolved by the Parliament, thatthat charter was void and illegal. Some of the burgesseswere said to have been " made " after the teste of the toriesand it was answered, that they were entitled by birth or mar Bind.rage to demand their freedom, upon paying a small fine. It Marriage.was urged, that such persons had been kept from their rightby the new charter of James II., and as soon as the oldcorporation was restored, they demanded their rights, andwere admitted before the writ came to the bailiffs.It will be also desirable to add an extract from thebooks of the borough of Ludlow, relative to the election ofa burgess, immediately after the Restoration.• Harl. MSS., 6806. f Book, 1648—1680, p. 179.1760 LUDLOW.^^'*^"' « At the New House, the 7th of September, 1(160.10^« <^ Touching the election of burgesses."Forasmuch as it plainly appeareth to the 12 and 26common council of this town, that there are many ale pesonscalled **chencer$**^ within this town,jEe to lob displacecf bwrgeues within the same, and as occasion dullhappen fit Likewise to be called into tkemmUfer of tke 25 colorcolors of the town, to bear office according to the custom ofthe same town and good government thereof: — it is tibenihtethought fit and so ordered that the bailiffs of this town MUyearly as occasion shall happen, and as they in their discretionshall think fit, impose upon every ekemeer within thistown, fit to be made a bwrgese^ \2d. yearly for him to payfor a hence rent, and so yearly to double the same rent untilsuch person shall procure himself to be elected and worma burgess of the town, paying the accustomed fee for thesame.This order is in effect the same as those we have beforeseen in the Cinque Ports, and in Yarmouth;)^ and otherplaces, and compels those who are fit to be burgesses to besworn, which could only be legal under the compulsorypowers of the court leet. And this is to be done yearly, asthe court leet and view of frankpledge were held.In pursuance of the determination thus made in 1661, thereturns in the 31st of Charles IL were made by the bailiffand burgesses with the comprehensive additional term ofcommonalty."Sedley.As to Bewdleyy% the charter of the third of James I. wascited and considered, and it was determined that the newRight, burgesses only, appointed by it had the right, exclusive ofthe old burgesses and all others.Cheers were thosewho paid the hence, or certum lethe, for the right of holdingthe court leet. And in the minister's accounts of the county of Glamorgan, 1Edw. VI., the word hence is stated to be a penny rent, payable by every tenantinhabiting or dwelling within the manor or court leett See before, p. 198, et seq.— Yarmouth Leet rolls.t See before, p. 1510. § See before, p. 1579.Sedley. 1761The direct opposition of this determination to the decision church ii.»f the celebrated committee in the time of James I.^ in the)hippenham case has been already noted.HAVERFORDWEST.For Haoerfcrdwest it was determined that " the burgesses ^'k*»^-nd the inhabitants who paid scot and lot had voices in thelection.*This determination is accurate in substance but inaccurateand unintelligible in form.It purports by its literal meaning, that there were threelasses of persons entitled to vote, which for the reasonseven before, could not be the case ; nor is the distinctionwith reference to the right of voting between either of themeasily to be seen. For the burgesses must be inhabitanthouseholders ; and then they would come within the two)ther descriptions ; and would necessarily pay scot and lot.The proper mode therefore of construing this decision,would be to assume that these three terms were only differentdescriptions of the same class of persons, viz. the inhabitanthouseholders paying scot and lot, who would be theburgesses. Burgesses.So applied, the determination is intelligible and consistentwith the common law ; as well as the decisive document webave before quoted in the reign of Richard III.,+ where theburgesses are distinctly shown to be continually inhabitingand abiding within the borough.It must also be remembered, that such a constructionis necessary to make the determination correspond with thestatute of Henry VIII., under which Haverfordwest first statuteV. 1- Hen. Vientmembers to parliament.We have previously seen that it had a charter fromEdward I.,J and another, making it a county of itself. Charters.granted by Edward IV., and confirmed by Henry VIII.;and that James I. gave it a charter of incorporation.The right of election for Haverfordwest, came before acommittee in the second of George I., when it was agreed 17158 Joum. 491. t See before, p. 1039. t See before, p. 538.5 U1762 HAVERFORDWEST.cfc«**"' cc to be IB the freeholders burgesses and inlMthitanH» ptfOiKRight. << scot and lot, and not receiving ans.Why the '^ freeholders" should have been added to dieformer decision, or why the '' inhabit** before mentionedshould have been omitted, it is difficult to explain: exceptingeither by the hypothesis, which the aimless variety of thinedecisions would justly warrant, that the committee matguided by no fixed rules :— or unless it is to be attributedAgraeBMDtto thb being an agreeing of the parties in which theirprivate interests directed them : — a common incidents aa wehave before had frequent occasion to observe.Order. In the course of this inquiry, several ord&n vere give isevidence, made by the mayor, common council, and other1629. inhabitants from the fifth of Charles I., to the first of1716. George I. inclusive, respecting the making of burgess$, Bwhich the title of sons by birth — husbands by sigrriajnand appraUice$ by service, are mentioned, as might be expected,because by the common law those facts were proofoifree condition. And it appeared, that these persons wereSheriflTi only to be admitted on the elected days or at the Bkmff^^^"^ tijvms^ and at no other time. The latter period is readilyexplained by recollecting that it was a county of itself,and therefore the sheriff's tourn was the same as the leetAnd in the course of the proceedings, frequent reference ismade to the ** court" at which they should take place.Burgesses. It is possible that the distinction between the burgesses,and the inhabitants, observable in the determination andagreement, of the right, may be accounted for by the burgessesso admitted, being considered as a distinct class frominiubiunta the rest of the inhabitants. But it is obvious from all thedocuments, that this distinction was more in name than iusubstance, because all the burgesses must be inhabitants, asshown by the document in the reign of Richard III., andthe statute of Henry VIII. ; and all the inhabitants wereentitled and bound to be burgesses by the law of the tournand the leety at which they would be bound to attend, and besworn ; so that in truth the only distinction between a freeman'sson, or free woman's husband, or apprentice, andHAVERFORDWEST. 1763Other inhabitants would be this, — that the former would be ^^^^ entitledto be sworn and admitted as burgesses, the moment ^^i^-they proved the facts of their qualification ; whilst an inhabitantwould not be entitled to vote till he had lived a yearand a day in the place. And by this view of these facts,the whole may be reconciled and explained.Had these intelligible principles been constantly actedupon, no difficulties would have arisen upon this subject;but the moment the charles's and usages of corporationsintroduced the term and practice of '^ making'* burgesses,then the intricacies and usurpations became general, andspread into all parts of the kingdom.Thus in this particular place, many persons had beenadmitted a short time before the election as it was saidclandestinely at unusual times and places ; one at a publichouse by the mayor, who declared " he would ' make ' as** many new burgesses as would serve his turn." And thoseabuses had gone to such a length, that the committeeresolved, " That the proceedings of the mayor and common'' council of this town, in making burgesses without theconsent of the commonalty were illegal, and contrary tothe rights of the town, and that the burgesses so pretended'* to be made, have not thereby acquired any right of voting** at any future election."PETERBOROUGH.As to Peterborough, the committee determined, and the 1667.House agreed with them, that " all the inhabitants paying Right.scot and lot h'dd voice in the election ;"f that is, were theburgesses.In 3 Keble, 146, in the case of Thomas and Sorrel, it was said that " the kingcannot grant power to others, to make a denizen ; which is of the same mischief,and the power to make free is the same, though they claim to be in by the king"—See 20 Hen. VII. 28 ; 7 Co. 25, Calvin's case. " Here all is done by makingfree." As to the usages introduced by these and other illegal clauses and charters,it may be observed, as is said of void letters patent, in 3 Keble, 425, inThamai ▼. Walter, that " they gave colour to the great breach there stated, thefirst attempts whereof were modest, but one absurdity admitted, a hundred willfollow." Vide Keble, Mst9 Journ. 17.5 U 2ti1764 PETERBOROUGH.^^f^l^* This determination is as general as that of Pre8toDy<—though it will be seen that it was followed by difiereiiftresults.Peterborough has been mentioned as a ^^ burgh " iaDomesday.* It did not, however, return members to Partial^^' ment till the first year of Edward VI., just before which ithad been made a city by Henry VIII., — and no other duoters or documents appear respecting it ; nor is there any coiporation ; but the steuHurd is the returning officer.1701. In the last year of William III., its election came before acommittee, when the right was agreed to be '^ in the tdbhBiiftt. bitters paying scot and lot'' as in the decision of 1667.17S8. In the second of (george II., the right was determinedto be '' in the inhabUaHis within the precincts of the minsterthere, being hcmekolders not receiving almost and in otherthe inhabitants within the city, paying scot and htJ'%This is a singular decision, relating the right of votingfor a borough, by the limits of an ecclesiastical establishmentIt properly requires that the voters as burgesses shouldbe householders. The accurate description of a burgess asargued in the Peterborough case, in 3rd Douglas. But thedecision goes on to add, that the right is also in '* other theinhabitants paying scot and lot ;" which can only be attributedto a mistaken conception of the meaning of thosetennSy — because there could be no other inhabitants whopaid scot and lot but householders, A person indeed mightpay scot — in the public charges for land only, but he couldnot perform lot — merely for land ; because, personal residencewas necessary for that purpose, and then he mustbe a householder; for the law took no notice of inmatesexcept for the purpose of making the householder responsiblefor them. And if he was a householder, he must beaninhabitants and also pay scot and lot, and thus the wholewould be reconciled with the case of Haverfordwest.See before, p. 219. t 9 Journ. 21, 162.X 3 Doug. 63.Bridgewater. 1766Charles II.Bridgewater.In the case of Bridgewater, we have another instance of ^|J|a decision made at this time in favour of the select bodybeing the burgesses* — but which was subsequently an 1669.nulled, by later decisions giving the right, with some additionalexplanations, to the '' inhabitants paying scot and lot."The report of the committee in this instance, gave theright to "the majority of the corporation, consisting of amayor, aldermen, and 24 capital burgesses."Bridgwater is not mentioned as a borough in Domesday ;nor does there appear any grant to it before the time of legalmemory, although there is one, in the time of King John, —and also one of incorporation in the reign of Edward IV., —and another for the same purpose in the reign of QueenMary.fIt returned members to Parliament from the earliest period,and they were elected by the burgesses, and once by deputationin the county courtesy:In the fourth year of William and Mary, the right of election ie22.was agreed to be " in the inhabitants paying scot and lot." Agreed.In the ninth of George III., upwards of 70 years after 1769.wards, the right of election for Bridgwater was consideredby the House, and it was resolved, '^ that the inhabitants Right,paying scot and lot had a right to votes — and a motionthat *' the mayor, and aldermen, and capital burgesses, not** being inhabitants paying scot and lot, had a right to vote,"passed in the negative.In five days afterwards it was decided — " that the inha- Right.bitants of the eastern and western division of the parish ofBridgwater, had no right to vote — but that it was in the'^ inhabitants of that division of the parish which is commonlycalled the borough, paying scot and lot."||This closes the municipal and parliamentary history ofthe borough of Bridgwater, in which, in substance, the com-9 Journ. 118. t Sec before, pp. 411, 999 1181.I All records of the borough are wanting until the year 1706.32 Journ. 301. || 32 Journ. 314.1766 Bridgewater.^^**'**"* moa law right — ^which equally applies to lM>tli — has benprotect to exists viz., that the inkabUanis paying 900i and hisand which in truth means the kouMekotden, have been therar^ssws*£Last OB1N8TSAD.1079. The question as to the borough of EaH QtimUBd waswhether the imkdbiUjaUM at large or the herbage koUen alonehad the right of election, as the burgesses.*labibitiiiti The inhabitants, who were the petitioners, in older toshow that East Ghrinstead was a borough by prescriptionand that all the inhabitants had a right to vote, produced areturn in the first year of Queen Mary by '' the bailiff, bur*''gesseSy and all others the inhabitants, of thar oommos'assent" Also one of the 30th of Elizabeth, and anotherof the 21st of James I., by ^'the bailiff, burgesses, and** inhabitants, of their common assent jointly together ;" andone of Charles I., ^' by the bailiff and commonalty, in thename of themselves and the rest of the burgesses and commonsof the commonalty ;'' and they had other records to thesame effectBesides these, they gave parol evidence of the inhabitantshaving voted, as well as the burgage holders, from the18th of James I. till the restoration of Charles IL Theyoffered also other evidence, but the counsel on all sidesagreed, that '' the inhabitants at large had the right to elect**Retfolu- And the committee resolved, " that it was a borough by prescription, and that the inhabitants as well as the burgage'^ holders had a right to vote." And the House agreed withthose resolutions.Whether Instead was, in point of fact, a borough byprescription does not distinctly appear ; for it is not mentionedas a borough in Domesday : nor are there any recordsto show its existence as a borough before the timeof legal memory. It is true that it returned members asearly as the beginning of the reign of Edward II. And itis not a subject of surprise that the parties on all hands9 .Touin. /)87.EAST GRINSTEAD. 1767agreed in the inquiry in 1679, that the inhabitants at large Charity.had a right to elect: for in the 16th of Charles I. the same • l^<)-question between the exclusive right of the free burgageholders and the inhabitants, was before a committee, andevidence was given of the abuse so common of the right ofburgage holders of multiplying votes and the committeedecided that " the right of election was original ;" no doubtmeaning, as in the Cirencester case, in Glanville, the commonlaw right of the inhabitant householders paying scot andlot; and they seated the candidate who was elected by theinhabitants.It would therefore seem impossible that this right, soreasonable — founded on the common law — and sanctioned bya former decision, could ever be afterwards defeated.Nevertheless, it will be seen that, although a subsequentcommittee confirmed the right of the inhabitants, the Housetook upon themselves to differ from that decision, and at asubsequent period the exclusive right of the burgage holderswas established.These proceedings are so extraordinary, and throw suchlight upon the usurpation of the burgage tenure right ofelection, that we shall postpone the consideration of themtill they occur in their chronological order.Marlborough.With respect to Aldboroughy in Yorkshire, the committee 1679.decided, ** that all the inhabitants paying scot and lot had Hight.only the right of election; to which the House assented'*They must therefore be considered as the burgesses : particularlyas this decision was confirmed. in 1690, with an express 1690.negative of the right of the select number of burgesses holdingby burgage tenure.Aldborough is not mentioned in Domesday, nor are thereany documents to show that it was a borough by prescription.It did not return members till the 30th of Elizabeth. 1688.A peculiarity with respect to this place is, that as early as1 ()76, the term " burghers'' was applied to those who exercised 1676.» 9 Jour. 622.1768 ALDBOROUOH.^^*'^.''' the privileges of the place. And letuniB in the.ie^nsrfJames I. and Charles L are stated to be made by '' the burgessesand borough men." The latter a tenn not met with inany other place. The largesses were also called ** baremgkholders' all of which would be consistent with the burgessesbeing, according to the common law, the inhabitant householderspaying scot and lot.MONMOUTH.im. With respect to the right of election for Mammmik, aquestion arose,* whether it was confined solely to the burgessesinhabitants of Monmouth, or whether the burgessesinhabitants of the contributory boroughs of Newport andDusk had also the right with them. The first position wasnegatived, and the latter affirmed, both by the committeeand the House.AOMONDESHAM— MARLOW.Iso. Xhe right in Agmondesham and Marlow was determined1687. to be in the inhabitants only who paid scot and ft^^fNEWARK.In the progress through the Journals, the resolution withrespect to Newark has been purposely omitted, in order thatthere might be an opportunity of introducing together, notonly the facts which are to be found with respect to theright of election, but also the important question of its beingentitled to return members to Parliament, under the chartersgranted to it by Charles II.The history connected with the former question may beshortly stated.Newark is not mentioned as a borough in Domesday,though it has been seen before that some burgesses in it arespecified in the entry of Nottinghamshire. J No other documentsexist showing it to be a borough by prescription ; nordoes it appear to be treated as a borough till this reign, whena charter was granted to it.1699. In 1699, the committee determined the right of election to9 Journ. 6()3. t 9 Journ. 677. t Sec before, p. 266.NEWARK. 1769be in all the inhabitants who pay, or ought to pay scot and chute* h-lot ;* to which the House added, before " the inhabitants' Right.the " mayor and aldermen."In 1791, complicated statements of right having been 1791.delivered by each of the parties, the committee simply deter Right.mined it to be '^ in the mayor, aldermen, and all the inhabitantspaying scot and lot :" in whom it continued until theReform Act.As to the second point, the following circumstances appearfrom the charters, the Journals, and the debates ofthat time.The charters is granted to the mayor and aldermen of 1673.Newark, in consequence of their petition ; and it gives andconfirms to them all their ancient liberties theretofore grantedto them. And that in addition, the town of Newark should beaborough town, with power to elect and send two burgesses to Charter.serve in Parliament yl^, who should he chosen by the mayor andALDERMEN, OT the major part of them. That all freemen andinhabitants within the town of Newark should be exemptedfrom payment of tolls, piccage, &c. ; the several townshipsof Balderton, Coddington, and Winthorp — the castle withthe spite thereof — and the mills, called Newark mills ; andall the persons residing within the town and places aforesaidshould for the future be under the government of the mayorand aldermen. That the corporation should have all goodsof felons, &c. That the mayor, recorder, last year's mayor, andfour senior aldermen, should be justices of the peace withinthe limits of the corporation, and might choose high constablesand petit constables within their jurisdiction. That nosheriff or justice of the peace of the county should intermeddletherein. That the mayor, recorder, and justices, or any five,four, or three of them, whereof the mayor or recorder was tobe one, might send felons and other malefactors, by warranttinder their common seal, to the county gaol. That the corporationmight purchase lands to the value of 200Z. per annumabove reprises, besides the lands they then enjoyed.• 1 Fraser, 314 ; 4 Doug. 494. t Flail. MSS., 7017, 35.t And sec 3 Doug. 1()0.1770 NEWARK.<*■»'»"' That they might Test for any action not eiceedipjrItetua of have the rHwm call writ$ within the limits.And that for the better maintenance of the vicar of theparish church of Newark, they should have the perpetual advowsonand rectory of Winthrop, with the appurtenancesbeing under value, and near adjoining, unto the mayor andaldennen and their successors for ever: — with other clanseijusual in grants of that nature, subscribed by Mr. AtomsGeneral, by warrant under his majesty's sign manualsNotwithstanding this charter, the right of election haever since and before 1698, been exercised by the inhabitantspaying scot and lot. And it was then stated to be, by theinhdututi charter, in the inhabitanU paying scot and lot, and vras soresolved.1676. The oitry inthe Journal,* states the petition of two personsof Newark, one of Baldarton, and one of Winthorp, onbehalf of themselves, and the most of the gentlemen, yret-awa, freeholders and copyholders of these tovnis, whichcomplained of undue means and practices in obtaining thecharter for sending two burgesses to Parliament. And as itrelated to that point, it was referred to the committee ofprivileges and elections, to consider it with the petitionagainst the return.Debate. However it was subsequently discussed by the HousesThe petition of Mr. Seville was read ; and counsel werecalled in and heard. After they withdrew the matter wasdebated. IMr. Serjeant Crone stated, that *^ during the sitting ofParliament such charters had been granted; and that asmany members served for boroughs by creation as bycharter which might restrain the manner of elections Theking might create boroughs, pro bono publico — burgessesbeing thought a benefit to the nation — for in the multitudeof counsellors there is safety." In answer to the objection,that by the charter those who pay the wages have no voicein the election, he urged, that in all charters where the» 9 Jour. 334. t 9 Jour. 403. \ 4 Icy's Debates, 297.i This waa directly contrary to the rlecl^ioa^ in Glanville.NEWARK. 1771election is restrained to the mayor and common council, it ^^^*>«'^"'is the same, as in the case of Dungannon,* He also said acharter was a flower of the crown, and the king's undoubtedright. And if the election was restrained by prescription,time out of mind, to the mayor and council, it supposes sucha grant. He again urged the increase of members by the newboroughs and the revival of old, and he moved for a committeeto inquire into the king's right to grant them charters.Sir Thomas Meres said, that in this question all Englandwas concerned ; and he asked, whether the king could dothis during the sitting of Parliament. Had it ever beendone? no one could show such a precedent. f Better to doitby act of Parliament, as in the cases of Chester and L^Jeroooi.Liverpool.Mr. Powle referred to the great inconveniences which *®^*might follow — suppose the king had a mind to alter thereligion. Boroughs sending 50 papists might be predominant.He said there were many precedents; and that itwas a rule that the king could not impose a charge upona borough : and whether it was a charge or a franchise hesaid the king could not grant it. But he urged that it wasa charge, because they would have to pay the wages as aburden on themselves, whereas otherwise they should onlyhear a proportion with the county. All boroughs were an County.gently bound to come to Parliament, which shows it was aservice. And he quoted the case of Torrington,J and ofWeobly — Milbome Port — Pomfret — Plymouth, and Maidstone,as well as the boroughs which were questioned inthe beginning of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, and theresolution in the 18th of James I. And he took the distinctionof their being by revivor, and not by new creation ; andthat this was the only one created. He said the practicewas, that the constitution of the House was never altered butby act of Parliament. The election is confined to a few, andall are to bear the charges of the burgesses. Qui sen titcommodus entire debet et onus.See l>e/^orc, p. 1600. t The reader has seen before that there were many.prynne, 1181.1772 NEWARK.^^''■^"- Mr. Walk cited the charter of Bewdkg in J&meg theFirst's time; and the universities — the townsmen having hadburgesses before, but the scholars cmly by grant. Xliiiquestions the seats of all. Some towns of great credit grewpoor, and were dismissed their attendance. He said it wasno objection that Parliament was sitting, for that Parliamenthad sat 16 years, and the king's prerogative could not besuspended for so long a period. The number of members isa great help to the House ; charters had been granted sometimesto the select bodies, and sometimes to the many, andthe House has given judgment accordingly.Serjeant Maynard contended the king might incorporate ;and also limit the privilege,* or grant it at large as he pleases,with the consent of the place incorporated. The bui]^County. paid tenths — the counties^itoefi^A^.Cottinf- Mr. Sacheverell. — ** The towns of Huntington, Bladderston ^Hafla^rtoa, '' ton and Winthorp, are drawn into wages for burgess-ship ;Thorp. a ^^^ j^^^ p^^ ^f ^^ corporation have benefit of the charter;** and all are subject to the jurisdiction of the corporation,'' and corporators summoned to the corporation court, — thus^' it creates new services. And in the grants of markets,'' &c., they have a clause, nisi sit' ad aliquod damnum."Mr. Secretary Williamson. — ^** To dispute the king's** power of granting charters, with a clause of sending burngesses, would shake many boroughs in England. Bewdley** was so created a borough during the sitting of Parliament** There is no precedent against it in the common or statute** law ; an independent clause in a grant may be repealed,and the patent yet stand good."Sir John Trevor made a few observations ; and Sir Nick.Carew said, he was glad to find that the best strength of thecharter was, the vote of the House, though it was againstseveral laws.The question was then put, whether by virtue of the charter,Newark had a right to send burgesses to Parliament ? Andit was resolved in the affirmative.After which, the question was put, that " the membersContrary to the decisions in Glanville.NEWARK. 1773were duly returned ?" which passed in the negative. And a -*new writ was ordered.The argument by Serjeant Broke, that the grant was duringthe sitting of Parliament, seems undoubtedly to put thecharter on more objectionable grounds than as if it had beenduring vacation; because all constitutional principles are tobe considered with reference to the dangers they are intendedto obviate or remedy. And it is clear, that, if thecrown exercised this power to any considerable extent duringthe sitting of Parliament, it might have the immediate effectof controlling the decision of the House of Commons ; but ifmade during the vacation, that effect would be too remoteto be made a just ground of complaint. The learned speakerstated, that the king's charter might restrain the manner ofelection; but it will be remembered that the decision inGlanville, in the Chippenham case, is directly to the contrary.He correctly argues, that the king might create boroughspro bono publico; — which is the true principle uponwhich the point should be decided ; and the sending burgessesto Parliament, is only one of the many consequencesof the places being made boroughs.The argument with respect to the liability for the wagesof the members shows, that at that time the wages werereceived; and also establishes the connexion which wasunderstood to exist between the liability to that charge, andthe right of voting for the members. And we have seen,that notwithstanding the charter to the contrary the right of charterelection was exercised according to that principle.In the course of the debate some of the points are of importance,both with respect to the municipal rights andobligations of a borough ; as well as with respect to the parliamentaryprivilege. Thus the distinction between theborough and the county, which we have before stated, is distinctlyinsisted upon ; as well as the increased charge uponthe smaller district of a borough, when compared with asmaller proportion of charge spread over the whole county.Mr. Powle also distinctly states, as the fact no doubt was,that all boroughs were anciently bound to come to NEWARK.^**''*"' lament. He Itkewke argued, upon the diBtinctiGii wfcodiis obvious between the instances of the revival of boroughsand those of new creation. The case of the Universitiesoonld hardly assist Mr. Waller's argument, because from thefact, as well as his mode of stating it, they daily wereexcepted instances. Nor do the exemptions of some plweSiupon account of their poverty, appear materially to affectthe question.Mr. Serjeant Maynard also remarked the essential differencebetween boroughs and counties— the one psyir^ tenths;the other fifteenths.Mr. Secretary Williamson spears to have entertained theopinion, that disputing the king's power of granting charters,with clauses fir the returning of burgesses, would affectmany more boroughs in England than it really would : ftrif the charters containing such clauses are examined, withreference to the boroughs which before returned membersto Parliament — to those which were restored — and thosewhich were created — ^ihe latter would be found very smallin number. However, the important facts connected withthis grant are, that the king made Newark a borough ; andgave the election of members to Parliament to the mayor andaldermenThe House of Commons determined that the members returnedfrom that place had a right to sit in Parliament, andtherefore they constitutionally determined, as we have contendedbefore, that the king, as the head of the executivegovernment, had the undoubted prerogative of declaring withinwhat districts the law should be administered; and thereforehad the power of creating boroughs, upon which creationwould follow all the legal consequences. \But they properly negatived the right of the crown to saywho should be the voters for members to Parliament ; andtherefore they disregarded the clause of the charter which• The precedent of creating a borough by the charter of the crown, and giving itthe right of voting has, however, never since been followed— the instances of newgrants only being where corporations had become dissolved by some accidental circumstances,and the crown interposed to restore them. See Introduction.t See post Geo. II., Geo. III., and Geo. IV.NEWARK. 1776gave the right of election to the mayor and aldermen ; and chwrtetu.fixed it, by the decisions to which we have before referred — -consistently with the common law — in the " inhabitants payingscot and lot*'This instance therefore of Newark, which has been in somedegree misunderstood, properly considered, supports the twofundamental principles of the constitution before insistedupon. And therefore Whitelocke and other authors, who ^**?*®'have written on this subject, should be read with caution,and tried by the authority of this case, and the principlesillustrated by it.*There is no doubt but the want of circumspection withwhich such text authors have been written and read, has led tomuch confusion, which the consideration of the cases themselveswill tend to dispel.However, Whitelocke, whose work was published in thisreign, after the Restoration, contains some sound constitutionalprinciples, and none more so than that in which hecontends, " that the same power and authority, both in nature Counties.and extent, was given to the members for boroughs as to the Boroughs,knights of the shires."f And that their elections originallystood upon the same footing, is one of the most importantfacts to be constantly kept in mind, for the purpose of avoidingthe confusion of ideas which is too commonly entertainedupon these subjects.It is a curious circumstance, that Whitelocke should haveelaborately traced the history of the sheriff's tourn, and have mourn.also mentioned the court leet — and although he had asserted Leet.the general identity of the power and authority of the membersfor counties and boroughs, that he should not have consideredthe identity of the sheriff's tourn and the court leet ;and from thence have been led to the obvious explanationwhich that feet affords of the identity of the origin of boththese rights, and the explanation which that identity givesof many of the circumstances connected with both these speciesof election.Whitelocke alleges with truth, " that the leets were before Seem.• 1 White. 501. t White. p.96.^f. 1776 WHTTEUXSKE.^"***"' the Conquest, and that they retained the nBmeof^ikeviemcffrwdiftedge to this dag" But as he had before disregardedthe real distinction between the camUg cowrt and the whiffstam, so he seems also to have .overlooked the material dkh^••i fiction between the cowrt ket and the cowrt ban. Anomission which produced many of the abuses before described,• particularly those of burgage tenure : and the abuses weie^no doubt, to be attributed to the views he and others entertainedupon these subjects*He however truly states, that there are many statutes andother authorities to show, that the court leet ought to continueto this day; which renders it still more striking that beshould have overlooked the connexion between it and theright of burgess-ship, which involved that of returningmembers to Parliament, particularly as he aid mentiqiiS'the '' burgh*motes," and '' ward-motes*'He also makes this observation, speaking of their localcourts : — ** Surely that old way of justice at kame, and the^ exact division of it, caused great ease and safety to the** people; and though there be difference at this day inthese courts, from what they were anciently, yet they may,** without so gross an error as some would reckon it, be yetstyled the same"And he further adds — " that the court leets and court^' barons were still in being in the country, and retaining the'' same name and nature they had before the Conquest J*^LONDON.Considering the circumstances under which Charles II.had been restored to the throne and the difficulties he encounteredwith the Parliament during the progress of hisreign — the granting the charter of Newark, with a clauserestraining the election to the mayor and aldermen — was initself a bold exercise of the prerogative. But the House ofCommons corrected the most objectionable part of that proceeding,by giving the right of election to the proper parties.The close of this reign exhibited events a bolder — moredangerous — and more oppressive description.LONDON. 1777The Parliament had driven the king to extremities — the ^^1^ "*Duke of Monmouth had been removed from his offices — andthe proposed exclusion bill threatened the interruption of thesuccession of the crown.Although there had been a dissolution, the greater part ofthe members returned were in the preceding Parliament,particularly those for London, The speaker was re-chosenand the temper of the House seemed to continue thesame as it was before the dissolution. The impeachment ofsome of the officers of the crown was again discussed, anddisputes arose between the House of Lords and Commonsthe exclusion bill leading to the dissolution of this Parliament— the last which Charles II. held.At the close of the commonwealth London still continued to ^^^interfere in the affairs of the state, with that preponderatinginfluence which it had always before assumed.The apprentices demanded a free Parliament — and the ^^^^^'city discovered symptoms of the greatest discontent. Iteven established a kind of separate government, and assumedthe supreme authority within itself.*They dispatched four of their principal citizens as deputies,to Monk, as he was approaching London, to congratulatehim upon his successes : and they also sent other deputiesto the king at BredaAfter the Restoration, London, also still possessed greatinfluence, and throughout the whole of this eventful period,it appears to have been resorted to in all times of difficulty ;and the citizens required and received attention from thewhole kingdom.Stimulated by the country party, they unexpectedly resistedthe course for the nomination of the sheriffs, and supportedcandidates of their own, for whom there was amajority of voices.The court candidate was, however, declared to be elected.But being disinclined to serve, he paid his fine, and anotherelection ensued ; after which, the two court candidates weresworn into office. The next sheriff* was fined a large sum• 7 Hume, 312—315. f 1 Siderfin, 317, 318.6x1778 LONDON.^^^'''*"' for speaking strongly against the Make of York. And theking beii^ dissatisfied with the city, the violent attempt wasQvo made of seizing its liberties, for which purpose a quo warrantowas issued against the corporation, calling upon themto show by what authority they exercised that privilege.ISBI. The information was filed by the attorney-general, inMichaelmas Term of 1681, and it stated that.The mayor, commonalty, and citizens, had used and claimedwithout any warrant, the following franchises —1. To be a body corporate and politic by the name ofthe ^ mayor, commonalty, and citizens, of the city of London.2. To have the authority of electing from themselves, twopersons, one of whom was to have the power of executing allwrits, &c., within the city and county of the same — the otherto execute all writs, &c., within the county of Middlesex.3. And that the mayor and aldermen should be justicesof the peace, to hold sessions, and pleas of the crown, withinthe city, and to hear and determine the same by their ownauthority.The mayor, commonalty, and citizens, in their plea toPleti. the first count, traversed their usurping upon the king, andstated, that ^^ from time immemorial London was an ancientcity," and that the citizens were immemoriallt/ a body corporateand politic, Sec, by the name of " mayor and commonalty,and citizens of the city of London," and by thatname had pleaded and been impleaded, &c.That in the Parliaments of the ninth of Henry III. — firstof Edward HI. — and the seventh of Richard II. — all theirancient liberties and customs were confirmed to them.That in the 23rd of Henry VL— 2nd of Edward IV.— 20thof Henry VII. — 6th of James I. — 14th of Charles I., and the15th of Charles II. — they had likewise received confirmationsfrom these sovereigns.To the second count they pleaded the same immemorialcorporation : as well by the name of" mayor and commonaltyand citizens," — as by the name of " citizens of London." AndCharter of that King John, in the first year of his reign, granted to theJohn.citizens that they should have the election of sheriffs of Long1779don and Middlesex for ever. And they concluded by pleading ^^^'" "•the same antecedent statutes and charters. ^®*-To the third count they pleaded, that the city was an art' warranto.dent city and county, and the citizens immemorially a body Pleadings.corporate and politic ; and that Charles I., in the 14th year Charter ofof his reign, granted that the mayor and recorder, the aldermenwho had been mayors, and the three senior aldermenwho had not executed the office of mayor, should be justicesof the peace, &c.The attorney-general first takes issue — " that the mayovy ^J^*^*'commonalty y and citizens, were not a body immemorially poli issue.tic and corporate.And then protesting that they were not an immemorialbody corporate, he alleged that in the 26th of Charles II.the mayor, commonalty and citizens, had assumed, by bye-laws,an unlawful authority to levy money for their own useupon his majesty's subjects and liege people, as well free, asnot freemen of the city, and other foreigners bringing provisionsto market, by which, for seven years then last past,they had received 5000Z. per annum.That in the 32nd of Charles II., the common council hadseditiously assembled, and without any legal authority assumedto themselves to censure and judge the king as tothe prorogation of Parliament — and did then ordain a petitionshould be exhibited to his majesty upon the subject: to theintent that it might be dispersed abroad, that the prorogationof Parliament was an obstruction of justice — to incitehatred towards the person of the king and his government —and to disturb the tranquillity of the kingdom.And as well as to the plea, claiming the election ofsheriffs, and also as to that which alleged, that the mayorand aldermen should be the justices, the attorney-gentilimparted.The mayor, &c., rejoin that the pleas were not sufficient Rejoinder.in law, and protesting that no act done by the commoncouncil is the act of the body corporate ; and that theynever assumed to themselves any unlawful power to levymoney on the subject to the private lucre of the mayor and5x21780 LONDON.II.W I ) 11 1Llty; and protesting that they had not levied lo16BI. much as the attorney-general alleged : For plea, neverthelesswmai^ ^f ^&t the city of London, from time immemorial, was the-Rifj^ijigt, chief and capital city and metropolis of the kingdom, ftc;that there had been immemorially a market held there ; andthat they had been immemorially seised in fee of themarket; and for supporting the same had been accustomedto provide market places, appoint officers, cleanse the market,and to have reasonable tolls: and that the citizens andfreemen of London amounted to 60,000, and more.That there had been a custom from time immemorial foracommon council, consisting of the mayor, aldermen, andcitizens being freemen of the city, not exceeding 250, anilally elected, called the ** Commons* of the city," to makebye-laws for the regulation of the public markets, &c. : andthat to defray the incidental charges thereof, they had demandedand received certain reasonable rates or dues fromthose trafficking in the market.That an execrable plot had been formed by the papiststo murder the king, subvert the ancient constitution of thekingdom, and to abolish the protestant religion. That severalpersons had been executed for the same, and severalnoblemen were then imprisoned in the Tower for thoseoffences. That the king, in his speech to Parliament, hadrecommended the examination of the conspiracy; that asolemn fast had been kept, in obedience to the king's proclamation;and bills prepared for the preservation of theProtestants.That whilst the impeachments and bills were pending,the Parliament had been dissolved, and the citizens and inhabitantsof the city being disquieted for the preservationof the king and his government, caused to be written the petitionin the replication, and presented it to the king : but theytraverse that it was done with any other object.Sur The attorney-general, in his sur-rejoinder, as to the makingrejoinder.• The ** Commons** properly speaking, according to a variety of documentswhich have been quoted, must mean the general body of the commonalty,t Lords Powys, Arundel, Pere, and Bellasis.LONDON. ]781and publishing the bye-law for levying the tolls in the mar chariw ii.ket — protesting that the mayor, &c., were not seised in fee 1681.of the markets, nor at their costs provided stalls, &c. ; and ,^^to.protesting that the rates, &c., were not reasonable : for plea, g^nevertheless, alleged that, by the statute of the 22nd of rejoinder.Charles II., it was enacted that commodious places shouldbe set out for the markets, that the principal streets mightnot be obstructed ; and that the Royal Exchange, Guildhall,Sessions House, Old Bailey, common gaols and prisons,might be enlarged and secured against the casualtyof fire; and that some convenient distance, interval, andcircuit of ground might be left between the Royal Exchangeand other houses to be built within the city ; and that themayor, &c., might employ those places for the public marketand the ornament and enlargement of the Exchange, &c. ; andthat they should have certain duties on coals ; all of whichmonies were to be issued and paid according to the directionsof that statute ; — one-fourth to pay the satisfaction forthe ground set out for enlarging the streets : — and onemoiety for such purposes as in the act is specified. And thatthe mayor, &c., had received the duty for coals, and, withoutany authority, had in their common council made a law bythemselves for levying certain sums from persons coming tothe markets, and had, under the colour and pretence of that lawso made by themselves, levied large sums upon the king'ssubjects coming to the markets, and disposed of such moniesto their own use, in subversion of the good rule and governmentof the city, to the oppression and impoverishment ofthe subject, and disinherison of the king, and against thetrust in them reposed as in a body politic. And he traversedthat the mayor, &c., had been immemorially accustomed toreceive tolls.And as to the rejoinder to the part of the replication,protesting that the prorogation of Parliament was for thegood of the kingdom, he demurred.And the mayor, &c., as to the last sur-rejoinder, joinedin demurrer.And as the sur-rejoinder of the attorney-general to theI7R2 LONDON.'^""* "- making ami publishing the law for levying the tolls iu the1681. market, they say, that the mayor and commonalty and citiesens, from time immemorial, have been accustomed to haveunreasonable toils of all persons coming to the market to bcIIrejoinder. their goods there, for their stalls and accommodation, aadfor this they put themselves upon the country, kc.And alter certain importance, there is a joinder in demurser by the mayor and commonalty.The attorney-general enters a nolle prosequi as to theelection of sheriff's, the return of writs, and the execution ofthe office of sheriff'.As to the matters in law a day is given.Judgment was afterwards delivered that the liberties, privileges,and franchises of being a body corporate, kc,should be taken and seised into the king's hands, and themayor, &c., should be fined for their usurpation.This case was first elaborately argued by Mr. Finch, theking's solicitor-general, for the king, and Sir George Trebly,the recorder of London, for the city.nor Mr. Finch argued the case under the four heads :I. Whether any corporation can be forfeited.3. Whether the city of London differs from other corporationsin that respect.3. Whether any act of the mayor, aldermen, and commoncouncil, in common council assembled, be so much the actof the corporation, as to make a forfeiture.4. Whether the acts by them done in making the bye-lawand receiving money by it, or in making the petition, andcausing it to be printed and published, be such acts as ifdone by the corporation, will make a forfeiture of thecorporation.It should be recollected that the first important questionwhich arose in this cause was, whether London was, fromtime immemorial, a corporation; upon which issue wasjoined, but not tried. That point, was antecedent to thoseui^ed in this argument; and if decided against the citizens,would have made the discussion of the others unnecessary.LONDON. 1783We shall not for the present canvass that point, but ^^^^ '^'postpone it till the close of this case. I68i.The first matter pressed by the solicitor-general was, ^jjf^to.That a corporation could be forfeited' upon which his g^ii^itorreasoning in point of law, was absolutely conclusive.* General.The second, " That the city of London did not, in essentialqualities, differ from other cities," was also conclusive: andis supported by the numerous documents respecting the oneand the other, which have been quoted in the course ofthis work.The third point, as to the liability of a corporation, for theacts of the common council, depended entirely upon'one fact,whether they represented the body at large ; if they did, ofwhich there could be no doubt, the corporation were clearlybound by them.The fourth, which was the substantial point in the case,(always assuming that London was a corporation,) was whetherthe offences set forth in the replication, were forfeitures; the first of which was the making a bye-law forthe levying of money under the name of tolls.It was a clear ground of seizure, if, being intrusted withthe jurisdiction, they took to themselves the power of levyingmoney upon the subject: — but to say that merely demandingtolls, whether lawfully or not, was a ground offorfeiture, is certainly straining the law beyond its properbounds.The solicitor-general argued at great length the point uponthe right of the corporation to take the tolls : but which, forthe reason given above, was not the real question. Thesecond point, as to the making the bye-laws, seems to be asclearly with him, as the other was doubtful. He properlydescribed it as usurping a power which they could not have,and that it was a breach of trust and misuse of theirfranchise, to the oppression of the king's subjects, and thatthey had taken upon them a legislative power to oppresstheir fellow-subjects.See instances of forfeitures and seizures before, pp. 562, 563, 587~614. Mirroradmitted, pp. 630, 655, 656, 683, 887, 1019, 1076, 1229, 1441, 1661, 1703.1734 LONDON."""'*'"■ The lash point was as to the petition, which the counsel1681. appears to have placed upon its proper ground — not as gosling in Uie presenting, but in the printing and dispersing„ .r it. A distinction well known to the law: and it would be aSacra. strong proposition to say, that the enfranchised grantees ofan exclusive jurisdiction from the crown, should not be liableto have that franchise ficized, when they published a papercharging the king with interrupting the public justice ofthe kingdom ; otherwise the grantees of the executive powerin the state could call in question the exercise of the executivepower by their grantor. A manifest anomaly in municipalpolicy,^'xreb"^ ^''" ^^"^3^ "^^ebi/, who had succeeded Jefferies, afterwardsthe chief justice, argued the case on behalf of thecity. And adopted the same division of the subject, exceptingthat he mentioned incidentally the question of London beinga corporation by a prescription.„ '""', As to the first point, urged by the solicitor-general, thatllM-ntder. r ' o j b ta corporation could be forfeited, the answer of the recorderdoes not appear to be satisfactory; and turns upon technicalraasuaiag, to which the rcaaei must be referred, ai it wouldbe useless to introduce it in this place, the law upon thishead being, now at least, perfectly clear.Neither can the authority of Lord Cote, with respect tothe case of Old Sarum, in order to show, that, though a townshould decay, the borough would continue, be much reliedupon ; as it is in fact only quoting the abuse of the lawagainst the law itself.Neither would it be possible at this day to dispute thedoctrine, that a corporation might be surrendered, whichthe recorder denied. The doctrine, in the case of Norwich,which he quotes, " that though a king can grant a corporation,he cannot dissolve it"* does not help his argument ;for that must be taken to mean, without cause, which is undoubtedlytrue ; and it is equally clear, that for cause theking in his courts of law may dissolve a corporation.SeealaosubBequcDtcateofReiet Reg.t. Larwood,6W.&M. 1 lU^ni. Rep.LONDON. 1786And as to surrender it operates by consent of the granteeCharon II.accepted by the grantor. 1®1«The recorder next argued the point as to the market, and ^j^Janto.contended for a pre-eminent regard to the privileges of r^^London beyond that given to other places ; for which there Reco"*«r-seems do solid ground, excepting in degree, with reference tothe importance of the place. He relied upon providing themarket places, as one of the reasons for the toll.He properly urged, that an unreasonable bye-law was noground for forfeiting a corporation, which is true; but ifthey assumed to themselves to make a law imposing a taxupon the subject, it is an obvious ground for forfeiture. Thatcould never be put on the ground of a mistake in law, oramistake in fact, as the recorder contended it to be. And theargument, that it was only a forfeiture of the market, turnsupon the same point; for that assumes, that the moneywas levied with reference to the market, and not as a generalimposition. If it was the former, no doubt it was not a causeof forfeiture ; but if the latter, it would seem as clearly thereverse.The recorder argued correctly that it was justifiable to petitionthe king : and in that respect his positions are unanswerable,both in argument and principle. But — as is said in thedictum from Lord Hobart, which he quoted — "much mustdepend upon the manner in which it was done." With respectto the matter of the petition, the recorder does not appearto be so successful in his argument. And the excuses forprinting and publishing it are still less satisfactory.The remaining point which he insisted upon was, that theact was done by the common council, and not by the corporationat large : but it is obvious, that unless they had beenappointed by the corporation, they could have had no existenceat all ; and therefore this argument was founded merelyupon a play upon the words.The recorder concluded by tinily asserting, that all innovationswere dangerous ; and expressed his hope that the frameof government in this country which had lasted and beenpreserved for so many hundred years, might still endure.1786 LONDON.^*'''**"' This case was again argued in the next term by Sir RobertH.T.MBi. Sawyer, the attorney-general for the king, who, as to the fiw-wtmnrtt, feature for the misconduct of the corporation, pnt it upon theSir Rote pl<^ ground of the danger either to the king or any of his^* subjects who lived near a corporation, if they were not responsiblein punishment for their conduct.The attorney-general took the same line of argument ashad been before adopted by the solicitor-general, and ills*treated his positions by a variety of cases which it would betedious and needless here to quote.But it is necessary to remark, that his argument goes to showthat ike prwUegeg granted to diei and boroughs were firtheir good rnU and government, wad fomukd upon theeeparaiejurisdiction of the boroughs from the county at large, inspeaking of which he expressly refers to the inhabitants and .their houses, for the government and peace of whom they arecreated, and intrusted by the king upon the public account,and not for any private respect or profit whatever.As to the question respecting the common council, theattorney-general placed it upon the sound ground of theirbeing a body delegated and intrusted by the body atlarge, either expressly in plain words or by implicationof law, and their acts were of the same obligation as if theyall assembled.And as to the levying of money, the argument of the attome-general seems irresistible; when he treats it as beinga power superior to any the king has, by laying burdens uponthe people and levying money. And his reasoning was stillmore conclusive, not with respect to the fact of the petition,but to the matter, form, and nature of it, which he wound upeffectually in this one sentence — " But when the matter isfalse, and the libel published against the king, to withdraw** his people's affections from him, and that by a joint councilof a corporation, there can little room for question remain,but they have broken their original trust for good government,and misused their liberty to licentiousness''It is impossible on the one hand not to admire thelearning, spirit, and talent with which the case was argued ;iLondon. 1787or on the other, to avoid censuring the bad taste and feeling ^**^ J^>with which the argument was closed. 1681.The case was spoken to on the other side, for the city, by ^^^ralnto.Mr. Pollexfen, who denied that there had ever been a pre ^cedent for the forfeiture of a corporation ; but which, con Pollfexfen.ordering the cases cited on the other side, was a strongassertion. He then proceeded upon artificial reasoning, toshow that corporations could not usurp, according to thedefinitions which had been before given of them and of usurpations,by Lord Coke and others. And that the proceedingought not to have been gainst the body at large, butagainst the particular persons.He also argued as to the defects of the pleading in pointof form, and the manner and effect of the judgment.And as to the bye-law for the toll in the market, hequoted many instances to show that the common councilhad the power of making bye-laws ; and as to the levyingmoney on the king, he contended, that at most, it was butextortion, but not a ground of forfeiture.With respect to the petition, he contended that the factscontained in it, and admitted by the demurrer, were true; andhe repeated the argument that the corporation were not liablefor the act of the common council. And he further argued,that even if all the other points were against him, the petitionwas not such an offence, as that the corporation shouldbe forfeited for it. And in summing up his argument, hecontended that the information should have been broughtagainst the particular persons — that it was repugnant andcontradictory, that a corporation could usurp to be a corporation— that a body politic or being could usurp to be abody politic or being before it had a being, — or to be thatsame body politic or being which it was when it did usurpthat if forfeiting a franchise could not determine it till theforfeiture appeared on record, then the old corporation supposedto be forfeited did continue in being till there was arecord ; and consequently, that one which is pretended tobe a new one by usurpation, is impossible.That if by seizure into the king's hands the continuance of1788 LONDON.Charles II. f^^ corporation is intended, it is inconsistent with law and1681. justice to continue in the king any thing that is wrongfullywamnto. usurped. And he objected to the form of the pleadings, and1^^ contended, that seizures and forfeitures were different ; andPoUcxfen. that the forfeiture by misusing or abusing a franchise wasnot applicable to a capacity or being.That the common council were merely delegates, deputies,or ministers of the corporation, and should answer for whatthey have done amiss in their own persons. That good righthad been shown to make bye-laws for the markets and tolls ;and that if any one of those points were with him, he oughtto have judgment.Judgment. In the next term, judgment was given in this case.Pemberton had been chief justice till the time whenit began.* Upon its commencement he was removed, andChief Justice Saunders, placed in his stead died the day thejudgment was given, or the next day after; and Mr. JusticeJones, having present with him Mr. Justice Raymond, andMr. Justice Withers, who concurred with him, deliveredthe judgment of the court, affirming, that the chief justicewas of the same opinion with them, and that they all agreed,1st. That a corporation aggregate might he seized, and thatthe statute 28th of Edward III. c. 10, expressly states it;and that bodies politic might offend and be pardoned ; forwhich the articles of pardon, in the 12th of Charles 11.,and the statute for regulating corporations in the 13th yearof the same reign were cited.2nd. That the exacting and taking money, by the pretendedbye-law, was extortion, and a forfeiture of thefranchise of being a corporation.3rd. That the petition was scandalous and libellous : andthe making and publishing it a forfeiture.4th. That the act of the common council was the act of thecorporation.5th. That the matter set forth in the record did not excuseor avoid the forfeitures.6th. That the information was well founded, and thereforeSec Life of Lord Keeper Guildford, vol. li. p. 40, and the nolt;s^ there.LONDON. 1789judgment was given, that the franchise should be seized into chMiw ii.the king's hands : but the entry of it was respited until the 16B1.king's pleasure should be known. warranto.And the attorney-general as to the issue to be tried by j^j^ent.the country : and the claiming to have sheriffs : And thatthe mayor and aldermen should be justices, and hold sessions: Ordered, " that a noli prosequi should be entered."As to the rest, the court took time to advise tillTrinity Term, when the judgment was entered, that themayor, and commonalty, and citizens, had forfeited theirfranchise to the king — that their plea was bad, and thereforeit was considered that the liberty, privilege, and franchiseof being a body politic and corporate, and pleadingand being impleaded by their corporation name, should betakenand seised into the king's hands.This case, probably in a judicial as well as a politicalpoint of view, the most important that ever occurred in thecourts of law, both in its origin and result, has been muchmisrepresented on the one side and the other. It is impossibleto form a correct opinion upon the subject, withoutconsidering the historical facts which preceded and accompaniedit.Whether called for by the king's conduct or not, whichmay be a disputable question, the House of Commons hadundoubtedly thrown great difficulties in the way of the kingand his government.The city of London had taken a prominent part in increasingthose difficulties. Political animosities, aided byincessant and violent disputes upon religion, had arisen* tothe greatest possible height ; and there can be no doubt butthat the election of the sheriffs in London, in the unusualcourse to which we have before referred, whether it waslegal or not, had been founded upon party political feelings.It seems however clear, that the interference of the courton that occasion, was both violent and arbitrary ; and in amanner not justified by the law.The thanks of the House were given at this time to the city of London, for thepart it took in these transactions.1790 LONDON.^'^^"**"' As far therefore as the quo warranto was in any degree toIW be attributed to those proceedings, as some writers havesift. considered, it was unwarrantable ; but upon the other handit must be remembered, that the House of Commons, inordinatelyalarmed upon the subject of papacy, had its suspicionsand fears roused to such an extent, as to be led intoacts altogether unjustifiable, and upon the suspicions it entertained,was attempting to interrupt the succession of thecrown, and introduced a bill into Parliament for that purpose.It was the bounden duty of the king, by his oath and honour,to maintain that succession unimpaired. Had the billpassed both Houses of Parliament he must, as a man, havegiven it his negative. It was better for him personally — andfor the nation generally — that he should avoid that dilemma,and dissolve the Parliament.However, be that point as it may, it was his indisputableright and prerogative to do so if he thought fit.On the other hand, it was the clear right of any of hismajesty's subjects — ^tbe city of London or others — to addressthe king in a becoming manner, upon that or any other pointconnected with their interest.But for any individual — and still more for a corporatebody — exercising municipal and judicial government underthe authority of the king — to address his majesty, and state,that by the exercise of his rightful prerogative, the prosecutionof the public justice of the kingdom — and the makingprovision necessary for the preservation of the king and hissubjects had been interrupted — was a libel on the king ; and,as such, ought not to have been made under the pretenceof a petition to his majesty. And even if, it might be excused,as inconsiderately, or hastily made ; yet its beingprinted and generally published was, under any circumstances,sufficiently unjustifiable to warrant the filing of theinformation of quo warranto.The making of the bye-law for collecting tolls from themarket was, also, probably a just legal ground of interposition.But still it is evident, that it was heather sought foras a reason for supporting the quo warranto, than the realLONDON. 1791cause of its being filed. And so far this latter complaint ^^^^ ^^'must be attributed to the feeling prevalent at that time in 1681.the court against the city ; and it undoubtedly throws upon santo.the proceeding a doubt and suspicion which would not havearisen had the measure been confined to its real occasion.Such would be the considerations with reference to filingthe information.As to the progress of the cause it cannot but be admittedon both hands that the case was most ably and mostlearnedly argued on both sides,* and apparently with equalindifference to each party, and under no restraint or embarrassment.As to the judgment also, undoubtedly, the removal of theLord Chief Justice, and substituting another Judge, is opento the suspicion which will always attend changes of thatdescription, without any honest assignable cause for them.But it is an unjustifiable weakness to allow such a suspicionto warp the mind from considering the real merits ofthe case.Upon some points there can be no doubt, that the judgmentgiven by the court could be supported.That a corporation may be forfeited there can be noquestionsThe exaction of the tolls, though perhaps supportable asaground of forfeiture, is a disputable point.That the petition was scandalous and libellous there canbe no doubt ; and if the legality of its being made werequestionable, there can be no hesitation in saying that thepublishing of it, was in a corporation a high crime andmisdemeanour : which, if any thing could justify the recallingAf preparations to the arguments a most elaborate collection was madefrom the city records, by the celebrated antiquarian, Mr. Petit, whose MSS.have been quoted from the Inner Temple Library :— and the records to which herefers, fully confirm all we have before stated, with respect to the citizens—their constituency— and inhabitancy — continual residence— and paying scot and lot :as well as the distinction between the citizens and foreigners. See also awriting upon the same subject in Strype's Stow, Ist edit. 1755, vol. ii. Holt'sRep. 168 ; S. C. 1 Shaw, 263, 2 Cro. 260, 10 Rep. 33, Sutton's castRex et Reg. v. Haywood, 1 Rays. Rep. 29 ; the King v. Ameryy, 2 T. R.515. The King v. Monck, 2 Dumb. & East, 515. And see the referencesbefore, p. 1783.«.'1792 LONDON.'"'"'" "■ an authority which hind bren abused, wnuM-early warrantISBI, the forfeiture of the municipal franchise.warranto. That the corporation was not to be bound by the act ofithe common council, was a mere subterfuge which it wouldhave been a disgrace to the law to have allowed to be successful.In fact, law, and morals, it was the act of the corporation,and intended so to be.The other parts of the judgment are merely the formalconclusions of law from the above premises, and upon thewhole, no mind investigating this subject with the impartialitywhich the distance of time allows, can hesitate to giveits assent to the legality of this judgment.However, so perverse are mankind, that when a supposedinjury has been committed, they are prone to run into anopposite extreme. After the still more violent reign ofJames II., upon the coming of the Prince of Orange, thelegislature were induced to puss an act declaring that thejudgment delivered by the three judges, in a court of competentjurisdiction,* after a full hearing of the case, wasillegal and arbitrary.It is perhaps a strong position to state, that this act ofthe legislature is difficult to be supported, either on theground of law or justice ; but a consideration of the statutewill appear to warrant such an assertion.If the legislature had merely restored the corporation toall its functions, it would have done all that was useful ornecessary, and no complaint could have been made of theproceeding. But to go beyond that, and declare the judgmentto be illegal and arbitrary, must be attributed to thediseased temper of the times. That the framers of thestatute were disposed to go great lengths upon this subject,may be farther seen from this circumstance — that notwithstandingthe documents and authorities which were referredto iu that case, and the continued series we have quoted,as well as those published by the numerous writers on therights and privileges of the city of London ; and particularlythe late publication of Mr. Norton ; no document• 2 Wills Mary, cap. 6.warranto.LONDON. 1793appears which shows London ever to have been incorporated ; chris ii.yet the legislature — as almost a solitary specimen of the 1681.kind— enacted, contrary to the fact — that the mayor and Q"^commonalty and citizens might prescribe to be a body corporateand politic : — Probably the greatest stretch of legislativepower which our statute book exhibits.Upon the whole, therefore, a dispassionate inquirer mustbe led to conclude, that comparing these legislative andjudicial acts with each other, the former must be held inlower estimation than the latter.But whatever justification may be asserted for the proceedingsin the London quo warranto, it is impossible toexcuse, or make any apology for, the proceedings adoptedwith respect to the other boroughs in England : which cannotbe characterised in any other manner than in the languageadopted by Hume, who says — " the crown thereby gave the*' greatest wound to the legal constitution of the country,** which the most powerful and arbitrary monarch had everbeen enabled to inflict"*The course adopted after the judgment in the London quowarranto, is described by Roger North, in his life of the LordKeeper Guildford — " Either to court or frighten harmlessor orderly corporations to surrender — or upon refusal, toplunge them in the chargeable and defenceless conditionof going to law against the crown — whereby that which** would not come by fair means, was extorted by violence."One of the principal instruments in these proceedings wasJudge Jefferies, who is described by the same author — " ashaving originally begun in the city with a turbulent spirit,taking part with the commons against the mayor and courtof aldermen, and so got made recorder." It is, however,probably too severe to attribute this conduct to Jefferies : for*' he was a high flier for the authority of the mayor, and courtof aldermen." Jefieries afterwards gave up the office ofrecorder, and was succeeded by Treby; and it was afterJefferies was made a judge, that he obtained much credit• Hume, viii. 178.t Roger North, in Ww Life of Lord Keeper Guildford, p. 115.5yitittltttt>• with the king, for procuring, in the maimer suggested above,in the life of tUe lord keeper, the surrenders of many chatters,insomuch, " that when he went the midland circuit ulord chief justice, h« le said to have made it his gnatbusiness to terrify the people into compliance with thesurrender of their charter. And at hia return he waitedon his majesty at Windsor, and delivered up to him thecharters of the city of Lincoln, and of several others withinhis circuit, as an oblation, it ia added, of his own loyalty,*' and a triumph over the people's liberties"* One of thecharges against him afterwards was *' his avoiding Dmcharter8."i-These proceedings, Hume justly observes, " left no rationalprivileges in security, but enabled the king underlike pretences, and by means of bke instruments, to reclaim"rU the charters which he pleased."The effect of such a course upon those who witnessed theirdanger, is also aptly described by him " as unfortunately embarkingin faction those powers, talents, and exertions,which, if applied in a legal and constitutional manner toredeem the state, might have produced effects more prt^t-able to the country and less ruinous to themselves."Another individual, engafiei! in procuring the surrenderthe charters, was the Karl ol' Batli ; who returned from Cornwallonly the day after the king's death, with pow«« of attorneyto surmise the charters (rf 13 or 14 places id Itt west.And he is said to have had in his possession " do Ici iliad15 charters, bo that some called him the ' prince elector;'and be put into those charters for Cornwall (as wa Stavenoted before), the names of various officers of the ^ardc'tAnd Roger North also says, " that the trade of chartersran to excess, and turned to an avowed practice of garblingcorporations for the purpose of carrying elections to theParliaments■ 3 KeoDct, 423.t EvdTi'i Mem. vol, p,i Bnroetl'i Hut. of hit oit6 Cobbelt,P.H.,p.«13.fit.1 Time, vol. in. p. Iste.QUO WARRANTO INFORMATIONS. I795Choktll.BRISTOL.was another of the places proceeded against ; theelections of mayors, sheriffs, and other officers being allegedto be made by different numbers — 49, 51, and 63, instead ofthe usual number of 43 ;* and the charge was, that they hadclaimed to be, of themselves, a body corporate and politic,&c., and to appoint two sheriffs and the mayor to be justicesof the peace, and to choose, from themselves, a commoncouncil, consisting of certain citizens exceeding the numberof 60,t with power to make bye-laws, &c.The city, alarmed at these proceedings, executed a surrenderto the king in the following form :** To the king's most excellent majesty.'' We, the mayor, burgesses, and commonalty having forseveral years past negotiated all the principal affairs of thiscity, made all the elections of our mayor and recorder, townclerk, sheriffs, common councilmen and all other officerswhatsoever amongst us, by a supernumerary common councilcontrary to the institutions of this city and charters and contraryto the usage and custom ever since that time, till oflate years ; and that we may have been faulty in that particular,and that there are some defects in the model of thegovernment among up. We therefore pray and beseechyour majesty to accept, and we have granted, surrendered,nul yielded up all the powers, franchises, liberties, privileges,authorities, &c., heretofore granted, used, or exercised,conceding the electing of any person or persons to theoffices, trusts, &c. of mayor, aldermen, sheriffs, recorder, ortown clerk, by virtue of any letters patent, charters, prescriptions,&c. And we, the mayor, burgesses and commonaltypray your majesty to accept this surrender, and imploreyour favour to confirm our charter as to all otherprivileges, and to grant unto the citizens the said libertiesand franchises, or so many of them as your majesty maythink conducive to the good government of the city."J• Vide pott., pp. 1798, 1799. f lb.X In this rai render, the town clerk is mentioned, but no such officer \% createdby any previous charter. This surrender is, in point of law, void, never having6y21796 ^^^ WARRANTO INFORMATIONS.chfiCT II. Bristol, like London,* is not spoken of as a corporation inBmtol. any of the charters before this time. And in a case at lawin 1682,f it was objected to the mayor and sheriffs that theydid not allege themselves to be a corporation. It is describedin the information of quo warranto, as having usurped theright of being a body corporate and politic. The mayor, burgesses,and commonalty in their surrender, do not in anyrespect, refer to their having been a corporation.After this surrender, the king granted a charter to Bristol,for the purpose of incorporating it, which commences with arecital, that for the bettering of the city of Bristol, and forthe good rule and government of the people therein ; andupon the petition of the late mayor, burgesses and commonalty,the king had granted that it might be for ever aiDcorpo- city incorporated and county by itself, in as ample and largeborders, &c. as the city and county had been terminatedfor any time within the space of twenty year past.That the citizens and inhabitants of the city, and theirName, successors, might be a body corporate and politic, by the nameof the mayor, burgesses and commonalty of the city ofBristol," with power to purchase lands, &c. and have perpetualsuccession, &c.The mayor and two sluMiils hire then appointed, whowere to have the same authority as their predecessors theretoforehad in Bristol.That all mayors should have their oaths of office administeredto them by the mayor of the city immediately preceding,if surviving and abiding h\ the city; or in his absence,by the recorder ; and in his absence, by the senioralderman who at that time should be inhabiting and residingxclthln the citg^That there nnuht l)c in the eitv as nianv of the better andmore discreet hnrg esses '^\m\ InhnhitiDits, who with the mayorbeen enrolled. — Newlint; r. Francie;, 3 T. Kcp. 3ft0. — But it having at a subsequentperiod been cancelled by the attorney-general, and returned to the mayor, it wasrendered absolutely nugatory.• London also uns not mentioned its a corporation, till a chapter granted to them inthe sixth year of James I., and then only indirectly in the confirmation of theprivileges " granted to them and their predecessors, by whatsoever name of incursporation." t 2 Show. 2.%\QUO WARRANTO INFORMATIONS. 1797and aldermen should not exceed the number of 43; and with chariCTii.them should be called the common council to aid the mayor Bristol.for the good governance of the city, &c. ; and that as vacanciesoccurred, they should be supplied from the discreet Vacancies.burgesses and inhabitants.Powers are then granted to the common council to makebye-laws, &c.That no laws made by them should be binding beyondthe space of one year, unless approved of by the lordchancellor.That the common council should elect the mayor annuallyfrom themselves; and also the two sheriffs from amongthemselves or not; and might elect and nominate all otherofficers.The recorder is then appointed and named ; but futurerecorders were to be elected by the mayor and commoncouncil ; and their selection confirmed by royal assent.The recorder and eleven others are then nominated andappointed aldermen, and to be justices of the peace, with thesame powers as theretofore.That the mayor and aldermen should fill up vacanciesfrom the common council.That all the aldermen of the city for the time being, therecorder excepted, should be resident within the city or Resident,suburbs, liberties and precincts of the same.The charter then proceeds to grant amongst other things,that the mayor and commonalty shall have all pines &c. Common-thatthe mayor might hold four sessions of the peace.That all the fines at gaol delivery should be reserved tothe crown.A town clerk, and steward of the sherifTs court are thenappointed and named : and that the common council mightelect the successors, who were to be barristers of three years'standing, and approved of by the king.That the two coroners, nominated in future, should beelected by the common council, and approved of by the king.That all the corporate officers should be removable underthe seal of the privy council.il7B6 qoiwABUinoiNFORiuTtoiia."^'t- A got of Gun Ud market, Ac, with a general confirmedBntitm of prinlegee, concltKleit this charter.^^^ It fboold be barred, thftt this document establishes ThatlotUMMi time huxguaet were the miaAUants of the place ; by stating inI the preamble that it was intended for keeping the peace of theI town, and the good rule and government of the people iheroKjI ' which clearly describes the persons intended to be affectedI by the charter; and there seems no sound reason for assuni'I . ing that they were not the persons to whom it was granted.Suuwitr. It seems to assume that the former charters had been sriifOdered, hecate it speaks of the late mayor, burgesses,and commonalty. If it was granted on the assumption oftkt \awTCuder Jmitg vaud, as in fact it turns out not to be, theI charter was void,* inasmuch as the king was deceived, andI - the charter hinted on the erroneous assumption of a rapidBomnder.-t-lawns 'RiiB charter expressly incorporated the town, and makesthe citizens and iuhabitOMtl the corporation; which tende toI confirm the opinion befcne expressed, that it was not ancientlyI a Importing ; — for after so long a series of charters, it wouldbe strain, that one should he granted, expressly particularitiesall the corporate powers, and should incoipontothem in a new and unusual manner, if they were refine hwor^ported by implication or otherwise,inhiututi It should also be observed, that the incorporation exjseadyincludes the inhabitants ; confirming the former assumption,that the inhabitants were the persons intended to be intendedin the operation of the charter.Conrooo The " common council " are first mentioned by name inthis grant. Excepting indeed that in the quo warranto, theburgesses and commonalty are charged with usurping theprivilege of choosing a common council ; and in the surrender,the burgesses admit that they have had a supernumerarycommon council ; so that it seems questionable whether theywere entitled to have such a body before this charter ; andIn 1710, th bu[E««e> refined U> act under Hit charter, cangideiinj UtoM.t See Piper u. Dennis, Hall's Rep. 170 ; U Mod. 2&3 ; and Bather n. Falkner.Salk. 190( Rei u. Osborne, 4 Eait,327; and M-Williami'i cue, Djtt, 237 ■;aod the Duke of SoEnenel'ECBse, 3 Dyer, 355.QUO WARRANTO INFORMATIONS. 1799as it was Told, it could not gire them the right of electing ^^"^^'^such a body; therefore it seems that such election caa* Brktol.not be supported ; nor any election of the kind excepting the40 under the charter of the 47th of Edward III.A common clerk also is for the first time appointed by thisgrant; although such an officer is before mentioned in thecharter of the 16th Charles II. ; but it does not appear by whatauthority he had been appointed. It seems to be assumed inthis charter of the 36th Charles 11., that a common clerk hadexisted long before in the city.IPSWICH.Ipswich also was another place against which similar proceedingswere had in the Court of King's Bench: by whichthe burgesses were intimidated, and imitating the exampleof many other corporations, they surrendered all their chas surrender.ters, franchises, and privileges to the king by a formal deedunder their common seal. After this was obtained fromthem, his majesty incorporated them anew^by granting thefollowing charter, which commences with a recital, ** that** for the advancements the town, and hoping that the burgesses,and inhabitants by enjoying more ample liberties,would feel themselves more bound to perform their services,"granted that the town or borough of Ipswich, might for ever beatown or borough incorporated, and that the burgesses and lncon>o-commonalty might for ever be one body corporate andpolitic, and that by the name of ** the bailifis, burgesses,and commonalty," might have perpetual succession, &c. —the usual corporate powers are then granted, and provisionsrespecting the election of the municipal officers. *The charter concludes with a clause, that '^ all the officers*' of the borough should be removable by order of the king in** privy council'*It also provides that the common council might admit any Common. Council.persons inhabiting or not inhabiting within the town orborough, to hefreennen for their lives, of the borough, if not Freemen.by the common council removed ; but that no person shouldbe admitted, who did not conform to the church of England ;receive the holy eucharist within the space of six monthsid tiuprcinicy,CHESTER.Center abo was in the same predicament. A wansntilfattorney to appear, was produced under the mayor's Boiland was afterwards followed by a surrender."Romney, e<c.Romney, and many other places too Numerous to uexperienced & similar unconstitutional interference.PETERSriELU.The extent however to which proceedings went, may be ,collected from this fact, thiit in the convention Parliament 'the precept to Peternjield (anionc^st other places) was directedto the chief magistrate, or such others of the borough of Petrified,as had a right to make returns according to theancient usage of the borough, before the seizure or nvrrettderof charters, in the time of King Charles II.IRELAND.Generally speaking, the same system of interference withthe boroughs and corporations, which prevailed during thisreign in England, was extended also to those institutions inIreland ; if not as universally, at least more decisively, andexpressly for the purpose of influencing the parliamentaryelections ' Thus the year after the Restoration, the followingtetter was written by Lord Orrery to " the Sovereign andinhabitants oi ^ctovm. oi Kindle."• Skinner, IM.t An Bnenerto a letter addieastd in this reign 10 an English Peered, shown thisJoseph Williamson, Secretary or Sute. wrote to Lady Anne, nidoir of the Mariaoi Dorset and Pembroke, and heiress to ibe House of Clifford and Cumberland,and who posted the borough of Appleby, to name a candidate to her fi thatborough ; to which application the foLlowing answer was relumed;—I holt bri bullied by an lijurper, / have been neglected by a Court, kul I vilnot Ih dilated lo by a subject ; ymtr man ihart't standi•' Anne Dorset. J'midi-oie, ami Mnnlgmery."t Orrery Slate Letter. The Each of Oiteiy wu ai this period one of the lordjiislic«hIRELAND 1801Charles II.Gentlemen, Dublin, Nov. 26, 1661. -:His majesty having commissioned the lords justices jggj *speedily to convene a Parliament here, they, in order thereto,have sent out writs to the several counties and boroughs inthis kingdom for electing members to serve in Parliament,which will begin the 8th of May next, and therefore shallentreat you to choose Colonel Handle Clayton, to serve asone of the burgesses of the corporation. And if you havenot agreed upon another for yourselves, then William Fitzgeraldmay be the other ; and one or both, if chosen, shallserve you gratis, and act as earnestly in your concerns asany other you shall choose. The performing whereof shallbe acknowledged as a kindness done to your friend andservant.« Orrery"*For my respected friends the sovereign andinhabitants of the town of Kinsale."Six years afterwards the following letter was also sent to thesame place : —Earl of Onely, Lord-President of Munster, to Sir RobertSouthwell, clerk of his majesty's privy councils.« Sir, " Charleville, bth Sept, 1667.I have received yours of the third instant, and amsorry you should meet with no readier a compliance from thesovereign and burgesses of Kinsale than I find by yours youhave done ; and although I have not so much experience in theThe Earl of Orrery, who, as Lord Broghill, took so conspicuous a part during theProtectorate, having declared for the restoration of the Stuart dynasty, he was, in1660, created Earl of Orrery : sworn of the king's privy council, appointed one ofthe lords justices, and lord president of Munster.* His character was so celebratedas a judge in his presidency court, that the king, and the Duke of York, offeredhim the seals, after the disgrace of Clarendon. The Earl of Orrery, also, drew thefamous act of settlement, by which titles to the property of the Irish nation weregranted and secured.In a letter of April Pth, 1678, among the State Papers and Correspondence of the£ail of Orrery with the Duke of Ormond and Sir Robert Southwell, he states,• Vide post., Kinsale.180Q IMLAHD.'^"'""- law as to advise you which way to proceed in your business,yet I am not of Mr. Ryan and Mr. Hare's opinion, who nay,that a corporation, being an enviable body, cannot be sued."If such quibbles are in the law, I am a stranger to them : butI think that, in honour and conscience, all engagements oughtto be performed to whomsoever the management of the newcharter is committed. I know my lord-lieutenant hath orderedthat none in this province shall pass without my approbation ofthe persons to be Terminated in it ; but that will take up sometimebefore it be performed, for until Cork, Waterford, andLimerick, the three cities of this province which must be firstpreferred, have their charters, the charters of any other of thecorporations will not be permitted to be proceeded on. AlthoughI am of opinion that the opposition given to your leaseby some of the burgesses is a juggle, yet 1 can say no morethan this, that if your contest comes judicially before me, I shallnot vary from the opinion I have of your bargain, nor fromanything else which may be against favour or kindness to you,and I do believe your procuring the opinion of this provincialcourt, that your contract ought to be made good, will btj nosmall inducement to procure a clause for it in the new charter,"Sec &c. &c.STATUTES.The statutes also in Ireland proceeded much in the sameless, course as in this put of the kingdran.Cap. 1. They commence with & reception of the knag's title to tirthrone; quid of inundation and abhorrence of the rebelliousand traitorous patricide of King Charles I.The growth of popery will b«, I find, much Urea to heart. I confer lliat a tplut Would not have thnveia bu nnjtttr'B dominions. I am dim that detoal any for coiueieiicc. but 1 would not hee those loo faigb which make per-Mcutidg all oaken Fat their coucieiice a cajx>D, and coDMqueiitlj a duty of theirTheM IcUcrs present a mort perfect delineation of the private eveBk which characterisethe period between 1661 and 1679— are ako highly illiutiativeof the realwImiaiMratioD cf the law— and the general state of Ireland ; — but we purposely ab-staidfrom other extracts, which inighlseein to apply loo much to ihepreaeat tiniei,and have the appearance of party feeling.*Thiiwas the argument of Sir George Treby.the recorder, and Mr.Polleifen,inthe London quo warranto. The metaphysical extravagance of it ii too abmrd sortiesober decision official inieitiEatioa.IRELAND. 1803An act for the confirmation of judicial proceedings, and for ^^^*'^^^'their continuance. Cap. 2, 3.In the succeeding year, there are also acts for raising money 1651.for his majesty's service, for continuing the customs and excise Cap. i.and subsequent statutes as to the poundage and tonnage ; and Cap. 3.an act for the better execution of his majesty's declaration for IGSSLthe settlement of the kingdom : which is followed in the statute Cap. 2.book by the king's declaration : with instructions to the com-■miflsionersy who are also appointed ; and the regulations aregiven at great length.There are also rules relative to trade, giving to every mer Cap. 9.chant free liberty to trade, distinguishing between natives andstranger 8 f and those horn out of the dominions of his majesty,and afterwards made denizens.And an act for the real union and division of parishes : and Cap. lo.concerning churches and fi-ee schools.Another statute for encouraging Protestant strangers to Cap. 13.inhabit and plant the kingdom of Ireland.An act for an additional revenue to his majesty, for the Cap. 17.support of his crown and dignity ; and for licenses for the Cap. 18.selling of ale and beer.An act corresponding with that in England, for taking Cap. 19.away the courts of wards and liveries, and tenures in capite,and by knight service.An act for explaining doubts in the act of settlement. Cap. 2*.An act for the uniformity of public prayers, &;c. And Cap. 6.another for the provision of ministers in cities and corporate Cap. 7.towns.A statute for the better collection of hearth money. With Cap. is.respect to which it may be observed, that this tax is imposedon the owners and occupiers of houses, as we haveseen the scot and lot were from the earliest period. And asaconfirmation of the property of the clergy being generallydischarged from burdens of this description, a special clauseis introduced to make them liable to this particular tax.For which their peculiar position will readily account.A further declaration was made for the removal of doubts"" • as to provisions under the dict of settlement, which ure'3- generally termed " the nere rules." They run to great length ;■Rotes, ^"'i specific rules are made for Dublin, Drogheda, Limerick,Galway; and also a set of rules for Cork, Waterford, Kin-sale,Youghal, Castel, Clonmel, Allow, Londonderry, ,Colprsiine, Strabane, Charlemagne, Trim, Dundalk,Kilkenny, Wexford, and Ross; and other "rules for the."regulation general of all cities, walled towns, and corporalstions in Ireland ; and the elections of magistrates and officers.■" there, for which no other particular rules had been made."K/They state an addret's made to the Duke of Ormond, as lordlieutenant, by the commissioners appointed by the kijig, specifyingthe doubts which had arisen upon the cases beforethem, as to the construction of the act of settlement.I PkUi*- The lord lieutenant and council therefore make a declarationto remove those doubts. After which follow the diP-^fervent rules to which we have referred, relative to the electionof mayors and other officers, and the oaths to be admIni»->tered to them. Those for DtthVin declared the number ofthe common council, consisting of the mayor, series, andaldermen, and the sheriffs' peers, not exceeding 48; to be'chosen out of the several guilds and corporations of thecity, specifying the manner in which they were to benominated. " And any person pretending to be one of thecommons not having been duly elected, was to be disfranchised.The tine is fixed for the admission of allforeigners, strangers, and aliens, as well others as protestants,who are merchants, traders, artizans, artificersseamen, or otherwise skilled and exercised in any mystery,craft, trade, or in the working or making of any manufacture,or in the ait of navigation, who were at that timeResiding. " present, residing and inhabiting, or should at any timethereafter come into the city with intent and resolutionthere to inhabit, reside, and dwell, shoidd upon theirreasonable suit or request made, and upon payment down,or tender of 20*. by way of fine to the lord mayor andcouncil, or other persons authorized to admit and makeuitIRELAND. . 1805freemen, be admitted freemen of the city; and if they should chwiM^desire it of all or any guild,* brotherhood, society, or fellow 1673.ship, of any trade, craft, or other mystery within the NewRulcs. . '' '' Freemen.same during his or their residence, for the most part and Guilds.^' his and their families constant inhabiting within that kingdom,and no longer; and should enjoy all privileges oftrading, working, buying, and selling as any freemen of thecity might enjoy by virtue of his freedom; and persons soadmitted are to be taken as denizens."The oath of allegiance is then directed to be administered, Oath.and all other customary oaths ; and that they '^ shall pay allsuch charges as all freemen of his majesty's subjects ofthe like trade shall pay. And any persons refusing to** admit any such persons shall, upon complaint, and dueproof of such refusal before the lord lieutenant, and otherchief governor, be disfranchised, and from thenceforth be'* incapable without their license of being a freeman. And*' the stranger, upon tender of his 20^. by way of fine, andtaking the oath before any justice of the peace, shallthereupon be deemed, reputed, and taken to be a freemanof the city, and of the brotherhood, &c. where he was denied,and might from thenceforth exercise all the privileges, &c.;'* and any person interrupting them, shall, upon like complaintbefore the lord lieutenant, be disfranchised."The rules are established for ever, and are directed to beenrolled in chancery.It is impossible for the reader to peruse these rules, andrecollecting the history — laws — charters and documentswhich have been before cited, not to perceive that thesedirections must have been copied from the ancient privilegesand practices of the English and Irish boroughs.It will be seen in the first place, that the whole rests, as Evidence.common sense, and the reason and object of the regulations,would dictate, upon actual residence.Every person of the description mentioned was, upon hisrequest, to be admitted. They were also, in conformityHere we find the guilds and fellowships mentioned an distinct from the municipalbody, as we have repeatedly pointed out in the English boroughs.£1t(U1806 IRELAND.ChMria II . ^m, j|jg ancient practice, so often explained, to pay a fine,'^*'i ^poa which they were to be admitted and swam. And theclear distinction between the general freedom of the city, andthe Freedom of any guild or mystery, is expressly mentioned.The other rules, in effect, correspond with these forDublin.It is a striking circumstance, that notwithstanding theI dear and express language of these rules, and that they are\ still in force, they have been in Ireland so totally disregarded,That the exclusive system, reducing the sovereign, burgessesand freemen to the smallest numbers, has been uninterruptedlypursued, in direct defiance of these provisions.The following extract of a letter from Lord Orrery to LordRanel^h,* dated Charleville, July 4th, 164*2, may in somedegree explain what took place at the time of making theserules. Tile better course will be to let the writer speak forhimself. After observing at considerable length upon theclaims of the Irish, demanding, from the act of council thenI'lalely published, to be free of all the corporations to whichthey did belong, and that near eight parts of them were neitherm tradesmen, merchants, nor habitants, of the old corporations,tu nay, many of them not so much as living in the county wherethe corporations were, &c ; his lordship states, that " he hadaddressed his majesty npm the subject, so^estiiig thefoUowbg regulations: That none of the Irish be admittedfreemen ; but such only as are, or shall be resident usuallyin the corporations ; and they shall pay yearly 20<., in the*' duty of custom tmly to bis majesty."That none of the Irish who are made free, shall be of thepannel, (that is capable to elect the annual magistrate andmembers of Parliament) but such as shall be ^uteluepersin the corporation, and pay 10/. in custom duties only to« his majesty.Hereby none but merchants will be made freemen, andthe rabble, which are the dangerous persons, will beexcluded ; for such as are merchants will have a stock toanswer for them »■ and having an honest vocation, will be• Sgulkwell MSS.IRELAND. 1607apter to follow that, than to mind doing mischief; especially ^^^^'"''*ititIttittittititttiaititttithaving all the just encouragement that can be given to them ^^^*'^ to follow their trade and merchandise. He can scarcely desserve the name of a merchant, who does not trade to the'^ value of 20/. a-year ; and he can hardly deserve to be (^ thepannel, who does not pay 102. year in duty of cust<»n8 tothe king; so that all merchants may be fine of the city, even'^ with the better sort of merchants ; and all may be of thepannel, that are of the better sort This way all traders andmerchants may have their fitting encouragement, and their*' ancient freedom, and yet this way his majesty's garrisonsmay be kept from being crowded with the beggarly and disorderlysort of people; and all the Irish will be encouraged tobe tradesman and merchants, when but 20«. yearly duty incustom is required to capacitate them to be freemen, and but102. yearly duty in customs is required to capacitate themto elect annual magistrates, and members of parliamentTo which I humbly offer, that none that are made fireshould pay any duty of the staple : and that none of the Irish'^ should pay above 22^., (which was the ancient rate) for all'' the offices he must go through in the corporation, to have** letters c^ freedom, &c."And another letter from the king to the Earl of Essex, theLord Lieutenant of Ireland, dated January 14, 1672, may 1672.be inserted for the same purpose.It commences by stating, that '^ certain rules concerning<' corporations, had been lately published by the Irish privy'' council; but that they had been suspended by his orders, and*^ that, lest the letters of suspension should be misunderstood,and a disallowance of magistrates and officers, which weremade in the corporations of Ireland, at Michaelmas lastensue, he had thought fit to approve of all the elections(excepting those, which for special reasons, the earl hadnot confirmed,) and approved of the election of those nine^* or ten Roman catholics, into the common council of thecity of Dublin.*^ That no new charters should be granted to any of thecities or towns corporate, but to induce them to live peaceitttitttablif with one another, and dutifully toivnrth the. eocenement; and iilwve all things, extinguishing and suppressing;by all means and ways you shall judge most proper, the'malicious suggestion diffused amongst them, of our desireto infringe, or any ways weaken the late acts of settlementand explanation, which it never entered into our heart to do,either by our late commissions here for inspection into th»-** affairs of that our kingdom, or any indulgence we have lately*' granted to our Roman catholic subjects, to live in town.corporate, as was expressed in our letters, bearing date iba-20th day of February, 1671."1686. In a letter also, from the Earl of Clarendon to Lord Sun-letter.demand, dated Dublin castle, July C, 1686, that noble writer,amongst many other things, says, " that he has sent lettersto all the corporations, to give their freedom to all Romancatholics, as to his majesty's other subjects, without titteringthem the oath of supremacy, and for presenting tomesuch as shall be chosen into offices, that I may dispensewith their taking the oath according to the rules. Ihave already received returns from about twenty of thecorporations, and every day I receive from one or other,all full of duty and obedience, saying they have obeyed,and tell me what number of Roman catholics they haveadmitted ; others saying they have appointed such andsuch days for their public assemblies, that those who wouldbe admitted may have notice, so that the king may beassured, that throughout, it will be settled as he commanded.In some places where they have two bailifis,(which are the chief magistrates,) they have without anycontest chosen one of each religion, and if due care be taken,there is no doubt they will live very well together," Andmost desirable would it have been, if the noble writer's expectationsof a peaceful unanimity had been answered at thetime, and had continued to the present day.From this correspondence some opinion may perhaps befanned of the difficulties in enforcing the new rules, whichmay in some degree account for their having been so shamefullyneglected.(IituuuIRELAND. 1809In the statutes above enumerated, we have seen that the ^^!^^^ ^*Parliament did every thing in their power to supply the necessitiesand support the dignity and honour of the crown.Charles II., immediately after his restoration, had pro ^^*«needed in the same auspicious manner, regarding the inter ^***^|2*est of his subjects, by issuing a proclamation which recitedthat the inhabitants of corporations paid various duties towardshis restoration — that the withholding from them theircharters obstructed trade and the well peopling thereof; andtherefore ordered that they should all be restored.And it having been formerly found by very sad experience,that nothing did more obstruct the growth of trade andincrease of manufacture, than the power granted to corporationsof restraining all manner of persons, of what birth ornation soever, to set up their trades and manufacture in thecities, sea-ports, and corporations, other than such as had'* served their apprenticeship in those towns, few of whose*' masters had ever attained the skill of working the nativecommodities of Ireland to such a perfection as to make them*' vendible in the kingdom, much less beyond the seas, so that*' the whole commodities of the province were only transported in kind, to the great impoverishment of the people'* thereof, and this only upon the account that no foreigner,** though an Englishman, should come and set up in theircorporations, and so take their trades out of their hands."The king (according to the spirit of the English institutions,and adopting the principles which were subsequentlyacted upon in the new rules) — " ordered that such a clauseshould be inserted in every of their patents, as might reservefull power to the chief governors, to admit as freemen intothe respective corporations such persons as they in theirjudgments should find would by such admittance and theirpersonal residence there, improve and advance trade, com- Residence,mere, and manufacture in any of the corporations. Provided,that no recorder or chief town clerk in any of the corporationsshould enjoy their offices but during the royal pleasure signifiedby the chief governor or governors of Ireland."5 z'^"'" "• Tliia order then concludes by vesting the then selection ofleei, all the corporate officers in the president of the province.The king also directed, "that the i^peciive former inhabitants,natives and freemen, and such as had rifjht to befreemen in any of the cities or towns of Ireland, shouldBearing. be forthwith Restored to their accustomed privileges and immunities,and admitted to trade as freely as theretofore."CHARTERS.I8W. The king, as appears fi'om the Egerton MSS., also grantedsome charter's to f he Irish Ijoroiighs ; one or two of which, aaspecimens, may be inserted.*HilUiKk One to Hilhboraugh commences by reciting, that to theend that the English people might be encouraged lo resortR^iffe- thither, and to reside there for the more speedy planting ofthe manor, the king had constituted 100 acres in the townCorpora and lands of Hillsborough, to be a free borough and Cot"""■ poration, consisting of a sovereign, 12 burgesses, and thecommons. That the sovereign, burgesses, and common*should return two members to Parliament. That ArthurHill, Esq., should have the appointment of recorder, and townclerk, during ]pleasure. That the sovereign and deputy shouldbe the justices of the peace. That the sovereign and buigcBSeeFreeiiMii. might make bye-laws, and admit such and so mant/ freemen aithey pleased : every freeman saying 5s. for his admis^cm, ttthe use of the borough. That the burgesses, commons, andfreemen, might make and sell aqua vitae ; and buy and sdlwine, ale, beer, and all kind of victuals, and keep tayemBj&c^without any manner of license. That the coroner would havethe execution of all writs, and that shut and service should bedone at the manor of Hillsborough.The charter to Hillsborough was ten years before the newrules, and therefore the power of admission given by thatcharter, must either be considered as giving, like the Englishcharters, according to the constriction before put upon them,the power of admission, reserving still to persons entitled tothe right to demand it ; or if it is to be construed as giving■ Egfrioii MSS. 79. 32.IRELAND. 1811them an exclusive and arbitrary power of admission, then the cimrtei u.charter must be taken as vacated in this respect, by theeffect of the act of settlement, and the new rules.Three years afterwards, another charter was granted by ^?^'Charles XL to the borough of Antrim,*The king being informed, that the town of Antrim, inthe rebellion of 1641, was burned to ashes, entirely laidwaste and depopulated ; and that the present inhabitants lahabituitshad, in some measure, rebuilt it ; in order that they mightbe enabled to proceed in the rebuilding thereof, empoweredJohn Viscount Massereene, and his heirs, to hold six fairswithin the town. And also liberty to embark 1000 acresnear Antrim into one or more parks. And the inhabitants ofthe town to have the privilege of sending members to Parliament.The latter part of this charter seems to have been grantedby the king upon the same supposed power of the prerogative,as the charter of Newark, which has been already considered. Newark.And a similar exercise of that power occurred also with Granary.respect to Granard in Ireland, Charles II., granting a charterto the Earl of Longford ,i- which recites that the earl wasthen in possession of Granard, an ancient market town ;and that the king, for the better encouragement of theplanting thereof, declared, that the present and all futurefreeholders within the town, that were made by the earl, hisheirs and assigns, should have full power and authority toreturn two members to Parliament.And the same power in effect was granted to Mullingar, MuHingirby a charter to Arthur Forbes, Esq.And in the year 1727, the right of election was declared to 1727.be in such freeholders as derived their titles under the granteeof that charter ; which was then referred to.Notwithstanding these particular grants to the freeholders,there seems to have been introduced into Ireland that anonEgerton MSS. 76. 2. t Egerton MSS. 76. 91.5 z 21812 Ireland,"*"'" "• niulouB right of election tor boroughs, and so far the charteitfwere productive of evil, yet it would have been happy for Englandand Ireland, had the good understanding with the king',the Parliament, and the people continued, which characterised:the commencement of the reign. However a different siof things unfortunately too soon succeeded.The king became dissatisfied with the Parliament, andParliament worse disposed towards his majesty. Thecreasing difficulties of this time are pourtrayed in a letter ofithe lord lieutenant to the lord treasurer, dated Dublinhera. 13th January 1678.*The Lord Lieutenant to the Lord Treasurer.Your lordship knows how long it is since bills were trattft^mitted from home, in order to the calling of a Parliam^here ; upon what account, and to what degree, the alterationof affairs have been since. Your lordship knows betterthanI can, how universal and violent the stone is that the feaitfof the people of England has raised in them, and cannot hatconclude, that those of the protestant here hold proportionwith them, and exceeds them, by how much the number ofpapists here is greater than in England ; so that, as the bkwhich were drawn and calculated for a time of security, cannotbe supposed to be fit for the cloudiness of this season, sothe temper in elections and debates cannot be the same it wouldhave been, if the changes we see had not happened ; fromhence I conclude, that the fittest time to call a Parliamenthere will be, when hie majesty and that in England, ahabbe on better terms than I conceive they are, which all goodsubjects ought to labour and pray for."The increasing bad temper of the times referred to in thisletter by no means abated, and the king at last was drivento those violent measures which render any further inquiryinto the documents of this period unnecessary.• Southwell MSS.SCOTLAND. 1813Chain II.SCOTLAND.As to Scotland, there is to be found at this period an act 1675.for the convention of the royal boroughs, which showssome of the abuses existing there at that time. It commencesby reciting, that "the general convention of boroughshad taken into their consideration the abuses that Abus.had happened to the interests of the royal boroughs, in elect-^ing commissioners to parliaments, conventions of estates,and to their own general conventions, such persons as arenot merchants, traffickers, residences, bearing common burden .R«»»-lenten*with the rest of the inhabitants, and who cannot lose or gainin the concern of the boroughs, which, as it was contrary tomany of their acts,* and particularly to the acts of boroughsholden at Edinburgh in 1674, at Couper 1686, at Glasgowand to several other acts of boroughs, and to the ancientand primitive constitution of the boroughs by their first erect Primitiveiron ; so likewise it was destructive to their interest, which tion.ought to be an entire body among themselves, making athird distinct estate of the kingdom, without being mixedwith persons of another rank or quality than of the merchantestate, who usually carry on collateral designs, than the solidinterest of royal boroughs, whereby they become divided, andlose their interest and strength, &c.*' Therefore the general convention revived all precedingacts of boroughs, by ordaining that commissioners for Parliament,convention of estates, and to the general and particularmeetings of the boroughs, should be of persons conform to thequalifications aforesaid; and that in all the heads, points,and clauses of those acts ; but also of new statutes, enactsand ordains, in all time coming, and which is to be observedas an inviolable rule, conform whereunto all future electionsshall be made, that no person shall be elected or chosencommissioners by any of the royal boroughs to conventionsof estates, and to the particular and general meetings of theboroughs, but such persons who are merchants, traffickers,So in Kngland the like course was contrary to the express words of thefirst Henry V. c. \.^KOTLKflV.t""" "• present ke81dentek8 within the borough, commissivnaltitgthem, and who bear common burd£!i with the rest op jTUB INHABITANTS, and are such persons who can gain and lote iin the conceit of the horoti//hs ; that all elections made of Ipersons not so qualified, be, ipso facto, void ; that ev«y !person who eUaJI vote for such illegal elections, shall lovethe freedom of the borough where he is a burgess and inAofri-tant ; and further certifying, that every particular pereooaccepting of such a commission, not being qualified, shallbe liable in the penalty of 1000 marks, as oil as they transgress,and for which fine they shall have no relief from theborough, but shall pay the same out of their own estate.And for the better performance and execution of this presentact, the convention ordains, that this clause shall be addedto the oath de fidele, which is to be taken of every biirgeu tf \every royal borough within the kingdom, at his adntixston to Jbe a counsellor of their respective boroughs, viz. that he shallnot, in any time coming, vote nor consent to the choosing ofany person to be commissioner from the royal boroughs toParliament, &c., hut such persons as are qualified in manneraforesaid."This act not only shows, that the same illegal introductionNon-reu- of Tum-resident members as representatives in Parliament,existed in Scotland as then did in England ; but that theremedy provided for it was not as in England, the repeal ofthe ancient statute which required the residence, bat on thecontrary, directing that, for the future, all the memnonshould be residences,AutiDihcr It appears that the borough of Anstmther Wetter made,(perhaps in imitation of the English boroughs) a mrraiderin Parliament, of its privileges as a royal borough :• andit was accepted upon the condition, that the rest of the royalboroughs should take upon themselves the burden of itsshare of ^e land tax ; but that not being done, it was, byan imprinted act of William and Mary of the 22nd of July,1690, declared, that this borough had never been divestedof its royalty, and the chief register was ordered to deliver• WiKhl on Election*, 48 n.SCOTLAND. 1816back to the magistrates and inhabitants their charters pf Cbiietii.royalty.No commissioner was sent from this borough from 1662until the meeting of the convention in 1689.*CONCLUSION.Notwithstanding the Parliament and the people, tired of theturbulence and uncertainty in which they had long been involved,hailed with satisfaction the restoration of the crown to itslawful possessor, and seemed disposed to concede every thingwhich was necessary to supply the king's revenue and protecthis throne : and notwithstanding, the king also upon his returnseemed sincerely disposed to meet the wishes of his subjects ;yet, the excitement of religious controversy soon produceddissensions which materially altered the position of bothparties.Parliament dissatisfied, withheld the necessary supplies —the king was driven to foreign and illegal resources — the suspicionsof the country aggravated the evils — and at length,the king and the Parliament stood again, upon the irritatingpoint of the exclusion bill, in direct opposition to each other.Unfortunately the king was advised to take the desperateexpedient of attacking the corporations; and as his predecessors,by the steps which have been traced, had given to themunicipal institutions of the boroughs a corporate character ;so did Charles 11., by an attack upon the corporations, seekto obtain an ascendancy over all the cities and boroughsthroughout the kingdom.The methods by which this was effected have beendetailed.A more decisive inroad upon the constitution was neverattempted ; nor was any measure ever more successful.The effects of it remain to this day : — from this periodof our history, little remains to be explained, but the gradualsteps by which this great innovation subsequently producedthose evils, now the subject of complaint.• The borough of Kilkenny also surrendered its royalty in the same manner, andat the same time.F isle CONCLUSION.' Although at this time the corporate system had been introduced,and parliamentary influence secured, yet comparativelyspeaking, there had been but few instances ia whichSejeci the exclusive right of the select bodies had been supported bydirect decisions in their favour ; and still fewer in which the"ifcu '%^* "'^ not-residents had been established.These are two great sources of the modem mischiefs.The courts of law, up to this period, had also not been d^directly instrumental by judicial determinations in supportingthose abuses.Coupons The extra-judicial opinions in the Corporation and Dungeoncases were calculated to produce, and have since produced,indirectly, much mischief; and the decisions before quotedand commented upon, which excluded the inhabitants fi-omthe enjoyment of the rights of commons they had long possessed,and which in some instances they still maintain, hadalso their tendency to effect considerable change. But aUthe consequences had not been at this time fully developed ;and there was no specific authority in thp court of lawto support the rights of the select bodies—to exclude therights of the inhabitant householders — or to confirm theusurpations of the non-residents.From the period at which we are now speaking, there isnothing but an unsatisfactory history of the declension from thesimple system of our ancestors, and the confirmation of theabuses which were in truth supported, extended, and confirmedby the decisions of the courts of law — the determinationsof committees of the House of Commons — even by theacts of the legislature — and in a great degree by the instrumentalityof the people themselves.After the short and unfortunate reign of James II., hopeswere entertained, upon the arrival of the Prince of Orange,that the party then in possession of power, with his assistanceand patronage would have corrected the abuses which CharlesII. had consummated.But it is a sad reflection, that these expectations were disappointed.And it has been already shown, and will beconfirmed by further facts, which history details, that theCONCLUSION, 1817Charles II.most marked and extensive confirmation of abuses occurredshortly after that revolution, which is so often the theme ofapplause.From that period they increased in strength: and thecollection of the instances to establish these propositions, isall that remains to complete this distasteful portion of ourhistory.JAMES II.The Parliament being abruptly dissolved by Charles 11.in 1681, during the progress of the exclusion bill, no otherwas assembled during the remaining four years of thatreign.James II., on his ascending the throne, called together a 1685.Parliament, which met on the 19th of May, 1686, and SirJohn Fowler was elected speaker.Of this Parliament the king himself said, " that there werenot above 40 members, but such as he himself wished for."And Burnett, stating that the revenue was granted for life,adds, " and every thing else that was asked, with such a profusion,that the House was more forward to give, than the kingwas to ask" — so effectually had the seizure of the corporationsoperated.It was no wonder, therefore, that the king should be pleasedwith the members who had been returned, and disinclined tochange them.The king appeared to take no pains to disguise his satisfactionwith the House : on the contrary, he took every opportunityopenly to avow it ; and when the House presented theaddress expressing their determination to assist the kingagainst the Earl of Argyle, the answer of his majesty was,that " he could not expect less from a House of Commonssro composed (as God be thanked,) they were." Monmouth,in the manifesto which he issued on his landing, complainedPARLIAMENT.^j truly, though in temperately, of the manner m which theelections for this Parliament had been managed. ^The open and direct attacks which Charles II. had, tnwardflthe close of his reign, made upon most of the corporationsL.lud in many instances been submitted to, and the boroughsI'fasd indirectly given themselves up to the induce of thscrown.Lad James II. acted upon a different policy, the encroachments of Charles might still have been counteracted,I and the evils he instituted checked.But unfortunately for this country, James pursued themesystem of establishing an ascendancy over the House of Com-1 moins ; and as the effectual means uf securing it, continuedlithe power gained by his predecessor over corporations, for thel^inirpose of influencing the parliamentary elections.Hume justly observes, that " the general resignation ofthe charters, had made the corporations extremely dependent,and the recommendations of the court were becomevery prevalent'*Though they do not immediately bear upon the presentinvestigation, as a part of the history of these times, therigorous severities of the law in the beginning of this reignunder the unprincipled JefTeries, cannot be passed by withoutnotice.Mr. Justice Powell, in his examination before the Houseof Commons, I William and Mary, 1688-9, stated that heconceived one of the reasons of his having been removedfrom the bench, was the judgment be had given in severalquo warranto informations, where the boroughs chose membersof Parliament by prescription, especially one againstMarlborough. The king saying with respect to it, that hehoped all the judges would be of the same opinion.He also stated, that a quarter of a year before, he wassent for by the Chancellor JefTeries, to take his opinion,whether a borough for a misdemeanour did not forfeit theirright of election of Parliament men; and whether such at■■ had no residence in the borough, nnd cere foreign burgesses,■ Vol.viii. p.220. I &Cobl>eH, r.H.3ll.PARLIAMENT. 1819had a right of election. He adds afterwards, that he con Jmp^ n.civet that the misdemeanours of corporations were pardonedby the act of indemnity.From this it is clear, that the proceedings against corporationsand boroughs, in this and the preceding reign, werewith a view to control the Parliament.The seizure of the liberties of corporations, and imposingon them new charters, many of which were granted in thisreign, reserving a right of removal to the crown — was one ?*"?*^^**of the most effectual means of placing the corporations crown,entirely at the disposal of the crown, and therefore that viewof the subject was openly avowed at the Revolution, whateverpractices to the contrary were secretly adopted.In the first year of William III., the prosecutions ofquo warranto were unanimously reported by the House ofCommons, in a committee of the House, to be illegal, and agrievance to the country.* And a bill was founded on thisresolution, and passed that House. It was however rejectedin the Lords, by a majority of eight proxies, — probablybecause it had happened that in a few instances wherespecific causes of forfeiture had been proved, such judgmentswere " in summon jure ** legalThe only Parliament which was held during this reign,affords the strongest evidence of the direct attempts madeby the king to gain an ascendancy in it. JIn the House of Lords, 20 peers were introduced in oneday.At the commencement of this reign, nothing could exceedthe tenderness which the king expressed towards his people,or the disposition to govern the country according to theprinciples of the constitution, as may be seen from the followingspecimen of one of the king's addresses : —His majesty at his first sitting in his privy council, was 1685.graciously pleased to express himself in this manner: ^ —My Lords, —Before I enter upon any other business, I think fit to• House Com. Jour. f 3 Black. Com. 263.t 4 Cobbett, P. H. 1684-5.— I Jas. II. May 19. $ Southwell MSS.Parliament.■ say Something to you. Since it hall pleased Almighty Godto place me in this station, and I am now to succeed so gotidand gracious a king, as well as so very kind a brother, Ithink it fit to declare to you that I will endeavour to followhis example, and most especially in that of his great clemencyand tenderness to his people.I have been reported to be a man for arbitrary power,I but that is not the only story which has been made of me.E And I shall make it my endeavour to preserve this governmentboth in church and state as it is now by law established.1 know the principles of the church of Englandr are for monarchy, and the members of it have showedthemselves good and loyal subjects, therefore I shallalways take care to defend and support it. I knowtoo that the laws of England are sufficient to make theking as great a monarch as I can wish; and as I shall,never depart from my just rights and prerogative, boI shall never invade any man's property. I have oftenheretofore ventured my life in defence of this nation, and Ishall still go as far as any man in preserving it in all its justrights and liberties."Whereupon the lords of the council were humble suitorsto his majesty, that these his gracious expressions might bemade public, which his majesty did order accordingly.Nor were the people wanting in their expressions of devotionto the king. A strong address was presented by theUniversity of Oxford, and also from the Templar ;• in whichit was stated, " that they thought it their indispensable duty toendeavour the choice of such representatives for the respectivecounties and boroughs to which they belonged, as might notonly concur in settling a revenue sufficient to support thegovernment as formerly; but also show a grateful sense ofthe great things you-have done and suffered for us already;an entire confidence in your majesty's goodness towards usfor the future, and a cheerful compliance with your heroicinclinations to advance the honour and interest of thesenations. May there never be wanting millions wi loyal as we■ Coxe'sMSS 9126, &c.PARLIAMENT. 1821are, to sacrifice their lives and fortunes in defence of your Jmhw II,sacred person, and prerogative in its full extent ; and incest 1685.saintly pray the King of kings to grant your majesty a longand happy reign over us."STATUTES.Following up the spirit of these addresses, and the dispose J ^siphon of the people to support the king; the legislature Cap. 3.passed bills for settling his majesty's revenue for life: — for Cap. 5.granting impositions upon wines, &c., tobacco and sugar, andon French linens — enabled his majesty to grant licenses ofthe lands of the duchy of Cornwall — provided carriages forthe king in his royal progress and removal — as well as for thenavy and ordnance: and passed an act for consolidatingthe estates which the king had in the post office — and alsothe hereditary excise.CHARTERS.But in the midst of these proceedings, the king appears to Currentbeen still intent upon pursuing the surrenders given bythe different corporations, and substituting new charters intheir stead ; containing the reservation of his power to displacetheir officers at his will.One was granted to Devises : — but the surrenders of the Devise.former charter not having been enrolled, the new one wassupposed to be void, and was not acted upon after 1688;when the old corporation was restored according to the proclamationof the fourth of James II.In the first entry in the borough book of Devises, of thedate of 2nd October, fourth James II., the names appearto be entered according to the charter granted by that king,in which the superior body are called mayor, recorder, deputyrecorder, and aldermen. But it is the only entry in that form.On the 22d of October, there is an entry containing theelection and swearing of a mayor, which is stated to havetaken place upon receipt of the proclamation of his majestyKing James II. for restoring corporations.I 1822 CHARTERS. I^*°"'"' The names vary from those entered on the pretending day,pr^viut. though some few are repeated in different situations Bad1688. order. So that it is evidently % meeting of the old corporation,which had been restored by the proclamation.^SBs' "^^^ '"'"^ ^'^^ granted a charter to the burgesses and inhabitantsof Truro ; giving them and their successor all themanors, lands, &c., privileges and franchises, enjoyed bytheir predecessors : but reserving a power for the fang andhis Successors' to displace, by hU majestie's signet and sitamanual, any officer of the corporation.Midian charter was also granted to the mayor, bridgewater*1684! and burgesses of the town of Maidenhead.I Cuiirrtiuty The charter of the city of Canterbury was surrendered,and the corporation was new modelled; such persons beingput into the government of the city as the king could confidein, to aid him, as was said, in promoting his designs oftaking away the test, and of bringing in popery and arbitrarypower.Upon the proclamation however of the king for the restorationof corporations, and after the landing of the Prince ofOrange, the old charter was restored.ipswich. The king held out to the borough of Ipswich, a prospect serf*recovering the privileges they had lost by granting to them anew charter, which in many respects resembled the former,but contained the two following clauses, which in effect placedthe corporation in the power of the crown.Provided always, and we do reserve full power and authorityto us, our heirs, and successors, by these presents, at alltimes hereafter, by any order in privy council made to removethe said or any other bailives, portmen, chief constables,recorder, deputy recorder, town clerk, or coroners, or anyoneor more of the other officers of the town or borough,■ This powci givcD lo the crown, of displacing Ihe officers was. in the ChetUrCue, Rei v. Ameryy, 4 T. R. 122, held to be illegal, and th chant to far void.CHARTERS. 1823and to declare him or them to be removed. That if at any J*™[ n.time hereafter, within twenty days after the removal of anyoneor more of the bailies, portmen, &c. from their placesrespectively, the remaining bailives, portmen, and chief constablesof the borough shall be ordered by letters mandatoryfrom the king to the remaining bailives, portmen, and chiefconstables directed, to elect, admit, and swear any otherperson or persons of the nomination of the king, to or in theseveral and respective places or offices, of any persons sofrom thence removed; that then it shall be lawful for thebailives, portmen, and chief constables of the borough (howfew soever in number they may happen to be), or the greaterpart of them, who upon public notice or summons shall bepresent, to elect and admit every such person or personsrespectively to and in the place or office of the person orpersons respectively so from thence removed or deceased, asin that case from time to time hereafter, by such lettersmandatory, shall be respectively appointed. And that insuch case every other election or admission had, contrary tothe tenor of these presents, or contrary to the exigence ofsuch mandatory letters, shall be void.And moreover, for divers considerations, and by virtueof our prerogative royal, we have dispensed and dischargedWilliam Brown and Edward Gale to be bailives and port-menof the town or borough : and the ten portmen, the 20common councilmen, the town clerk, and every other officeror servant, within the borough, hereafter to be nominated,or elected, or admitted ; from taking the oath of supremacy,and the oath of allegiance mentioned in the act of Parliamentof the third of James I., or in any other statute ;and also from taking the oath mentioned in a statute, the13th of Charles II., for the well governing and regulatingcorporations ; and also from taking the sacraments, accordingto the rites of the church of England ; and also from thetaking and subscribing the declaration mentioned in thatstatute, and in another statute of the 25th year of the samereign."But the proclamation restored the rights and liberties of theJ824 CHARTERS.J»ina« It. corporation (when they were, to all appearance, irrecoverablylost), and the effects of this arbitrary charter were prevents,for the validity of it could on no sound be maintained, inafr-Surrender. much as the deed of surrender on which it weirs founded wasBDrDimni. illegal and riot enrolled. And therefore, in this case, as inothers, all that had been built on the supposed validity of thatsurrender of course fell to the ground, the ancient charterreviving, and by them the burgesses of Ipswich have sincebeen governed.Bristol.Bristol also, in the frame manner, acted upon the proclamation,and proceeded to elect fresh officers for the remainderof the year under their former charters.1688. A charter of restoration to Poole, reciting the good sBnrgtaMs. of the burgesses and inhabitanU releases to them and themayor, bailiffs, burgesses, and commonalty, the judgmentsUMibiunti obtained gainst them, or against the inhabitants, by the nameof mar/or, bailiffs, burgesses, inhabitants, and commonalty, orany other name or names in Easter Term, 26 Cha. II., andHilary Term, 2 Jas. II., and restores and grants to the burgessesand inhabitants, as also to the mayor, bailiffs, burgesses,and commonalty, all the liberties, &c. which they had beforethe judgment, by the name, or in the right of the burgesses,or inhabitants, or by what name soever the incorporate bodywas called, and that the but^sses and inhabitants should be»• called one body corporate, by the name of " the mayor, bailiffs,burgesses, and commonalty.">. From this strange document it is at least to be collected,that inhabitants and commonalty were synonymous terms in thisborough ; and if to this be added, that burgesses meant alsothe same, to the exclusion only of such inhabitants who couldnot be burgesses, a clue will probably be afforded to the dueunderstanding of all the charters granted to this borough, andthe terres used in them, particularly the variety of synonymsadopted in this extraordinary charter.CHARTERS. J825James II.EVESHAM. igQQEvesham like many other places, surrendered its former Surrender.charters during this reign, and took a new grant at the discretionof the crown.A charter of the fourth year commences with a recitalsimilar to that of Charles II., and then adds, that *^ the charters,by reason of certain defects or negligence of the inhabitantsof the borough, had become determined and void, wherebythe incorporation of the borough is totally dissolved, and theinhabitants had petitioned, that such other liberties andprivileges should be conceded to them as to the king shouldseem fit."The charter then speaks of the burgesses, and grants thatEvesham should be an incorporated borough, and incorporates Incorporateburgesses, in the same manner and by the same name asthe charter of Charles II., with the usual corporate powers —and that there should be nine aldermen, and twelve capitalburgesses with a recorder.At a subsequent part of the charter it is provided, that everyalderman, capital burgess, assistant and other burgesses, whoshould absent himself from the borough for the space of one Absence.whole year, without the license of the mayor, aldermen, andcapital burgesses, or eleven or more of them, should lose theliberties and privileges of ^freeman and burgess. Power isreserved to the king to remove the office's of the corporation Removalsat his pleasure, upon which they are enabled to elect others ; Electand there is a proviso, that if after twenty days the vacancies ^^ **"'are not filled up, then the remainder, however small theirnumber, may elect other persons into the vacancies.CHESTER.This king also granted, in the last year of his reign, a 1688.charter of restitution, to the citizens of Chester, which commenceswith a recital,* that in consideration of the good serviceswhich the mayor and citizens had rendered, and topromote the good government of the city, the king had• This charter extends to great length, but the substance is here extracted.G ACHARTERS."°" pardoned and released to the mayor and citizens, the judg-chester.ment givcQ against tlieni in Hilary Term, in the 35th and■ 36th of King Charles II,, upon an information in the natureof a quo warranto, which had been exhibited gainst them,and also all seizures and process thereupon.The charter then proceeds to regret them their formerprivileges, and to reinstate all their municipal officers.HUNTINGDON.King James II, recites, that the borough of Huntingdonhaving been endowed with many liberties and privileges,Burpeaies, and the burgesses there having enjoyed divers franchises, &c.by reason of ancient customs and charters, the late kingwilling for the future, that a certain method should be hadfor the better government of the people there, granted thatEuiu' *^^ borough should be free, and the burgesses and inhabitantsCorporate. » body politic, by the name of " mayor, aldermen, and burgessesof the borough of Huntingdon," &c. kc. &c. Thatthere should be one nobleman, who should he called chiefAkie"^' *'^^ steward of that borough, and twelve aldermen, whereofone should be chosen mayor. That the mayor, recorder, and iCommon aldermen should be the common council, and the rest of the \"^^ ' burgesses should he present at the command of the mayor;also, that they should have a person honest and discreet, tobe their recorder, to continue for life. That the mayor, recorder,or alderman, or the greater part of them, who uponsummons should meet together, should have power to makeall laws and constitutions, which should be necessary for thegovernment of the burgesses, artificers, and inhabitantsthere.That the mayor for the time being, should be coroner andRemoval. cUrh of the market, of the king's household, with a powerreserved to the king at his pleasure, by order in privycouncil, to remove the chief steward, recorder, and town-clerk,&c.The charter concludes, by confirming to them all theirancient jurisdictions, with their court leet, &c.CHARTERS. 1827James II.WELLS.There was also another charter of this year, granted on the lee?.request of the inhabitants of Wells : but it appears from thecorporation books, that it was abandoned ; and on the 1st ofNovember, 1688, they availed themselves of the proclamationof James II., for the restoration of their ancient privileges.*This king recites that the several charters granted to Wells 1688.had, by the abuses of the inhabitants become determined andvoid.That the inhabitants had prayed, to have granted to themsuch privileges and liberties as should be deemed expedient ;and hoping that if the burgesses and inhabitants had themgranted, they would feel themselves bound to bestow theirservices upon the king and his successors : the king thengrants that Wells should be a free borough or city ; that theburgesses by whatsoever name they had been incorporated,should be from thenceforth one body corporate and politic, Corporate.by the name of "the mayor, aldermen, and burgesses of thecity or borough of Wells, in the county of Somerset."The usual corporate powers are then given; and thegovernment of the town confided to one mayor, seven aldermen,and 16 capital burgesses, who were to compose thecommon council, and to have the power of making bye-laws. CommonCounciL&c. ; but that all the corporate officers should be removable RemovaLby order of the privy council, and the grant closes by confirmingall their ancient customs, &c.These charters are sufficient to show the nature of thosewhich were granted at this period — the circumstances underwhich they were obtained — and the reasons upon which theywere afterwards, generally speaking, held to be void.• This, in the case of Newling v. Francis, 3 T. R. 189, was held to operate asthe acceptance of a new charter, and to have the effect of superseding the surrenderto Charles II., and restoring the ancient grants.GaMUNICIPAL DOCUMENTS.One or two municipal documents, to illustrate the history ofthe boroughs at this period, should be mentioned.The matter of annexing the Castle Garth of Newcastle, middismembering it from the county, haviu[f been referred, by thelords of the treasury to the then attorney-general, he reported,that " he conceived it might be more fit for the government ofthe inhabitants of Castle Garth, if that place was pint withinthe limits and jurisdiction of the town of Newcastle, vrhichmight be done by the king's letters patent, with a provisothat the assises and session be kept there for the county asformerly;" upon which, a grant passed the great seal ofhis majesty upon the one part, and the mayor and burgesseson the other, for the term of 31 years, at an annual rent of100 chaldron of coal, to b6 delivered in the port of London.The king's rents in the castle were excepted ; alio theMoot Hall" within the walls, where his majesty's justicewere used to hold their assizes, sessions, and gaol delivery, &:c.From a view of the Castle Garth, made by commissioners188.^ in the year 1685, the rental of premises by building and improvements,amounted to 149?. l.f. Sri. per annum ; but it wisalleged it arose to that height, iy strangers and fugitives harbouringthere in a place not subject to the government of thetown.From which it will be seen, that the castle was separatefrom the borough, and that the ground of its annexation, wasthe fiict of fugitives going there to escape the jurisdiction ofthe borough. And the actual interference of the king withthe borough, may be collected from the fact, that on the 30th1687, of June, in the third year of this reign. Sir William Creagh,Knight, a zealous papist, was admitted to the freedom of thecorporation of Newcastle, in consequence of a mandate fromthe king. He was the next year appointed mayor.NEWCASTLK-UI'ON.TINE.168B. On January the 16th, in the last year of this reign, aflattering address, intended to have been presented to theuuuNEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE. 1829king by the corporation of Newcastle, and signed by Sir James ll.William Craggy Knight, mayor,* and other aldermen, someof whom were papists, and others dissenters, with some ofthe common council, was negatived by a majority of thatbody, and not sent.But it is 8aid,t a surrender of the charter was actuallysealed and transmitted to London ; although it was not enrolledIn a letter, dated November 3rd, in this year, subscribedby Silvester Petit, and directed to Mr. Douglas, is thepassage : — " As for the proclamation and orders touching thecorporations, I was at the Crown-office, and the clerk toldme they were sent under seal to all the corporations;and that Green, a messenger, had those for Newcastle, andbelieves you have them before this : and because you thinkthe Gazette not sufficient, I have sent you the proclamationand order, printed by the king's printers, and think you*' may (if the other be not come) give credit to thesesEVESHAM.In the constitutions and ordinances for the better govern i687.ment of the borough of Evesham, made at this period, bythe mayor, recorder, aldermen, chamberlain, and capital burgesses,it was provided, that every apprentice, after he had Clause 14.actually and bona fide served the time of his apprenticeship, ^cm°'should be made free of the borough — take the usual oaths ofa freeman — and pay the accustomed fees. And if the apprenticeneglected to do so for 12 months, he was to lose thebenefit of his freedom.That every freeman, commorant and inhabitant of the bo Clause 16.rough, should bear and pay all manner of taxations, fines, rant.&c. ; and if he refused so to do, he might be distrained, &c.,or the mayor and common council might disfranchise him.That if any of the inhabitants of the borough, being of the Clause 18.common council, or otherwise, should use opprobrious orSee admission, year before, by the king's order. t 2 Brand's App. p. 642.X See the proclamation for restoring the corporations, 4 James II., Newling t<.Francis, 3 T. R. 189.2 Brand's Appendix, p. 543."" • contemptuous words or gestures against the mayor, coninioit11)87. council, or any of the masters or wardens of the companies,or do anything derogatory to the ordinances of the borough,the mayor and <;oinmon council might punish such personaby fine, disfranchisement, or imprisonment.C1BUSI.-21. The 21st clause commences with a recital, that the inhabitantsof the borough, for the better regulation of theirtrades and occupations, had fonaed themselves into (livenpiin™ companies and fraternities — viz. the company of mercers —cordwaincrs — clotliworkers — glovers — ironmongers, — andhad enjoyed divers constitutions and orders respectively;nevertheless, through the licentiousness of the late wars, confusionhad wot into the place of order, and many indirectways had been taken to lessen and bring into contempt thegood government of the borough. And amongst other innovations,several of the companies had taken upon .selves to make many strangers free of their companies,without so much as acquainting the mayor and commoncouncil: and under the notion of this supposed freedom,such strangers and others, that are so brought in, refuse toSwoiii. ie admitted and som freemen of the borough, to the prejudiceof the common council, and contempt of good government: it was, therefore, ordered and constituted, thatno person of the respective companies should presume toadmit, swear, or otherwise take into their companies, anyperson, until the master or wardens, and the mayor andcommon council, should have consented and reed thereuntoin writing.Otis. That they should take the oath of a freeman as prescribedin the charter of the sith of Charles II. Every otheradmission to be void.That no person within the borough should fraudulently orAppian colourably presume to take any apprentice, with intent toFreemen. make him a^ceman, without performing seven years' actualservice at the least. That the indentures should be enrolledwith the chamberlain ; and if not, the master was to bedisfranchised, and the apprentice should take no benefitas to the freedom of the borough.ROMNEY. 1831That the relict of every freeman might use the trade of her Jm"« II.deceased husband during her widowhood; and the eldest sonof every freeman alive at his deaths should be made freeby his father's copy, if required.HYTHE.At an assembly of the mayor, jurats, and commoners of 1685.Hythe, held in the first year of this reign, the question wasput, whether Stephen Healer, who hath lived out of theliberty by the space of one whole year and a day last past,should be from thenceforth deemed as a freeman of the corporation;and it was carried in the negative, nemine contradicente.HASTINGS.And at Hastings there was a custom, that if any man liveda year and a day out of the town, and did not pay scot andlot, he hath no vote.ROMNEY.There were also at this period ordinances made at the i687.Brotherhood and Nestling, held at the town and port of NewRomney, in the third year of James the II., which commencesby reciting the decree of Brotherhood, made in 1603, beforequoted ;* and then states, that the assembly found that thedecree was not so effectual as to compel such inhabitants to inhabitantsbe made free in their respective corporations where they inhabited,but that several persons evaded it, and the penaltytherein contained, by refusing to appear in full and opencourt where the oath is to be required and tendered, and Court.by divers other subtle devices ; wherefore, for preventing suchevasions, and for the better upholding of the several corporationsof the ports, towns, and members, which otherwisemight cease and be annihilated, it was ordered, that the penaltyof lOL mentioned should be imposed and levied upon everyinhabitant of any of the ports, towns, or members, who shouldbe elected a freeman of such respective corporation whereinSee bcfoic, p. 1502.IM832June* II. pp ^jjg ittkabilant, according to the ancient decree; and ia1687. ciise Such inhabitant so elected should neglect or retire toappear at the next court of record, to be holden in suchDweiieJ. corporation wherein he dwelled, upon verbal or oilier summonsfi-om the mayor or bailiff, or upon appearance at thecourt should refuse, or neglect to take the oath, so often asi«uch inhabitant should so refuse or neglect, he should forfeitfor every such offence the like sum of 10/.*CASES.A few cases also occur in the law reports of this reign,which it may be proper to insert, for the purpose of illustratingthe particular history of some boroughs.idol. Person of the name oi Light, m the second year of JamesII., brought an action against David Pym and Roger Ami,for seizing his malt.i-The defendants pleaded the charter of the 3(jth Charles II., Igranting a market and reasonable toll to the citizens ofBristol.The plaintiff replied, that he was a burgess of Teiokabury,and by a charter of 1 1 Edward III., he was free of toll.The defendants rejoined, that the burgesses of Tewluhwyhad surrendered their charters.It was determined, that the toll was not demandable, becauseit was not alleged that the malt was sold; and thistoll could not be claimed by prescription, for the corporationwas created within time of memory.It is therefore clear, by this distinction, that Bristol wasnut a corporation by prescription.1686. It was admitted in argument, upon a case of this periodrespecting toll, J " that all the inhabitants within the libertiesLancaster. of the duchy of Lancaster were discharged from paying tollthroughout England."Lowell, .Shale Trials, vol. iii. p. HIS. t 2 Lull. 1332.JOURNALS. 1833James II.JOURNALS.A few extracts only from the Journals will be necessaryto show the progress of the parliamentary proceedings withrespect to the cities and boroughs.Parliament met on the 19th of May, in the first year of this ages.reign.Amongst the many petitions relative to elections whichwere presented, some were by the inhabitants of the bo iniubitaiitoroughs : — as Wallingford* — Scarborough — 2%e(/brrfJ —Sandwich — Shaftesbury. \\It appears from the Joumals,1f that on the 27th of May, adebate arose touching several royal charters , supposed to begranted to divers boroughs, which had a right by prescriptionto send burgesses to serve in Parliament ; whereby, aswas alleged, an alteration is made in the manner of their ancientelections; and the debate was adjourned till the followingSaturday.CRICK LADE.The right of election for Cricklade was agreed*— notdecided — to be in the freeholders, copyholders, and leaseholders,for three years — a right for which there could be nopretence, beyond the interest of the litigant parties to establishit ; unless it meant the inhabitant householders, whetherthey were freeholders, copyholders, or leaseholders.MONTGOMERY.As to Montgomery, the right was determined, like that ofBrecon, not to belong to Montgomery only, but also to thecontributory boroughs of Llanidloes, Poole, and Cavilling.THETFORD.With respect to Thetford, the circumstances of the surrenderof whose charter will be hereafter referred to, andwhich has been already remarked in Domesday as a borough,•9Journ.7I6. tlb.719. Mb. 72L $Ib.723.II lb. 723. fib. 72L ••lb. 732.1834 JOURNALS.james II, and iLs burgesses enumerated as householders, in connexionTheiiani. With their houses, a strange decision was made— according tohide* ^^^ spirit and practice of this reign, but without the .ment of any evidence which could justify it — that the rightof election was "in the mayor and fury esses, which are ten,"and in the commonalty, or common council, which are"twenty; amounting in the whole to 31." How it wasConiniDD. possible for a committee to determine that the "com-Common monalty " and " common council" could be synonymous,and Import the same class of persons, when it is obviousthat the common council must, from the import of the term,be selected out of a larger body, must be left to the ingenuityof Dr. Brady, or any person who may be induced to supporthis theory, to explain.Thetford did not return members to Parliament until the1673, reign of Edward VI. ; and was incorporated in the Isti year1664. of Queen Elizabeth. In the first year of Queen Mary, thereturn was made in the most general manner hy the " mayor,"burgesses and other men of the common council, andcongregation of the borough." And the same form was1558. adopted in the first year of Queen Elizabeth.Nevertheless this right was, in the second year of Williamand Mary, agreed to be as determined above.*But a question arising, who was the proper returning officer,the petitioners, relied upon the return by a mayor appointedunder the old charter, and the sitting member upon the returnby a mayor under the new charter : — the committee decided,that the charter of the 16th of Elizabeth was not dulyor legally surrendered.16S9. In the llth of William III., the right was again agreed tobe in the select body, and it continued in them afterwards.The power enjoyed by that body, leading subsequently tonumerous instances of legal litigation.I6SB. In the last year of this reign, the usurpations of the crownbecame direct and open. " By the practice of annulling thecharters," as Hume observes," the king uas become master€1€€JOURNALS. 1835*' of all the corporations ; and could at pleasure change every Jones il .where the whole of the magistracy. The dissenters were 1688.first in London, and afterwards in every other corporation,substituted in the place of the members of the church."James II. also appointed regulators to examine the qualificationsof electors.Instances of the encroachments upon the rights of theinhabitants may be found in the Journals and elsewhere.In some places, particularly in York the elections were York,transferred from the people to the magistrates : who, by anew charter were all named by the crown, which was inreality, as Hume observes, "nothing different, from theking's naming the members."In the case of TTietford,^ it appears from a subsequent in- Thetford.query in the succeeding reign, that the surrender had beenobtained by the illegal interference of a person of the nameof " Bentham:" who being mayor in 1681, and his year leei.expiring, refused to swear in his successor. On a mandamusbeing obtained to compel him to do so, he was afterwardstaken into custody for his contempt in not obeying it; andin order to get his discharge, he procured a surrender of Surrender,the charter by a pretended majority of the corporation, madeup by his son, who was under 16 years of age, and an excommunicatedperson ; both of them received the sacramentto qualify them to be of the corporation.But before the surrender was enrolled, the other members,to the number of 17, did all they could to prevent it. Sothat, in fact, there were 17 against the surrender, and only14 for it. But the 17 were never called or summoned at thetime the surrender was agreed upon.The indecorous circumstances attending the taking of thesacrament by the two who were attempted to be qualified,are mentioned in the Journals.And in a subsequent paget a petition states the clandestinemeans by which the pretended surrender had been obtained; and that " Bentham" had turned out many of the burgesseswho would not consent to the surrender; and appointed• 10 Journ. 139. f 10 Journ. 302.PROCLAMATION.■'•"*■''■ others in their places who were not duly i^uatitied: and byIsis. those means he procured the old charter to be surrendered,(sand obtained a new one, whereby the burgesses were excludedfrom voting.This case may serve as one of many instances, to show themanner in which these surrenders were elected.It was not possible that such a state of things could longexist: at length, the Prince of Orange landed in the west: apetition for a new Parliament vas signed by 24 bishops andpeers of the greatest distinction, and was presented to theking ; and accordingly he issued writs for a new Parliament;which, however, were soon recalled.But, as the last actor his expiring power, too Iftte to retrievethe errors he had committed, and only in time to showthat he was sensible of them, and desirous if possible, otcorrecting them — the king, when he bad fled to Favereham,Ptocluiia- published a proclamation for restoring the corporation,*which commences with a recital — that several deeds of having been lately made by several corporations andbodies corporate, of their charters, franchise's, and privilege,which had not been recorded or enrolled ; and that upon Jthe proceedings and rules for judgment which had beenlately had upon the quo warrants, judgments had not yetbeen entered on record : whereupon, notwithstanding newchatters had been granted in the reign of King Charles II. ;and in his own; which deeds, not being enrolled, did notamount, or in law, make any surrender of the charters, franchises,or liberties mentioned : and such of the corporationsagainst which rules for judgments had been made in the lifetimeof King Charles II., or since, in the Court of King'sBench ; but no judgment entered upon record, were not dis-corporateor dissolved. And that it was in the king's powerto leave such corporations in the same estate and conditionthey were in; and to discharge all further proceedings thatmight be, of such rules for judgment and deeds of surrender.That the deeds of surrender made by the corporations andbodies politic, except the following, viz, — Thetford, Notlmg-• Stc 3 Ludtrs-leo.PROCLAMATION. 1 837hay Bridgewater Ludlow . Betcdley, Beverley y Tewkesbury, James ii.Exeter, Doncaster, Colchester, Winchester, Launceston, Lis 1688.heard, Plympton, IVegony, Plymouth, Dunwich, St. Ives,Fowey, East Looe, Camelford, West Looe, Tintagel, Penryn,Truro, Bodmin, Harleigh, Lostwithiel, and Saltash, were notenrolled or recorded in any of the king's courts.That though rules for judgment had passed upon informationsagainst the corporations and bodies politic of severalcities and towns, yet no judgments had been entered uponrecord upon any such informations, except against the Cityof London, Chester, Cane, St. Ives, Poole, York, Thanked,Llaughour, and Malmsbury,That to restore and put all cities, towns, and boroughs inEngland and Wales, and also the town of Berwick uponTweed, into the same state and condition they were in, beforeany deed of surrender was made of their charters, franchises,or proceedings against them, the king directed, that the corporationsand bodies politic of all cities, towns, and boroughs,whose deeds of surrender were not enrolled, nor judgmentsentered against them; and all the members in every ofthem respectively, should immediately proceed to act as acorporation or body politic ; and when places were vacant,to make immediate elections, and to execute every matterand thing as they lawfully might have done, if no suchdeeds of surrender or rules for judgment had been hador made.That all the corporate officers from their offices had beendismissed, which they claimed to hold only by charter, grantorpatent, from Charles II., or the king; since the dates ofthe respective deeds of surrender, &c., except such corporationswhose deeds of surrender were enrolled, or againstwhom judgment was entered.The king also promised he would grant to the cities, corporations,and boroughs, any further act to confirm untothem all their charters, &c. which they at the times of suchdeeds of surrender held or enjoyed.That as to those corporations which had made deeds ofsurrenders, or had judgment given against them, and which1S38 PROCLAMATION,*"** • were entered on record, the chancellor, attorney, aud polite).citor-general ghoiild, upon application, without fee or reward,pass charters, instruments, and grants, fur the incorporatingregretting, confirming, and restoring to tlieni their respectivecharters, liberties, &c. ; and aJpo for restoring all their oliic«nat the times of such deeds of surrender or judgments who werethen in office.That divers boroughs, which lead not been corporattuiwsince 1 679, and had their charters of incorporation subsequentlygranted to them ; should from theucetijrth cease and determine,and that all, and ' every persons in those corporationshould be removed and disclaimed from their offices.That the king would do any other act that would renderthese matters effectual ; and that it was his intention to callB Parliament as soon as the general disturbance of the kin.dom, by the intended invasion, would admitthis conciliatory and beneficial proclamation, the fullesteffect has been given by the courts of law,* who decided thatthe additional fact of any corporation acting under it, wouldhave the effect of a new charter and confirmation of the ancientrights.The general consequences of this proclamation we shallhave occasion to mention in this and the succeeding reigns. Itwill be sufficient for the present to add, that of the boroughsmentioned in it, new charters were granted to the followingeleven : —1. Ludlow 1691 3W.&M.2. Plympton 1692 4 W. & M.3. Colchester 1693 5 W. & M.4. Dunwich 1694 6 W. & M.5. Tewkesbury 1696 8 W. & M.6. Plymouth 1696 8 W. & M.7. Harleigh 1702 1 Anne.8. Bewdley.' 1708 7 Anne.9. Lostwithiel 1732 6 Geo. II.10. Saltash 1774 14 Geo. III.11. Bodmin 1798 38 Geo. III.• 3 Term Rep. 189, in Newling and Francis.PROCLAMATION. 1839As to the other boroughs mentioned in the proclamation James II.some of them availed themselves of it and resumed their oldcharters and offices without any new grant : — sin others theright of burgess-ship being exercised by the inhabitants, theywere not materially interested in obtaining new charters.Thus in Bridgewater and in St. Ives the inhabitants were inhabitantsthe burgesses ; and in St. Ives the same class, in 1702, claimedthe rights of the borough, and the surrender of these charterswas held void.*In Liskeard, the old charter was re-established, and inEast and West Looe, the same.In Camelford the rights of burgesses were claimed by thefreemen and inhabitants : in Fowey by the prince's tenants :in Penryn by the freemen and inhabitants : in Bossinney bythe freeholders: and in Tregony and Nottingham by theinhabitants. In the others the surrenders were, in all probability,treated as illegal, and the old charters revived.IRELAND.The proceedings which had been adopted in Englandwere also extended to the sister kingdom. And Hume statesthat, " In order to become masters of the Parliament, thesame violence was exercised as had been practised inEngland. The charters of Dublin, and of all the corporations,were annulled, and new charters granted, subjectingthe corporations to the will of the sovereign. The** protestant freemen were expelled, catholics introduced,'* and the latter sect, as they always were the majority in*' number, were now invested with the whole power of the'* kingdomsThe following letters, selected from many others of asimilar description in the Southwell MSS., will confirm theassertions of Hume.• 8 Hume, 260.t See Piper v. Dennis, 12 Mod. 253 ; and id Holt's Reports, the case is thus stated.Under a quo warranto against the town of Liskeardf in King Charles the Il.'t time,they surrendered their charter, which was not enrolled till King James II., who inconsiderationof the surrender, granted a new charter to them.Per eur. The second charter being in consideration of a void surrender, was alsovoid. Holt, 170.■ u.SOL'TIIWELL MSS.Fruit William Blathwaytc, Esq. clerk of the [they I'ouiicil,to Sir Robert Southwell.WJiUelmU, April 23, 1687.I have considered what you write of the charters of ,and of the means to obtain a saving of your right mKinwls. that of Kinsale, and expected the former letter from Mr.Madam, who says he has not yet received it. The only persons,I think, to be applied to here, are Mr. Bridgeinaii andMountsteven, and the rather because the former has beenlong in good humour, and continues so. Mr. Pepys wouldbe in earnest for you, if it belonged to his station, but I danot see what you can expect from my Lord Dartmouth. But,after all, I fancy that the thing must be done in Ireland, andby my lord deputy alone; for all those things will be entirelyreferred to him. If it be so, I hope you have interest enou|^with his excellency for so Email a matter. If 1 have anywith his secretary, Mr. Sheridan, by our military correspondence,I will employ it all for this job, and perhaps with asuitable qualification to one that knows the language already,"&c, &c.Letter from William Blathwayte, Esq., clerk of the privycouncil, to Sir Robert Southwell.Whitehall, 3rd Nov. 1687.His majesty having reformed the city of London, and regulatedthe several companies, has been pleased to declarethat he will use the like method throughout all the otherparts of his kingdom, for the support (as his majesty ispleased to express it,) of his late declaration.To this purpose, orders are issued to all the lords lieutenantsforthwith to repair to their respective counties, andthen having called before them all their deputy lieutenants,officers of the militia, j justices of the peace, and the principalgentlemen, to ask them a plain question, ' Whether they are• ready to concur with his majesty in the necessary means toconfirm his majesty's late declaration, and in the repealingIRELAND. 1841of the penal laws and the test, by giving their consent to it James II.in Parliament, if chosen, or choosing such as will repeal 1667.them.'The lord lieutenants have orders to return the names ofall those gentlemen, and their answers, to the king; who willimmediately put out of all offices and places of trust, such asdo not comply, and fill vacancies with such as declare themselvesready to concur with his majesty's desires," &c. &c.Lord Clarendon in his letters, writing to the lord chang 1688.cellar, gives an account of a conversation he had had withrespecting the king's letter about admittingthe Roman catholics into corporations, and putting in justicesof the peace and sheriffs.The noble writer represents himself as saying, that he wasadvising about the best and readiest way of doing the business; that he had already discoursed with Mr. Justice Dalyabout the town of Galway, where there were most of thetrading Roman catholic merchants, and with which town andcountry he was particularly acquainted, all his concerns andrelations being there ; and that he was advising with otherRoman catholics, and that it would not be long before heshould see that affair in as good a prospect as he could desire.That for the sheriffs, he would give such orders tothe judges, when they went their circuits, as was necessaryfor presenting to him proper persons, Roman catholics, forthose appointments.The rest of this singular conversation may be seen by referringto the Clarendon letters.The extracts from Hume, and these letters, give shortly thewhole history of Ireland at tHis time, as far as it is in anymanner connected with the subject of our inquiry, and it isunnecessary to add anything to these documents.SCOTLAND.The history of Scotland for the same period, though differingin some respects, particularly with reference to religion,as far as regards its municipal institutions may be given withgreater brevity.6 bHume justly observes iu uiie of his notes, " that the Humeacta of authority " and interference which had been adopted1 England with respect to York, and other places, " hadbeen employed in all the boroughs of Scotland "*\v A 1,ES.The same observation is equally applicable to Wales, andCw^'ff the following short extract from the charter of Cardiff mayserve to establish the similarity of the clauses which wereintroduced into the Welsh charters with those whichbeen adopted in England.This king granted a charter in the third year of his retro,which contained all the grants and privileges in the charterof James )., vi-with some few alterations, namely;That aldermen should take their oath of office before thI constable or his deputy.And that the constable or his deputy should be one of thejustices of the town.That a power should be reserved to the king, and his heirsRero«y«I. and successors, to remove any or either of the justices of thepeace, bailifl's, aldermen, capital burgesses, stewards, es-creator,or coroners of the town, for the time being, at hiswill and pleasure, by any order under the seal of the privycouncil, to them respectively signified : and aa often as theking should by an order in privy council, declare any of theofficers to be removed, that then the person so removedshould be ipso facto, and without any further process, really,and to all intents and purposes whatsoever, removed. Anythingto the contrary thereof notwithstanding.<0\CI,|iSH>N.Thus we have concluded the history of this reign, thebrevity of which is to be attributed to the uniform course ofarbitrary power adopted by James II,, with reference to themunicipal institutions of the country, and the directness andundisguised nature of the means to which he resorted. Noris it necessary to add any further observations, but a repel1843titian of the remark before made, that from the close of the Jeunes II.reign of Charles II., the progress of usurpation and abusewas progressive and uninterrupted.WILLIAM AND MARY.The anxiety for repose, which manifested itself after the 1689disturbances in the reign of Charles I., and the successive 1702.usurpations of the House of Commons and Cromwell, followedalso the violent inroads upon the constitution, whichhad been attempted by James 11.Hence a disposition to terminate the doubts and uncertainties,which the unsettled state of the government andthe country produced, drove the two contending parties intothat coalition, which brought the Prince of Orange to England.The same feeling had a strong tendency to render the commencementof this reign, comparatively speaking, tranquil,and to oppose a barrier to change or innovation of anydescription. Thus, rather than run the risk of discussion,or the peril of mooting new suggestions, many of the mischiefsprevalent during the reigns of the Stuartss, were leftunremedied ; and the greater part of the influential peopleof the country, were rather disposed to leave things as theywere, than incur the peril of change for the purpose of improvement.The king's disposition, prudent, cautious, and calculating,led him to the same course ; and therefore in this reign,few strong and decisive steps of any kind, which refer to ourinquiry, are to be met with — none that are public ; and thefew which occur of a private character, will be introduced inthe general history of the reign.It is only in the gradual confirmation of those abuses,which had been increasing frown the time of Henry VIII., and6 b21844 charters.William were brought to rapid matuntv by the Stuartss, that we aremad Mus. a r j jto look for the Serious mischiefs to the constitution, whichwere effected in this reign ; and those progressive steps arechiefly to be discovered in the legislative and parliamentaryproceedings of the period, particularly those of the Houseof Commons.The king himself did few acts to affect these questions.Charter. He granted the smallest number of charters of any of hispredecessors, from the time of King John. They did not, asappears from the Patent Rolls, at the Rolls Chapel, exceed14 in number, as shown by the following list with theirdates.List of Charters enrolled at the Rolls Chapel, during thereign of King William and Queen Mary.1. 1690 2 W. i M Forney.2. 1692 4 W. & M London.3 Ludlow.4 Nottingham.5 Plt/mpton.6 Warwick."7. 1693 5 W. & M Colchester.8. 1694 6W.&M DuntricA.9. 1696 8 W. & M Malmsbtay.-f10. 1697 9 W. & M-eye.11 Hereford.12. 1698 10 W. &M Ramsey.13 Tewkesbury.14. 1699 11 W.& M Deal.Wimick, which bad previously received charter from Henry Vlll Pulpand Mary, Elizabeth, Charles II., and William lll.inihe fifth year of this rica,Obtained another, commencing with a recital, that il had been accustomed to hare(wo burgesses, in every Parliament, as other ancient boroughs within Ihe kingdom:and thai the inhabitants had been by previous charters a body corporate: — t>her«-timon the king then iacorpoiales the borough in the usual manner, by the name of"the mayor, aldermen, and burgesses, &c." confiding the government Co onemayor, 12 aldermen, IS assailant burgesses, a recorder, and town clerk ; the count;justices are empowered to enter the boioogb as usual, but uol otherwise to interior.And the charter closes after confirming their previous liberties, with a clausethat they should not be prosecuted by any writ of quo warranto for any cause thent See before, p. 1565.\DECLARATION. 1845The first public act was the declaration of the Prince of ^*li*™. *°" Mary.Orange, detailing the evils to be complained of in the governmentof James II. The principal topics were, the alterationof religion — the dispensing power — the tampering withthe judges — the ecclesiastical commission — the case ofMagdalen college — the orders for the examinations of thelords-lieutenants, deputy-lieutenants, and justices of thepeace, relative to the test and penal laws ; and particularly (asreferring to the present subject of inquiry) grievous complaintwas made that the evil counsellors of the king had invadedthe privileges, and seized on the charters of most of the towns charta!that had a right to be represented in Parliament, securingsurrenders to be made of them, by which the magistrates Surrender,delivered up all their rights and privileges to be disposed ofat the pleasure of these evil counsellors, who placed newmagistrates in those towns, in whom they could most entirelyconfide.The other parts of the declaration are immaterial, exceptsing the remedy which is provided for all these evils in callinga new Parliament, attributing many of the previous mischiefsto the interference with the elections of members, andthe Parliament itself. And that contrary to the charters andprivileges of the boroughs sending members to Parliament,they had ordered such regulations to be made as would assurethem of all the members to be chosen by the corporations.The declaration further adds, that although according tothe constitution of the English government, and immemorialcustom, all the elections of Parliament men ought tobe made with an entire liberty, without any sort of force,as the requiring the electors to choose such persons asshould be named to them ; and that the intention of thecoming of the Prince of Orange was to have a free andlawful Parliament, assembled as soon as possible : in orderto which all the late charters, by which the elections of burgessesare limited contrary to the ancient custom, should beconsidered null and of no force. And all magistrates who hadbeen unjustly turned out should forthwith resume theirInformereuiployiiienU; as well as hII the boroughs, shouldreturn again to their ancient pri^acripLiona and charters;and more particularly that those of thp city of London, shouldagain be in force: — that the writs should be directed to theproper ulcers, according to law and custom ; and that noneshould be suffered to choose, or be chosen members, butsuch us were qualities by luw.Thus it is obvious, that the obtaining a free Parliamentwas the grenl object held out to the country ; and the meansof doing it, was, according to the proclamation of Juices II.,the restoration of the ancient charters; and the nnuuliingthose that restrained the right of election, which wasassumed to have been the object of seizing the charter.The king next called together the knights, citizens, andburgesses, who had served in Parliament during the reign ofCharles II., together with the lord mayor and court of sldn^men for the city of London ; and they met at St. James',from whence they went to the House of Commons, and Mr.Henry Bowie, the member for Windsor, to whose electionfor that place, we have before particularly referred,* tookthe chair, and the members assembled there resolved, thatthe Prince of Orange should be desired to take upon himselfthe administration of public affairs, both civil and military.And that he should cause letters to be written subscribedby himself, to the lords spiritual and temporal, beingProtestants, and to the several counties, universities, cities,boroughs, and Cinque Ports, for calling a convention. Andan address to this effect was drawn up and presented by thechairman, Mr. Powle.The letters issued by the convention Parliament, containeda clause which was not in the resolutions of the House, nor inthe address to the Prince of Orange ; " tktit the elections shouldbe made by such persons only, as according to the ancientlaura and customs, of right, might to choose members forParliament." And the direction of the letters was " tothe chief magistrate, or such others who had right to makePARLIAMENT. 1847return of members according to the ancient usage, before ^*i^*"** the seizure or surrender of charters, made in the time of« Charles II." ^^'Upon the meeting of the Parliament, the Earl of Wiltshirerose, and putting the House in mind that the first businessto be done was to choose their speaker, added that therewas an honourable person in his eye, whom he conceivedwell experienced, and qualified for that place. And heproposed the right honourable Henry Powle, who beingapproved of, by a general call was conducted to the chair,and the mace was called for, and placed upon the table, andthe officers of the House chosen.The returns of the different members were called over,and it is but justice to the prince, to say, that in confirmationof the observation we have before made, respecting hisabstinence from interference, that there is no reason tobelieve, that he, either directly or indirectly, interposed inthe elections ; but that it was in the main, as he describedit — *^ a free representative of the nation."This is confirmed, as well as the state of representationduring the last reign, from the observations of Sir HenryCape, in the debate on filling up the vacancies of theHouse, in which he said — " This assembly had been chosenwith freedom ; and that there had not been a better electiona great while, without force of the lord lieutenants"*Amongst the heads of those things which were reportedby Sir George Treby as essential for the security of theliberties of the country, was the right and freedom of elect-ins:members for the House of Commons — and that thetowns corporate, and boroughs, should be secured againstinformations of quo warmth, surrenders, and mandates,and restored to their ancient rights.The difficulties which arose in settling the new government— always incident to such a state of things — and theimpossibility of finding terms applicable to the position ofthe country, or which could reconcile Xhe course then takenwith right and law, are beside our present inquiry.♦ .0 Cobbett, l\ H.PARLlAUfiNt:William Before the proceedings uf the lIout>e of Uni-— — - sanctioned by the act which is usually considered the firststatute of this reign; the double returns were adjusted, andsome petitions' against the elections were presented.Pole.Tile first place respecting which any report was made wasPoole, which also preceded the statute above referred to.We have before seen the erasures which had been madein the books of Poole. And the last parliamentary decisionin the reign of James II., relative to Thetford, treated thecommon council " and " commonalty" as synonymous.IGBS. In 1688 the word " commonalty," is interlined in an■"!■ entry in the books of Poole.Upon the occasion of the present inquiry, it appeared fromthe report of the committee, that two members were returnedby one certificate— and two by another.It was proved, that Sir Nathaniel Napper, one of th*members in the first, had agreed to settle 15/. per annumon the town, for their school, and he was at the changeof passing the new charter before the prince's arrival ; towhich it was answered by the counsel on the other aide,that what was done by Sir Nathaniel, was about the timethat he was made free of the towne and that it wasusual to give presents to the town, when any peraoa wasmade free. " And that Mr. Trenchant and Mr. Cbafia(two of the other candidates), when they were madefreemen, gave 501. a-piece to the use of the town for theirfreedom."This is a strong instance of the abuses arising from theriDi. " making" of freemen, and of the perversion of the finewhich was anciently paid as a contribution to the coitionstock of the town, to the modern purposes vf direct orindirect bribery.The question, in effect, was, who were the burgesses? orwhether the right of election was in the mayor and bui■ Some of tlicse were by the inhsliiaiPOOLE. 1 849only ; or, in the mayor, burgesses, and commonalty who paid JJ^'^j*"*scot and lot. — ,^^1688.But it appeared to the committee, by many parliamentarydecisions, that the right of election had anciently been in themayor and burgesses only ; except a return in the 18th ofJames I., when the " commonalty " are mentioned with themayor, aldermen, and burgesses. But it was said to be sealedby the common seal of the " mayor, aldermen, and burgesses."Sir Nathaniel Napper had 23 burgesses, and Mr. Chainbut 22; but of the commonalty, he had the decided majority.The committee resolved, that the right was in the mayor, Right.burgesses, and commonalty, paying scot and lot ; and seatedMr. Chain.The House after debate, negatived these resolutions ; whichcannot but be considered a strong measure in the House, asthe committee had had an opportunity of seeing the documents,and hearing the evidence produced before them;particularly considering, that the election committee at thattime was composed of some of the most considerable menof that day* — constitutional lawyers, as well as statesmen ; —who both then, and for some years before, had been engagedin investigating the principles of our constitution, andparticularly that of Parliament.This negative vote of the House, will also appear the moreextraordinary, if the documents stated before are considered.It is therefore probably to be explained by some secret intrigueof that day, which may have been exerted in favourof Sir Nathaniel Napper ; who, it appears from the Journals,had interest enough to procure a new charter for the borough; and was soon afterwards appointed upon the committeeof the bill for removing disputes concerning the assemblingof the Parliament.Thus in the first instance, when a right of election camebefore the House of Commons ; although the evidence was• Sir Richard Onslow, Sir George Treby, Colonel Sidney, Mr, Windham, SirRobert Sawyer, Mr. Pollexfen, Mr.Godolphin, Mr. Denzil Onslow, Mr. Sommers,Mr. Hampden, Major VVildman, Mr. St. John, Mr. Larboard, and many others ofconsiderable importance.n strong ill Favour of the " commonalty "' paying scot aod lot;and the committee decided in their favour; yet the Uouwnegatived that right.The eH'ect of this decision seems to have been apparentBbortiy after ; for the next return assumes to br made by theincorporated hndif: emphatically so describing themselves, asif the deteruii nation of the House had been understood togive the right of election to the corporation.lu the seventh of William and Mary, the return was by themayor, senior bailiff, aldermen, burgesses, and commonalty,incorporated ; and stated, that the maYor,aldem)en,burgeseeE,and commonalty had elected — the mayor, aldermen aud burgessesaffix the common seal ; the mayor signs it, and 28persons subscribe themselves as witnesses— to four of whosenames is added " a hiiTgeM."This strange introduction of the word " incorprwaferf" for thefirst time, and the cautious addition of the word " burffesi"after the four names, which does not appear to have beenintroduced before, shows how strong the disposition atthat time was to support the corporate right of election. Theattacks upon corporations during the reigns of Charles 11.and James II., had probably raised the estimation of thepeople for their corporate rights; and Dr. Brady's book, insistingupon their emanation from the crown, had probablyrendered them palatable to the king.'- It is said, that, after 1695, the word " commonalty' wasomitted ; and that, subsequently to that time, the inhabitantsdid not vote.On the 13th of February,* the Houses of Lords and Commonsmet in the Banquetting House at Whitehall, and tenderedthrown to King William III. and Queen Mary ; andthey were proclaimed accordingly at Westminster and in thecity. And on the 18th, the king went to the House ofPeers, to which the Cognitions were summoned ; and headdressed both the Houses of Parliament.On the nc\t day, the hill for removing all disputes concerningthe as^^cnibliiig and silting of PiirlihUiiejit was sent1688.POOLE. 1851down by the Lords to the House of Commons.* It was read j^JJ^^l}}*",a first time, and appointed to be read a second time the nextday, which was done accordingly ; when, after a resolutionby a committee of the whole House, that the Lords, spiritualand temporal, and the Commons, then sitting at Westminster,were the two Houses of Parliament; the bill was read asecond time, and committed : — Sir Robert Napper being oneof the committee appointed.It soon afterwards passed into a law, and forms the firstchapter of the statutes in this reign, and imposed new oathsof allegiance and supremacy.In the next year, the Bill of Rights was passed, by which 1689.the dispensing power of the crown was complained of, anddeclared illegal. The violation of the freedom of elections,particularly by letters to the boroughs as to the choice oftheir members, were likewise subjects of complaint; and itwas declared elections ought to be free.WALLINGFORD.By a decision upon the right of election, the burgesses ofWallingford were determined to be " the inhabitants payingscot and lot.^'tDUNVVICII.A few days afterwards, the case of Dunwich was heard,;}: theprincipal question being, whether the right was confined tothe burgesses inhabiting, or was in the freemen who lived outof the borough, commonly called " out-sitters :*' a term obviouslyof modern invention. In other respects, this descriptionof the two classes appears to be correct, and to correspondwith the ancient law ; for those inhabiting within the boroughare properly called " burgesses," because they dwelt in Dwelt,the borough ; the others also are properly called free men,because they might originally have been freemen of thatplace by birth, servitude, or marriage ; and being once offree condition, they would always remain freemen, whether• 8 Join. 31. t 10 Journ. 31.X See before, p. 123. and 10 Journ. 36.they lived within the place or not ; but if they left the hasrough, they would have ceased to be tThe evidence, as stated in the Joumaln, was strong,». establish the right of the burgesses inhabiting nitfain the borough,for the returns in the seventh and twelfth of EdwaiwIV. are expressly described aa made by them ; to which itwas only answered) that those returns were about the tinthat the statute passed requiring " all persons elected to 1]resident within the boroughs :" which seems rather a rfor inferring that the return was made with precise attention'to the law and practice at that time, than to warrant any coielusion in disparagement of the effect of those returns.The evidence offered on the other side were returns in thei'reigns of Henry VIII., Edward VI., Queen ElizabethJames I., and King Charles II., which, supposing them to be'contrary to those in the reign of Edward IV,, ought not tathave superseded them, because they were prior m date.But in fact, they were not inconsistent with them, for tlwjonly described the election to have been made by the " hva-gesses and commonalty," that is, by their specific name oburgesses," and the general name of " commonalty," for 'the whole aggregate body. At all events, there is nothing athe term " commonalty " to import " non-reiidejux," more thanin any other term. And it would be very extraordinary, ifthe term " commonalty of Dunwich, in Suffolk," should bedescriptive of persons residing in Exeter, or any other placein the kingdom.From the course of the evidence it seems, that some factawere proved, which were applied directly to the conduct ofthe candidates at the election, who were said, in the fit instance,to have been disposed to take the votes of all thefreemen, resident or non-resident, till they found that thenumber of tke " out-sitters overbalanced their voices," andthen they polled only the burgesses inhabitants — evidencead hominem— which is, generally speaking, too prevalentbefore all tribunals, and which certainly ought not to havehad any effect in the decision upon the right of election.However, the committee resolved, "that the freemen out-munich.1863'sitters, as well as the freemen inhabiting within the bo Williamand Mary.rough, had the right of election," and the House agreedwith that finding ; seating Sir Robert Rich and Sir PhilipShipping, to the exclusion of Sir Roger North and Sir ThomasAllen.Sir Peter Rich was one of the election committee. Mr.North and Sir Thomas Allen, against whom the decision wasgiven, do not appear to have taken any part with the influentialparty in the House at that time : and would not be atthe charge of bringing up their witnesses ; they producedbut one return ; and it is added " so they lost it"* It mustbe remembered that, as it appears there was a majority ofnan-resident freemen above the inhabitant burgesses, this j^^^^gdecision as effectually destroyed the rights of the inhabitantsof the place, as if it had been effected by any of the meansadopted by Charles II. or James II.The committee seem to have entertained some idea ofwhat they were effecting, as well as of the difficulty ofmaintaining, that persons living out of the borough could beburgesses of it ; because they do not in their determination,preserve the distinction marked at the beginning of the reportbetween " burgesses inhabiting," and the " freemen outsiders,"but they abandon the word " burgess' which is theproper appellation by the common law, and the writs and precepts; and adopt the more general term of '* freemen' whichis in truth only a qualification for a burgess.Thus amongst many others, were the real character anddescription of the municipal burgesses thrown into confusionby the hasty or partial decisions of committees of the Houseof Commons.The error once commenced, was speedily propagated.Three years afterwards, upon the election of Dunwich legs.coming again before a committee, the term " burgess" was Burgess,dropped altogether, and it was agreed on both sides, that thequestion was, whether the right was " in the freemen residentonly, or in the freemen generally, whether resident or • 11 Joumn. 442. t 10 Joum. 677.ni'Nwicfi.wd'Ul^v *''*'" ^^- '*<^"''"' "''" insisted on the exclusive right of the- rftidfntt, it was iiiaistod, that Dnnwich was a borough by pierI fUaidtQU. scription ; which was undoubtedly true, as we have seen thatthe borough and its burgesses are mentioned in Domesday.*Hciunu. A relish in the seventh of Edward iV., was given in iwdense, by which the two btiiliflM, in the presence of the twoCoroners, and ten other named in the retunii and many uUttfpurchases and resiants, elected.Another of the 12th of Edward IV., was by the baiUHa,with the assent of the whole commonalty.The 3Dlh of Klii^abelh, the iMiiliffs, burgesses, iiiid commotionelected.In the first of James 1., and the first of Charles I., thbftililf^, burgesses, and honest men elected.And by an ancient book it appeared, that in the 11th ofJames 1., such of the 12 — 24 — and freemen as were present,in all making 34, elected a burgess.And in the 15th of Charles I., the election was the same,excepting that the numbers were less. During the Commonwealth,and upon the Restoration, and afterwards, theelections were made by still smaller numbers.However, it nest be remembered, that notwithstandingthe decisive proof of the existence and interference of theselect bodies of 12 and 24, (no doubt the grand and petitjuries of the court leet) no one pretended that the r^btwas confined to them, but it was allowed on all hands, that itDurgcisea. was in the burgesses at large, whoever they might be.Parol evidence was also given as to recent elections, inthe course of which it appeared, thai since 1670, 500 freemenhad been made, whereof two were Scotchmen, and otherslived very remote : — and particularly 42 were made free atan ale-house ; — whereas there were not above 40 resident?.John. The charter of King John was produced, which was incorrectlystated to be a charter of incorporation — but as itgranted a " gildas niercatoriam," that fact wa? insisted uponby the counsel, according to the doctrine of Brady, to betheancient method of creating a corporation-munich.1855The opposing candidate Mr. Heveningham, insisted that ^'jj|"*Dunwich was a corporation by prescription, contending, thatas the word " confirm '' — as well as " grant' was contained Prescnp-in the charter of John, it implied that the burgesses wereincorporated before that time ; that all the ancient returnswere under the common seal ; and that in the ancient booksit appeared, that elections to Parliament were always madeat their corporation assemblies.Here we find the whole doctrine of corporations expresslyavowed for the first time, and that at the period when Dr.Brady's book was published.The argument upon the word " confirm '' is in every point Confirm.of view unfounded. The word itself, as used in that charter,does not apply to the confirmation of prior privileges,but to the prior grant under the privy seal, which wasconfirmed by the letters patent, after proof of payment ofthe fine for the charter, by the production of the " oblataroll."But even if it did confirm former rights, it would notbe a confirmation of an incorporation, but of former immu- Immunities,resembling those contained in that charter : which,notwithstanding the assumption in the argument of its beingan incorporation, was undoubtedly not of that description.Nor could these facts, in any respect affect the question,whether the residents or non-residents had the right : because Non-resindents.Henry III., a short time before the grant to Dunwich byKing John, gave a charter to Wallingford, with a merchantguild, and confirming a charter of Henry II.; and yet we Guild.have recently seen that the burgesses of Wallingford, " werethe inhabitants paying scot and lot*'The fact of the returns being under the " common seal," Commondo not prove that they were corporate acts ; and besidesthe many other circumstances to which we have beforereferred, to negative that fact, there is this decisive proofwith respect to Dunwich, that it returned members to Parliament,from the 26th of Edward I., the earliest period, longbefore any municipal corporation existed in England.Therefore, the returns having been as stated at corps CorporateWilliam rate assemblies, in fact, proves nothing; for as the election*!and yluy. ^ ^\~ would occur at uncertain periods, special meetings mihave been appointed for the purpose, and wherever anyplace had been incorporated, those assemblies would, nSietthe incorporation, be characterised by that name ; althotigkthe original elections must have been at other meetings.Qai-Mtun. Parol evidence was also given on the same side of recentelections, at which "out-sitters" had voted. And singulartestimony was adduced with respect to the supposed right ofthe " out-fritters," — that the " inhabitants were not able tobear the public charge of the town:" — which might be areason for their not sending members to Parliament, butnone for the out-sitters voting.168B. The detennination of 1688 was read, and the committeeproperly resolved, in direct contradiction to the formerRi(hi. resolution, according to the evidence, " that the right wasnot in the freemen, commonly called 'out-sitters,' as wellas in the freemen inhabiting within the borough ; but vfUin the freemen inhabiting only."And the House agreed with both' these resolutions.Thus the right of the real burgesses was once morarestored.1095. The election for Dunwich came again before a committeein the seventh of William Iii,* when much of the evidence,both documentary and parol, which had been laid before thecommittee on the former occasion, was repeated.The petitioners contending that the right was " in the freemeninhabiting," and the sitting member, that it was in theout-sitters."The case was, like many others, involved in much obscurity,by the confusion arising from confounding theBurgesses. " burgesses" and " freemen" together. And in the courseFreemen, of the evidence, it appeared that the freemen, who hadbeen made in the extraordinary manner before referred to,had some of them been sworn at Yarmouth, Ipswich, secantthat many of them had never seen the town.The former decisions were read on the one side and theMunich. 1867other: and the question appears to have been treated, strange ^*'j{j^as it may appear, (considering the sound determination ofthe committee reported in Glanville, in the Chippenhamcase,) as turning upon whether a charter of James I., which Charters.though it had been accepted, was said to have been surrendered,ought to have prevailed ; or whether a charter ofthe sixth of William and Mary, which had been granted after 1694.that surrender, but had never been enrolled nor accepted. Surrender.should regulate the election. The question being strangelysupposed to depend, upon whether the freemen under theone charter or the other, had the right to vote : — and thenumber of freemen would be more or less, according as theone or the other was supported.As to the surrender, it was stated that it was not en Enrolled.rolled until the time of James II. : and the question was,whether the enrolment in his time did make good the surrenderin King Charles's. And if it was good, then thecharter of King James being accepted by the town, and nosurrender of it being made, the petitioners insisted that thecharter of William and Mary was void, and that it wasnever accepted.The sitting member, on the contrary, contended that thesurrender was void, for that the king cannot take but bymatter of record — that not being enrolled in King Charles'stime, that king could not take by that surrender — and consequentlyKing James could not. And that the right of theburgesses could not he surrendered.With respect to the grant of the charter of William III.,it appeared that in 1693, the freemen heard there was a petitionstitian for another charter. Upon which a hall was called,and every freeman in the town was there. That one Girdingsaid, he signed the petition for fear "of being pressed."Others said, they did not understand it, but supposed it tobe a petition for a scire facias or quo warranto.There were 16 in the hall who were against any newcharter — and nine that adhered to the petition they hadsigned. And accordingly one was framed against it — butfinding the first was for restitution, they were desirous of6c"185^ llt'NWlCH.Wiiiinm obtaining another, but Ijeinii unable to raise the amount *»fMid Mars. '^ ^ ' ^- — costs, 531., it was dismissed.1®*' In June, 1694, they carried King William's charter duW9Ctiirur. anti 3 or 400 foreigners, but the town never accepted iUMany of the voters were objected to, upon grounds com-ncctcd with the rules and law of corporations ; as that therwere not free — that they had been disfranchised — that theyhad lived out of the borough — that they were in dependentsituation, as apprentices, servants, living with their parents,&c. — that some were made free under King James'scharter, and some under King William's.High The committee finally resolved (contrary to the last determination),that the right was " in the freemen, comnioalycalled 'out-sellers,' as well as in ike freemen inhabiting"1708. The question was again agitated in the seventh year ofthe reign of Queen Anne, and the two former decisions infavour of the out-sitters were set aside, and the right re-Right, stored to the real burgesses — by being decided, that it wasonly in the freemen inhabiting," An amendment wasproposed to be made, by omitting the word " only," but itwas negatived. So that it is distinctly evident, that the intentionwas to exclude ail but the inhabitants.It is true, we have before seen, in the reigns of Charles II.and James II., that the right of the " non-resident" — asthe most effectual mode of destroying the privileges dfthe real burgesses of the borough — was supported ; boweTCTthat was in periods when nothing better could be expected.But after the Revolution, and when the constitution was supposedto have been restored, particularly with reference tothe re-establishment of municipal rights, it was not to beexpected, that the " non-residents" of Dunwich should havebeen supported in their usurpation ; particularly when theevidence, as well as reason and principle, were so decisiveagainst their claim, — and when there was an interveningdecision excluding them. It was however, left to a futureday to correct the errors of the convention Parliament.It is singular, that shortly after the first resolution wasmade, supporting the right of the " non-residents" in Dunce€1Munich. 1859wich, that the House of Commons appeared fully aware of a^'^Jf"*the mischief which had been produced by the encroach •ments upon the rights and privileges of the boroughs, andtherefore upon a report from the grand committee ofgrievances, the House resolved, " that a bill should bebrought in to restore all bodies politic and corporate tothe state and condition they were in before the restorationin 1660 ;" and which in truth if it could have been effected, 1660.would have corrected a great part, though not the whole ofthe abuses that had been introduced.But the error in this resolution, as well as in many of theproceedings of that time, was, that the question of the municipaland parliamentary rights of the boroughs was consideredas depending on their corporate rights — a position Corporatewhich has been shown by history, principle and precedentto be untenable ; and to involve the greatest constitutionalanomalies.DEVIZES.The election of Devises, in the same year, was submitted ^^^•to the consideration of the committee of privileges* in theconvention Parliament : the question being, whether themayor and burgesses, as a select number, had the right ofelection, or all the free burgesses? — as if there could be anydoubt, that the election ought to be by the burgesses, as thewrit and precept required.The petitioners' counsel insisted, that it was a " borough** by prescription ;" of which there is distinct evidence bythe charter in the reign of Henry ILf But it was trulystated, that it was not a corporation by prescription ; whichthere is sufficient general evidence to establish.It was contended for the petitioner, that all the burgesses Burgesses.had a right to elect : and they produced a charter of the 1 5thof Edward III. to the " burgesses and their successors," anda return of the second of Henry V., of burgesses chosen by ^,the ** commonalty of the borough'' city.• 10 Journ. 66. t See before, pp. 157. 322, 410.6 C 2^I'u"" Another of the first of Quean Mary, by the mayor, " forllirnself and the commonalty of the borough."AntI another in the 3 1st of Charles 11,, by the "mayor andburgesses."A witness, upon his cross-examination stated, that he hadPopaiariiY known many elections, but that none was by the " popularity'bnt one, about eight years before.Bit For the silting members, it was insisted, that it was B corporationby prescription, and that the right of election was inthe mayor and burgesses as a select number ; and tfiey producedreturns of the reigns of Queen Elizabeth, James I., andCharles I., and also the charter of James I.,* referring to Iherecital " that the mayor and burgesses time out of mind, had'enjoyed divers liberties," &c., and therefore it was insistedPrescribing that it was a corporation by jirescri/ifitm. But upon that circumstance,and the inference to be drawn from it, we havealready remarked.It was further proved, that the election by the " bitrgfttain general," had taken place a few years before, and had beenallowed by the mayor, after he had received a bond of indemnityfrom the candidate. The committee decided, that theRight, right was " in the select nnmhfT of the buttresses only," andthe House agreed in that determination.Thus the error founded upon the introduction of the corporatedoctrines, and upon the mistaken assumption of theexistence o( corporations hy prescription, led the committeethe convention Parliament to make this, their first resolution,in favour of the right of the select body, which was followedshortly after hy others of a similar description.Much confusion was no doubt introduced into all thesequestions, by the supposition that the privileges and libertiesof the boroughs differed from each other : raising questionsUsages, as to the anomalous and contradictory usages in differentplaces; which could never have occurred, had the sectsreferred to in the progress of our inquiry been borne in mind,establishing that all the boroughs were created for the same• See before, p. 1493,DEVIZES. 1861purpose — and had charters in substance similar, though ^'!S""varying slightly in expression.1688«Marlborough.The next place which came under the consideration of thecommittee was Knaresborongh :* which affords a strikingillustration of the observation j must made.There is no ground for supposing that it was an ancientborough. It is not mentioned in Domesday; and it neverreturned members to Parliament until the reign of QueenMary.In the 17th of Charles I., it is stated, that Sir William 1641.Constable was returned, a baronet of great esteem and integrity,by many able men of the borough.But one William Deerlove, a son-in-law of Benson, whoad been previously expelled from the House, and who wasdescribed as a man of very mean, or of no fortune or condition,was returned by his younger brother, whom he had appointedhis deputy or bailiff; and on that ground his return wasmade void.The next time the election for this place came in question, 1688.was before the committee of the convention Parliament.The bailiff had made a double return, against which therewas a petition, and in the report, the voters are describedas the borouqhmen ; a term which was also used in the evidence Boroughin the Dunwich case, though the right was finally fixed inthe freemen. Sir Thomas Fawkes was stated to have themajority of the ancient votes, who had been sworn in courtand returned. Which probably meant, that they had beenentered in the court and paid their reliefs for their boroughhouses, according to the custom of the borough. The ancientvotes were admitted on all hands to be good : the new voteslately transferred were disputed. Lord Latimer, the othercandidate, died ; and there being no petition from the borough,and Mr. Fawkes having had 25 of the old votes, and LordLatimer only 19 — Mr. Fawkes was elected.From this report it appears, that there must have been alOJourn.57.men.1862 Marlborough.*Dd bit ^^^^ leet* and a court baron within the borough : for transientvotes which were admitted to be good votes, a ^*Leet. stated to have been sworn in court, and to have paid thesereliefs. The former act would have been done in the cou -^leety for the court baron has no power of administering sue? ^an oath ; and the latter was no part of the functions ofCourt court leet, but the peculiar province of the court baron : — etheffect of these two combined qualifications, as describing thiinhabitant householder 8,-^ will be pointed out in the observationsupon the right agreed in the next year. It being remembered,that as Lord Latimer had died, there was no decisisagainst what were called the new votes ; which no doubtswere for houses built on lands, newly separated from the '^ancient burgages.1690. In the next year, the right of election was agreed to be inBurgage the burgage holders ; and if that agreement meant the wholeof the inhabitant householders, it was accurate. Couplingit with the report in the former year, there is every reasonto think that it did ; for, from the statements as tothe voters, contained in that report, it is clear, that the beinga burgage holder was not sufficient to give them the right ofSworn, voting, because they are stated to have been also sworn ;nor would it seem on the other hand, that the swearing alone,House unless they were also holders of burgage houses, was sufficient.The result therefore is, as the common law required,and as stated in Glanville, describing the common law right,that they must have been inhabitant householders resiant ; forthe combination of those qualifications could alone makethem subject to be sworn at the leet and to pay a relief fortheir houses, was the necessary consequence of their beinghouseholders. Whatever the modem doctrine may be as tothe burgage holders, there can be no doubt but that originallyall the houses in a borough were held by burgagetenure; and therefore this description in fact includes allthe inhabitant householders.And in the must of George I., 1715, it appears from a petition, that the bailiffof the borough was charged with having without authority, channelled a jury of30 burgesses. This proceeding must also have been at the court leet, for there is nojury at the court baron. t Sec also, Newport, Cornwall.Marlborough. 1^63Such would be the constitutional explanation to be given ^'!i^"® and Mary.of the evidence, and the determination in the case of Snares —borough.But the striking circumstance to be marked with respectto this place is, that although it clearly is a modern borough,the right of election was put upon the ground of the " ancientvotes :" — but in the case of Devises, which was undoubtedlya borough by prescription, and had always returned membersto Parliament, from the earliest times, the right was declaredto be in the " select body'* who must have been of moderncreation.EAST GRINSTEAD.The next case of East Instead affords the strongest proof 1688.of the manner in which these questions were disposed of bythe House of Commons.*Mr. Confers petitioned against Sir Thomas Dyke. Thequestion was, whether the burgage holders alone — or the in- inhabitanthabitants as well as the burgage holders — had the right ofelection.For the petitioner the following decisive evidence was given Petitioner,to show that the right was in the inhabitants,A return of the first of Queen Mary, " by the bailiff, burgesses,and all other inhabitants."Another in the 14th, 30th, and 21st James I., by "thebailiff, burgesses, and inhabitants of their common assentjointly together."Another in the first of Charles I., by the " bailiff and othersof the commonalty."Another in the 15th of Charles I., by "Thomas Dine andothers, burgage holders, and Edward Lexington and others,inhabitants'In the 16th Charles I., " burgesses et alii inhabitantes** eleeerunt."The decision before given in 1640 and 1679, in which thevotes of the inhabitants were supported, was also read inevidence. And proof was adduced that the election had• 10 Journ. 66.4 EAST URIKSTEAD.iliad been by the " inhabitants," as well as by the " burgagef tod Mar?. -" ,, > ■holders," in Charles II. a time.Siiiin'i For the eittiiig member, Sir Thomas Dyke, who had the ,nemine niajo,.jty pf the burgage holders, fetums ol' the I2th of .ward IV., by the "burgesses;" in the 17th of Edward IV., byirons the " badiif and commonalty ;" in the 28th of Elizabeth, by|.iaiubinuiu the "burgesses and inhabitants ;" in the 15th of Charles1.; 13th, 27lb, 29th, and 30th of Charles II., bythe"bailiffand burgesses."Evidence was also given of elections by the burgageholders, and some objections were made to the votes of Mr.Conyei-3, that two or three of them lived in one house, andthat they did not all pay to the church and poor; but theywere not supported by evidence.Upon the whole matter, the committee finding, both byUrge. " records and witnesses, that the usage for the election ofthe boh-ough hath been for the most part by the inhabitantsat large, as well as the burgesses, the committee resolved :Kighi, *' That the burgage holders alone within the borough, hadnot the right of electing members to Parliament."That the inhabitants as well as the burgage holders, havea right to vote for members to Parliament."Upon these rights being reported to the House, strange toay, they negatived them ; for which it is difficult to account,unless it is to be attributed to any party or political feelingat the time, which is not improbable, as in a subsequent in-quiiy a few years afterwards, it appeared, in the course ofevidence, that Sir Thomas Dyke had been charged at theelection with being a jacobite, and keeping a jesuit in hishouse.IIS5. In the seventh of WiUiani and Mary, the election of EastInstead again came before a committee upon petitionsfrom the candidates, and also from the burgesses and inhabitants.Prtiuooera. The petitioners insisted upon the right of the inhabitantsand burgage holders paying scot and lot. To prove theirright, the same returns were given in evidence which hadbeen used for that purpose before, as well as those of theEAST GRINSTEAD. 186512th and 17th of Edward IV., adduced on the former occa- JJ mJI]^.sion against the right of the inhabitants. And there wasalso added a return of Edward VI. by the " burgesses andinhabitants,'^ inhabitantsIt appeared in evidence, that it was doubtful when someof the deeds had been executed : from which it is probablethat the usual abuses, connected with the burgage tenureright of voting, had been practised.On the part of the sitting member it was proved, that Sittingmany imputations against them, and threats against thetown, had been made during the progress of the election.The committee decided, that the right was not " in the Right.** burgage holders and inhabitants : but in the burgageholders only."From a petition in 1708 it appears, that the burgage tenure noe.right of voting having been thus established, the fruits of itwere soon visible, by double voices being given for one andthe same burgage hold."And in 1803, the abuses had reached to such an extent, 1803.that a petition was presented, and an investigation continuedfor a considerable time, founded upon the objectionof " occasionality" to the votes.* It appearing in evidence Occasion-thatnone of the voters had ever paid any quit rents for theirburgages — nor the land-tax — and that the houses wereassessed in the names of the persons from whom the titleswere derived — and who were also at the expence of maintainingand repairing the buildings. No consideration was paidfor the deeds, but the grantees, when they accepted theconveyances, signed a declaration of trust as trustees for thegrantor. None of the voters had possession of their deeds ;but they were brought in a bag to the place of election, bythe agents of the grantors, and carried back by them in thesame manner.Thus was a decision of the House of Commons, in contradictionto the evidence, and the report of the committeewho had patiently heard it, the foundation of such abuses ofthe municipal and parliamentary rights of a borough, and• 1 Peck. 307.MARLBORO II tithenext case,* of Marlborough, affords, ia the ar^tnenlfor the petitioners, an apt cummeiit upon the decision forDevices in favour of the select body : — the question being,whether the election ought to be by the ninyor aad a selectntanhtT of burgesses, or by the populace paying scot and/o^ ; ui'r properly speaking, whether the tn/iaii/rrab were Uieiiuri/tsgen.» It was contended by the petitioners, thatof cannon ria(ifs vested in the inhabitants, and that the mayor quid selectnumber could not prescribe, because, until the reign ofHenry IV., no mayor had existed in that borough.Returns were also produced, by the petitioner, of the 28thof Edward I,, " pro burgh ;" 33d Edward 1,, " pro comrnvni-tale burgi de Marlborough;" sixth Edward II., "probni^;"and likewise the charter of the 18th of Elizabeth. fSitting Tbe sitting members insisted, that the " mayor and selectmem re. ,jy,„5^ yf^y^gggggg" (ujj jig |.ig},j And produced indenturesof the ninth of Henry IV., 36th of Henry VIII., seventhEdward VI., first and second of Mary, all appearing to bemade under the common seal of the " mayor and burgesses."The town clerk gave evidence that he had never heard,from 1636 to 1679, of any popular election, though at thelatter period such a right had been set up; but two personshad then testified, one for 60, and the other for 40 years,that they had never known any election by the populace,and that the free burgesses enjoyed privileges above theinhabitants, as being toll free, and possessing a close of 80acres; and the committee found by the records and witnesses,that the usage of the right of election bad been bythe mayor and select number of burgesses ; and it was there-highfore resolved, that the right " was in the mayor and selectnumber of burgesses."The committee in this case, instead of ascertaining who• 10 Journ. 70. t See before, p. 1220.MARLBOROUGH. 1867were the burgesses in the 28th of Edward I., appear to have ^'*J?™relied upon the parol testimony of the town clerk, which extended,at the farthest, to 60 years : and he was, in one respect,inaccurate in his statement, when he said, " he hadknown the borough from 1636 to 1679, and had never heardof the rights of the inhabitants being set up, except in theyear 1679;" it distinctly appearing that, in 1641 and 1680,the inhabitants insisted on their rights.With respect to the interval of 60 years, there had beenthe long Parliament, and only six returns, at two of which,in 1679 and 1680, as well as this of 1689, the inhabitantshad petitioned ; and, in 1641, had pursued a similar course.It therefore appears, that at four of these elections the inhabitantsinsisted on their rights : and if they did not at theother periods, it should be remembered they were in the reignof Charles II., when that king was making encroachmentsupon the municipal institutions, in favour of the selectbodies.As to the " free burgesses being toll free'* that privilegewas granted to the " burgesses of Marlborough" by the Burgesses,earliest charters, and the absurdity has been already pointedout of supposing that such exemptions could have beengranted to any select part of the " inhabitant householders :"and in fact, the exercise of this privilege is enjoyed at thepresent moment by inhabitant householders, though not ofthe select body.It does not appear upon what grounds the committee werejustified in stating, " that from records and witnesses the** usage of election had been by the * mayor and select numbber,' " except, perhaps, that they erroneously conceived thereturns being under the common seal of the " mayor andburgesses," and the evidence of the town clerk, were sufficientauthorities for making that assertion.Andover.An inquiry as to the election for Andover also immediatelysucceeds that of Marlborough and we have alreadyseen, the right was likewise decided to be " in theWilliam ^' gctect number only"* The circumstances connected withthe evidence of the exercise of the right by the " populace,"and the threats of the town clerk, to prevent them frothasserting their rights, will he in the recollection of theSALISBURY,The next case which occurs is New Sarmn.+ la whole theright was also determined to be iii the select number; butwhich cannot be a ground of surprise, considering the dispositionof the committee, to adopt that right eis the petitionersdid not appear, and the proceeding was ex parte.The question was, whether the right was " in the selectnumber," or " the citizens in general."The sitting members, who seemed to have availed themselvesof the absence of the opposing party, asserted thatNew Sarum was a corporation time immemorial — an extraordinaryassertion, considering that it had no existence as aborough, or municipal institution of any kind, until after theremoval of the see from Old Sarum ; and the first chartergranted to it was in the 11th year Henry 111., which wasconfined by another in the 34t]i of Edivajd I.There was therefore no ground for this assertion, uponwhich the rest of the case depended.The recitals from the charter of sixth Charles I.,^ and theninth James I., were also read : but they are subject to theobservations before made, with respect to similar recitals ofQueen Elizabeth :They produced also, returns under the common seal,which for the reasons before adduced, proved nothing.An ancient book of the corporation, stated elections inthe 31st, 33rd, and 39th Henry VI., to be by the mayor,24 and 48; and the same in first Edward VI.; and 30thHenry VIII.The resolution in ] 640, was also given in evidence, andSALISBURY. 1869an extract from another borough book, to show that the ^*!Ji*'"o ' ftDQ Mary.persons then returned, were elected by the corporation ;which seems to proceed upon the assumption, that the24 and 48 formed the corporation; whereas it existed ofthose persons, and the commonalty besides, the latter beinggenerally an indefinite, and more numerous body. But it is acircumstance to be remarked, with respect to this place,* andTruro also, that the commonalty or body at large of thelargesses have been altogether superseded by the selectbody ; no such class now exists in either of those places.Parol evidence was also given of recent elections, and thecommittee resolved, " that the right was in the select num Rig^**-ber," to which the House agreed.And in the next year, upon a petition, the right wasagreed by the parties, no doubt in consequence of thisdecision, to be in the '' mayor, recorder, aldermen, andcommon councilmen*'It then appeared in evidence, that five had been swornafter publishing the precept for the election ; but upon theground that they had been elected some time before — thatothers had been sworn as long after their election — and thatno objection was taken at the time of their swearing — thecommittee allowed the votes to stand. But the reader willperceive that abuses of that description were one of the consequenceswhich followed every species of corporate rightof election : and that such consequences must ever ensue,unless the right of burgess-ship, and every privilege connectedwith it, is made to depend upon other circumstances than themere exercise of a particular right. Occasionality will everbe an accompaniment of such proceedings, unless rightsand duties are, as correlatives, united together, and theexercise of the right is only made one of the consequencesof a pre-existing qualification.CRICKLADE.The description of the burgesses of Cricklade is still more 1688.extraordinary than any we have seen before In determiningSee also post. temp. Queen Anne. t 10 Journ. 82.liIthe right of election for tibia place, the burgesses were byagreement declared to be " the freeholders and copyholders ofthe borough houses, and leasehoUers for tiiiy term not under"three years;" — which varies iii some slight degree fromthe agreement as to the right in the reign of James II. Blithecomments then made are sufficient to point out theweight that is due to such an agreement, aud tope anomalousnature of the terms of it.The rest of the ease turned upon the conduct of the election,and is immaterial to our inquiry,As to Jigs, the question was, whether the right was in tinfreemen who were resident in the town only — or in the noonfreemen also,*The inquiry was involved in one of the questions resultingfrom the corporate right of election, viz., whether Uiefreemen had been made by lawful mayors ; and they wereobjected to upon supposed defects in the titles of themayors: another instance of the difficulty connected withthat species of right of voting.A ptTsun who had been town clerk for many years statedthat there were no instances from the time of Henry VI., ofany foreign freemen appearing at the election. That allwere swim to pay scot and lot, which was always understoodto mean the bearing part of the chaise of the franchises; but he never knew foreigners to pay towards thecharge of the parish. That he never remembered any foragefreemen, till the act far regulating corporations, give anyvote, unless they had been members of Parliament a yearbefore. That he never knew any foreign freemen serve atany coronation as barons, from the time of Henry VI. tillthe coronation of Charles H., and then only one. That forthe eleven years he was town-clerk, there was never aI Aa " foreigner'cana, bje-1w5. and musico( every bo.Hugh-the hermintroductionwa* > uaurpallivereall; excluded by all the salute, charter, law[)a1 documents fran all participation in the privilegesforeign" freemen ?gems clearly to point out thai theirRYE. 1871farthing paid by any foreign freeman towards the charge ^j*!}}*"'of a bailiff to Yarmouth, or wharfage ; though he apprehendedif they were spotted, they ought to pay; but he never knewthem spotted.They also produced in evidence the act of brotherhoodbefore quoted,* stating, that none but resident freemenshould vote.Much evidence was then given as to the persons whowere entitled to be mayor, and also respecting a contestedelection for that office — as well as the proceedings upon amandamus, which had been obtained for the restoration ofone mayor ; the other, who had in the mean time been inoffice, having made many freemen, who were *' said to havebeen disallowed by the rest of the corporation."On another occasion it appeared, that the king in councilbad turned out a mayor elect, and placed another person asmayor in the office, who also made four other freemen.For the sitting member it was insisted, that the foreign Sittingfreemen had a right to vote as well as the resiants; and itwas not material whether they were made by a mayor defacto or de jure. Some evidence was given that foreignfreemen had been allowed to vote; and, that at the election ofmayor, some had voted who were expunged men, havingbeen turned out by the regulators of the corporation.Sir Dennis Ashburnham said he was a foreign freeman, andhad been so ever since the commission of 1662; had sincegiven his vote several times for mayor, but had never votedbefore for burgesses to Parliament.They also produced a bye-law of 1661, by the mayor,jurats, and commonalty of Rye, by which it was resolved,that a "freeman, by dwelling out of the franchises, should hence.'** not lose his freedom."But it should be remembered, that this was a resolution ofthat particular corporation, which could not alter its constitution,and give the non-residents a right, if they did not possessit by law. And we have before shown the principlesupon which the non-residents could not have that right.See before, p. 533, ctseq.tRYB.Neither could such a bye-lnw alter the class of penwntwho were entitled to be freemen of the Cinque Ports, whichwere to be regulated by the orders of the brotherhood orig." Whistling," — in the Journals, described as of the nature ofa Parliament of the Cinque Ports. The order of that body,mentioned before, was seven years after this order for Ryeand would therefore, at all events, have superseded it. It wasalso given in evidence, on this occasion, that none bat freemencould carry the canopy at the coronation; and thatseveral who were non-residents, had been chosen to serve forthat purpose ; and non-resident? had attended at the assemblies,and given their votes, but they could not say they baddone BO for parliament men. The oath of a freeman, bywhich they swear to pay scot and lot, was also read.The committee resolved, that the right was " in the freemenwho were resia/tt in the town only ;" and the House agreedwith that resolution.Some important points are discoverable from this case;first, the inconveniences resulting from the right of electiondepending upon the modem doctrines as to corporations.Next that the freemen of Rye, one of the Cinque Ports, continuedtheir ancient liability to jay ncnl and lot ; which isproperly described as " the individual's contribution to thecharges of the town :" — certainly more accurate than thedefinition of Lord Glenbervie, who confines it to the paymentof the church and poor rates.*Another point to which we have before referred, is hereI also distinctly established, that the foreign freemen were introducedimmediately after the Restoration, under the statuteof the. 13th of Charles II., for the regulation of corporations.The effect of which statute is also explained in the evidencerelative to the expunged men. It will likewise be observed,that other precedents for the introduction of non-residentfreemen, were borrowed from the admission of persons whohad been previously members for the borough. Another importantconsideration — applicable to all other places, butRYE. 1873more particularly apparent in this, — is, that Uie question, who ^}^^^should vote for members to Parliament ? is in fact the sameas, who are the burgesses of the borough.But in this place, as well as in many others, the absurdexpedient was resorted to, of supposing that there could beburgesses who were entitled to vote in corporate, and notin parliamentary elections.It has been repeatedly shown, that of freemen there mightbe residents and non-residents — also freemen belonging to the Freemen,corporation generally: and freemen admitted only for thepurpose of licensing them to trade in the place. But ofburgesses there could be but one class, the free inhabitants of Burgesses.the borough.In passing, we should observe, that leave was given in 1689.this same year,* to bring in a bill for repealing the statute ofHenry V., which required members returned to Parliament,to be burgesses, resiant and free, of the boroughs for whichthey were returned. But it does not appear to have proceededany farther, and the act remained unrepealed, aspointed out before, until the 14th year of George III., 1774.+WINDSOR.Upon the extraordinary decision relative to Windsor — thatthe right was in the " select body'' — we have already commentedin the early part of this work. JThat this decision was contrary to the former determination— that it was subsequently set aside, and that the personseated under it was Mr. Powle, who was one of theindividuals who applied to the Prince of Orange to cometo England ; and the individual who took the chair whensome of the members assembled upon the Prince's arrival inLondon, will be in the recollection of the reader. And itseems somewhat singular, that there should be a distinctreport which retained the seat for Mr. Powle, on the 2ndof May, and a separate report as to the other seat, on the10 Douro. 86. t See stat. 14 Geo. III., ch. 58, repealing I Hen. V. ch. 1.X 10 Journ. 106. See before, p. 133, et seq.6 Delect lOD (- dared to be void. And Sir Algerian May being abo decidednot to be duly elected, a new writ was ordered.LYME.The borough of Lyme, in Dorsetshire, was brought intodiscussion before the committee of privileges this year,*but the report affords little further information, than that bya confusion of the corporate and freehold right of voting,with reference to the payment oiacot and lot, the whole wmleft in such a state of uncertainty, that it would be impossibleto collect from it who were the real burgesses of theborough.Other inaccuracies also appear in the report ; as that Lymewas made a borough and corporation by Edward I.; andthat they were coeval ; for which purpose the charter isquoted, (granting that it should be a free borough ; and thatthe men-\ should be free burgesses; and that they should ihave a merchant guild : — but that such a grant did not make |them a corporation, has been abundantly proved. jMany returns were given in evidence by the mayor andburgesses, who were the proper persons to make them.It appears that the act for the regulation of corporations,had been followed by the same effects in Lyme, aa at Rye;and Sir John Strode and Colonel Bishop had been called bythe mayor to his assistance ; and they had afterwards votedin the common council house, for mayors aud other offices.They seem to have introduced the custom of " out-burgeae^'■ lOJoUTD. 140.t Grant to the " men" of the different borough* have been so frequent; qualcdin this work. Shal it is thought desirable to add a reference ID the several page* inwhich They occur-see pp. R5, 86,9!), 100, 118, 123.134,137.139,144, 174,187.191, 217. 250, 300, 304. 306. 307, 319. 3'28. Scotland— 335. 336, 337, 338, 346, 3S3,354.355, 358, .159, 372, 378. 380, 382,391,404,409,414,415,430,438,454,465,467, 468, 469. 470, 473, 481 , 484, 506, 508, 516, 516, 51$, 519, 521. 526, 529, 545,546,567. 580, -W. 693, 598, 617, 6-28, 630, 640,641, 645, 650,651,662,664, 665. 667.673.699.747, 750.753,760,773, 778, 789,791. 79t>, 799. BOO, B33, note, 853,654,858, 883, 886. 896, 919, 941, 946, 963, 967, 974, 998, 1000, 1003, 1005, 1008,1013, 1036, 1075,1085, 1113, 1119, 1130. 1)31, 1151,1198, 1327, note, 1335, 1392.1393, I43S, 1436, 1490, 1553, 1557, 1558, 1590, 1615, 1618, 166-i, 1665, 1668, 1708,1740, 1876.LYME. 1876into the place ; as there were five other " out-burgesses'' ex ^*Ui^*"accepted to.^ 1689.An effort was also made to set up the rights of the " freeholders'but no particular ground was stated for it. If theywere " resident householders," they were certainly entitledto be burgesses ; but if they were non-resident freeholders,they were as clearly not entitled* And it appears to havebeen assumed, that the " freeholders " were confined to*' residents ;" because it was said that there were no instancesof freeholders out of the town voting.A surrender of the charter was also given in evidence ; and Surrender*much confusion seems to have arisen as to the freemen whowere entitled under the old, or under the new charter. And*' honorary freemen' the most objectionable class of voters,were also referred to.Nothing further appears from the report, excepting thatthe committee determined in favour of the petitioner. SirWilliam Drake, against the sitting member, Mr. Bridge.But the House, as we have seen in some former instances, tookupon themselves to decide against the committee, and supportedthe seat of Mr. Budge.TRURO.The next case which occurred is that of Truro.We have before mentioned some of the peculiar circumstancesof this borough, and particularly noted the earlyreturns by the commonalty and that a court leet was con Common-tinnedthere in the reign of Queen Elizabeth. ^ ^*There was also a return by the " mayor and commonalty'* Returns.in the reign of Queen Mary ; as well as one before quoted,in the reign of Edward VI. ,f and the return added that they** of one mind, assent and consent, elected the members ;"and the seals of the parties were affixed to the indenture.The court leet also continued in existence till the period Court lc«i.IfiQOof which we are now speaking, and in the full exercise ofthose functions with respect to the resigns, which we have• 10 Journ. 141. t See before, p. J325.";■"«"» traced fromanil Mus.- in Truro,Iearliest laws. And we find that the jurythis year, presented persons as " inmates," withInmmiti. ^ ''^* *^ prevent their being settled there : establishing theconnexion before pointed ont, between the ancient commonlaw, and the modem law of settlement. Some of the person'presented appeared in the court, and according to the Ancientpractice, were sworn to abide by the law, and wenthereupon admitted and enrolled as townsmen.1691. In the same manner, in the succeeding year, the jury p»-Uet. seated, according to the articles of the Uet, " all who oughSuitors. " to have done suit, and had made default :" and partiewere summoned, to show cause why they should not beremoved iron their habitations within the borough,1699. A few years afterwards, the j ury presented a man, his wife;lumut, and family, as "inmates:" and all persons who did notappear to do suit.They also presented irregularities in the swearing of themayor and magistrates, which they stated to be encroach*ments upon their rights, and declared to be void ; showingclearly that the ancient borough rights and jurisdiction exercisedin tile court leet, were paramount to any rights belong-corporaling to the corporation : or to speak with more precision, weought to say that, in this case at least, the borough municipalgovernment continued in its ancient state, the corporatepowers having been superinduced upon it, merely for thepurpose of making it conformable to the modem doctrineof corporations; giving it a perpetual succession, and a corporatename, under which it might take and grant — sueand be sued — and do other acts as a corporate body."The twenty-four" having been mentioned before, withrespect both to this place and others, and it having beensuggested that they were the juries, we ought to add, that itappears from the entries ti the records of Truro, that thegrand jury of that place always consisted of 24. And thealdermen are entered as "presented, elected, and affirmed,by the jury at the court teet, according to the charter, andancient privileges of the borough :" — and, it might be added,according to the ancient law of the land: the aldermen being,TRURO. 1877as in the cases of london, Norwich, and Cane, the ancient ^"Uj*™' ' and Mary.conservators of the peace ; and, therefore, presented andelected like the constables at the court leet.There is an entry of two persons being continued as alder 1689.men, according to the charters and ancient privileges.The jury also present all persons that entertain strangers Stranger.to dwell and sojourn with them, and do not give noticethereof to the mayor within one month after they receivethem, according to the common law ; as in Bracton, andaccording to the usage in Leicester.*Inmates are also presented for opening shops within the Inmate.borough without the license of the mayor ; and also a personfor entertaining an inmate as a reputed showman, withoutthe consent of the mayor ; and others as pedlars and pettychapman opening shop windows ; and two as reputed Scotchmenhaving wandered into this realm of England,There is another entry in strict conformity with the com- Freemen,mon law, by which all freemen and others that ought toappear at the court and make default, are presented : whereit is obvious that the word " freemen" could only mean thosewho, as the " liberi homines," were bound to be sworn andenrolled at the court leet.Considering the previous history of Truro and the factswe have just detailed, showing the continual existence of thecottrt leet, and the matters which were presented at it by thejury, the following decision, that the right of election was " inthe select number ;" or, to reduce those expressions into constitutionallanguage, that the select number of mayor, aldermen,and capital burgesses were the whole body of the burgesses,or the commonalty — is a contradiction in terms, and apalpable absurdity.There was a double return on the Prince of Orange's 1688.letter, against which there was a petition, which was heardbefore the committee of privileges, and the question was, 1689.whether the right was in the populace or the select number.The petitioners, Mr. Tredenham and Mr. Manley, claimedby the populace.See before, p. 235, et scq.IsisWilling The sitting member, Sir H. Surat and Hem-v ViiioMil,by the select body.1689. For the petitioners it was said, that Truro was a borough byprescription, and that it was incorporated by Queen Elizabeth*Returns from the 2f)th of Edward I., sixth of Blward U.,and tenth of Henry IV., were given in evidence, and that ofthe seventh of Edward VI. appeared to be made by th mayorrnrnmoD- with the cousent of the whole commonalty.The return of the first of Mary was as stated above.Siiiiiii; For the sitting member, it was said, that Truro was acorporation by prescription, as well as a borough (with whftttruth we have shown before) ; and that this was imported bythe recital of the charter of Eh/ubcth, upon which we harealready commented.Ittiurni. They also gave in evidence, the return of the 2(}lh ElixHbeUi,by the mayor and burgesses, under the seal of the borough.But it must be observed, that a return by the mayor andBu>Kcu>». burgesses proved nothing on this point, unless it was by themayor and capital burgesses; and the omission of the lendcapital," used in the charter, was on the contrary, strong loshow that the tenn " burgess-es" used in that return, did notmean the capital burgesses, but the burgesses generally.They also gave in evidence an ancient book, in the time ofHenry VII., mentioning the twenty-for, (who, as observedbefore, were probably the grand jury at the court leet) — andthey produced a return of the seventh of Edward IV., andthe 30th of Queen Eliiabeth. Also a lease of the 33rd ofHenry VIII., and a grant of the third of Edward VI., as wellas the resolutions of 1660 and 1661. And they asserted ausage for the mayor and 24 to elect, ever since the 3lst ofQueen Elizabeth ; which at best, could only show the practiceto have arisen out of that charter ; which could not, accordingto the Chippenham case, affect the right of electionexisting from the reign of Edward I.The committee however resolved, that the right was inthe mayor and select number of burgesses only.• See before, p. 1325,TRURO. 1879As to this resolution, it may be observed, that the ques ^^^^^^^tion was between the populace and the 24 — the decision16S9«being, that it was in " the select number of burgesses only" —not expressly mentioning the 24. So that it was neither expresslyinconsistent with the exclusion of the/re^wi^n by theformer resolutions, nor of the populace by this, that theright should have been still in the select number of burgesses,who did suit and service, and were enrolled in the courtleet.Such persons were the ancient voters — distinguished aswell on the one hand, from the inhabitants at large who inno place had the right ; as on the other, from the non-residenttrading freemen, or freeholders, who had as little pretencefor their claim.And in that sense, and that only, could this election bereconciled with the former, or with the general law.There were afterwards other petitions as to the mayor,denying his title to that office in one instance; and in anotherobjecting to his conduct; but no further petition as to theright of election occurred.It is a curious custom, said to exist at Truro, and whichseems to refer to the right of the householders ; that upon Houses1 • /• 1 1 holders.the election of mayor, the town mace must by custom bedelivered to the lord of the manor, until 6rf. is paid for everyhouse in the town, consisting of 400.HEREFORD.In this year, an election petition complained that many 16B9.persons were secretly and unduly sworn, and made free, inale-houses, &c., and in no way qualified for the freedom.In the heads which were reported to the House for the indemnitybill,* amongst others was inserted the opinion of thecommittee, that the advising and procuring the surrenderingof charters — the alteration and subversion of corporations —the violating the rights and freedom of elections to Parliamentby declaration or informations, were crimes for• 10 Journ. 148.William which pcrbuns might justly be excepted out of the bill of ^indemnity. JCALNE. 1ItiSS. From a petition in this year,* it appears that a quo wait Icanto was tiled in the reign of James II,, against the boroughof Cane; and that a new charter was granted, which turned ,out the old burgesses, and brought in new ones ; and that the |person who obtained it made himself steward, or head bui^ .gest, though he lived at the Crown-office — and the petitionerI situated, thut the court being informed thut he was a disaffectedperson, the Chief Justice Jefferies being enragedwith him, had him sentenced to stand in the pillory beforeI Westminster Hall — at Cane, before his tenants and neighbourhoodalso at Salisbury — to be fined 1000/. — to beimprisoned till it was paid— and to give security for fais goodbehaviour during life : which was executed upon him accordingly,he being confined three years in the King's Bench,I to his ruin.I > The petition concluded with a request that he might havera sum of money for the distresses and privations he had sufferedout of " those plentiful estates that the late LordJeffreys and Browne had got by regulating corporations."PLYMOUTH.1689. The borough of Plymouth affords another striking instanceof the disposition of the committee of privileges in the conventionParliament, to exclude the claims of the burgessesat lai^e — which was called the common law right of election— and to give a preference to any other exclusive classof burgesses.Plymouth was said, upon this occasion, to be a boroughby prescription ; it might have been, and probably was so —but it is not mentioned in Domesday. Its ancient name wasSutton, under which it returned members, from the 26th ofEdward I., with some intermissions, till it was incorporatedunder its present name in the reign of Henry Vl.f• lOJouin. 164. * Secbefuie.pp.eOl, 870, 1097, 1401.PLYMOUTH. 1881On the Restoration, the question being, whether the mayor, JJj'jJI*"*12 aldermen, and 24 burgesses — or the mayor and commonalty,had the right of election ; it was decided to be in thelatter.On the present occasion,* the petitioner insisted upon the 1689«right of the " freeholders and freemen."The sitting member on the right of the "freeholders"only — and he was confirmed in his seat.But in 1740, the decision in this respect was corrected 1740.in practice, and the freemen were allowed to vote : but thatcommittee made the right exclusive, by adding the word*' only:" and the term " freemen," being understood to relate Freemen.to corporate freemen, all the evils of " non-resident and Noneresidents.honorary freemen," were introduced and continued till thelate alteration.By means of this decision, and also of a mandamus,which was tried in Exeter, the freeholders were altogetherexcluded.SOUTHAMPTON.Southampton, in some respects, obtained a better fate thanother places in this Parliament, though it still had one of thegreat evils resulting from the corporation act entailed uponit, by allowing non-residents to be called, and to act as in- Non-burgesses.In the Joumal,+ they are strangely called, residentburgesses.In the second year of William III., the certificate of the 1689.return of the members was made by the mayor and sheriff.Sir Charles Windham petitioned against the return, claim iniuwuntsing to have been elected by the burgesses and inhabitants.Mr. Fleming, the sitting member, claimed to have beenchosen by the mayor, bailiffs, and select number of burgesses Burgesses,of the corporation.Several returns were given in evidence, and many witnesses Scot andcalled to show the scot and lot men had voted.For the sitting member it was contended (but erroneously),that Southampton was a corporation time out of mind : the• sojourn. 320. t Ibid.BOtiTHAMrrO\.1 having II iiiercliaut guild being mislukeiily treated as e*'i-- (hence thai there was an incorporation of the burgesses. Infact the members of the guild and the burgesses were tarodistinct and separate classes, as we have frequently pointedout. The right was determined to be "in the burgetaet and ,inhabitanU."In the sixth of King William lU., there was anotherpetition :• — the petitioner insisting thut the out-living bariteases bad do right to vote : the siltmg member the entry.]. It was given in evidence for the petitioner, that thoughout-living burgesses had been polled, they were marked to betried upon any question in Parliament.For the sitting member, many witnesses were called toprove, that out-burgesses had voted for membera of Parliamentas well as mayors.And it was resolved, that " the out-ling burgesses had aright to vote,"Corporation Bill,. The bill for the restoration of corporations to their ancientprivileges, which hud been fur a long time pending beforethe House of Commons was read for a third time mu the10th of January, in the first year of King William andQueen Mary,The proceedings upon this bill are curious, as exhibiting theextent to which party feelings and prejudices are calculatedto drive the strongest minds. And with that view — ae wellas for the purpose of showing the extremes into which thearguments were driven, and to prove in how unsatisfactory astate the municipal and parliamentary rights were placed, bybeing connected with the modem doctrine of corporations,some history of the proceedings, and short extracts fromthe debate, which was long and violent, may be excused.Smollett says, " that the Whigs brought in the bill, awarethat their strength at the elections consisted in the corporations."On the former stages of the bill the attendance in the■ II Journals. ' Sec lOJuuin, ia, ll, ^33, 301, Say, 325.CORPORATION BILL. 1883House had been thin, and no accounts are given of the j^JJ^'jJjJ"debate.*^^^.•vx^. 1689.Mr. Sacheverell said, that the surrenders of charters werenotorious crimes — he spoke of the times in which it was doneas wicked ; some men, through their poverty surrendered, asthey could not withstand. He urged that after the citycharter was taken away, it might have induced the majorityto surrender.Sir Walter Younge spoke of the villainies of the surrenders.Sir Christopher Mangrove appealed to the knowledge ofthe House, that whole books had been stolen away by thetown clerks.Lord Falkland spoke of the rights which had been restoredby the circular letters of the Prince of Orange.Serjeant Maynard (a great constitutional lawyer) said, " Ifthose surrenders stood, they may make what Parliament menthey will at court,"Sir Henry Goodrich appears to have fairly summed up thecauses of the surrenders in the words, " avarice, force, andeasiness,'^ which induced the corporations to surrender theircharters.Sir Thomas Charges stated that he knew a corporation of600/. a-year, advised by this Lord Chief Justice, to surrender;or else, if judged against them, the lands would go tothe next heir of the grantor.Sir William Williams said, in some corporations of 600who had a right to give consent to a surrender, not above 34were for it, and they prevailed ; and how came this about,this was a packed common council by Lard Jefferies. And, inChester case, that there were 500 still in being in Chesteragainst the surrender.Mr. Hume, complaining of those who had made the surrenders,said, " those men have delivered up their charters,depriving of their right children unboni." He added, " corporationsdid choose such us wei"e for court purposes."Mr. Solicitor Somers said, " to destroy corporations, andto make Parliaments at the pleasure of the crown, this is the• 5 Cobbett, Pari. His., 508.1684 CORPORATION Bit.WiMism thing — and three persons are complained of lor it. This ithe worst means to arrive at the worst ends imaginable ; aithose men that were in the first part of this matter,either for private or worse ends."Mr. Folly said, it was endeavoured, in the two last reigii%to get a Nathaniel to subvert all our constitutions. Thenwas a design for a clause in a bill that all corporations sbooM^surrender their charters by such a time, or else they should'be void - and the justices of the county should act in allI towns, &c. Had that design succeeded, there would hanbeen no need of quo warrants. It was part of the king'sdecoration to restore all corporations to the condition theywere in before tile quo warranto informations and surrender.Mr. Finch (another constitutional lawyer), spoke of thesurrenders as a fault, but said it was general, and attributedthem to the judgment iu the London quo warranto, afterlich most of them occurred. It appears also from hiispeech, that the preamble in the bill dilated, that the design 'had been to pack Parliaments — and that there was a clauseto declare all surrenders void.Sir Robert Howard stated, that it was in times when the \doctrine of divine right was upheld, that they began with 1corporations; that is, began to oppress and interfere withthem.This debate arose upon a clause which had been introducedfor the expulsion from the corporations of those whobad prevented the surrenders — the clause was rejected, andthe bill passed.Tindal gives an account of harsh clauses, which wereintroduced into the bill, as well as the further proceedingsthereupon, particularly the protest in the House of Lords,in which were collected the cases, which when pi-openly considered,show that the incorporation is a matter totally distinct,both from the municipal rights and burgess-ship, asconnected with local jurisdiction and police, and also withreturning members to Parliament.As it is obvious from every principle, that a corporationwhich exists under the grant of the crown, accepted bvCORPORATION BILL. 1886such a body, may be put an end to by the surrender of ^*'ij*™the grant by the grantees ; and the acceptance of the surrenderby the crown : so it is equally clear, that if the kingshould by his charter, create a borough for the public good,giving it local jurisdiction, and as a consequence that placeshould have returned members to Parliament, both of thesebeing for the public good, could not be forfeited either byabuse, non-user* or surrender; so that, as in the cases ofTaunton and others, the corporation might be destroyed, andthe borough would continue its jurisdiction and its representationin Parliaments By this view of them, the cases whichwere cited, may be reconciled and rendered intelligible : —without such an explanation, they appear irreconcilable, anda mass of confusion.The session having ended, the bill proceeded no further,and the Parliament was afterwards dissolved.Upon the assembling of the Parliament in the second 1689.year of King William and Queen Mary, the effects of thedecisions of the convention Parliament, in favour of non Non-residents.residents, became apparent.A petition was presented from the borough of Bridportycomplaining of the bailiff, for allowing persons, not inhabitants,to votes And a similar petition from Aldborough,in Suffolk, against persons brought in from the country, notinhabitants nor paying scot and lot, but lately made free tothe number of 25, contrary to the usage and custom of theborough. There was also a case at law, relative to theborough of Oxford, in which complaint was made, that foreignershad been unduly admitted to offices in the borough.Eyre, C.J. said " they could not choose out-setters, for by'* charter they must choose of the inhabitants. But if the• Where a court is established by the king's charter, for the public benefit, thewords of permission used in the charter, are obligatory; and the right of determiningsuits cannot be lost by non-user. Rex v. Mayor and Jurats of Hastings. HilaryTerm, 1822, 5 B. & A. 692 ; Rex v. Steward, &c. of Havering, ate Bower, ib, 691.t See also as to the effect of a dissolution of a corporation, case of the Kingr. Corporation of London, Skinner, 310. See also, Rex v. Ameryy, and Rex v.Monk; 2 Term Rep. 515.t 10 Journ. 352, 353.Y0BK.-CHB9TER." usage of the pliu-e, tiatli Ix'pii to choose ' out-sitlei^' sitiee- " the charter, though wrong : yet it lakes away the conspiracycharged by the information."There were also complaints made, with respect to th*undue making of freemen, after the teste of the peril i»y'tyrk* And of the improper admission of freemen, dIt will be remembered, that in Maldon and Dumrlek ilwas proved, that the honorary freemen out-numbered tlwinhabitants and freemen.;^In all which cases, had the real point been kept la vieVithat the only question was, who were " the burgesses of theborough ;" no reasonable doubt could for one mutueiit hidebeen entertained. Losing sight of that guide, cunitnilteoiof the House of Commons involved these inquiries in sociik-endless distinction and intricacies, that they at last beeatm^9 barely intelligible.LUDLOW.The methods hy which the surrenders of old charters wereobtained, and the effect of the new grants, may be seen bythe following extract fmm the petition for Lndlow:^ whichstated that the town was a borough by prescription, andincorporated in the first of Edward IV. Tliat the IxirdChancellor JefTeries extorted a surrender from the town ofall its powers of electing the officers, even to the attomiesof the town court, which surrender was enrolled by thehead bailiff of the town.That King James II. incorporated the town by the nameof " mayor, aldermen, and common councilmen ;" but it hadbeen previously incorporated by that of " bailiffs, burgesses,and commonalty" — with a reservation of the power of removingall the officers at pleasure, and confining theelections of members to Parliament, to a select numberof 12 aldermen and 25 common councilmen, contrary to all,LUDLOW. 1887former custom — and that the late king, in order to restore the Imam^ and Marjr.town to its ancient privileges, removed the mayor and all theother members and officers of this new corporation.But a person assumed the mayorship, under the new charter,though dissolved, and by combination with the sheriff,having the precept directed to him, proceeded to. an electionby the new corporation men, and 28 view burgesses, madeunder the new charter, and returned his own brother-in-lawas member. Notwithstanding the petitioner was chosen beforethe bailiffs, by a unanimous consent of voices, qualifiedunder the old charter; and the bailiffs having made a returnthereof to the sheriff, he took the same and tore it.HASTINGS.A petition from Hastings, also proves the interference withelections which was at that time continued, particularly in Cinquethe Cinque Ports ;* for it states that " the governor of DoverCastle claimed to have a power in the several CinquePorts, and required them not to engage their votes for any'^ particular person, for that his majesty would recommend to** them such persons as he should think convenient for them to** choose, and by menaces and threats, procured the voices ofmany electors."It has been asserted by Smollett and other authors, thatWilliam III. did not interfere with the election of membersto Parliament, but this petition appears to give a denial tothat assertion, and the interference with the Cinque Portsappears to have gone to such an extent, that a statute waspassed expressly for the purpose of preventing it. It was lego.entitled, " an act to declare the right and freedom of election Cap. 7.*^ of members to serve in Parliament for the Cinque Ports,"and commenced by reciting, that the election of members toserve in Parliament ought to be free ; that the wardens ofthe Cinque Ports had claimed to have the right of nominatingto each town of the Cinque Ports, one person, as baron, torepresent them in Parliament. It was therefore enacted, thatsuch nominations and recommendations were contrary to the• 10 Joum. 36LLONDON.Next after the above statute, follows wi act for restoringthe privileges and for reversing the judgment in the quo |warranto against the city of London, and for restoring it U>its ancient privileges. It recites the quo warranto, and declaresthe judgment to be null and void; and enacts thatthe mayor and commonalty and citizens should be a bodycorporate; and, strange to say, it is enacted, that they shouldprescribe to be a corporation.* In the recital, as well as theenacting clause, it shows the proper powers of a corporation,viz., to plead and be impleaded in their corporate name. Allgrants, but not leases, made after the judgment, are declaredto be void — the officers in place at the time the judgment ,was given, are conhrnied — the then present officers continuinguntil a new election. The companies and corporations of thecity are also incorporated and restored to all their lands andprivileges: as well as those who had been admitted into thefreedoms or liberties of the companies.In the next sessions of Parliaments there is a statute forpaving and cleansing the streets of the city of London andWestminster which with some others passed in this reign,may, as comments upon the introduction of non-residentvoters in the election of members to Parliament, serve tosatisfy the reader that on all other subjects, but those inwhich political feelings interfered, as in those elections, thelegislature, and all other institutions in the country, accordingto the practical wisdom and experience of our ancestors,confined all rights and obligations to actual residents andhouseholdersll a impossible that London could, under any circumstances prescribe to be acorporation, for had it been so before Ibe lime of legal memory itp liberties wereseized in the reign of Henry III,; which being after thai period, destroy theprescription. See before, p, Mt2 W. and M. sea. 2, cap. 8. ) See also 8 & W ill III., cap. 37.See ease as lo residence in Oxford, 1 Vent. 106, City of (Jifard's else. And uto the objection to strangers being eleelcil into Ihe office uf the cii;, 3 Lev. 293,Mayor of Oxfonl v. Wildgoose.LONDON. 1889The statute to which we have referred, compels the persons ^*jj|*'"inhabiting in and about London and Westminster, accordingto the common law as practised in the court feet, to cleansethe streets, &c., before their respective houses ; and all thestreets are to be paved and lighted at the expence of the Sec. 15.householders and inhabitants; and the rates are directed to Housepaid by the parishioners and inhabitants according to theusage and custom of the city.The reasonable interpretation of the words " parishioners Parishioners.and inhabitants" would obviously be to apply them to thosepersons who were at that time actually inhabitants occupyinghouses ; because, unless they had houses, they would not berated: and those who had houses, which they might haveleft for some temporary purpose, without having removed toothers in different parishes, in such a manner as to makethem parishioners there : which explanation is, in all respects,consistent with the proposition, that inhabitancy in a boroughwould, with the other legal qualifications, make a burgess.In other parts of the statute, the ancient inhabitants usus inhabitsally present at the election of parish officers, are mentioned.Such inhabitants are to be called together, and they, Sec, lo.or the greater number of them present, are to make a rateupon the inhabitants, (who could only be the inhabitanthouseholders and in practice they are so,) and which rates, ifnot paid, are to be levied by distress.The warrants of distress are directed to be executed bythe constables and headborougJis ; that is, by the constables inplaces under the jurisdiction of the counties at large, and bythe head boroughs in the boroughs, according to the ancientduties of those officers.There is also an act* for an amendment of the laws for the• See also 8 & 9 Will. III., c. 30, where, in the preamble, the parish, township,or place where the person lives is mentioned, which clearly applies to actual tn*habitation; and reference is made to the security to be given upon any personcoining to settle in any other place ; which is in conformity with the common law,and supports the explanation we have before given as to the fines to be paid by newcoiners into the borough. The persons referred to in this statute are to be supportedas inhabitants of the parish, and their settlement by birth and subsequentacquisition by settlement are both mentioned. Sec also 9 & 10 Will. III., c. 11,settlement by tenement of 10/.6 E■S'm*"" B^t''*""^"^ **f tl"* poor, which referring to the 40 days' residence,handed down to us from our earliest laws, requiresthat notice should be given to the overseers of the bouse ofhis abode, and the Dumber of his family, which is to be .tered. This appears to be a substitution for the notice requiredby the common law to be given to the tythiugman, orscarborough, by the hosts, of every stranger or guest whocame to their houses.The sixth section, in analogy to the common law, gives a spermanent settlement, without notice, to any person whoinbaLii. should cone to inhabit in any town, and should, on his ownaccount, execute any annual otKcc or charge during onewhole year ; or should be charged with or pay share towardsthe public taxes or levies of the town or parish.Scot A more accurate definition of paying scot and bearing lotcannot be conceived, and from the terms used, it could on);iloui*- tjg applicable to householders ; for such only would fill thoseoffices or pay those levies.The principle upon which this settlement is given withoutnotice is obviously because the town must be understood aahaving notice of the person whom they had appointed anofficer, and from whom they had received levies. Upon theSons, same ground as the sons of freemen and apprentices had aright to claim to he recognized as of free condition, becausethe town must have notice of their being so, inasmuch as theirfathers, in the one case, had been recorded as freemen ; andApprcD* in the other the apprentice would have been enrolled.The registry required by this statute seems to be inanalogy to the enrolment at the court-leet.The eighth section of this act appears also to place themeaning of the word " inhabit," beyond all doubt. It directsthat, if any person bound an apprentice by indenture shouldinhabit in any town or parish, such binding and inhabitationshould be adjudged a good settlement. Here the termsinhabit" and " inhabitation" cannot but mean actual residence,and have always been so interpreted,The 11th section, speaking of the magistrates who are toregulate the persons to receive collections, describes them asSTATUTES. 1891residing in the parish, or (if none be there dwelling,) in the ^*j[j**"parts near or next adjoining — where residence is clearly in- — — —tended and dwelling and residing are used synonymously.The statute of the third William and Mary, for the repair Cap. 12.of highways, describes the persons from whom the surveyorsof the highways are to be selected, as inhabitants, whohave an estate in lands, tenements, or hereditaments, ofthe value of 10/., or a personal estate of 100/., or areoccupiers or tenants of houses, lands, tenements, or hereticof the yearly value of 30/. ; if there be none such,then the most sufficient inhabitants of the parish ; a descries inhabitant*lion which in practice has always been confined to actualresidents. The 13th George III. c. 78, s. 1, which, althoughit in some degree altered and amended the above statute,yet adopted its general provisions, further denotes the necessityof residence, by describing the persons who are to have Residence.the qualification mentioned above, as living within the district.And that residence is required by the latter statuteis clear beyond doubt, because, in default of persons properlyqualified being offered to the justices, they are enabledto appoint some person, whom they shall think proper, surveyor,with a salary, and he is to have an inhabitant ashis assistant. It is further provided, as to such speciallyappointed surveyor, that if he does not reside, he shall givesecurity to the parish.The places enumerated in the statute are, counties, cities,BOROUGHS, and other places ; boroughs being substituted for Boroughs.corporate towns, the term used in former statutes in this reign.Boroughs is the more correct term, because they are theonly places excepted from the counties: corporate towns. Corporateunless they are boroughs, being included in them. Therate is to be imposed upon the inhabitants, owners andoccupiers of lands, houses, tenements and hereditaments,or any personal estate usually rateable to the poor.By the statute 4 William and Mary, c. 1, for an aid to the 1692.crown (the first land tax act), the commissioners appointed areto direct their precepts to the inhabitants, constables, bailifl's, inhabitants6e2statutes.or other officers; and the warrants are to be directed to twfl,~ at least, of the most able and efficient inhabitants,The persons to be assessed are those dwelling and rendingwithiathe limits of the places.'I've collectors are to be persons litiiw} where they arechargeable.Persons are to be nitcd for personal estate where they arerenubnt.And all thesis itt being householders, nor havii^ a oertiuplace if residence, shall be taxed at the place where thorthrall be resident at the time of the execution of the act.Then are provisions for persons having property aberthey are not resident, and for persons having several nuuuimhouses, or places of residence,I. Householders are to give an account of persons who lodgeor sojourn in their houses.No letters patent granted by their majesties, or their jassenators, to any persons, cities, boroughs, or towns corpontCrof liberties or privileges, shall exempt the inhfibUantx somthese rates. But no person inhabiting any city, borough, (fftown corporate, is to be compellable to be assessed out ofthe limits of the city, &c. This miiPt necessarily be con-tined to those actually resident.Any person inhabiting within the city of London, or anyother city or town corporate (boroughs are strangely omitted),having his dwelling in one of the parishes or wards, and;. having in another parish or ward goods chargeable, shallbe rated where he dwelleth, and not elsewhere.In the 54th section, which provides for the change ofresidence, " inhabit" and " reside" are used as synonymousterms.The second chapter of the statutes for this year, is an actthat the inhabitants of the province of York may dispose oftheir personal estates by will:* and it speaks of the customof York with respect to persons dying inhabitants of thatprovince ; and the persons included within the statute are• So also as to Wales, 7 & 6 Will. III. c. 3fl.STATUTES. 1893pei-sons inhabiting or residing ; but it is not to extend to the JJ^'^jJ^^citizens oi York, and Chester, who Bxe freemen of those cities, — -— —inhabiting therein or within the suburbs thereof.The form of the venire for juries, given by the statute, 1693.4 & 5 William and Mary, c. 24, requires, in the language ofour earliest laws, that 12 free and lawful men (liberos etlegates homines de vicinity, &c. should be summoned.* Savingnevertheless to all cities, boroughs, and towns corporate,their ancient usage of returning jurors.Here the term " liberos homines** or freemen, must meanpersons of free condition ; and it should be observed as tothis writ, that the persons returned are always those whoreside in the county, and yet there is nothing further torequire their residence but the general expression de vicinity,an expression so common in many of the early charters.A stamp is first imposed by 6 William and Mary, c. 21, ^^®^*8. 2, upon admissions into any corporations or company. Stamps.The right of the inhabitants as burgesses to vote, wasmuch less encroached upon in the Parliament which succeededthe Convention, than during that sessions.Thus in the case of Bedford, the burgesses, freemen, and Bedford,inhabitants being householders, were treated as the burgesses,by being declared to have the right of election : butsojourners were excluded .-f*The charter of Queen Elizabeth to the borough of Plymp- Plympton.son had been surrendered, and a new one granted byJames II. It was declared to be void by the House of Surrender.Commons, who appointed a day to consider the advisersand prosecutors of the charter of Plympton, and who passedit, as well as the surrender of the old charter. J In thenext month, there was a petition from the freeholders, inhabitants,and burgesses, stating their early charters, andcomplaining that in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, by some• So also 7 & 8 Will. 111. c.32. f 10 Journ. 376.\ 10 Journ. 378, 397.1894 PLYMPTON.Wiiliun undue meims, a charter was procured to make the town tand Nay. .mayor town; since which, by ia&]Liag fartnifnem freemen ' suitpower of election and right of return had been usurped fromthe petitioners, and the charter had been surrendered ti Kii^James, and a new one procured, whereby a greater powerwan pretended in depriving the petitioners of their rightAnd it appears that the mayor, who lived three miles out ofthe borough — had unduly returned sir Geoi^e Treby, theattorney-gene nil, the then late recorder of London ; and Mr.Pollexfen with him.LUDLOW.A complaint was also made with respect to the proceedingsSu'WDiler. relative to the surrender and grant of a new charter to Lttd-loWff which was declared void. And great irregularities at the |election appear to have taken place, in consequence of the ,manner in which the charters had been dealt with — the right jboth of the select body and non-residents being insisted uponas well as the power of the " chamber," as it was called,admitting and rejecting such persona as they thought fit. iTHETFORD. !As to Thetford, although the right was taken to be in theselect body," it was not by the decision of the House orthe committee, but by the agreement of the parties.!^ALDBOItOUGH.In AldboTough, in the county of York, the question was,whether the right was in the select number holding by burgagetenure, or in the inhabitants paying scot and lot ;§ and thecommittee decided, that the right was not only in the selectnumber holding by outrage tenure, but that " all the inhabitants,paying scot and lot, had the right ;" with which theHouse agreed.Vidoanli;, DimwichanJ Maldon. t tO .louis. 352, 428, 575.t in.1ourn.3g<>. f 10.lourn.418.WINDSOR. 1896Williamand Mary.WINDSOR.As to Windsor,* the right was again decided by the com- committeeto be in the select number ; but the House negativedthat decision and seated the candidates who relied on thevotes of the inhabitants paying scot and lot. And as itwould appear, properly, for many returns were given inevidence made by the " commonalty*' and by the burgessesand inhabitants.SANDWICH.The right as to Sandwich was agreed to be in the freemen Freemen.of the port inhabiting within it.fCIRENCESTER.And in Cirencester it was agreed to be in the inhabitants,to the exclusion of inmates.'^DROITWICH.The election for Droitwich, came before the committeeof elections However little can be collected from the report,for the right of election adopted by the committee is sopeculiar, that it affords no precedent or principle, whichwould be applicable to any other borough.The history of this place, which was anciently calledWych," is also very imperfect. It is said to have re- Wych.turned members to Parliament in the earliest times, but 1554.afterwards discontinued till the reign of Queen Mary, sincewhich it returned members regularly.The question on this occasion was, whether the right wasin the burgesses of the Salt Springs of Droitwich, or in theproprietors of the Salt Springs at large.Very little evidence was given on the occasion. It howeverappeared, that several of the corporation had only areversion upon a pepper-corn rent, reserved after the termof 500 years ; and by the ancient rolls it was proved, that• 10 Journ. 419. t 10 Journ. 467.X 10 Journ. 461. $ lb.IDROIT WICH.n many of the proprietors, were not burgesses of the corporation.The committee resolved, "that the right was in the burgessesof the coi-portion of the Salt Spring of Druitwich,"a strange definition of burgesses.From the nature of the decision in this case, which expresslygives the right to the corporation, it ia obvious forthe reasons wc have given before, that this could not, onthat account, have been the ancient right of election in thetime of Edward 1. iColchester. 'Ae to Colchester,* the right was agreed to be in iJie"freemen ."—or in other words—involving a species of contradiction— the "freemen" were declared to be the burgesses.BUCKINGHAM.In the case of Buckingham the right seems undoubtedlyto have been determined by the committee, to be in theselect body of " the bailifl'and 12 burgesses :"— but there isnothing in the evidences to justify such a decision; and itwould be difficult now to say to what it can be attributed.As to Marlou>,X both the contending parties insisted thatthe right was in the inhabits and householders — but thesitting member contended it was only in those who paid scotRi(lii. and lot ; in conformity with which both the committee andHouse decided.SALISliURY.In the case oi Salisbury, \ the right was agreed to be in theselect body of " mayor, recorder, aldermen, and commoncount ;" but it was not decided by the committee or theHouse.■ 10 Joum. 466, t It).CHESTER. 1897Williamand Mary.CHESTER.1690.And, in the Chester case, on the other hand, it wastaken for granted by the parties, that the right was in thefreemen,Markham.In Wareham-^ it was agreed the right was in the " inhabitantspaying scot and lot, and the freeholders," whowere therefore strangely determined to be the burgesses.DEVIZES.In JDeinzes% the right was assumed to be in the " free burgesses,"which is a proper and legal name for the burgesses ;but then the question is, who, properly speaking, they oughtto be.Till the end of December, in this sessions, we find thatthere was only one case in which the right of the select bodywas maintained, which was that of Buckingham. That decisiontook place upon the 11th of November, 1690 — on the29th of December, in the next year, the case of Banburywas heard.The attention of the reader has been before drawn to boththese cases and the period at which Dr. Brady's History ofBoroughs was published. The reasons have also been pointedout in the observations on the charter to Banbury, in thereign of Queen Mary,|| and upon a comparison of that charternth the grant to Abingdon, the right never should havebeen directed to be in the capital burgesses, but in the inhabitants,as it was in Abingdon,It is now only necessary, as far as relates to the decisionrespecting Banbury, to say, that the sole question on thisoccasion was, whether the right was in the mayor, aldermen,and capital burgesses — or the select body — or in the burgessesat large. It was said to arise from some doubtfulwords in the charter of Queen Mary, upon which we have• 10 Journ. 492. t 10 Journ.520. JlOJourn.See before, p. 111. i| See before, p. 1201.1898 BANBURY.William already commented. But, amongst other things, the recitalthiit the inhabitants had been of great service to thcqneen, ismentioned in the report. And, on the other hail, it wasstated, that the capital burgesses were frequently spoken ofin the charter, with reference to the vacancies in their bodies,the choice of the serjeants-at-mace, and in several otherparts. After which, the profits of the markets and fairs werestated to be granted to the bailiff, aldermen, and burgess;and in that clause, at all events, it is impossible that theterm should have applied to any but the body at large — forthere could be no pretence for saying that the markets andfairs were intended to be granted to the bailiff, aldermenand capital burgesses.— It is obvious that they were intendedto be granted to the inhabitants or burgesses at lai^e,who were the objects of the bounty of the queen.The report then goes on to say, that " the privilege ofsending a burgess to Parliament was granted to the bailiff,"aldermen, burgesses, and their successors — so that theword capital being left out of the grant, made the doubtupon the charter, whether the borough should choose intheir corporate capacity by the select number, or the burnge.ssca at large."Even this statement of the question seems to answer it,for why was it to be assumed that the word " capital " wasomitted. The charter giving this power to the bailiff*, aldusmen, burgesses, and their successors, was sufficiently intelligibleof itself, without assuming that there was any omissionthey were the persons incorporated, and for whose benefitthe grant was intended, and for whom the capita! burgessesthemselves were to act. If therefore, the word "capita!"had been introduced into this clause, it might, consideringthe general scope, intent, and object of the charter, havebeen contended, that it was a mistake, and that the clausemust have meant, that the burgesses at large should elect —for such a direction by the king would alone have beenconstitutional, and consistent with the common law.But when in point of fact, the word "capital" was not inthe clause, but the general term " burgesses," which was con-1G90.BANBURY. 1899sister with the common law — how it could for one moment ^'|J^have been contended that such a mode of expression could becharged with any omission, it is impossible to conceive.Still less can any good reason be found for the determination,when the evidence is considered.Returns were produced by the petitioners of the fifth and14th of Elizabeth, by the bailiff and whole commonalty.And the 28th and 30th of Elizabeth, by " the bailiff, aldermen,burgesses and commonalty.*^ In the 18th of Charles I.by " the mayor, aldermen, and burgesses."It is true, that in the 13th of Charles II., the return wasexpressly made by the " mayor, aldermen, and capital burgesses;" but it is clear, that although returns by the bailiffand whole commonalty, are absolutely destructive of theexclusive right of the capital burgesses, it by no meansfollows, that one return by the capital burgesses shouldexclude the right of the burgesses at large — because, thoughthey had the right, they might not have exercised it. Butbesides this, supposing even that such would have been theeffect of this evidence — could such a return in the yearwhen the corporation act was passed, be for one momentreceived as satisfactory evidence upon the subject ?For the sitting member returns were produced of the 29thand 41st of Elizabeth, by the bailiff, aldermen, and largesseswhich in tnith proved nothing for him, but rather theother way, as he produced another return in the 31st ofCharles II., in which the mayor, aldermen, and capital burgesseselected, under that particular description.Parol evidence was also given for the sitting member, thatthe elections had been by the capital burgesses; and thecommittee decided that the right was in the mayor, alder Right,men, and capital burgesses ; to which the House assented.It is impossible to account for this decision, exceptingfrom the fact to which we have already adverted, of Dr.Brady's book having been published the year before.That work probably produced a considerable effect at thetime of its publication ; and it was no doubt afterwards1900 Brady.alfTM*" *J'"^'''^*' '*" many occasions as an authority;— probably theonly instance in which b political pamphlet has been eoused.However, it has been so far relied upon, that it becomesindispensably necessary to show the nature of that publication.BRADY'S JIISTUUY OF Boroughs.'»ce. It scarcely eeenia necessary to attempt an answer to thegeneral observations and surmises in the preface of thatauthor; they will either he supported or fall to the ground,as the cases which he has cited subsequently in the work,either confine or deny them: and as he himself appealsto matter of fact, as the ground of his work, to that test itis better to refer.As to the querulous complaints of pretended prescriptionsand customs, it may generally be observed, that on prescriptionand custom many of our most valuable rights andprivileges depend; and the title of long possession hasprobably been allowed in every system of law that has yetbeen known; for this obvious reason, that the feeling ofmankind must ever be in favour of it. It is the abuse andmisapplication of this doctrine of which alone complaint canbe made ; — and to define the line of its proper applicationshould have been his endeavour, and is the object ofthese observations. The consideration of what the ancientboroughs were — what were free boroughs — and what werethe real or pretended privileges of the London citizens, alludedto in the preface — would necessarily fall into the subsequentdetail of the facts.The etymological inquiries of Dr. Brady may also bepassed over, as affording, at best, but a very uncertain light,not sufficient to lead the reader on his way, unless he cangain a sight of more satisfactory guides in the course of hispursuit, than the glimmerings to be caught from the investigationof terms used ambiguously in other countries, andprobably altogether inapplicable to this.BRADY. 1901From the charters adduced relative to the borough of ^,*!i^°*o g^mj Mary.Great Yarmouth and the observations made upon them, it: . Ytnnouth.appears that the object was to show that the privileges of afree borough were derived from the crown, and that thoseprivileges had reference chiefly to trade. The first assertionis certainly true, that the privileges of boroughs from theearliest time were derived from the successive kings, as wellSaxon as Norman and others. As to the second assertion,the documents produced by no means establish it: — Dr.Brady transposed their chronological order in so singular amanner, that it is impossible not to assume there was somemotive in the transposition ; and in reading them in the orderin which they stand in his book, it would seem that thefirst documents have only a reference to the trade of GreatYarmouth; — but if it is recollected that the quarrel thenexisting between Great and Little Yarmouth, was solelywith a view to trade, that circumstance is accounted for;and if the charters are taken in their chronological order,a very different effect will be produced on the mind of thereader : particularly if that of King John, which is the first,and resembles the charters of other places of that date, issomewhat minutely examined. From that grant it is apparentthat Great Yarmouth was then a borough, as it is made tothe burgesses;* and it was a free borough, because it was heldat fee farm, or at a certain rent, as many manors and landsalso were ;f the boroughs, manors, or lands so held, beingcalled free, and the tenants, free burgesses or free tenants.The privileges first granted are soc and say which gives thema borough jurisdiction ; by other parts of the charter extendedto criminal matters or pleas of the crown. Exemption fromsuit at county and hundred courts is also added. There isalso a grant of a merchant guild, and other privileges.Now the question is, what part of the grant forms the distinguishingcharacteristic of a borough ? Is it the having ofa merchant guild? What has that to do with the constitutionof a borough ? — there are many without any such privilege.See before, the borough mentioned in Domesday, p. 277.t Sec also post., Northampton.wi''j»"' Or is it not that, being by the operation of these privileges exemptedfrom the jurisdiction of the sheriff, who returned theknights of the shire, mid paid them their wages, which hecould not levy in the boroughs, he directed precepts to theboroughs to return their own members, who were paid bythe burgesses themselves ?This view of such charters is much strengthened by theprivilege given by this grant, as well as by many others toLondon, Bristol, Norwich, Sec. to elect their own propositus,bailiff, or port reeve, who was within the borough what thesheriff was in the county.If this ia the proper view of the charter of John to GreatYarmouth, it gives us at once the real nature of a borough.This IS the first chapter to Yannoulh, from which all theothers emanate : — and they afford but battle information uponthis part of the subject, as they solely relate to the governmentrespecting the trade of the borough, and not to its othermunicipal privileges. No inference, therefore, to support Dr.Brady's opinion as to the origin of the boroughs can be drawnfrom this case of Yarmouth, but it seems distinctly to supportthe view of the question before deduced from the early lawsand history of the country,THETFORD.The account of Thetford in Domesday, which Dr. Bradyquotes, ia strong, as previously shown,* to establish that theburgesses were householders within the borough ; for afterstating that there were 944 burgesses in the time of KingEdward, and only 720 then, being a diminution of 224, itadds, there are 224 houses vacant : from which also itappears that it was only the paterfamilias, the actual housekeeper,who was the burgess.DUNVVICH,The extract from Domesday as to Dunwichf is also givenby Dr. Brady, as well as the charter by King John. But it■ See before, p. 277, and also Dunwich and Exeter.BRADY. 1903supports the same inferences as the charter of Yarmouth, ^'JJ?™being very similar to it, and more strongly marks that exemptionfrom the interference of the sheriff; as, instead oftheir dues being paid, as they would be if it was not a freeborough, through the hands of the sheriff, it is specially providedthat it shall be by their own hands.In this charter also there appear some traces of the capitalpledges, of which mention is so often made in boroughs ;for it is provided, that when they are summoned before thejustices they shall send 12 lawful men (legales homines) oftheir borough, who shall be for them all ; and by the nextprovision, which is that they shall be amerced by six honestmen of (de) the borough, and six honest men out of (extra)the borough, it is clear that there was a distinction betweenthose persons who lived within and those who lived withoutit, and that only the former were the burgesses.NORWICH.The author also relies upon the extract from Domesday asto Norwich — but it is difficult to draw any inference from it,either as to the new or the old burgh ; and it certainly throwsno light upon the point for which it is quoted, but rather againstit. It may however be observed, that the assertion in themargin, that the " burg," means castle, is perfectly gratis Burgh,tous. In many other places in Domesday it clearly meansborough ; and what is there to show that its meaning isdifferent in this instance ?EXETER.An extract as to Exeter is also quoted : from which itappears to be clear that the householders paid the king rent fortheir burgages ; for it is said, " the king has here 300 houses,*' less 15, paying rent; and 48 are lying waste since the kingcame'*See before, p. 275. t See before, p. 168.HARNiiTAI'LE.The extract rs to Barmlnple* seems at first sight ■justify the opinion that burgosHcs might live out of the farough, because it is stated that there were at Banistapl«istrain (Ae borough, 40 burgesses, and nine u-il/tout .-f bnt wehave already given the explanation of this passage and othcnof a similar ilescnptioD.LIUEFORD.The extract as to Lideford\ is also subject to the mmeobservation ; and in this case it should be observed, that theburgesses had lands without the borough, which mightcount for their partial non-residence.11^ VWALLING FORD.The extract as to WaUlngford,% so far from BupfiorUqfDr. Brady's theories, affords a strong inference that alehouseswere the principal point of consideration in the boroughs; and that the common burdens were borne by thehouseholders. The author makes a great mistake in aayii^that the burgesses are not mentioned in Domesday : — Nijel' ^lus is stated tn claim a house as heir of Soaring: "sedburgesses testificantur se nunquam abuse."He then quotes a charter of Henry II., confirmed bjHenry III., in the 31st year of his reign.This charter, which is one of the earliest, is of a verypeculiar description. It should be observed, that it speaksof the burgesses as then existing, and consequently thischarter should have induced him to assume that there wereburgesses before the reign of Henry II.From the words " leges seas," it appears that they hada constitution of their own then existing, which supports theinference, that the jurisdiction of the boroughs excluded thesheriff. Indeed, that appears more distinctly from the non-intermittentclause which immediately follows, and whichBRADY. 1906expressly excludes the prcepositus of the king, who was the j^^^Sysheriff or his officer, and secures the whole jurisdiction totheir own alderman or minister in their own borough court,by the judgment of the burgesses.It should likewise be remarked, that all the men ofWallingford are by this charter exempted from the house tax,which they are described in Domesday, as liable to pay fortheir borough. We have already introduced and observedon this charter.The prohibition of a market in Cromarsh seems to raiseno inference; for the common law would give an action toany person who was injured by a market being establishedtoo near his own.*And as for the rest of this passage, it seems that Dr. Bradyin his note (c), has misinterpreted it : — the purport appearsto be, that no dealer should be in Cromarsh, unless hewas of the merchant guild, the word "in" or "de" beingomitted; and then, if he goes there, that is to Cromarsh,or any where else, provided he still belongs to, or gainshis livelihood from the market at Wallingford, he shouldnot, under any pretence, do any injury to the marketat Wallingford, but act towards the burgesses according tothe law of the merchant guild, whether he is within theborough or without.Dr. Brady translates the word " aliquis," — " any burgess'*If that is the correct translation, the passage indeed supportsthe statement he has made : — but if it is not, then itrather militates against his doctrine. Now the immediateantecedent to " aliquis" is " mercator'' — and taking that asthe proper clue to the translation, then the whole passage,in fact, puts the non-resident merchant in contradistinctionwith the burgesses, which appears to be strongly indicatedby the peculiar expression — " isis burgensibus."The security held out by this charter, to the burgesses ofWallingford, wherever they may be — the reference to theconduct of a merchant or trader of the merchant guild,whether he is within the borough or without — and the ex-seeCom. Dig. tit. Market, p. 17.6 FWilliam euiptioii from loll, passage, and all custunts and exactionswherever they may be in the king's dominions, might at 6eight induce an opinion that this charter recognizes Qaa>'resident burgesses or traders of the guild ; but upon furthwconsideration, it wonid appear to be the reverse, for none ofthese privileges or provisions are stated with reference topermanent non-residence, (with the exception perhaps, of the.traders ;) but the security given to the burgesses whenthey are, seems to be necessary for them in their occasionand requisite absence from home — and the exemptions fromtolls, passage, and customs, expressly continued to travellingin their trade, "m mercalionibus :" and the trader who ismentioned as living without the borough, is still describedas living upon or by the market at Wallingford, probablypurchasing his commodities there to vend elsewhere, ofwhich practice traces may be found in the early history ofother boroughs. It seems, therefore, that these proviiUotKwere introduced for the benefit and encouragement ofand are to be taken with reference to that view alone,all interfering with the other burdens or privileges ofburgesses, confined, as the house tax and the other servicesare, to those residing in the borough. Taking this charterwith reference to other places, it is an observation worthyto be considered, that these provisions would not have beenso expressly made, if it was at that time the custom and lawfor burgesses to be non-resident ; as the privileges would thenhave extended to them in their non-residence, without anygrant to that effect.In another part of the charter the king speaks of his jns-tieiarius de gilds ; if the crown had such an officer of theguilds where the boroughs were not free, it would destroyevery inference which Dr. Brady could draw from the merchantguild, unless all the places, where such an officer ofthe king had jurisdiction, were boroughs.TevtfBiioiuflJVUHWWvnotaMof Ih^BRADY. 1907Williamand Mary.IPSWICH.The extract from Domesday as to Ipswich* is also cited.From which it is clear, as observed before, that the burgesseswere the householders and that the number of burgesses J^Weradecreased as the houses became waste : and those who couldnot pay their guild were distinguished from the rest of theburgesses ; and it could hardly be expected that they, notbearing the burdens, could have shared the privileges of theborough.EYE.Dr. Brady also relies upon the market mentioned in theextract as to Eyes which might seem to support his opinionas to the origin of boroughs, being founded in trade — but itproves too much. If the burgesses had been described asin Vi guild merchant y it would have afforded a strong inference,but nobody has pretended to carry the doctrine so far as tosay that a market made a borough ; for there are abundantinstances in which there have been grants of markets to lordsof manors, where there were no boroughs.BUCKINGHAM.In the extract as to Buckingham the 27 burgesses are describedas belonging to several different lords or patrons —but it seems to afford no support to Dr. Brady's opinion : ifit has any effect, it would seem to be a confirmation of burgagetenure ; but the plainer inference is, that they residedwithin the borough, and so were burgesses — although theyat the same time held lands in other manors, belonging tothe lords whose burgesses they were said to be.There are many other places mentioned in Domesday,where the burgesses are described in the same manners• See before, p. 280. t See before, p. 282.t See before, p. 200.§ See three or four instances in Wiltshire, and other counties.(J F 2Northampton.In the entry as to Northampton,* the burgesses are directsconnected with the deacriplioii uf their houses ; and as theybecame unoccupied, the number of bui'gesaea decreased. Itis impossible for a stronger proof than this to be stated, of theburgesses being the householder.Hertford.The extract aa to Hertford appears to mark very stronglythe difference between the burgesses and the tenants. The 18afi well as the 146 are all described as burgesses, though itseems they held at the same time of different persons; Hie146 were in the soke of King Edward, that is, owed suit atbis manor court, or court baron^whilst the others were beforethe tenants of Harold and Lining. — Differing as to tlieittenure, and their suit in civil matters; but all burgesses utretreats, and owing suit there to the cohort leet, for inatt«n-jof ponce and criminal jurisdiction.IThe entry as tu the city of Yorke so far from supportingDr. Brady's theory, seems to afford the strongest inferencesthe other way, and to show aa clearly as can be expected,from matters of remote antiquity, what was the nature of aborough — of a burgage house — the inhabitancy of which wasthen required, and the effect of such inhabitancy.The house spoken of in the latter part of the entry, seemsto have belonged to the church ; and the ecclesiastics beingfree from all military service, on account of their order — aswell as of all customs, because they then imposed aids onthemselves by their own body — it was probable that it mightbecome a question, whf'l'rr a house in a borough or a privilegeddistrict, was originally held by the church, and soexempt from customs ; or whether it was a recent acquisition,and therefore to be held by the church in the sameHeady. 1909manner as it was in the hands of the person from whom the ^*jjj""church had recently acquired it. That seems to have beenthe question here; it being urged on the one hand, by thoseof the church and others, that T. R. E. it was held by thechurch free of custom, and by the burgesses on the otherhand that it was no further free than the other burgagehouses, the residents in which, were in right of the housesfree from toll.As the whole kingdom was divided into shires, so was thecity of York, probably from its great extent, subdividedinto its shires also; one of which was included in the castleand therefore, (as is the case in almost all other boroughs)excluded from the borough, because the military residingthere were not to contribute to the burdens of the state,and were exempt from civil suits and services, being boundby their military allegiance, without taking the oaths at thecourt leet ; therefore the shire included within the castle, wasnot reckoned in the account of the borough.So also the shire of the archbishop was excluded, becausethe ecclesiastics paid aids and customs by themselves, andwere not liable to do suit at the court leet.As to the other houses, they are divided into the hospitable,inhospitable, vacuae, and those held by the French.If the ancient classification of the inhabitants of any partof the country, with reference to the doing suit at the sheriff'stoum, or at the leets, is referred to,* it will be seen, that inorder to prevent any person from residing in any place wherehe had not taken the oaths and given his pledges, everyperson who resided a year and a day in a place, was calledupon, and bound to do his suit at the court leet,+ and to givehis pledges there ; and he was also obliged to render an accountof any person who was lodging or residing in his housefor temporary purposes, that is, for any time short of a yearand a day, which would make him a resiant within the leet,and for such persons the permanent resiant was responsible.• See before, Brae. p. 470, et seq.t And .sec post. temp. Geo. I., the articles of tht wardmote inquests in the cityof London.1910 niiADV.wiiiuini Houses therefore, inhabited by those who had been iheiellong enough to be Suitors at the leet, and subject to ftj.Haipiuuc the customs of" the place, were Itospitat^ ; the occupiersinhabitant burgesses, bearing its burdens and sharing theprivileges of the place, one of which was, being free of toll ;and another, being free from the jurisdiction of sheriff,and king's bailiffs. But houses inhabited by persons whowere not fixed resiants — had not done their suit at tfae Icett —piiBic. nor given pledges, and were uncouth — were hospitals, andthey paid only a small custom for their houses, but did notpay the other burdens of the borough — and therefore werenot entitled to its privileges and exemptions, and were hintburgesses.The " vacuffi" explain themselves, and account for thenumber of burgesses varying.The houses occupied by the French seem also to havebeen excluded from the account of the borough.So that from this entry it clearly appears, that the burgessmust have heea^einhabitantofahotise;* but not having hisprivileges of burgess-ship merely in right, and by the title ofhis house, but also by virtue of the permanency of his credence,and of his bearing the burdens, and sharing the responsibilitiesof the borough, and doing his personal serviceat the leet.Surely this is a reasonable explanation of inhabitancy ; particularlywith reference to the manners and customs of thoseearly times in which the burgess rights had their origin : andby no means inconsistent with reason, taken even with referenceto the more modern institutions. It certainly is incloseanalogy to the spirit of our constitution and the commonlaw.CANTEltliLiRV.The extract as to ('nnterbHrijf is very material, not onlyfor the purpose of destroying Dr. Brady's right as to corporators,but also the exclusive right set up by others forfreeholders :— for there the (lisliiictiou is expressly taken• And see posh. 1911, Ciiiieil lucy. I Set before, p. 75.^BRADY. 1911between householders and freeholders ; and yet they all seem ^*w"^clearly to be burgesses. Some were householders, and wereto render gable — a payment perhaps partaking more of housetax than house rent ; and the others by reason of their holdingof the king were subject by such tenure of their lands,to do suit for them in the court baron of the borough ; orinother words, were within the soke of the borough. Itappears also, in confirmation of what was said before as toYork, that the right of the householder was not merely inright of his house, but also in some other personal right; — ashere the number of burgesses rendering gable are lessenedby their deaths, although it would be fair to suppose thattheir houses must have come into the possession of other persons.As to the burgesses who were tenants of the lands,their number seems the same, because, in all probability, theholdings would not be altered : — and as the court leet andborough court, or court baron of the borough, were usuallyheld together, and the tenants were compelled to attend thecourt baron ; when there, they were sworn as resiants, andso the list of them probably kept perfect: — but, as in aftertimes, much of the jurisdiction of the leet was referred to thesessions, and the attendance on it became, in some respects,a matter of form,* the resiants, merely as such, ceased toattend : whilst the tenants were compellable, for many reasons,to be at the court baron. Hence, in many boroughs —by the absence of the one class, and the constant attendanceof the other, coupled with the voting being confined to freeholdersin counties, which was, in some boroughs, thoughtalso to extend to them — that which was originally a concurrentright in householders as well as freeholders, was reducedto freeholders only, who were called burgage tenants — andhence arose the burgage tenure usurpation.Another inference also arises from this extract, as to residence: — some houses are mentioned out of the walls of thecity, of which the burgesses took the gable and customsbut the king the see and sac. No doubt those were houses• See Stat. 1 Edw. IV. c. 2.t Perhaps they were bordarii to the burgesses, as afteiwanb in Huntingdon.1912 BRADY.William built Oil lauds liuld by the burgesses of the king, over which- of course the king had sac and sac ; but the house tax haslodged to those who held the land, namely, the burgesses.And it is to be observed, that the inhabitants of those housiaout of the city are not called burgesses.It is true the guild is here spoken of, and so tat this extractfrom Domesday might seem to support Dr. Brady; — but.any dispassionate reader, perusing the whole passage, wouldB8y, that it is impossible to infer that the guild tut thegreat distinguishing feature of a borough : because it is hereonly spoken of indifferently with other things, and indeedSeems subsidiary to the rest, tt is, no doubt, one privilegewhich is very generally found in a borough; but there anplaces which have guilds, and yet arc not boroughs; andsome which are boroughs, and yet have not guilds.IIOMNEV.The 85 burgesses in Romney* who belonged to the arch ,bishop's manor of Addington, were burgesses of Romney,holding lands of the manor of Addington, and paying rectito the amount of 6i. The tendency of this is to supporta burgage tenant-right of voting, if any thing; but, in fact,establishes nothing: it only shows that burgesses mighthold of another manor, and consequently, in some degree,proves that their burgess-ship did not altogether dependupon tenure. It also shows that the tenant of an ecclesiastic,not being in demesne, was not exempted from the suitat the court leet, as tenants in demesne of the church were;but they were obliged to take the duties and services of theborough upon them, and consequently were burgesses.HUNTINGDON.From the extract as to Huntingdon,-^: one material inferenceIS to be drawn, that the payments made to the king, or lord,which have been mentioned before, were different from thegeld, which appears to have been a general and public tax, andnot a local or partial payment. It is clear that the geld was not• S«e before, p. 86. t .Sm before, p. 216.BRADY. 1913confined to the burgesses, but was paid by the public at large, ^*!{|'"and here the bordarii contributed to it ; which is also materialto show, that it was not the whole of the inhabitants who were .the burgesses, but that some, on account of their servile situation,were excluded, of which kind were the bordarii. It isalso worthy of remark, that some of these burgesses, holdingof an abbey in demesne were, in the time of King Edward,freed from all customs, and only paid the public geld ; butbeing seized out of the hands of the church by the earl, theyso came to the crown ; after which, it seems, they paid allcustoms: — which confirms the exemption of the tenants of thechurch in demesne, as noted before ; and also that when theburgesses cease to be such tenants they become liable to paycustoms, &c., as others.Newbury.Upon the strange error which Brady has made with respectto Newbury, we have already commented.*BATH.By the entry as'to Baths the observation that the paymentof the geld extended over the whole country, is supported.And the burgesses of other men there mentioned show, asobserved before, that burgess-ship did not depend upontenure alone ; but that though they held of different lords,they might still be burgesses of one borough. Dr. Bradytranslates the genitive, " aliorum hominem'' — " under theprotection of other men; '* but that seems a gratuitous construction: surely '* tenant" is a more obvious one.MILEBURN.The market mentioned in Miletus will not help Dr. Brady ;because, though such a privilege was certainly sometimesone of the accompaniments of a borough, the borough inthat case had nothing to do with the guild. There was atoneperiod a corporation in that place, but it was distinctfrom the borough. The corporation by some means became• Sec before, p. 256. t See before, p. 163.Dr. Brady.PEVENSEV.The principal peculiarity as to Pcirnset/f was, that thegreater portion of the burgesses were tenants of differentlords : but that lias been observed upon before Dr. BradyStill describes them as under the patronage of those lords ;u however there appears no ground for that supposition, and{ the other construction of tenant seems more obvious.Port dues are mentioned amongst a variety of other things,E from whence it would seem that the port and customs duelI- do not alter the nature of a borough, as Dr. Brady seems to jhint as to Yarmouth. 1ARUNDEL.In the entry as to Ammlel,^ the borough and port are expresslyspoken of as distinct. It was not therefore the portwhich created the borough, but they were separate things,and for different purposes; one for jurisdiction, and theother for the convenience of trade.The lords who had burgesses are spoken of more distinctlyas having their custom : which is strong to rebut the idea oftheir being merely under their patronage : and shows thatthey were tenants, and as such had to pay their customs totheir lords.• Ste before, p. 1 10. t See before, p. !».I See Lewes, before, p. PC. * Sec before, p. 98.BRADY. 1915Williamand Mary.WARWICK.The persons in the entry as to Warwick,* who had houses,are called " burgesses," and the district in which they lived,and had sac and soc, is emphatically called ** ipsum burngum ;" — as if the other part of the borough, where therewere no burgesses, was treated as different from that partwhere there were burgesses.TAMWORTH.The appurtenances of the burgesses of Tamworth to themanor of Molehill, has been already explained : and itshould be here added, that this extract confirms the idea ofthe burgesses being tenants of other lords, rather than merelyunder their patronage. Besides which, all these cases gostrongly to show, by their being burgesses of one place, andtenants under another manor, that it was not by their beingtenants, they became burgesses ; otherwise they would beburgesses of the manor under which they held, and not ofthe place where they resided. It also shows that burgess-shipwas not acquired at the court baron, but at the court leet.CRICKLADE,The like observations will apply to the burgesses ofCricklade, belonging to the manor of Allbome, which is tenmiles from that town; and Ramsbury, which is nine; andBradbury nearly as far.Dr. Brady closes these extracts from Domesday, bythese strange and gratuitous conclusions from them: hesays, " we J find from them, that the burgesses and tradesmenin great towns, had in those times their patrons, underwhose protection they traded and paid an acknowledgmenttherefore, or else were in a more servile condition, as beingin dominion regis vel aliorum, altogether under the power*' of the king or other lords, and it seems to me that thenthey traded not as being in any merchant guild, society** and community, but merely under the liberty and protectSee before, p. 253. t Sec before, p. 254. t Page 27.tioii given them by their lords and patrons, who probably- " might have power from the king, to license shield a uuinberin this or that port, or trading town."In passing, the attention of the reader has been repeatedly idrawn to the attempts made by Dr. Brady, to give the burgessesa trading character, as it seems without any foundationor authority : the inferences being directly the otherway. Let those who have leisure, glance their eyes againover the extracts from Domesday ; and see if there isthe slightest pretence for this Assumption of the author [Indeed, Dr. Brady seems himself to be aware that this gratisdictum requires some little further support ; and therefore he iintroduces in the margin an assertion, which, for aught thatappears to the contrary, as he gives no quotation or authorityin support of it, is as gratuitous as the proposition in thetext. After all the Doctor's labour of collecting thesepassages from Domesday, they appear only to end in assertionswhich they do not support; and it is curious, that theauthor, who seems to have written his work with the view ofshowing that boroughs had their origin in grants by thecrown, for the benefits trade, here states, that the burgessesoriginally traded without being in any mcrclmnt guild orcommunity; thereby admitting, as the act undoubtedly is,that boroughs existed before those communities ; and consequentlycould not have originated in them, nor have beenfounded upon them.This brings Dr. Brady to the case of London,* whichis the place of all others the most likely to support histheory; if in reality there was any truth in it. For it is, andas long almost as history goes back, it has been, the largestplace of trade in the country, and has had the greatest andmost extensive privileges; the records also, from their importance,have been better preserved than in other places.It is therefore with reference to London, that the questionmight be more fairly and satisfactorily agitated than anyother; and a minute inquiry into its early history would, in allprobability, distinctly developed the real history of boroughs.BRADY. 1917But to return to Dr. Brady's account of it — he commences ^^JJ}*"*with the charter of William the Conqueror, which, in orderto confirm his former notion of the lords being the protectorsof the trading burgesses, he calls a mere instrument of protection— and for no other reason but to introduce his expressionsof " protecting patrons — and charter of protection," asif there were any essential connexion between patrons protectingtrading burgesses, and a charter of general protectionlike that of William the Conqueror. In truth it is by nomeans what Dr. Brady misnamed it; but is a charter ofconfirmation of the most valuable privileges they had longenjoyed, and which so far from having an exclusive referenceto trade alone — as he would seem to hint — refersexpressly to that privilege which was the foundation ofboroughs. Every man, as we have shown before, was, bythe Saxon law either a freeman or a villain — the lattercould have no property, and was in a state of servitude.A freeman was bound to bring himself within thepale of the law, so that he was legalis homo as well asliber homo; and if he was not so he was an outlaw — hisproperty liable to be seized — and his person to be throwninto prison. Now the mode of becoming a legalis homo,was by doing his suit-royal at the sheriff's toum, theretaking the oath of allegiance, and enrolling himself amongthe defenders, &c. ; but if a man lived within the privilegeddistrict of a borough, he might do his suit-royal at the leetthere : and so he would become a legalis homo of the borough.But it is easy to suppose, that either men might bedisposed falsely to assert that they were within particularleets; — or lords might assume to hold leets without sufficientgrant or authority for that purpose; — or the sheriffs might bedisposed to dispute and disallow leets that were claimed ; —for either of which reasons frequent disputes would arise, ofwhich traces may be found in our early law books, whether aperson was within a particular leet, or whether a lord hada right to hold it ; and to prevent these disputes, boroughswere frequently in the habit of obtaining from every succeeding1918 ntiAitv.William king, and sometimes repeatedly finn the saniL- kmg, granite■ — of confirmation of their charters, of wliicli in fact tliie of Lnn-doD is an instance ; ae may be seen by accurately examiningthe words of it. The first observation that arises on thtcharter i^, that there appears at this time to have been nomayor ; and Dr. Brady is mistaken, to a degree not to beexpected in a man so learned in antiquity, iu supposing thatport reeve, as slated in his margin, was derived front " portor haven ;" because the same appellation for the head officerof the borough existed in many other places where there wasno pretence for saying there ever could have been any portor haven. The truth is, that the port reeve in a borough was,as he stales, the king's bailiff, and was within the boroughwhat the sheriffs in the county. And it should be observed,that the city of London had not till many years after this time,the grant of the county of Middlesex, when they had alsothe power of electing their own sheriffs. In addition to tin?mention of the port reeve, as an officer then existing, and whois beyond all doubt an officer of a borough, the expressionbui^wara," is decisive to show that London was a boroughbefore this charter of William the Conqueror. Dr. Bradytranslates the word "burgwnra," (HA«6i;«n/s of the borough:and in truth all who were of the burglars were inhabitants,but they were also something more — they were the shoonsuitors at the borough court leet, doing all the public cbUies,and bearing all the public burdens of the borough, as well asbeing responsible for all who lived within their jurisdiction:and, in short, were within the borough what the hundreds,the tythingmen, and the capitales plegii were in the county.The reference to the time of Edward the Confessor showsthat the burgesses then had privileges; and the grant thatThey should be law-worthy, shows what the nature of thoseprivileges were. If it can be clearly ascertained what thereal meaning of the word law-worthy was at the time thischarter was granted, there is no doubt that this ancientdocument must go far to show what the privileges of boroughswere at that time. The greater nnd lesser (BRADY. 1919and the knights seem to have been the only persons who, in ^*\!i*™those times, were treated as independent and free, with theexception only of such dependents upon them who were,from time to time, made free by their immediate lords — bythe grant of lands, or the sale of goods. The dependentsof any inferior lords, whether villains, bordarii, colbert,or others were, before they were made free, under the controland disposition of their lords ; who, in return, wereresponsible for them. They were not capable of acquiring afixed and permanent property in any thing : nor could theytransmit their property to their heirs. In short, they were notlaw-worthy, neither legales nor liberi homines. If they weremade free by their lords, which they might be in many ways,they were released from their dominion — they held theirlands free — and they became responsible for themselves.Hence began their liability to the jurisdiction of the sheriff,for all their aids, customs, &c. ; and to do suit at his tourn :having done which, they thereby became lave-worthy ; andwould be one of the " legales homines," liable to be summonedon juries, &c., by the sheriff. Men thus made free in thecounty at large, were generally tenants of some superior lord ;and though they were free themselves, and held their landsin free socage, still they commonly owed some suit at thelord's court for their lands. But there were others, if notat the time of this charter, very soon after, who had notlands, but still were free ; — the former owed suit to the king,and the law, in the tourn or leet as well as at the lord's court;the latter only at the leet. The object, then, of this charterwas, to give to the burgesses of London ready and immediateevidence of their being late-worthy, by having done theirsuit in their own court, although they had not done it in thesheriff's tourn : and the grant that every man should be hisfather's heir, after his father's days, was a recognition of theirbeing free, and not subject to any lord : the former was toprotect them against the sheriff — the latter against the claimof any lord.The author then attributes the possession of freedom to thegranting of merchant guilds; the groundlessness of whichassertion the numerous quotations we have made from theearly charter are sufficient to prove.*The assertion also, that communities meant the rulinginhabitants of cities and boroughs seems to answer itself,'besides the refutation it has received from the nunieroas instancesvte have quoted, of the application of that tenui andcommonalty," to every species of aggregate body.The partial attempt to support his theory by reference tothe foreign "communities" is so unsatisfactory, that itrequires no additional comment.It is singular, that in the next page, the author should havequoted the passage which is to be found in Glanville andother authors, attributing the right of freedom to the regidemxfor a year and a day in the borough; and also to watch andward, to which he refers, and yet should not, from that clue,have discovered the real nature of borough rights ; but shouldhave adhered to his notion of their origin in trade, and thepower of governing bodies. His error, in this respect, canonly be ascribed to the biassed and interested view he wastaking of the subject.The next assertion is founded on the assumption that theburgesses were tradesmen, which is begging the whole question; and he rests it only on the charters, which we havebefore given, and which lead to a contrary conclusionsDr. Brady assumes a distinction between the wealthierpart of the burgesses and meaner sort, whom he calls freemen;entirely disregarding the real class of burgesses, andthe nature of free condition, which was a qualification for aninhabitant of a borough to become a burgess.It is strange that so leaned an author should also nothave discovered, that the very documents he quoted markedthe distinction between the borough and the guild; and thatthe members of the latter were not the whole of the burgesses.He states alao,| that the " communism" which was grantedi recognised by ibe courts or law m this reign, iiileit. Wilkes, 2 Lord Raymond, U19 . 1 Salk.at Page 36. 1 FBRADY. 1921to the citizens of London in the reign of Richard I., was a ^^'Jj*"™° and Mary.ituuselect number, which is contradicted by all the city recordsquoted by Mr. Norton, and referred to before in this work ;*as well as the decisions cited from the legal authorities.It is also a subject of wonder, that when Dr. Brady wasquoting the acts done by the sheriff, with the assent of 12men of each ward, it did not occur to him that they were thejuries or inquests at the wardmote: and it is still more ex Juries.extraordinary that he should have supposed, with all his prejudicesin support of the " communism," that the " communityde quolibet ward" could be any select body, and not,as the known practice was, the whole of the inhabitant householders.In referring to the controversy as to the right of electingthe mayor, &c. in 1650, Brady most extraordinarily a86erts,fthat the arguments on both sides, and the records producedand insisted upon, manifestly proved that * the communityof the city,' or, as it is called, the * commonalty,'did consist of a select number of the more discreet, able,wise, and rich citizens, and was not the body of the freemenin general. And that such a select number in citiesand burgs was most frequently expressed, meant, and understoodby the latin word * commune,' * communia,' or ' com-unites,' and is or ought to be so at this day."How this author could suppose that" commonalty" meanta select body, and that it was the ancient import and truesignification of that word in all nations, it is impossible toconceive: or how he could assert that " conmiunitas" hadthat application, when so many direct instances to the contraryhave been shown.;}:It is not correct that either the arguments on both sides,or the records produced in the controversy alluded to, supportedthe position.The argument for the freemen was, that all the freemenformed the commonalty and that they were entitled to vote• See before, p. 370, et seq .t See the petitions respecting this, bound up with the pleadings in the quo warranto,t Brady on Boroughs, p. 42.6 aW''*]*™ lor the mayor and Sheriff :— it is true they acliititted that- certain repTtnentatii^eit* had often been sent from eat-h mind,to vote in thp name of the whole body of freemen ; but thiefat the same time contended that it vias a virtual voting of thewhole body, and that it was an arrangement further own convenienceand ease, but that all were still entitled to vote.The argument for the liveries certainly insisted upon thecommonalty being a select body ; and perhaps Dr. Bradynight have been misled by reading only the petition for theliverymen, which would certainly appear, when taken alon.to support his position.But it is clear, by the argument on both sides, that froththe violence of the people the dread at that time was of popularcommotion: — the liverymen relied with confidence onthat argument ; and the freemen were obliged, as Iras thcould, to ward off the effect of that feeling against them, 1^appearing in some degree to yield.The first record referred to was the charter of the I6th ofJohn, to the barons of London, giving them power to choosea mayor. This is the first charter in which the barons werespoken of, and it is apparent that they were called barootfrom a prior grant of the county of Middlesex to them. Thesame charter granted them all the privileges which they hadbefore : from which, coupled with the mayor's being appointedfor the city of London, and subsequent charters beingto the citizens, and recognizing the right of the citizensto elect a mayor, it is clear that the barons meant citizens,and the body at lai^e, and not any select number, of whichthere is no mention either in or before that charter, nor tillcenturies afterwards.Another record produced was an act of the commonalty inthe 20th Edward III., 1347,t which was read to show thefreemen's rights, as stated above, and their delegation of it tocertain persons to be elected by them out of each ward.It appeared clearly that the select body of the liverymen• And see posl.lemp. Geo, II, the lameasto Norwich.t It may perhaps he worth observation, that this change look place id LondonHoly six years after the Scottish act of parliament, which il so much resemble*.BRADY. 1923were first sanctioned by acts of the common council, in the ^.*^1?"™•^ ' and Mary.seventh and 15th of Edward IV. — acts which, upon generalprinciples, it must be allowed they had no power to make.At least it is certain that such an act could never affordany exposition of the original meaning of the word " com-monalty.'*So much as to Dr. Brady's assertion of the effect of thiscontroversy in the city of London : and it may be added, thatif there is any place in which it can be more clearly shownthan in another, that " commonalty" meant the body of burgesses,freemen, or citizens at large, it is London. The generalterms, burgesses, barons, and citizens, are all that are usedin the earliest charters. The commonalty is first spokenof in a grant by Richard, Earl of Cornwall, in the 21st ofHenry IIL, of Queenhithe, to the mayor and all the commonaltyof London. The same word is mentioned a second timein a charter to London, in the send Henry IIL, 1268. Itis not till long after that period that any trace can be foundof an exclusive select body.Dr. Brady is equally unfortunate in the meaning he givesto the word communitas. In the earliest periods of our historyit was applied to the commonalty of the wlwle realm : afterwards,to the commodities of counties, and only to the com-penalties of boroughs in common with other large bodies.Dr. Brady attempts to show before, (p. 36,) that Londonhad a " communia" in the 2nd of Richard I. But surely it israther too much, first to cite Hovered as an authority forthat assertion, when all the charters of London at that timeare silent on the point: and next to vouch a clear act ofusurpation as a ground for his position. As the communiais not mentioned till long after, the probability is, that if itexisted at all, the king afterwards refused to sanction it.But even if the legal existence of the communia is granted,how does Dr. Brady thereby at all advance to his nextposition (p. 37), that the communia of London was a selectbody? For the reasons given above, out of the charters,the inference is the other way. And how the observationswhich follow, establish a select body, it is difficult to say.(i <; 2I 1924 Shady.Willioro yVs tu the " probe homines," Bucikcn of in p. 38, those tcrnu- were generally applied to all jurymen and otlien: a« theliberi homint-B," " legates hominem," &c.Tile two, four, six, or ciglit delegates or rcprasfnttUives outof such ward, have been spoken of before.As to the extract from the private act of parliament reUtinto Plynionth, it dues not expressly how a select body ; thata merely u deduction by inference : and if any other meaningcsn be given to the passage, the inference is destroyed. Nowthis is ail enabling elapse, and therefore intended to apply, byexpress mention, to every person properly within its operation: therefore, though the general terms, mayor and cotn^'monalty, might include all the burgesses, if commonaltymeans the bui^ettses at large, still, if there were in the boroughany such division of the burgesses into mayor, aldersmen, common council, and commonalty, us at Plymouth ttdoubt there was, it was but reasonable, ex major cautelili, toadd the word, " all other burgesses," to prevent the chancef of those who were above the commonalty contending that■ they were not included in that general term ; and such tiiu-dolorous expressions were by no means unconnuon in documentsof that date. The same observation in principle appliesto the residents and dwellers in the borough, because theremight be persons, who, though possessing property whichought to be subject to the distress, still could not be burgessesor members of the commonalty ; as peers, women,inmates, minors, &c. &c.Dr. Brady then proceeds* with an attempt to supporthis position, that the "commodities" were a select number,by quoting the statutes in the reign of Edward VI., andQueen Mary, and a writ which imposed levies upon all theking's subjects, as welles every fraternity, guild, corporation,mystery, brotherhood, company, or commonalty ; and beinfers that all those names must denote a select number ofmen.In one sense, they cevainlyuiport a selectlumber, »withreference to the ircnera1 bodof the kind'ssubjects.forBRADY. 1925otherwise they could not be called a company , fraternity, ^*l!}*"*&c. However that was not the point the author was attemptingto establish, but that those words meant a " selectpart of the corporation ;" for he goes on to say, that theselect number was contradistinguished from the ordinaryand general members of the fraternity. And in thatsense his observation is not correct: for they obviouslymean the whole body of the fraternity, guild, corporation,&c. or otherwise the levies would have been enforced onlyupon a part of those bodies.These statutes, therefore, do not support, but contradictthe position for which they are cited, notwithstanding theauthor concludes his paragraph with so positive a reassertionof it.He also quotes a petition of the commonalty of Huntingdon,of which he says,* that no man can affirm otherwise,than that the commonalty was the corporation, the bodypolitic, or governing part of the borough. The two firstterms are certainly properly applied, for the " commonalty,"did mean the corporation or body corporate ; but the thirdwhich so far from being synonymous with the other two,as imported by the passage, is directly contradistinguishedfrom them, is improperly applied, and the " commonalty"did not mean the governing body, but the whole corporation.Dr. Brady having, as he supposes, this established thepoint, that " commonalty'' meant the select body, states,that he should cite some modem charters, to support thatposition; and quotes Banbury, with his construction ofwhich, it was his great object to succeed.We have already noted the extraordinary manner inwhich he has dealt with the three places, the charters ofwhich he quotes — Banbury — Higham Ferrers — and Abingdon.In his quotation of each, he introduces in conspicuousprint, the word " only," upon which his whole argumentturns ; but which is not in either of the charters : and omits,♦ Vide, p. 46. t See before, pp. 110, 1210.J92(i BnADY.Wiliinni the word " burgess," wlikh is in Them. Thus he arrives at■ - his conclusion ; passing over ill silence the previous decisionby which the inhabitants komrholdrrs of Abingdon weretrc'dted as the burgesses. And it xhoutd be recollected, thatUiK chui'tcrs of all these places are the same, and aregranted to the iiihubitatits, for the services they had renderedthe queen ; and throughout it appears, that the general bodyoT tile inhabitants, were the intended objects of the bouittjof the queen.It should also be remarked, that Dr. Brady Wis, ut thetone of writing his work, the keeper of the records, andcould, no doubt, have obtained easy access to any of thereturns, if he had thought fit ; and had he examined that ofISKl. the 5th of Elizabeth, he would have found a word of a verydifferent import from the exclusive tenn " only," which heintroduced into his work. For it is made by "the wholecommonalty" (total comuiunitatem), which it would require«a bold, and a more ingenious supporter than Dr. BradyI- to apply in any manner to a select body.Nevertheless the learned author makes that attempt in thsnext doctuneiit, fur he quotes a return for Oxford to establishhis position, which is made by the "mayor and thewhole commonalty ;" and another of Wallingford,* whichis by the " mayor and commonalty ;" and he concludes byobserving, that these communities had their seals, withreference to which he makes a quotation from Pavillon,but it is difficult to perceive in what manner it helps hisan|;ument.With respect to seals, remarks have been already made.It is therefore only necessary to add, that as to the twoplaces, the returns of which are quoted, the Doctor is peculiarlyunfortunate, for in both of them they have always beenby the bodies at large, and not by any select number.The author then proceeds, as he says, " after defining whatbui^s" were, to show what was the nature of "parliamentburgs;" by which he wonlil seem to import, and indeed itis a part of the course of his argimicnt to show, that thereBRADY. 1927was a distinction between parliamentary and other boroughs, ^"j^*"*But an indiscriminate assumption of that distinction wouldlead to much error. That there were some boroughs which,from poverty, or being decayed, had ceased to return membersto Parliament* is true, but they in no other respectdiffered from the other boroughs; and it is essentiallyrequisite to keep in view, that they all had the same originand object, and were of the same nature.The discussion which Brady entered upon as to the levyingthe fifteenths, does not appear to be material, either to his, orthe present inquiry But it is singular that he quotes awrit directed to the knights, free tenants, and whole communityof the county of Cumberland. It would be difficultto show that those words there imported a select number ;and still less the community of the kingdom, which he afterwardsmentionsThe author then adopts another position, for which thereappears no proof, that all the boroughs were the ancientdemesnes of the king. There is no doubt that some of themwere — and there is also no doubt that tenants in ancientdemesne had peculiar privileges : — but that all the boroughswere the demesnes of the crown, or on that account wereboroughs, or sent members to Parliament, is not true.Brady quotes writs for the collection of taxes and otherThe following w the list of boroughs which sent members to Parliament;bat from poverty and other causes ceased so to do, and were not subsequently restored:—Newbury, Ely City, Egremond, Bradninch, Creditor, Leamington, Bedford,Ledbury, South Moulton, Warrington, Sandford, Bromyard, Ledbury, Rosse,Berkhamsted, Stratford, Greenwich, Tunbridge, Flamborough, Cambridge, Bedford,Chipping-Norton, Dodington, Whitney, Axbridge, Chard, Munster, Languor,Montacute, Stokegursy, Watchet, Were, Beresford, Alton, Basingstoke, Fareham,Overtop, Farnham, Kingston-on-Thames, Bradford, Mere, Bromsgrove, Dudley,Kidderminster, Per»hore, Jervaulx, Pickering, Ravens, Ticklish, Calais.The following also were summoned, but refused or neglected to send, and madeDO return : —Dunstable, Glastonbury, Odium, Highworth.These towns and ports sent representatives to councils, but never to Parliaments: —Polruan, Exmouth,Teignmouth, Overborne, Melon-Mowbray, Spalding, Wain-fleet,Doncaster, Whitby.In all 65 boroughs, town and points.f Page 63, sec also p. 78. t Page 77, sjcc also p. 80.•4938W ilium^MMi Mars.alimentary or municipal privileges of boroughs; and theBane may be said as to the writ which lie quotes for the clergy,* and for knighting the king's son, whichwere special cases, and not generally applicableIn another parts Brady appears to confound the citiesand boroughs which were the king's domestica, wiltthose which had charters. If he had confined bimeeirtothe latter class he would, no doubt, have been correct; forthough the king's demesnes would not include all the boroughs,nor would all the demesnes of the crown be cities wboroughs, yet the definition that a borough was a place existingby the king's charter, either expressed or presumed, ,would include the whole. Notwithstanding which, Bradysays that there were "burgs" which never had anycharter; and places which returned members to Parliamentthat were not boroughs, but only towns of ancient demesne.But he gives no instances of the latter; and as to the formerthey would be boroughs by prescription, which prsupposes a charter before time of memory.Tile author aflemards proceeds to describe the king'sdemesnes,! cities, and boroughs, and (or that purpose quotesDomesday, which is the only authority upon the point.He first gives a list of the amercements of the men andburgesses, farmers of the different " village" at fee farm,who bad not paid at the exchequer ; which seems not toapply only to boroughs, but to the county at large ; and alsoto places which were not boroughs. And he quotes an ancientwrit, from which it appears that the men of " Lindon'i hadbeen taxed a tenth instead of a fifteenth, though it wasneither a borough nor ancient demesne; which so far fromsupporting the doctrine, seeuis to raise a strong inferenceto the contrary, and to show that boroughs and ancientdemesnes were different things. 5In the list which Dr. Brady gives of the boroughs which he■ I'axoTO. i Page 73. ; i'ai;ee-2.i It has been bel'ure shown, in lh(!cx[iai:l9fiom l>uiii«>cUy.lhal lliere were distinctinstances ottiurqi^srs not liolrliiiE of the kiuR. Tliiis in C^intcrliiiry litre were 231Brady. 1929describes as ancient demesne, he makes many errors, — vviiiiamhe states that Wendover was not a borough at that time : but .'we have seen that Camden so records it, upon the authorityof an old inquisition, which he quotes.Wycomb is not entered in the Terra Regis, nor Aylesbury,PlymptoTiy Ashburton, Cirencester ^ and Huntingdon areentered by themselves in Domesday, and not in the TerraRegis : neither does Grimsby appear in the Terra Regis.And the reader must be well aware that there are numerousother boroughs mentioned in Domesday, which werenot Terra Regis.It is a curious circumstance, that Brady, who so perverselyinsisted upon the right of the select bodies to elect underthe name of "commonalty," should not have consideredthat term as more applicable to the inhabitant householders,whose general right was established by the committee in thereign of James L, which the author himself afterwardsquotes ;* and that they would by the ancient law, as resiants,owe suit at the court leetyf which he mentions as the placein which the mayor of Corse was chosen and sworn; J andalso that the burgesses of Christchurch were sworn there.The parliament men for Stockbridge, he says, " were returnedby the leet or court baron, and the burgesses of Amersham."From which statement he makes a great confusion betweenthose courts, and seems almost to consider their names assynonymous ; — but we have had frequent occasion to showthe essentially distinct character of the two.Dr. Brady afterwards enumerates many boroughs whichwere not demesne lands, and which would appear to contradicthis former assertion. But he follows them with acorrect statement, that all the boroughs had their originfrom charters — a point which he seems before to have overlooked.He then quotes many charters, as those for Truro, Launceston,Liskeard, Grampound, Saltash, Plympton, Preston, LanePage 127.t Particularly as that court was in this reign in tail existcucc, of which tracermay be found in the courts of law. Sec Kex v, Bernard, Roll. Hep. 152.t Pp. 88, 89.w.iiiitn caster, Richmond, Heron. Butlieseeaisnot lohavecousideithe important clause which characterises the major part ofthem, viz., the exemption from suits of ibirea and hundredthand instead of acting their having jurisdictions distinct frooithe shcriflj ticcountitig for the manner in which they are treatedby the sheriffs, and making the whole one consistent systemshe attributes their existence and essence to their being frustratingtowns, with merchant guilds or communities. But tlaKaffords no reason why the sheriff shunt deal with them IB'any particular manner ; nor why they should have their awnpresiding officers ; nor return members to Parliament ; nor,in truth, does it connect them in any miner with the municipalgovernment or the general police of the country ; iotwhich it is so obvious they were created : — particularly Ulit has been so repeatedly shown that the merchant guilewere institutions mostly for the purposes of trade, and distinctfrom the municipal rights,Brady then refers to the History of New Sarum, and quotea writ fur the appearance of the mayor and commonaltybefore the king and his council; to which he adds, aAusual, " that they were not all the burgesses, but the govern*ing part;" for which he gives no authority; but, on thecontrary, it seems that they appeared by their attomies,which the whole body could do, as well as the select Dumber.And he infers from the nature of the proceedings in that case,that the citizens were to pay their talliage, in consideration ofthe profit they had derived by their trading, but which thedocument itself does not appear to support.He also quotes a document with respect to Bristol for thesame purpose, and apparently with the same effect. And hevouches London for a similar purpose ; after which he sayshe shall conclude his treatise with these two questions :•1st. Who named them, and by whose direction and appointmentwas it that such and such burghs chose and sentburgesses or members to Parliament, and not others ?2ndly. Who then were or ought to be, the electors in realor reputed burgherBRADY. 1931In answer to the first of these questions, Brady says, it JJ^'JJi^^was left to the sheriff of each county to name and direct ^which were boroughs and which not.If he meant, as would appear from his subsequent argument,that the sheriff had any power or right to summon oromit any places he thought fit ; the assertion is altogethererroneous: for no such power was ever conceded to thesheriff.If, on the other hand, he only meant that it was the dutyof the sheriff to ascertain, according to the fact, what placeswere boroughs, and which not, and accordingly to send hisprecept to them, the author is correct. With the formerpower, the constitution never intrusted the sheriff; the latterduty it cast upon him, and he was bound to perform it underthe same responsibility as every other official act; and inthe same manner as he would take notice of any liberty, orexempt franchise, which actually existed within his bailiwick.That this was his real duty, appears from the return whichBrady himself quotes from the county of Wilts, where thesheriff states the writ was returned by the constable of thecastle of Marlborough, because he — the sheriff— could notinterfere within the liberty, the constable having the returnof all writs there. So likewise the sheriff adds, that therewere no more cities or boroughs within his bailiwick ; clearlyimporting, that he issued his precepts, and made his returns,according as there were, in point of fact, more or less boroughsin his bailiwick.In truth, his office in this respect was ministerial and notjudicial. The writ required him to return for every borough,and the returns quoted by Brady are to that effect. Notthat the sheriffs were " more or less kind to the boroughs, orthat it was his pleasure** as the author describes it, but thatthe boroughs were incompetent from poverty — or want ofpopulation — or other sufficient cause — to return members.Upon which ground, as before urged, they not only oughtto have been exempted, but rather to have been prohibitedfrom returning, the consideration for the original grant, whichwas the necessity of a local jurisdiction, havuig ceased.• Such a prohibition shout not have been-scored by l1- direction of the king or his council; — for, as we hiaobserve-cl before, it is a principle, that the king cannot rvcinithis grant he has made — but in strictness of law it should iby scire facias or quo warranto, founded on the feet of ticonsideration of the king's charter having failed.It is true, sheriffs did not wait for the result of fainlegal proceedings, but they acted on their own resjioitBibili^according to the existing facts; but still upon the principleof ministerial official function, as declared in the statute ithe fifth of Richard II.As to the second question, — Who were the electors ? Brahonestly quotes the decisions of the committee in the relyof James I., and the case of Colchester, in which a prescriptionfor a select body to elect, was held insufficient.*also the Bridport case, in which it was decided, that tWcommons had the right to vote, because they contributed (ithe members' wages, likewise the t^eueral resolution hodBoston case, " that of common right the commoners sboitHelect." And the Wwaick decision, that the right belongto the commonalty : — authorities, having the sanction of thk |constitutional committee, to whose proceedings we have sofrequently referred: — and cases drawn from the differentparts of the kingdom, and supported so much by reason andevidence.But the observation which Dr. Brady makes upon them,can hardly fail to create a smite : — he says — " by these fiveinstances, it appears how perplexed and conjectural werethe opinions of the committees, and the resolves of theHouse of Commons. "t To which it might be answered,that the number of cases to the wame cft'ect are numerous;ind though it must be admitted, as shown before, that thedecisions of the committees, and of the House, do strangelyvain; yet Dr. Brady is probably the only person who wouldthink that the decisions in favour of the householders — thecomnioniilties — or those who contributed to the expence ofthe nienibcrs^fihould be those, of which complaint shouldBRADY. 1933be made. However, the Doctor proceeds to say, that the William1 TT n d^ •111 ^^^ Mary.committees and House of Commons j urged the " communities"or "commodities" " of cities or boroughs, to beonly the ordinary and lower sort of citizens, burgesses, <jr freemen,and not the mayor, aldermen, and common council ;"*and then he adds — " the ground of this popular error was,that this committee, notwithstanding the two great antiquaries.Sir Robert Cotton, and Mr. Selden, and the oracle of thelaw, so called. Sir Edward Coke, were members of it, did nottruly understand the meaning of the words, * communicates,'civitates,' et * burgorum,' which always signified the mayor,aldermen, and common council, when they were to be found ;or the steward, or bailiff, or capital burgesses; or, in short,the governing part of cities or towns, by what persons soeverthey were governed, or names, or titles, they were called orknown ; which hath been sufficiently evinced by what hasbeen said before, in this treatise upon the subject."It is impossible to say whether the arrogance with whichignorance is imputed upon such a point to the two greatantiquaries, and the extraordinary lawyer, whose names arementioned — or the boldness with which commonalty isasserted to mean the select body — and the asserting thatsuch a meaning had been fixed upon the term by the previousargument — be the most predominant in this extravagantpassage.The author proceeds by saying, " that if the communitieshad been truly understood, the committee would havedecided that the right was vested in the governing part,which was always a select number."It is marvellous that such a book should have misled thecommittee, which sat upon the Banbury case. But it is stillmore incredible, if the fact did not establish it, that sucha work should afterwards have been quoted in the courtsof law, and even in the court of dernier resort, as a legalauthority.After this assertion, several returns are quoted, made bythe " commonalty ;" but for the reasons before given upon• Page 131.nthe unquestionable meaning ol' that word, they mv again- the point fur which the author cuiitends ; and it is unlwfor his argument that they are mostly instances whereright has not been exercised by the select body but bybodies at large — as Hereford — Leominster — Derby — Nottingham— Colchester— Hertford — Newcastle-upon-Tyne —Boston — Bristol — Exeter — London — one of the returns ofwhich is by the whole commonalty (" tota comraunitas") —York, which is also by the whole commonalty — Ipswich-oxford,the return of which was likewise by the wlcommonalty — Wallingford — Nelson — Windsor — ReadLynn— Yarmouth— Wells — Bridport — Colchester — Wiwick — Lincoln — Grimsby — Stamford — Rochester, in whitherreturn was " by the mayor, with all and singularcitizens and commoners of the city,"Upon which Dr. Brady observes, " the meaning whereofis, that the mayor, together with all and singular the citizensand commoners — that is, with all and every citizen whowas a commoner, and of the community of the city, whichis as much as to say, the whole community of the citychose them — for the ' communiarii," or ' comminarii,' of'the city of London, are the common councilmen thereof'and a select number," kc*So that by this mode of reasoning, all and every citizen,is tortured to mean a select number of the citizens.And with similar propriety the Doctor observes, upon someof the writs he bad quoted that the words " assessvillas," and " assents communicates vills," signified thesame thing ; and that as the community of the town, so thetown itself, the government of the town, and the bodypolitic, were and did consist of a select number; as if itwere possible, that the assent of the town could, by anyconstruction, mean only the assent of the select number ofthe town.Dr. Brady afterwards adds the returns of Bath andBridgwater; in the latter, the election is by the inhabitantspaying scot and lot: and Bath is the only place cited,• Page l.-ie. t Piiie 157.BRADY. 1935in which the return was by the common council; the cir- ^**Jj^•^ and Mary.substances of which are very peculiar, and the return bythe common-council, is no doubt to be attributed to Prynne,who so laboriously and perseveringly insisted upon theirright, and maintained it by every means to which he couldhave recourse.Brady relies also upon the returns,* in the reigns ofHenry V., Henry VI., and Edward IV., which were madein the county court ; but they appear to be " with theassent of the whole commonalty," which was given at theelection, before they attended at the court, and a part of theburgesses only went there, not to make the election, butthe return f as before explained: — the twelve persons mentionedin the Cambridge and Huntingdon returns, being nodoubt the juries who interposed, as constituted bodies existingin the place.In conclusion, the Doctor was in some difficulty to explainthe right of election in those boroughs, where, as he assumes,there was neither charter — custom — nor free burgesses — as inthe case of Cirencester; and he relieves himself from thedifficulty, by asserting, in the first place, that under thosecircumstances, there could be no borough.Secondly, — He asserts that Cirencester was no borough, andThirdly, he states " that it is an error occasioned by wantof due observation, and perusal of ancient charters, to say,that the towns which have sent burgesses to Parliament,must be boroughs by prescription'' and he endeavours toextricate himself from the difficulty by saying, " that suchplaces must have been ancient demesne." He is, however,obliged to admit that there is no such thing as a writdirected to any town of ancient demesne.He then suggests, that the sheriff, having the power todirect his precepts to what places he pleased, " might sendthem to such large towns of the king's ancient demesne ashad a market only by convenience and permission, or charter,without the constitutive clause of a borough or free • Page 158. f Page 162.I 1936 BKMn:Biitall of this is nero conjecture, unsupported byany fact- or authority: and the power of the sheriff" to Bummon wbplaces he pleased, upon which the whole rests, we baialready shown to be unfounded in law.The author then states, that in such boroughs the eWtioiKought to be made by the freeholders ; such as were possessedof the ancient demesne lands, or those which anciently, bfone way or the other, had been in the crown. The first passis unfounded in fact, because in such places, generallyspeaking, the right was not in the freeholders. AndGlanville's Reports it was expressly decided to be by catt^mon right — not in the freeholders, but in the householders.Dr. Brady adds some few returns of the reign of £dwai^VI,, as Wycomb, and Windsor ; of which latter place siaccount is given: particularly an extract of the charter oftr Edward iV.,t by which Dr. Brady says, " it is plain that the {corporation or body politic, or community, was Uie saatt ^thing;" which might be conceded to him. And the chartersproceeds to grant that the burgesses and inhabitants shouIdiJbe that community — therefore the burgesses and in/iabitiuttaMwere the community. But lie says, " these burgesses WCM^Ia neglect number of the chief inhabitants of the town, as," he 'says, " appears by the books."In answer to which it is only necessary to be observed,that after repeated discussions, the inhabitants have, accordingto the charter, been declared to be the burgesses. And,therefore, it is probable that the author was as incorrectwith respect to the fact, as he clearly was with respect tothe construction of the charter and the law : and it is mostextraordinary that he should afterwards assert, so unhesitatingly,that the "community" was a select number,according to the ancient usage and custom of the town : andquoting the charter of James 1., which appoints thirty of theworthy and best inhabitants to be the common council,should still assert that in that provision the mystery of thecommunity or corporation was unfolded.It is hardly possible that any person could be induced to• Hfcbefoi?. p.iar.BRADY. 1937believe that the " common council" could mean the whole Williamand Mary.body,* particularly when the inhabitants were incorporated.However, we must cordially agree with the next paragraphof the author, that " if the ancient charters, writings,and monuments, of all burghs, or pretended burghs, in'* England, were inspected, judiciously examined, and comparedone with another, the meaning of the word ' com-unites,' ' community,' or ' commonalty,' would be asclear and perspicuous as it is in this place of Windsor, orany other city or burgh." But we should add to thatobservation, that if the meaning was ascertained, or the precedentof Windsor investigated, no one would arrive at theconclusion that it meant the select body ; and, in fact, it wasdetermined in Windsor to mean the inhabitants paying scotand lot.As Dr. Brady seems to have collected his strength for thispassage, and it seems to involve the greater part of his argument,we trust it is not necessary to make any further observationon his work, as it cannot be requisite to comment uponthe single authority of Thetford, which he quotes from theworst times of James 11. ; or to attempt to confute the wildpropositions with which the work concludes.Having thus canvassed the doctrines of Dr. Brady, whichin all probability produced the decision in the Banbury caseand have been the foundation of the theory upon whichthe exclusive right of the select, or governing bodies in corporations,has been founded ; and as the subsequent historyof corporations will only exhibit the successive occasionsupon which Brady's doctrine has been adopted, it will beneedless to make many additions to our present collection. —After the documents which will complete this reign, a fewcharters — some prominent decisions in the courts of law — andthe leading statutes, materially affecting municipal rights —will alone be requisite to complete this compilation.In a case at law, it was urged in argument, that the common council was butapart of the corporation, and that it was a distinct body ; but, strange to say.Holt, C. J., observed, ** It might not be so." Perhaps in consequence of the publicationof Brady's book. See Holt's Reports.6 Hjggg IRELAND.William But ir. must not be unnoticed that, in the seventh <d*- '- William III., the House of Commons provided against anyfuture irregularity in elections, as far as the sheriff waaconcerned, by enacting,* " that every return to Serve iaParliament for any borough, contrary to the last determinationof the House of Commons, as to the light of electiontherein, should be adjudged a false return." Thus placida stamp of confirmation upon the varying and contnidiidecisions which had been previously adopted.Before chasing!; this chapter, we should also remark, that a1699. committee waa appointed in the 11th yearof William III.,tlflexamine all proceedings relative to charters ; and what newones had been granted ; and an address was voted to himajesty, that the clerk of the council should lay before AeHouse an account of the (petitions and proceedings before the;—council, relative to all charters granted during his majes^ldreign, to corporations sending members to Parliament. ^IRELAND.The same coarse of interference which had existed inEngland appears to have prevailed in Ireland, and, perhaps,to as great an extent.But it is better to allow the documents to speak for themselves;and the state of the corporations will be more accuratelydiscovered from one or two letters written at the time,than from any general description which can be given.The following is a specimen of interference much less objectionablethan many we have seen before.Letter of Sir Richard Ryvei-s, recorder of Dublin, recommendinga lord mayor for the city.lj:Honoured Sir,I am very sensible how little time you can allow forprivate addresses, which has hindered me from borrowingany part of it. The mistake already committed in swearing1690.IRELAND. 1939our present lord mayor, and to prevent a greater in the next, WiUianiforces me to give you this trouble. The aldermen of thiscity, upon his majesty's most fortunate reduction of it, wereso ester to reassume the government, that they overlookedthe necessary medium; and this present mayor was confirmedby his majesty, and sworn without any previouselection. It is true he was elected in 1688. But by the NewRules, made pursuant to the act of Parliament for regulatingthis city among other corporations, as he was notconfirmed by the government within ten days after hiselection, it was void.He is to serve till Michaelmas next. Our custom is tochoose at Easter magistrates to serve for one whole year, tobegin from michaelmas day following. We now must do as wecan ; and at the next table of aldermen must choose eitherthis present lord mayor to serve out the next year, becausehe came late in, or the next in order after him ; who mustalso be confirmed by the king within ten days, otherwisethey must choose the next, and so forward until someoneis chosen whom the king may think worthy his stationin that trust.One Otterington is next in order to succeed this presentmayor, who, for estate, integrity, activity, and loyalty totheir majesties (if my opinion, and Jo. Allen's, and most ofthe other aldermen whom I consulted in this matter may betaken),is as fit to serve as any man below the cushion.And I have reason to believe he will be elected, unlesshis majesty interposes, to whom all duty will be paid.I am credibly informed, that application is made for onealderman Mitchell to be our next mayor. I have nought toobject against him. He may be a fit man in his turn. Heifi the junior of the whole court of aldermen, and to disorderthe settled course of the city, when without it, the hinges servicemay be as well attended, I am well apprised is neither theking's intent nor yours. I have served as recorder of thiscity near 12 years ; and nothing of this nature has been attemptedin my time, nor do I find it at any other, but after1641, when there were some Roman catholic aldermen, who6h2DuhUn, A«ffvst 16. 169aThe gentleman I mentioned in my last to you, is cicmayor of this city for the next year : to enter on his officeday af^cr Michaelmas day, if his majesty please to confiidllthe election. A precedent for such confirmation I em^Joecdwith the certificate of the election. The present lord masterseemed to wave his pretensions on the scrutiny ; and ytlseems troubled that he was not chosen.If this election be not confirmed by his majesty, withinten days after the date, the election will become %'oid. Ifhis majesty do not approve of the city's choice, be pleased tosignify hip commands ro nie, and they will be punctuallyobserved," &c. &c. ic.There ia also a letter from Wnltci Motley, mayor of Dolphin,to Sir Robert Southwest'- Dublin, August 19, 1690.Your honour's letter of the sixth instant 1 have communicatedto some of our aldermen. The objection concerningSir William Ellis doth not concern us. We were dismissedbefore he was treasurer. He ctnae into titan place by thtpopish charter, which created him alderman and turned mostof us out. As for alderman Reader's continuation above hisyear, it was by reason of some succeeding mayor's necessitouscondition ; and with the consent of such whose riffht it• SomhwclllMSS. t Souihwi'll MSS,IRELAND. 1941was to be treasurer, in consideration of the advantages the Jl^^jjj^city received by his managing that office, which they declinedthemselves.** Yet in respect of your recommendation, we, notwithstanding,did elect alderman Michel to be treasurer during mymayoralty. And I do assure your honour, he is the first aldermanbelow the cushion (although the last of them,) that everwas chosen treasurer. 1 thought it my duty to let your honourknow thus much, that so if anything be insinuated to hismajesty or the Duke of Ormond, your honour may give atrue information of the whole matter ; and that, by the immemorialcustom of this city, none is put by from his electionin any office or trust in our city in his turn according to hisseniority, unless a just cause be assigned," &c. &c. &c.It is impossible not to admire the firm but moderate tonein which this letter concludes, with insisting upon the ordinarysuccession of the corporate officers.STATUTES.In the statutes relative to Ireland, the same attention is tobe found, as in those of England — sto the actual residence ofthe officers, with reference to the duties they were to perform— to the oaths they were to take — ^and to all the generalpurposes for which they were established.Thus, in the statute for abrogating the oath of supremacy Cap. 2.in Ireland, and appointing other oaths, the persons who areto take them are described as inhabitants of, or residingiffithin, the realm of Ireland. And in fixing the place wherethey are to be taken, the words used are the same as in theEnglish statute of the first of William and Mary, chap. 8.,** Those who shall inhabit, be, or reside within the city of Reside.Dublin, or within 30 miles : or those who inhabit at a'* greater distance at the sessions, where they shall be orresidesAnd the 14th, as well as some of the subsequent sections,directs, that* "justices of the peace, within any count i/, city,• So albo 4 & 5 William and Mary, cap. 22.ui' luwH corporate, sliouki give warrants to coitstubt*j(, lyth-- tubmen, AearffiurjAs, or other officers, to Bummon anyi»crsonofthe age of 1 8 or upwards,' to take the oath ofallegiance:"— «public duty, which every individual was before bound to<h>at the ^;e of 12, at the court leet.The interference of magistrates is, by the atrirt words ofthiR statute, confined to counties — where before it would hawbeen executed by the sheriff in the mourn — and to citie amitowru corporate:" the latter terms being evidently usedincorrectly instead of the word " borough." For, otherwise, a»there are boroughs which are not incorporated, but by reajsaiiof their being boroughs, are excepted out of the county, andexempted from the jurisdiction of the sheriff' in his toum, suchplaces would not be included nt all in this statute, whichcould not have been intended.In the Irish statute of the ninth of William III., for lightingthe city of Dublin, the in/utbUantii are, like the citizens ofLondon, to pay for every house inhabited.WALES.In the first year of King William and Queen Mary, theright of the contributory boroughs of New Radnor to vote fimembers lo Parliament, chine before the committee of privileges,of the convention ParliamentsThe return had been made in conformity with the practiceby certificate, and the petitioner's counsel, insisted, that bythe 27th and 35th of Henry VIM., the burgesses of the fiveout-boroughsofRyader, Knight, Kunckglass, and Sevensought to vote. And the counsel for the sitting memberassented that they were entitled.The same abuse of the introduction of foreign burgessesoccurred in Wales, as in England, in consequence of thedecisions made supporting their rights : — and we find thaiin Tenby and Ruthviii, a petition was presented against themaking of " forfeiting burgesses.''^.• S,.' (.t-I., I'l>m|.t n. p. H14S. t lOJouin. 77.Conclusion. 1943Williamand Mary*CONCLUSION. :The Convention Parliament, from which so much was ContentionParliamentexpected by the country, undoubtedly did more towardsconfirming the abuses introduced in the reign of James IL,by the attacks upon municipal and parliamentary rights,than any other subsequent Parliament. And the right ofthe selecting particular classof persons on a former occasion should affect the general• See before, p. 391 . t See before, p. 280.t See before, pp. 511, 589.■ •HMe IPSWICH.Anno, right of election, which coiipemed not only the petitioner on.Ito. that occasion, but would adept the rights of the burgesses ofIpswich, and the borough at large, for ever.Witnesses s]x>ke to their knowledge of the borough for 30or 40 years, and that there never was any distinction amongthe freemen ; a fact which is clearly negatived by the formerextracts from the dom-book of the borough. They also saidthat they were all chosen at the great court, and paid scot8iM aii.l fijffi /o( The latter was impossible for non-residents.Hii[tii. The committee resolved, that the right was "in the bailiff,portmen, commonalty, and freemen, at large."It is difficult to reconcile this resolution with any just viewof the history of boroughs, in general ; or of this place, iDparticular — unless, indeed, the bailiffs, portmen, commonalty,and freemen, mentioned in the resolution, are to be treated aidetailed enumeration of those who would be described byelbe general term " burgesses." The bailies, portmen, andftconnnonalty, nu doubt, appear from the documents, beforeI stated, to form the body of burgesses; but to what classf freemen can be applied, as contradistinguished, or scantyfrom the conmionalty, it would be very difficult to define.This determination has been treated as establishing theright of the non-resident freemen. But it appears that theobjection of the petitioner was only confined to three freemen,by redemption, who were not resident at the time theywere made free ; and, consequently, the effect of the determinationis only to say, that it was no objection to a person'svoting at Ipswich, that he was not resident at the time ofobtaining his freedom.I. It seems clear from the evidence, that the freemen spokenof by the witnesses must have been resident ; because theyare described as paying scut and lot, and bearing offices,which non-residents could not.Upon this resolution being reported, and read in theHouse, it was amended, by substituting the " common council"for the " commonalty" — which so far obviates thatobjection to the resolution of the committee. The bailiff's,portmen, coition council, and freemen, are, in fact, allresolvable into the general term ''freeiiien ;" the three formerIPSWICH. 1949classes being only freemen filling certain offices. The ques Anne.tion, therefore, even after this determination, is, who are the 1710.*^ freemen'' Of what class they ought by law and usage tobe, the early documents, before cited, satisfactorily prove.Three years afterwards, another petition was presented to 17 13.the House, respecting the election for Ipswich, upon whichthe principal question was, as to the undue making of freemenat the great courts which were contended to be undulyconstituted for want of one or more portmen present, respectingwhich the sitting members were allowed to giveevidence ; — the result of which was, that after hearing thewitnesses, and having the charter of John read ; and other /Jhn!°evidence being given ; the committee resolved, " that port ^j^""men's are an essential constituent part of the great court ofIpswich, without which the court could not be held."Another objection was also urged against some of thesupposed freemen, that they were made at the petty courts,without having first manifested their rights at the greatcourts.The committee resolved, that " the persons voted freemen Resolutethe pretended great courts, at which no portmen were*' present, had no right to vote :" — which is an authorityto show, that where burgesses or freemen have been illegallyadmitted, their votes were treated as nullities, notwithstandingtheir admission.CHARTERS.The following are the only charters which were granted inthis reign.1. — 1703. 2nd year of Queen Anne, . . Great Yarmouth.2. — Wareham.3. — 1705. 4th Leominster.4.— 1707. 6th New Sanim.6.— 1708. 7th Bewdley.6.— 1710. 9th Bristol.• It appears from Sert. Whitaker's case, in 2 Lord Rays. 1285— that the greatcourt was there described to be *' an assembly of the whole corporation**t Portmen, in truth, meant only the men of the town. Saxonice. Porte. Seebefore, observations on Brady.1850 CHARTEB9.-GHEAT VARMOlTH.-SALWBimy.Adeo. I, That to Yarmouth sive to the burgesses a power oftinrat chooHui^ a mayor, instead of two bailiffs; and to the corporationI7(K>. the name of " mayor, aldermen, burgesses, and comically ;"the aldermen being 18, and the common domicile 36.2. That to Warekam is a charter of incorporation, confidingthe government of the town to one mayor, six capital, and 12aaeiataiit burgesses, with a recorder, &c.17(6. 3. That to Leominttcr, appointed justices, with a grant offairs, &c.\ S«1»biirf. 4. The cliarter to Salisbury recites, that ambiguities hadarisen as to the time and manner of elections; aldermen, byreason of the charter of James 11.; and that the mayor andcommonalty by writing under their common seal had, on the24tli of February, 1706, surrendered their charter, andpetitioned the queen to make provisions for the election ofthe aldermen and assistants, who were the common cotincU.The queen, accepting the surrender, incorporated the ma^tr,aldermen, asastnnts, and commonalty ; the Krsl mayor beingallowed to continue till another is elected.A recorder and town clerk are also appointed, — and thefirst alderman and assistants, who are described as atizeiuand inhabitants.Provisions are made for the meetings of the common council,and for filling the vacancies of aldermen and assistants.No mayor is to call a common council unless notice is firstgiven to the justices, who arc to consider whether it is expedient.The mayor and aldermen are, the day before the election,to nominate double the number of aldermen who arewanted to fill the vacancies, out of whom the mayor, and inhis absence, the recorder is to nominate to the commoncouncil one or more as may be required.In the books of the city are to be found the oaths of (hemayor, the 24 aldermen, the assistants, and of the free citizens;and yet, notwithstanding this explicit cliarter, speaking sodistinctly of the mayor, aldermen, assistants, and com-Charters-SALISBURY. 1951monalty ; — for a long time there has been no commonalty ; A"°g-but the mayor, aldermen, and assistants, have by a legal 1707.sophistry been considered as the commonalty, though they a?ty?°"are to be taken out of that body, and consequently mustbe distinct from them.Either, therefore, there has been no commonalty — and inthat case the plain and obvious meaning of the charter hasbeen neglected ; — or if there has been any commonalty, itmust be the inhabitant householder s^ (subject only to the inhabitantscommon law restrictions and exemptions), no other classhaving been elected out of that body.This borough, though created in the reign of Henry Iii,* ^^27.since the time of legal memory, possesses many of the characteristicsof the ancient boroughs. It is divided into wards Wards.it has always had a court leet which belonged to thebishop — and the service at which is expressly mentioned inthe articles which were made between the bishop and thecitizens, in the 34th of Edward I., in consequence of a dis J^*pute which had arisen between him and the citizens, as totheir being taxed by him, which they resisted ; — it was left totheir election, whether they would keep their liberties andpay the tax, or whether they would renounce them — theypreferred the latter : and accordingly surrendered their privileges.But afterwards, in the 35th of Edward I. — the ^•^•citizens submitted themselves to the bishop, and articles weredrawn up between them, by which they were to perform theirservices to him ; the commonalty were to choose the mayorfix)m themselves, and present him to the bishop's steward,and in his absence to the bailiff.It is also expressly provided, that the citizens should onlybe bound to do suit at the bishop's court, called the view offrankpledge (that is, the court leet) twice in the year. ^i^"^"If, therefore, there has been no charter to alter this part of theconstitution of Salisbury, the bishop would no doubt be stillentitled and bound to hold the court leet ; but it has, as inmany other places, grown into desuetude, and the last court washeld on the 14th of November, in the eighth of George IV. 1827.• See before, pp. 461,589.r i]0SS CHARTER3.-SALISBUEV.One. A fhurtcr of iiK'i>rj»>niti<3ti was also granted tv Salisbury,1611. in the reign of James I.,* and another confirming it, in thesixth year of Charles I.fThe fact to which we have referred during the commonwealthsthat the return to Parliament was made by thecitizens and inhabitanU of Salisbury, is a strange eommratupon the present non-existence of any commonaltyThere was likewise a charter granted in the 22nd ofI Charles II., confining those which had been previouslygranted. Upon the decision of the committee in 1(>89, ,giving the right to the select body, which was a manifestusurpation, we have already commented. [|Under the circumstances connected with this porous, itseems clear, that originally the inhabitants owed suit and Iservice at the bishop's view of frankpledge, and ought thereto have been admitted, sworn, and enrolled. Nor can therebe any doubt, but that such a course might now be adopted;I —^Jid the citizens, or mayor and comwown^fy, in their common .council, would also have power to make "free citizens." Sothat the reformation of the municipal body at Salisbury,might easily he effected by the bishop, or by the mayor andcommonalty, or still more desirably, by the conjoint intersterence of them both.5. We have already given the history of Bewdley.% Thecharter granted at this period was for the restoration of thecorporation, in accordance with the provisions of James I.But this charter was, in 1710, decided by a committee ofthe House of Commons to be void ; and was likewise sodetermined by the verdict of a jury in the Court of King'sBench, country it is said, to the opinion of the court,on which ground a new trial was afterwards moved for• See before, p. I4<M. t See before, p. 1664. } See before, p. 1688.} Where a elder granted )o the mayor anJ commonalty, that the office of anyalderman being vacant, the rest of the ablemien might nominate tno buigeaes, foithe choosing of one of them as alderman, by the commonalty (per communicated);belt that, einnnumaJli; iiiciiidtd tht uhiilr corporation, and Bat an alderman soelected by the vote of the oilier aldermen, as well a^ the burgesses at large, improperlyelected.— Tbe King v. Osborne, 1 Kali, 327,II See before. p. 1869. f See before, p. 157!t.Charters-BRISTOL. 1953and obtained ; and it is said, the new charter was afterwards ac acquiescedin by the parties, and the members elected under it.*6. It has been shown that Bristol was not incorporated,except by a charter of Charles II., which being founded upona void surrender, was also void in law.fQueen Anne, in the ninth year of her reign, remedied this nio.defect by a charter, J which commences with a recital, that the** mayor, burgesses, and commonalty had petitioned for agrant of all the powers, liberties, &c. which they had thithertoenjoyed, together with such additional privileges, as mightseem proper for the good government of the city." And thenproceeds to direct, that Bristol should be and remain for everan incorporated city and county by itself, within as ample Incorporatedextensive boundaries as it had enjoyed for the then last40 years. That the mayoTy burgesses and commonalty and Burgessestheir successors should for ever be a body corporate and morality.politic, by the name of *' the burgesses and commonalty of Name.the city of Bristol."The municipal officers are then confirmed, and provisionsare made for filling the vacancies in the common council.Various clauses are added relative to the election of theofficers and for the internal regulation of the town ; and thecharter concludes by granting a pardon to the mayors, aldermen,&c., who had not taken certain oaths, according to theprovisions contained in the charter of the 36th of Charles 11.^and that the royal approbation should be no longer necessaryfor the election of mayor, aldermen, &c.Mr. Seers, who with so much labour and research col Severe.elected the charters of Bristol, and commented upon them,has the following note respecting the two charters of• 2Luders,230, 231.f Queen Anne, by charter granted to the burgesses of Bristol, that they should beabody corporate, &c. &c., and released to the corporation that power of removingits members which had been reserved by a former charter of King Charles the Second,and released any just cause of complaint which might be against the corporation forhaving acted in opposition to it. Held, that it did not thereby appear that the queengranted this charter in consideration of the former r/iar(fr granted by King Charles theSecond, and that the queen's charter was not therefore void, although the supposedcharter of Charles the Second did not exist.— But see Rex v, Hawthorne, 5 Bam.6c Cres. 410. t See before, p. 1795.C H A RTERS.-BIIWTOUCharles II. qikI Queen Anne, containing an crural; viewof the facts, though he does not venture to draw the conclusion,which the legal decisions would warrant.There are some circumstances attending the precedingcharter, which merit consideration. King Nantes, some fewweeks before his Replication, by proclamation restored theancient government of the corporation, and replaced it on ikformer charter, the surrender of which was cancelled by theattorney-general, and delivered to the mayor. It is questionable,therefore, how far this charter of the smith of Charles II.is to be considered as valid. The burgesses in geoeislibefore the time of Queen Anne's grant, in 1710, seem tohave considered it as void, for they refused to serre theoffices, and the common council did not compel them byfinivas it might have done if that charter had been esteemed raisonthe other hand, Queen Anne in her charter supposes thaiof 3f) Charles II, to be in force ; for she grants a pardon Ivthose who hat! offended against it, and confirms all fonatfcharters, unless contradicted by her own. It is a questionof some difficulty and of considerable moment, for the validityof many of the acts of tete common council at this day dependsupon it : but although I have seen and heard letjalopinions relative to it, yet it does not seem hitherto determined."It appears that there was a considerable difficulty a fewyears preceding the grant of this charter, in inducing personsto fill the offices of common councilmen, at Bristol. Forthere is a case in the law reports of a motion made for aninformation against a person for not serving the office ofcommon councilman of Bristol : — and it was suggested, thatif he might refuse it, the corporation might soon be at anend. Sir Edward North, who made the motion, did notput in upon the ground of any obligation by charter totake the office, but that a common councilman was a publicofficer, and the corporation a part of the public government.Lord Holt observing that that was when they had a powerto make bye-laws, and that they should make one inflictinga penalty on him who refuses ; which he stated «-as theCHARTERS.— COLCHESTER. Improperway. But there seems to have been no reference to Anne.the obligatory effect of the charter of Charles II.COLCHESTER.Colchester, which has already supplied many facts* connectedtooth its ancient privileges — its burgesses in Domesday— its grant in Richard I. — its hundred, law courts, andwards, in the reign of Richard II. — the interpolations in itsrecords in the reign of Henry IV. — its ordinances, lot, scot,and common stock, in the reign of Henry VI. — and its beingmade a perpetual body in the reign of Edward IV. — exhibitsalso in the reign of Charles I., and the succeeding reigns tothat of Queen Anne, many instances of abuse and usurpationsWe have already seen in the third of Charles I.,J that theselect body attempted to claim the exclusive right as burgessesto return members to Parliament, but it was negatived,and the common burgesses were restored to their privileges.Unsuccessful attempts were also made by the common 1636.council, in the 10th year of King James, to alter the constitutionsof the 29th of Elizabeth, by new orders, which wererepudiated by the free burgesses ; and in the 13 th year of thesame reign they were expressly repealed, and the constitutionsof the 29th of Elizabeth declared to continue in force. 1623.In the 21st of James I., an abortive attempt was made toinduce Parliament to grant that the council might elect allthe officers; and King Charles, in the 11th year of his reign, 1636.granted a new charters by which a mayor was substitutedfor the two bailiffs ; and considerable powers were given tothe aldermen and common council.Nevertheless, in the 14th, 15th, and 20th yeare of the same 1639.1640.reign, ihefree burgesses appeared as electors with the mayor ; 1645!but nine years after, the select body, whose power and influencehad been increased by the charter of Charles I., 1664.resumed their usurpations, and an order of that date appearsthat no foreigner should be made^ee without the consent ofthe majority of the common council — a double usurpation —• 11 Mod. 162. t See before, pp. 273, 366, 688, 747, 796, 899, 968, 1093.X See before, p. 1634. $ Rolls Chapel.6i2chahti:rs.-coichestkr.first in excluding the free burgesses fi-om a participationthe exercise of that right if it existed, (the free burgewhaving always before the charter uf Charles I. claimed frconcurrent power with the bailiffs and common council;,and, secondly, in untrod ucing^/tweiy iwrs, contrary to the earlyrecords of the borough, which show that the burgesses oughtto be inhabitant and resident : — thus assuming to themselvesa power which afforded a ready means of out-numbering illegalresident burgesses. In 1656, 1657, and 1658, during;the Commonwealth, the select body, apparently proud of thatnewly acquired power, exercised their assumed right of Ml?omitting foreigners. In the first, however, of those yeanthe free burgesses contested the right of returning the members; and although the mayor, aldermen, and common councilelected two burgesses, the free burgesses elected twoothers, and a double return was made — the members chosenby the burgesses, described as elected by the free interesseand inhabitants, were seated upon a petition.Thus within seven years after the select body had beendefeated in their claim of the parliamentary right of election,and that of the burgesses at large bad been established, asif to prevent the recurrence of an election by the popularparty, or the common sort of burgesses, the king granted anew charter of incorporation, giving them a mayor ; and increasingthe power and influence of the higher officers of theplace,Charles II., in the 15th year of his reign, also gave acharter to Colchester, reciting that of Edward IV., andgranting in effect the privileges they had before enjoyed.But in the 36th of Charles 11.— the last year of that king'sreign — all the charters of this borough, like the others, weresurrendered.Immediately after the accession of James II., the selectbody appear again to have exercised their pretended right ofadmitting foreigners.That king, at the close of Diis reign, included Colchesterin his proclamation for the restoration of corporations ; givingit a new charter — reducing the number of officers to tenCharters-COLCHESTER. I957aldermen, including the mayor, ten assistants, and ten com- Anne.mon councilmen. 1693.William III., in the fifth year of his reign, granted anothercharter, reciting, " That the king ratified all the franchisesand liberties, &c., to the mayor, commonalty, andtheir successors. And that he was given to understand, thatby pretext of an instrument, to which the common seal of themayor and commonalty y by the combination of a few of thesame borough was affixed dated in the 36th year of thereign of Charles II., and enrolled of record in the Court ofChancery, purporting to be the surrender, by the mayor andcommonalty, to the late king, of all franchises, charters, &c.And also that as well by reason of the pretended surrendersand by charters, divers doubts had arisen, concerning^^Their liberties, &c. : — ^^The king ^^Then proceeds to re-grant and confirm them, &c.In the second year of the reign of William and Mary, 1690.upon a petition, the right of election was, by management ^^^rather than by right, agreed to be in the freemen of theborough, and not as before in the burgesses.In 1690, it will be remembered. Dr. Brady's book waspublished.In the fifth of William and Mary, the select body again 1693.exercised their assumed right of making foreigners freemen.In the seventh of William and Mary, there is a petition of 1695.tie freemen and burgesses, on behalf of themselves and themajor part of the burgesses: — which petition is in the samesession, called by the House the petition of the inhabitants.The report in 1696, stated, that the right was agreed to be inthe sworn burgesses : which must therefore be the proper expositionof the term freemen, in whom the right was agreedto be in 1690. In the course of the proceedings, a list of thefree burgesses is spoken of; and also the freemen's book: Free• 11 1 1 burgesses.and freemen are mentioned repeatedly; as well as their nightto demand their freedom, and their making apprentices free.The foreigners who had been admitted under the usurped Foreigners.power of the select body, appear to have attempted to voteat this election ; but although the poll was said to be takenpromiscuously, and the mayor who refused a scrutiny.1968 COLCHESTER.Ann*, carried the election with a high hand, still the foreigners areBtatcd to have been entered upon the poll with queries ; — diiadmission, it would seem on all hands, that their right ofvoting was generally doubted. It would be difficult lo corktend that the corporation had not a power to admit into theirown body, almost any person they liked, for the purposeof permitting them to trade in their borough, and to exemptthem from tolls payable to themselves ; which, as they wereto receive them, they might remit to whom they pleased ;and in this sense they might admit freemen; but they wereessentially different from the ancient " liberi homines," orIves burgesses, who by the general law, and the particularusage of this borough, were required to be resident. Thatspecies of burgess the corporation could have no power ofmaking, but in the ancient legitimate manner; and it wacontrary to their very nature and all law and us^e, thatthey should he foreigners.After this attempt of the foreigners to vote, the attentionof the free burgesses appears to have been roused to thesubject.96. In the eighth of William and Mary, whilst the above petitionswere depending, and five days before the report wasmade by the committee, the common council appear to havebeen alarmed, by an anticipation of the result of the proceedings; and in order to ward off the expected effect of it,made an attempt to entice the free burgesses into a consentto the measures they began to think necessary, to continuetheir influence ; for which purpose apparently, they made anorder on the 23rd of March, for admitting several persons tofreedom, upon payment of such fines as the bouse shouldthink reasonable ; provided the free burgesses should consentthereto.After the previous struggles, and considering that thepetitions were then depending, a more decisive admission ofthe right of the free burgesses could not be framed.The committee by their report seated the candidate, inwhose behalf the freemen and burgesses petitioned, and unseatedthe candidate, for whom the foreigners had voted.In the July following, in the same year, four months afterCOLCHESTER. 1959this determination, an order of the common council was made, ^°°^'that '^ thenceforth, no person being a foreigner and not hav fleeinga right to freedonif should be admitted a free burgess** without the consent of the free burgesses assembled in thecommon hall, or the major part of them." The characterof this order will easily be seen. The common council had,in the March preceding, admitted the free burgesses' right ofdissent ; and the decision of the committee having in fact defeatedthe votes of the foreigners who had been before votedadmitted, it became necessary for the common council, ifthey intended to preserve the influence which the power of admitting/orciyn^* gave them, to make some further effort tosupport it ; — they accordingly made this order of the 6th ofJuly, which shows as well their anxiety to preserve even anypart of this privilege — so essential to their influence — aswell as the adroitness with which they struggled for the continuanceof their usurpation. They were compelled to admitthe right of the free burgesses to dissent, but the artfulqualification, " not having a right to freedom," limited thatpower of dissent ; and if this qualification had been maintainedby the common council, as they were necessarily tobe the judges of those who were within the exception ofhaving a right of freedom, it would in effect have given thewhole power to them ; and made the power of dissent bythe free burgesses perfectly nugatory ; because there wouldhave been none who, in the opinion of the common council,would have had a right to freedom.This order, however, seems not to have deceived the freeburgesses — they still contended for their right ; and in thenext year, the ninth of William and Maiy, the struggles 1697.on this subject were continued, and the effect of them seemsto have been, that the free burgesses at that time maintainedtheir right. For in April, in that year, an order is made bythe common council against foreigners " setting up their tradebefore they had agreed with the mayor and aldermen, orthe major part of them, for freedom :" — so it appears thatthe common council themselves, at a time when the matterhad been fully discussed, and foreigners had failed in anattempt to vote, look the distinction, before referred to, respectingfreemen admitted to trade,' aud did not venture lotarry the admission of foreigners any further; nor indeed didthey succeed even in that point without dispute, for in theJuly following, only three months after, there is an orderin the town book, that " no foreigners should be admittedwithout consent of the majority of the free burgesses assembledin the common hall;" which, as far as appears,via the end at that time of this struggle, tenninatiiig in thesuccess of the free burgesses.In the tii^t of Queen Anne, there was another petition byseveral of the freemen of the borough — and also one by thefree burgesses of the corporation — one or two non-restdeolsappearing to have voted ; but the question chiefly turnedupon bribery.In the fourth of Anne, there was a petition complaining ofthe mayor's having made great numbers of freemen after tieteste of the writ, though they had no right before U> thefreedom ; and omitting to make oihera who had a right to bemade free. Another petition at the same time by the freeburgesses, complained of above 100 freemen having beenmade in a most unusual manner in nle-homis, and countryand private places, and not in the town hall as customary,and having no right to be made, being foreigners, alimentor minors : — and others were spoken of as having a right tobe made free by birth or sei-vicesIn 1706, a petition to the same effect was presented byother free burgesses.In 1710, it was reported upon a petition, that the right ofelection was agreed to be in the mayor, aldermen, commoncouncil, and burgesses; and thi' (juestiiin was, whether themayor of his own authority, without the consent of theIS. council, could make /<mc(^«(TS free: — ex tracts from the townA siniilaTillMinnian nitli re«p?('l la rri'pmi'n. admillod for Ihe purposes of trade,is tube nietwilli in Durlmi'ulli . Vpvn a pelion fromwhirh place, in 1701. an fto-i-'riirn freeman wa oljjtrlcJ to, because iliac nulli was diHorent from iliad of a (racJ-.■«S/r«mfl«-llif bM.t ublislng tlitm lo perform ll.' dmieiof the corporation : which's not 60 in io fnnmr. I In, i, tkvm yc.iK slut J)j. lHaJjV look "a^ pubWIicd.t Sec Ic rami Uluiu, m i\laMonan.l llnii.Mcli.COLCHESTER. 1961books for and against the right were read. Some witnesses ^^^also were examined ; one who was called to support the right nio.was a Mr. Glasscock, who was three years afterwards committedto the custody of the serjeant-alarms for refusing aninspection of the corporation books ; and who therefore was,in all probability, a decided partisan of Sir Thomas Webster,who insisted on the right of foreigners ; — the committee decided,that " the mayor could not make foreigners free of the"boroughs without the consent of the majority of thealdermen and common council." The committee shouldcertainly have gone still further, and upon the facts statedabove, have decided, that the mayor, aldermen, and commoncouncil, could not do it without the consent also of themajority of the burgesses; or more properly, should havedecided, that the whole body had the power of admittingforeigners to be freemen of the corporation for the purpose oftrade onlj/y and in order to exempt them from the tolls anddues of the corporation. But that there was no power in anybodyto admit foreigners to be burgesses, who, by all theearly documents, should be inhabitants and resident.If, indeed, the power of admitting foreigners had then beenconfined according to the spirit of the order of the commoncouncil, in April, 1697, to their setting up trade, there wouldhave been no great reason for complaint. But if it wasintended, either by this or any subsequent resolution, that anybodyin the corporation could admit foreigners to be suchfreemen or free burgesses as should vote for members toParliament (which must have been the object, if anythingwas meant, because otherwise the committee hadnothing at all to do with the question), then, indeed, withallsubmission to the committee, it must be allowed, accordingto the principles and authorities already mentioned,that their decision was erroneous. But it would be unjustto say that they resolved, " the mayor, with the consent of*' the free burgesses, could make foreigners free burgesses :"they only decided negatively, that the mayor could not do itwithout their consent.In July, in the 10th of Queen Anne, there is an order of nn.the common council, purporting to repeal the order of July1697, which they were incompetent to do. They also proposed,by the same order, to confine the titles of some foreignerswho had paid for lieing admitted freemen, and whosemoney the corporation was not then in a state to repay. Thislikewise the common council were not competent to direct;for if the foreigners admitted were not good freemen at thetime they were made, this order could not make them soinfact, for the reasons mentioned before, the common councilhad not the power of making freemen, and consequentlycould not confirm them. The rest of the order is little morethan a repetition of that of the sixth of July, 1696.It may with propriety be observed of the order of July1711, that it could not operate to affect the right of freemento vote for members of Parliament, though it might affectthe rights of persons admitted into the corporation forthe purposes of trade: — on the principles, therefore, thatomnia presumuntur esse rite acta," and "the constriction ofevery document should be, that it should rather avail thanbe nought;" this order must and ought to be retired tothe making of persons free of the corporation for the purposesof trade, and not for the purpose of visiting them theliberi homines," or free burgesses of the borough.By the evidence for the sitting member, upon a petition in1714, it was stated, that this order was made in pursuanceof the determination in 1710; but it was not in conformitywith that resolution, and was attempted to be supported onft mere us^e of 30 years. Still, however, the committeeconfined the right of making foreigners to the mayor and freeburgesses : and the votes of foreigners otherwise elected werestruck oft' the poll, and the petitioner seated.It should nevertheless be observed of this latter determination,that although it was properly decided that theright of making foreigners, if exercised at all, was in theburgesses at large, and not in the select body; still, asthey were deciding upon the right to vote for members ofParliament, they should, according to the principles and authoritiesbefore slated, and the particular circumstances ofCOLCHESTER. 1963this borough haec decided, that no body or class of persons ^'"'^'had the power of making foreigners freemen, but that allthe freemen (more properly called burgesses,) ought to beresident and inhabitant.In the 12th of Queen Anne, another petition from this bo ^^u.rough was presented, upon which a report was made. Theright was agreed to be the same as that which was agreed Rightin 1710, excepting that the word *free burgesses" was substitutedfor burgesses, showing that in this place those wordswere synonymous. On this petition, the old question, soeffectually concluded in 1697, and in some degree again setat rest in 1710, was revived by the common council: thequestion being, whether the common council, without theburgesses, could make foreigners free. The orders of March1696, April 1697, and July 1696, were produced; but thevery material and conclusive order of July 1697, wasomitted.The committee resolved," that the right of making foreigners,not having a right of freedom by birth or service, is in the** mayor and free burgesses of the borough in common-hall** assembled."In the course of the inquiry, the free burgesses paying scotand lot, were mentioned.About the year 1741, the charters and privileges granted 1741.by the crown to Colchester* were, in consequence of the propernumber of corporate officers not being kept up, placed inabeyance, by the corporation being unable to continue itself;but a new charter was afterwards granted to them in the thirdyear of George III., under which the present corporation exists. 1763.There were in the course of a few years many other petitionsagainst the return for this borough ; but some were neverdetermined, and one was withdrawn. In the 29th of George II. 1755.the right was agreed to be in the free burgesses duly swom.fIn 1781 and 1784, there were other petitions, which turnedon the qualifications of the candidates.See the constitutions of Colchester, published by Mr. Struts, chamberlain, in1822, at Colchester.t See 2 Lud. 166.ICOLCHESTER.*"'*«■ In tess, Mr. Jackson and Mr. Tierce contested this borough.Twig hitter gente-man, in a. petition, complained ofthe conduct of the mayor in having unnecessarily and arbitrarilyadjourned the poll, for the purpose of admitting severalpersons to their freedom, whom he afterwards suffered to vote.Mr. Theme via seated upon the petition. This is the lastcontest in the borough which tends to illustrate the questionas to the nature of the burgesses.From this history of Colchester, the origin of the boeotiathe character of the original voters — the contmonaUy, the httr-ceases, conburgenses, freemen, and free burgesses, may be discovered.That they were all originally one class of personsthere can be no doubt ; and as little that they ought all tohave been inhabitants. It is evident also, that the Introductionof foreigners was altogether a usurpation, broughtabout by the unremitting management of the select bodyin the corporation.HATH.As there was a. parliamentary decision respecting this cityin the course of this reign, it is desirable to give a shorthistory of the citizens of this place.We have seen, that in the time of William I,, there were64 burgesses rendering 10/., and four .score and ten burgessesof other men rendering 60s.* There was a charter of Richard I,to the citizens, who are subsequently mentioned in a writ ofHenry III., and a confirmation to them of the charter ofRichard I. ; and the citizens are again mentioned in a grantof Edward I. Queen Elizabeth, in the 32nd year of herreign, incorporated the " inhabitants" by the name of themayor, aldermen, and citizens r — the charter giving powerto the common council to make of the inhabitants of thecity free citizens and burgesses, and to swear them. Acourt-leet and view of franhpMiji: were also granted; andit was provided, that all persons dwelling and inhabitingwithin the city, should be at scot and lot with the citizens,HeiHin^:, The first ri:lurns of numbers to Parliament, which com-• S« U'futt, pp. li), 164, ;i(j7, 4()J. f,22. I-1U5.BATH. 1966menaced from the earliest period in the reign of Edward I., reappearto have been by the body at large of the citizens.Thus, in the first of Henry V., it was by one person named,and " all the other citizens, by the assent of the whole"commonalty'' So likewise the 2nd, 5th, 7th, 8th and 9thof Henry V.; 1st, 3rd, 4th, 8th, 9th, 10th, 11th and 13thof Henry VI.; the 12th and 17th of Edward IV. In theIst, 2nd, 4th, and 5th of Philip and Mary, by the " citizens ;"the 14th of Elizabeth, by the " mayor, aldermen and burgesses;"the 26th, 30th and 39th of Elizabeth, by themayor and citizens." And in the 1st and 21st of James I. — r1st, 3rd and 16th of Charles I.— 21st of Charles II.— 5thof William and Mary — and 4th of Anne, similar returns.After which uniform acts of the citizens and burgesses —and the incorporation of the inhabitants by Elizabeth, underthe name of " mayor, aldermen, and citizens'* — it wouldappear to be impossible that a doubt could at any timehave been entertained as to their having a right to participatein the elections; yet, in 1661, Mr. Prynne was returned 1661.with Mr. Poplar by the mayor and aldermen. There wasa petition presented against them, but it does not appear inthe Journals to have been reported.Mr. Prynne however states,* that " it was heard, and that*' a right of election was made out to be in the corporation ;the question being, whether all the freemen had only a*' voice in the election, or only the mayor, aldermen andcommon council."What was precisely meant by this author, by saying thatthe right was in the corporation, does not distinctly appear.If he intended to make any distinction between the corporationand the burgesses, his position is inaccurate. Forthe burgesses had returned the members from the 26th ofEdward I. and the corporation was not created until the 32ndof Elizabeth ; and as to the right being in the mayor, aldermen,and common council, the uniform returns by the citizensor burgesses to the end of the reign of Charles I., afford adecisive answer.• Prynne, Brew. Pari. Red. 318.Aline. In the fourth of Queen Anne, the question, who were the1706. burgesses or citizens of Bath ? came again betbre a committeeof the House of Commons.t>«iiiMiien. The petitioners insisted that the right was in the maytu',aldermen, and all the freemen paying scot and lot.Silting The silting member, that the right was iu the mayor, aldermen,and common council, or capital citizens only.The petitioners gave in evidence the returns mentionedabove, and the charter of Queen Elizabeth ; and a witnessproved that at Mr. Prynne's election, in 1660, and in thoseof 16S0 and 1681, the freemen polled.The sitting member insisted, that Bath was a " corporationby prescription :" — which is undoubtedly not the fact, thoughthey relied upon the recital of the charter of Elizabeth toestablish it. — And they produced a book of the corporation of1660, when it was stated that Mr. Poplar and Mr. Prairiewere elected by the mayor, aldermen, and common council ;1600. and in 1680, the members were elected in the same manner.And they were desirous of calling other witnesses, but thecommittee declared they were satisfied with the evidence,Right, and resolved that the right was in the " mayor, aldermen, andcommon council men only,"Thus, contrary to the unvarying evidence from the regnoHenry V. — by giving effect to a short usage subsequent to1660 — the period at which the utmost irregularities withrespect to corporations were introduced ; — the select bodywere treated as the burgesses, the tatter of whom ought tohave returned the members to Parliament — this usage beingfounded only upon the entries in the corporation books madeby themselves, and contradicted by the express evidence of awitness who spoke to the elections. Nor, in estimating thevalue of the usage, should the pains taken by Prynne to establishthe right of the select body, be altogether overlooked.CASES.1703. A few cases determined in the courts of law during thisreign, ought also to be quoted.In an action of debt for the penalty of a bye-law made byCASES. 1967the common council of the city of London it appeared that Anne.** the bye-law was, that the company and fellowship of i703.** porters having been, time out of mind, a company and Bye-law.fellowship, it was ordained, that they should still remain*' and continue for ever a company and fellowship ; and '*' that no master of any boat, &c. should unload or send on** shore any goods, but by such persons as were free of the'* company :" — to which it was objected, 1st, That the cityof London could not make a corporation. 2ndly, That acorporation could not make a bye~law to bind strangers,unless founded on public convenience. Et per cur. The cityof London cannot make a corporation, for that can only becreated by the crown. But this is only a fraternity, not a cor Fnuernity.poration : and a corporation may make a fraternity. A corporationis, properly, an investing the people of the placewith the local government thereof, and therefore their lawshall bind strangers ; but a fraternity is some people of aplace united together, in respect of a mystery and business, intoa company; and their laws and ordinances cannot bindstrangers, for they have not a local power of government.The celebrated case of Ashy and White, being an action nos.against the returning officer for Aylesbury, for refusing a white?vote, occurred in this year in the King's Bench ; and wascarried by writ of error into the House of Lords But as itdoes not relate to the municipal rights of the burgesses, itis not necessary to enter further into the facts or law connectedwith the case ; nor would any thing excuse even themention of it, except its celebrity.The connexion of the law of settlement with the same 1706.principles as those of burgess-ships: particularly with referenceto resiancy, may be collected from the following extract,which also exhibit the confusion which then existed inthe general notions as to corporations and parishes.In case respecting a settlement, Holt, C. J., and Powell, J.in giving judgment, said, " Coming into a parish, and• Cuddon V. Eastwick, 2 Salk. 192.t Abby V. White, 2 Raymond's Rep. 938; 6 Mod. 52.X Holt's Rep. 582.NAnne. " being taxed in a parish, make a good settlement withoutIts. " a notice in writing, within the statute of James II. Butthe law is altered by the third and fourth of William andMary : and as to voting, they could not take notice thatReticence. " that implied a settlement ; a hart reniilcuce might perientitle him to that ; it was an act that related to the corporation,and not to the parish."1706. To a mandamus directed to the mayor, &c. of the boroughmilieu. of Lostwithiel in Cornwall,* tu restore Truebody to the officeof a capital burgess of tfutt borough, they returned the constitutionof the borough, and the election of Truebody ; butthey show further, that Truebody left the borough, andlived oat of it for several years, and neglected attendance atthe public assemblies, &c., and therefore they removed himfrom his place of capital burgess.Sir John Hawes, for Truebody, took an exception to thereturn ; that it did not appear that Truebody had any noticeor summons to attend, and show cause why he should notbe removed; which was contrary to natural justice, that aman should be disfranchised, without ever being heard whathe had to say for himself. Sed non allocatur; — for, per curiam,if a capital burgess quite leaves the borough, and goes andresides altogether in another place, there is no need of stan-morninghim before he is removed, because he has abdicatedthe borough, and it is a sufficient ground for turning himout; otherwise, if he only left the borough a while for hishealth's sake, &c. And the return was adjudged a goodreturn.1708. Sir Simon Harcourt argued this case thus ;f There are threecharges in this information. First, for taking men non incommunicated burgi. Secondly, fur taking men not of thetown. Thirdly, for making them free of the borough. Thecharter of King Philip and Queen Maiy says generally,"that they may make omnes homines r/twscnnque ;" but norestrictive words are therein, and so it gives no more than• Begin r. Truebody, Hiymoml's Ittp- p. I's, 174 ; lli.li. 4VJ: S. C. II .Miwierii.t Regina v. Mayor of Hertford, 1 1 MoJ. 11)8, IB!1. And m' before, pp. 212.374,022,558.CASES. 1969the law gives.* King James I.'s charter says, " not exceed ^°°^'ing three." King Charles II. grants them "to use, ex noe.excise, &c., in all and every such manner as theretoforethey had done ;"+ and this seems to restore Queen Mary'scharter, and to enlarge King James's; so that this issueabout acting under King James's charter, is immaterial.Mr. Lutwych, The charter of King Charles II. has, bywayof new grant, given them every privilege they had before.The question was, whether there being no restrictivewords in Queen Mary's charter, if thereby they might by lawhave taken in whom they had pleased into their corporation,from any part of the kingdom, when the queen incorporated themen ofsiLch a place only ? Queen Mary's charter grants thema power to make " omnes homines quodcunque tenants andinhabitants ; " and the charter of James I. restrains them tothree. King Charles II. grants them " to exercise, use, andenjoy all privileges they at any time before ever used." Itis objected, that the issue being upon King James's charterwas immaterial, Queen Maiy's charter being restored by thegeneral grant of King Charles II.|Harcourt, solicitor-general. The affirmative grant importsa restriction in the essential part of the corporation, and notto be compared to the cases of bye-laws, &c., for they aregenerally incident to all corporations ; but this is particular.Powell, justice. The question is, whether this corporationcan make persons free thereof who live out of the town ?Holt chief justice. As this corporation is constituted, allpersons that are inhabitants, are of the corporation as such.And he said they were freemen.But Powell, justice, thought that would be of dangerousconsequence, that by their mere coming and inhabiting there,they should gain a freedom.But doubtless by the ancient and common law, a residencefor a year and a day within any free borough, made the partyfree of that borough ; and though he was a villain before, hethenceforward became a freeman,• See before, p. 1495. t 10 Co. 92.t Rait. Went. 530.(i K1970 c*«»-Ado. The reader will not fail to observe, thai in this case an:involved all the leading principles before asserted — thepower of admitting freemen is to be limited by local residence,and fit (qualification — but being resident, and bavinj;the qual locutions, the inhabitants are entitled to be bar*lessee. Above all, it is expressly affirmed, that the tennfreeman' is properly referable to the common law withrespect to Villeinage and freedom.MUNICIPAL DOCUMENTS.Besides the few cases quoted above — the hollowing iraui-cipal documents of this reign may properly be inserted, asconfirming the former records.rtYTHE.1107. At an assembly of the mayor, jurats, and comv>oaen thenholden. " it was resolved, this assembly will admit all such totheir freedom to this corporation as have a right by birth atmarriage, that do appear to claim the same, and are residueScot ind in this town, and of ability, paying scot and lot ; whereuponfive per-ions claimed to be admitted into the franchise, beingfree-hor/i ; and thereupon four were admitted axd swanfreemen, paying the usual fee of \$d."ReiiiDcy. Notwithstanding this entry so positively requires relief,three years afterwards, the following perversion of a dedsioaof the House of Commons, for the purpose of supporting xysnr1710. residents, is to be found in an affidavit ofthe eighth, year ofQueen Anne.Id this year, the election of barons to serve in Parliamentfor this town and port, was determined by the Houseto be in the mayor, jurats, common council, and freemen :upon a question whether the right was in the mayor,"jurats, common council, and freemen; or in such ofthem only as inhabited in the port, who paid scot andht;and the determination therefore as appears to this deponentwas, that actual inhabitancy was not necessary to constitutean elector, provided ho was a corporator of any ofthe descriptions therein mentioned. And before the resolveDOCUMENTS.-HYTHE. 1971*' tion passed, evidence appears to have been given, that all ^^^-** who polled at the election then in dispute, had paid scot I7io.** and lot ; though some voters on both sides lived out of the** town, from whence this deponent submits it to be inferred,** that the committee from whose decision the House adopted** its determination, did not mean to negative, but rather toadmit the necessity of payment of scot and lot."It would be difficult to explain how the freemen could payscot and bear lot — particularly considering the ancient Scot andservices of the barons of the Cinque Ports — if they were notresident within the borough.And although it does not belong to this reign, the followingdocument, the last there will be occasion to cite relativeto Hythe, may be added for the purpose of showing, that notwithstandingthis deposition, still some restraint was placedupon non-residence. Whether this bye-law can be supported any principle, analogy, or usage, or can be reconciledwith the general law, must be left to the candid reader todetermine.** At an assembly held inter alia, it was agreed, for the furtherestablishing and better securing the corporation in all itsjust and legal rights and privileges ; that henceforth and atall times to come, there shall not be at the same timemore than one legal inhabitant paying scot and lot (as theyare commonly distinguished) to ten local inhabitants, &c."And yet notwithstanding the distinct history of Hythefrom the earliest times, and the clear necessity of residenceto entitle a person to be one of the barons or burgesses : non Non-refreshmentswere in modern times allowed without restraint;and they, in fact, outnumbered and controlled the inhabitants,till the recent statute.PORTSMOUTH.The following document is found amongst the records of I707.Portsmouth of this date.We, the major part of the aldermen in being, of theborough of Portsmouth, do hereby demonstrate to the presentmayor and to the minor part of the aldermen of the6 K 2Municipal Document.— Portsmouth.snicl Ixtroiiah as followeth, viz. — that forasmuch as the tnaywrefuses ami neglects to summon a council, in order to choosealdermen and burgesses, to fill up und replenish the corporationwith fit members into Io many vacancies accordingto ancient charter, and to our repeated request thereto : if.it should so happen that by Hirkneas, deatlif, or nfCfstaPfabsences, the due proceedings of law or justice should beimpeded, we declare ouri>ielve!i and each of us not accessariesto, or accountable for the same.Furthermore, saving to ourselves and successors, furtherprotestations, we declare and protest against all acts, thaihave, and shall be done in choosing and admitting membersand disposing of any of the rights, enfranchisement,nues, or emoluments of the corporation, without the codeof the major part of the aldermen in being, for chaldermen, and ivilhout seven aldermen present, for admitburgesses ; or doing any other of the aforesaid acts,contrary to law, charter, and custom, and therefore wndfacto."There was another similar remonstrance : and the ma]was removed, Henry Madman being substituted in Msplace. And in 171.3, thp town clerk was directed by themayor and aldermen to expunge the names of 14 persons —said to be illegally called as burgesses — out of the nevrecords of the boroughs, that no entry of them might appear.HALES.It appears from the following entry, that the same tinieces arose from the introduction of non-residents in Walesas in England, and the same meaiis were taken to enforceresidence.(A 111)1 hK.i coiinril held in the (guildhall, the 22nd ofMarch— an order recited that several persons bad been andmight be thereafter admitted burgesses of the town, whowere not or should not be resident ; and might thereafterplead to be exempt from pLiynienl of toll, to the greatWALES. 1973prejudice of the inhabitants paying scot and lot,* for pre ^^»^«venting whereof it was ordered, that all such out-burgesses Cardiff.or honorary burgesses, who by themselves or their servantsshould insist upon the immunities or privileges of burgesses,should be liable and charged with bearing and paying towardsthe relief of the town, and other charges incident to the saidtown.In the same book in which this entry is made, theaccounts of the churchwardens and overseers for manyyears are kept and audited ; and there are several entries onparish business. Nor can there be any doubt from the boroughcharges being similarly combined with those for thesupport of the poor, both in England and Wales, but thatoriginally the sick and indigent poor were provided for, outof the borough common stock.SCOTLAND.It was in this reign that the ilion between England andScotland was finally adjusted ; and the articles for the treatyof union were ratified by an act in the fifth year of QueenAnne ; in which it was provided that 16 peers should sit uponthe part of Scotland in every Parliament in England, with thesame privileges as the English peers ; and that 45 representativesshould sit in the House of Commons, with the sameprivileges as the English commoners.That statute was also amended by the sixth of Anne,chap. 6 ; and another was passed in the same year for settlingthe manner of electing the 16 peers and the 45 congeners,in which the royal boroughs were to take a part.The evils arising from the creation of occasional voters, bymultiplying votes for elections of members to Parliament,spread to Scotland, as it had through England. And in the12th year of this reign a statute was passed for the provencal 6.tion of this evil : whereby it was enacted, that no conveyanceshould be effectual where an infeftment was not taken, andseisin registered, and given before the teste of the writ;This would be in lei^tiaint of trade, if all who came in were not entitled tobe made free.adopting that period of time which was so generally in useunder the common law of England. And further provisionagainst the splitting of votes, in the eighth sect., in the 16thof Geoi^e II., chap. 11 ; and the enrolment of all enfeoff-meets,and the voters were required by the former statute.In the 15th of Geog ill., the case of Linlithgow occurredin the House of Lords, from which it appears, that whperson petitions in Scotland to be admitted a biiifjess, be,in the same manner as has been noted in several places inEngland, engager to pay scot and lot.lltELAMI.Some letters and municipal documents of this reign, mtserve to throw light upon the application of the New Satsat this period : as well as explain the proceedings in the corporationof Dublin, which bear en strong a resemblance tamany of the transactions before reported as to England : particularlywith respect to London. 'In the sixth year of the reign of Queen Anne, the IrishHouse of Commons made the following strong resolutions: —Sabbath, 26th of October 1707.Resolved, That it is the opinion of this committee, thatthe privy council of this kingdom hath assumed a power ofhearing and determining the right of magistrates of corporationsnot within the New Rules ; and that their any wayintermeddling in such elections, or making any law relatingto the right or possession of the office of magistrates incorporations,not within the New Rules, or retaining any petition,or cause relating thereto, is arbitrary, illegal, and ofdangerous consequence to the parliamentary constitution ofthis kingdom.Resolved, That it is the opinion of this committee, that onpreferring any petition to the council board of this kingdom,complaining of the undue election or return of any magistrates,or other officer of any corporation within the NetcRuUs,it is the indispensable duty ol' the privy council to hear anddetermine the right of such election, before they approve ofIRELAND. 2975the magistrates or officers of such corporation ; and that the Anne.denial thereof is arbitrary and illegal. "To which resolutions the question being severally put, theHouse did agree without any amendment."DUBLIN.The following ext-act from a letter of this date, will show nil.the municipal proceedings of Dublin at this period."*^I doubt not but you will hear of an unlucky contest inthe city of Dublin, about their mayor. You may remember(I think whilst you were here, that is in 1709) aldermanConstantine by a cabal, for so I must call it, lost his election,and a junior alderman, one Forrest, was elected mayorfor the ensuing year. Constantine petitioned the councilboard not to approve the election; for you must know by theNew Rules f settled in pursuance of an act of Parliament, for NewRai«.the better regulation of corporations, their chief officers mustbe approved of by the governor and council after they areelected, before they can enter into any of their respectiveoffices ; and if not approved of in 10 days, the corporationthat chose them must go to a new election. Now aldermanConstantine, upon the corporation's return of Forrest, complainedof it as wrong, and desired to be heard by counsel ;but my Lord Wharton, then Lord Lieutenant, would notadmit it. This passed on to the year 1710, and then the presentmayor was chosen, alderman Eccles, another junioralderman; and this year, alderman Barlow, another junior.Constantine finding the government altered, supposed heshould have more favour, and petitioned again of thewrong done him; the city replied, and we had two longhearings. The matter depended on an old bye-law, madeabout the 12th year of Queen Elizabeth, by which the aldermen,according to their ancient, are required to keep theirmayoralty, notwithstanding any licenses or orders to thecontrary. Several dispensations and instances of contrarypractices were produced ; but with a salvo, that the law ofsuccession should stand good ; and some aldermen, as apeExtract of a Letter from Archbishop King, to Dr. Swift, dated May 15th.1RP.LAKD. Ipoured, had been disfranchised for pitt suhmitUug t»> Jl, atI, holding their mayoralty. On the contrary, it was urgeil,that this rule was made in a time when the m/iiforaltg trainlooked upon as a great burden, and the senior AldcnBcngot licenses from serving it, and h\ faction and interest goi,it put on the junior, and poorer; and most of the aldernt(iBwere then papists, and being obliged on accepting the officesto title the oath of supremacy, and come to church, thfffdeclined it; but the case vras now altered, and most wertambitious of it; and a rule or bye-law, that imposed it ns*duty and burden, must be understood to oblige theju to lastIt, but could not oblige the electors to put it on them ; thatIt Kens ellen dispensed with, as alleged, and altogetherabrogated by the New Rules, which ttxik the election out ofthe city, where the charter places it, and gave It to the aldci^then only ; that since those Rules, which were made in lb72ithe elections have been in another manner, and in about3(j mayors, eight or nine were junior aldermen. On thewhole, the matter seemed to mc to hang on a most slendopoint; and, being Archbishop of Dublin, I thought 1 wnobliged to be for the city, but the majority was for the bye-law,and disapproved alderman Barlow, who was returnedfor mayor. I did foresee that this would beget ill blood,and did not think it for my lord Duke of Ormond's interest,to clash with the city ; and I went to several of his Grace'sfriends, whom I most trust, before the debate in council, anddesired them to consider the matter, and laid the inconveniency1 apprehended before them, and desired them to takenotice that ! had warned their ; but they told me, thatthey did not foresee any hurt it would be to his grace. AndI pray it may not ; though 1 aui afraid it may give him sometrouble."The citizens have taken it heinously, and as I hear, metto-day, and in common council repealed the bye-hiw, andhave chosen aldermen Barlow again. 1 think them wrongin both, and a declaration of enmity against the council andgovomincul. which ioiid is c;isicr begun than laid. It iscertain illic council must clis;ii>provc llicii invoice, it beingIRELAND. 1977against the New Rules, as well as good manners. And what Anne.other steps will be made to correct them, I cannot say: Dublin.whereas if they had appointed a committee to view andreport what old obsolete hye-laws were become inconvenient,and repealed this among the rest, it would not havegiven offence ; and if they had chosen another instead ofBarlow, I believe he would have been approved, and therehad been an end of the contest"*The following is a letter, among the Southwell MSS., to ^JJJ^^«"Lord Dartmouth : 1712.My Lord, — I had this evening an express from Ireland,with the enclosed letters from the lords justices, to your lordpresident ; and I had seven letters from members of the privycouncil, viz. : — from the three chief justices — the chancellorof the exchequer — the auditor-general — and the bishops ofDown and Killaloe — also from the deputy clerk of thecouncil.In all which they do, in the humblest manner, representand entreat her majesty that they may be allowed to disapproveof alderman Barlow, and do assure you, that whateverchoice afterwards the city shall make, shall be readilyapproved : they allege, as indeed very true, —1 . That Barlow was the man, who, after being chosen andrejected last year, was put up again a second time, andwas chosen by the city ; which Mr. Attorney-general hereallows is punishable, and for which they might be prosecuted.2. What was done the last year being purely in vindicationof her majesty's prerogative : if, in the instance of this manitshould be given up, it would encourage factious peopleto nose the lords justices there, which cannot be for hermajesty's service.3. It would have a very ill effect upon all other corporationsunder the New Rules, who would presently think hermajesty had given up her right of rejecting ; and consequentlyfill them with a spirit of faction not easily afterwards to bereduced."• Swill's Works, xix. 81.IhbUa. From the lords justice (^iir Cun&taiitinc Phipps and theBishop ofTuam), to Mr. Secretary Suuthwell :« Dublin Outlet, 3rd Ma, 1712.Sir, — Yesterday the loi-d mayor and aldermen of the cifrfof Dublin proceeded to the election of lord mayor aadsheriffs for the next year ; and have elected alderman Barlowfor lord mayor, who was twice before disapproved of by thegovernment and council ; and one Leg and one Somervillefor sheriffs, who have also been already disapproved.You see by this method of proceeding, they are determinednot to choose persons in the interest of the government. Butbefore we approve of this election, we think it necessary toknow her majesty's pleasure ; whether, in case aldermanConstantine should petition, we may support him in hispretensions. For if we do, it will have this consequence, thatthere will be successively three good men chosen, by whosemanagement, during their magistracy, the city may be recoveredout of the direction of the present set of men, whohave strenuously opposed her majesty's prerogative and theright of the council here. But if it be her majesty's pleasureI hat alderman Barlow should be approved, we shall readilyobey, though we apprehend by it, that her majesty's powerand prerogative in the city will be absolutely lost ; and thereforewe desire you will take such measure as you shall thinkproper to lay this matter before her majesty, signifying herpleasure to us therein with all expedition, because we shallforbear doing anything thereon until we hear from you."At a board of aldermen* held at the Tholsell of the city ofDublin, the 2tlth of September, 1713;The humble memorial of 19 out of the 24 aldermen ofthe city of Dublin, to the lord mayor.When we last met, your lordship was pleased to nominatealderman Constantine, alderman Mason, and aldermanFrench, to be put in election for the mayoralty ; your lordshipwould not permit us then to proceed to an election, by insistsSouthwell MSS.IRELAND. 1979ing that we should choose only one of your then three no ^^^'mine aldermen and thought fit to refuse putting the question Dublin.on alderman Walton's objection against alderman Constantinebeing put in election for the mayoralty, he having, for(most two years together refused attending the duty of hisplace, since which time her majesty's gracious proposal (thesubstance thereof was to have another alderman nominated inthe stead of the person against whom exception was taken forhis having already served as lord mayor, whereby Sir WilliamFinds was very plainly described) to accommodate ourdifferences is come into this kingdom, and was communicatedto us at the council board yesterday by the lordchancellor, viz. : — that your lordship should strike out oneof your last nominee aldermen and add another alderman tothe two, and thereupon we should proceed to an election.To show our duty to her majesty, and cheerful compliancewith whatever comes recommended by the best of queens,we do hereby declare, that if your lordship will strike outany one of the aldermen nominated by your lordship at ourlast meeting, and put in the stead of one of your nomineealdermen, any other who has not served in the mayoraltywe will instantly proceed to an election, and therebyprevent the confusion and inconveniences that may attendthe not having new magistrates tomorrow in this city ; butif your lordship shall, notwithstanding her majesty's graciousinterposition, act contrary thereto, by refusing to strikeout one of your nominee aldermen mentioned in your ownnomination paper, at our last assembly, and before hermajesty's royal pleasure was known therein; — we beg leaveto protest against your lordship's proceedings therein, andto let your lordship know, that you only — (her majesty'sprincipal secretary of state's letter had expressions in itto the following purport; viz. that if the expedient aforementionedwas not readily and thankfully accepted ofby the aldermen, which was the utmost condescensionthey could hope for from the government, then they wereto be answerable to their queen and country for all theconfusion and inconveniences that might result from theirIRELAND.*"'■ '■ iiou-uonipliance)— will be answerable for the slight thiit willSvblia. thereby be put on her majesty's recommend atiun, and forthe fatal consequences of leaving this city without mathor sheriffs tomorrow : and at the saue time we earnestlyentreat your lordship to take this our necessary applicationinto serious consideration."Signed by 19 persons.The lord mayor put in a petition to the council for'leave to rejoin to the aldermen's reply, and yesterday thacouncil met, and allowed time to rejoin, and they have givenhim to the 26th to put in his rejoinder, and the aldermen lohave a copy of it, and the case to be heard on the 9tb ofSeptember; and all the privy councillors in the kingdomare to attend at that time.While I am speaking of the proceedings of our city, inrelation to the election of magistrates, 1 must inform youwhat eti'ect it has on other corporations; for yesterday I hadc. an account from Colerahie, that because the mayor of thattown would not, at the desire of the aldermen, call a court,and elect two new aldermen and burgesses, in the room ofso many deceased, sixteen of the aldermen met together,and by an act of their own making, disfranchised the mayor,chose a new mayor in his room for the remainder of thisyear, elected two new aldennen, and a burgess, and proceededto make several other acts and orders relating tothe corporation. I give you this account, to let you seewhat influence the proceedings of the city of Dublin have inother corporations, and where these matters will end Godknows. But I think some stop should be put to them bysome smart steps towards humbling the aldermen of Dublin,and then lesser corporations will be afraid of the like proceedingsfor tin; future."■ Kximi:! of a klliT from Mi. l)a«M.n, Soulh«cll MSS.GEORGE I.A statute of the fifth of George I., for the quieting and 1718.establishing of corporations, recites the 13th of Charles II.,and giving a new oath, confirms and indemnifies those whohad not taken the former, which are repealed.Another of the ninth year, relative to the manufacturers 1722.of stuffs and yams in Norwich, provides that all persons in- inhabiting.Inhabiting or living in the city being such manufacturers, oremploying servants in such manufactures, or having any interest,stock, share, or partnership therein, should, upon theirrequest at any court of mayoralty, or assembly of the mayor,sheriff, citizens, and commonalty, be made free, paying one ^'^•and twenty shillings for such admission; and all personswho should be such manufacturers, and living or inhabitingin the town, being foreigners, should be admitted, paying asum not exceeding 5/., and they were all to be sworn. Regulationsare added for the electing and swearing thesheriff, the mayor, and common councilmen.In the 11th of George I. an act was passed for preventing 1724.the inconveniences arising from the want of the due electionof mayors or other chief magistrates of boroughs or cor Corpora-potationsupon the days appointed by charter or visage Usage,for that purpose, and directing in what manner such electionsshould be made. It recites, "that in many cities. Cap. 4.'* boroughs, and towns corporate in England, Wales, and*' Berwick-upon-tweed, the election of the mayor, bailiff, or ,other chief officer, is by charter or ancient usage confinedto a particular day or time, without any provision how toact in case no election is made. And it frequently happensthat certain acts were required to be done at certain timesfor completing such elections, and by the contrivance ordefault of the persons who ought to hold the court or presidein the assembly where such elections ought to be made,or such acts to be done, or by accident, no courts orait€€U1982 STATUTES.George I. « assemblies have been held, or elections made, or such acts1724. " done within the time fixed for that purpose ; in which cases,'^ if elections of such officers could not afterwards be madeor completed, or in consequence of such omission, the coreporation should be dissolved, great mischief might ensue:^* It provides, that where the elections should not be made on'^ the days appointed, or the election should become Void,'' the corporation should not thereby be deemed or taken to** be dissolved or disabled from electing such officers for the'' future ; but if there is no election, they might meet uponthe next day and proceed to the election, and do every actnecessary for completing it, in such manner as was usual ;and in case the officer who ought to preside were absent,'' the nearest in place present was to preside.** And if no such election should be made, or it should** become void, the court of King's Bench might issue a man-damnsto proceed to the election."The third sect, recites, ^' that in certain boroughs and townscorporate, in England, Wales, and Berwick-on-Tweed, the'^ mayor, bailiff, or other chief officer was nominated, elected,Leet. " or sworn, at a court leet, or view of frankpledge or someother court ; and by reason of the contrivance or defaultof the lord or his steward, in not holding the same, orby some accident it hath happened, that no due nomination,election, or swearing of such officers have beenmade. And enacts that the court of King's Bench mightissue a mandamus, and do every other act necessary tobe done."It also imposes penalties upon mayors, for absentingthemselves, and cures former omissions and defaults ;but provides that the act should not make void anycharter, nor make good any election, where judgmentof ouster had been awarded'This statute requires some remarks, as it is the first legislativeact, directly attracting the nature of boroughs and corporations.The statute of Charles IL, relating only to thedisplacing the members, and that of Queen Anne, to theremedies connected with their elections; but the presentSTATUTES. 1983act appears to be founded upon the abuses, which had George I.crept into these institutions. 1724.It speaks of boroughs or corporations, as if there weresome natural or necessary connexion between them ;whereas the fact is notorious, that there are boroughs notincorporated, and corporations which are not boroughs ; andthe whole tenor of the documents which have been quoted,establishes that the former preceded the latter, by many centuries; and that incorporation was only an additional capacity,superinduced upon the original institution of someboroughs, and omitted in others.However strange it may appear, after the precedinghistory has been considered, the courts'*^ have construed thisact as if it were confined to corporations alone— omittingthe substance, by excluding the boroughs from its purview; and adopting the. shadow, or the accidental incidentof the corporations, in its stead.Again, the act in its title and provisions appears to haveassumed, that particular days might be fixed for the elections,by charter or usage.The first is the usual course. Prescription might beanother ground. But usage could not, strictly speaking, fixthe election to a particular day, because it can give no rightor title, it is only evidence to support prescription, or construea charter.It is the more necessary to be precise upon this point,because it is from the doctrine of usage and the variety of Utagc.anomalous proceedings which it has sanctioned, that thegreatest abuses have been introduced.Some cases in the Court of King's Bench, in which, inconsequenceof the corporations having, according to themodem doctrines, neglected to keep up the proper numberof the integral parts of their corporation, or to hold theirelections on the proper days appointed for that purpose,had been held to be thereby dissolved, were the occasionThis statute, and the seventh of Queen Anne, have been held in many cases toapply only to corporations — see Rex v. Saracen and others. 3 Born. 1012; RexV. Williams, 1 Burr. 402 ; S. C. I Black. 93 ; Rex o. Wallace, 5 T. R. 375; Rex v.Richardson, 5 East, 969 ; Rex v. M'Kay. 8 Dow. U Ryl. 393.George " assemblies have been held, or elections made, or such acts1724. " done within the time fixed for that purpose ; in which case,if elections of such officers could not afterwards be madeor completed, or iii consequence of such omission, the corporationshould be dissolved, great mischief might ensue:It provides, that where the elections should not be made on"the days appointed, or the election should become void,the corporation should not thereby be deemed or taken tobe dissolved or disabled from electing such officers for thefuture ; but if there is no election, they might meet uponthe next day and proceed to the election, and do every actnecessary for completing it, in such manner as was usual ;and ia case the officer who ought to preside were absent,the nearest in place present was to preside.And if no such election should be made, or it shouldbecome void, the court of King's Bench might issue a mandamusto proceed to the election."The third sect, recites, " that in certain boroughs and townscorporate, in England, Wales, and Berwick-on-Tweed, themayor, bailiff, or other chief officer was nominated, elected,Lost. " or sworn, at a court heel, or view of frankpledge, or someother court ; and by reason of the contrivance or delinultof the lord or his steward, in not holding the saide, orby some accident it hath happened, that no due nomination,election, or swearing of such officers have beenmade. And enacts that the court of King's Bench mightissue a mandamus, and do every other act necessary tobe done.It also imposes penalties upon mayors, for absentingthemselves, and cures former omissions and defaults;but provides that the act should not make void anycharter, nor make good any election, where judgmentof ouster had been awarded."This statute requires some remarks, as it is the first legislativeact, directly affecting the nature of boroughs and coiportions. The statute of Charles II., relating only totherdisplacing the members, and that of Queen Anne, to theremedies connected with their elections; but the presentSTATUTES. 1983act appears to be founded upon the abuses which had George I.crept into these institutions. 1724.It speaks of boroughs or corporations, as if there weresome natural or necessary connexion between them ;whereas the fact is notorious, that there are boroughs notincorporated, and corporations which are not boroughs ; andthe whole tenor of the documents which have been quoted,establishes that the former preceded the latter, by many centuries; and that incorporation was only an additional capacity,superinduced upon the original institution of someboroughs, and omitted in others.However strange it may appear, after the precedinghistory has been considered, the courts'*^ have construed thisact as if it were confined to corporations alone — omittingthe substance, by excluding the boroughs from its purview; and adopting the shadow, or the accidental incidentof the corporations, in its stead.Again, the act in its title and provisions appears to haveassumed, that particular days might be fixed for the elections,by charter or usage.The first is the usual course. Prescription might beanother ground. But usage could not, strictly speaking, fixthe election to a particular day, because it can give no rightor title, it is only evidence to support prescription, or construea charter.It is the more necessary to be precise upon this point,because it is from the doctrine of usage and the variety of Uiagc.anomalous proceedings which it has sanctioned, that thegreatest abuses have been introduced.Some cases in the Court of King's Bench, in which, inconsequenceof the corporations having, according to themodem doctrines, neglected to keep up the proper numberof the integral parts of their corporation, or to hold theirelections on the proper days appointed for that purpose,had been held to be thereby dissolved, were the occasionThis statute, and the seventh of Queen Anne, have been held in many cases toapply only to corporations — see Rex v. Marten and others, 3 Burr. 1012; RexV. Williams, 1 Burr. 402 ; S. C. 1 Black. 93 ; Rex v. Wallace, 5 T. R. 375 ; Rex v.Richardson, 5 East, 969 ; Rex v. M'Kay. 8 Dow. & Ryl. 393.• genera) description of the suitors at this court; and ihav-fun, the citizens were iu substance, the householders nin the wards, taxable to scot and lot.Tlierc can therefore be no doubt but it was this class «&persons who, as citizens, attended in the wurdmotvs, ns, lotact, they do to the present day.It is true that they were also required to he free, but uponthat qualification observations have already been made; ami,since villainage lias ceased, it ought no loiter to exist as idistinction.The original doctrines as to freedom, were in some degree*connected with the right to trade; and thus there wus, frwBthe earliest times, some affinity between the trading guildand the right to citizenship ; though it was only to a veinlimited extent, and was mither founded upon the puf^iuiHt,that a citizen, being unquestionably free, was entitled totrade, than that a trader was entitled lo he free of the city,which he was not ; unless he was an inhabitant householdpaying scot and lot.The guilds had indeed existed from the earliest time,commencing with the " Brighton guild ;" and otherswere subsequently recognized ae having been dulygranted by the king, whilst some were suppressed as adulterine.*'■ In the reign of King Johns the guild of weavers is expresslymentioned in a charter ; but they were distinct bornthe body of the citizens at lni^e,J who petitioned for theirsuppression.». The trading mysteries and companies which arose out ofthe guilds, were also equally without necessary connexionwith citizenship.It was long after the time of legal memory that anyallusion was made in the charters or documents to liverymen; and therefore they could not have rights by prescription.Indeed, they could noL have had their origin till afterthe sumptuary statutes, which prohibited the giving of liveries,LONDON. 1987for the purpose of curtailing the expences and the power of George I.the lords, by restraining their liveries and retainers.* Andit was from an exception contained in those statutes, infavour of the guilds and fraternities, with their wardens andother officers that they had their origin. They are notmentioned in any of the charters of London, and do notoccur in any of the documents till comparatively speakingmodem times.The articles indeed, in the reign of Edward II., requiredthat the inhabitants to be admitted should be of some tradeor mystery ; but nothing further appears upon that head : andsuck a requisite is not referred to in the legal definitionbefore cited of the citizens ; nor are the liverymen expresslymentioned till long afterwards.The first instance of any reference to the liveries is rather Liveries.to the dress than the persons ; and occurs, not in a charter,but in an order of common council, in the seventh ofEdward IV., at which the commonalty were present, and 1467.which directed, " that no freeman or officer of the city shoulduse the livery of any lord or other grandee, under thepenalty of losing his freedom ; and that thenceforth the** election of mayor should be made by the common council,the masters and wardens of each mystery coming in theirlivery and by other good men for that purpose speciallysummoned. "f An order which certainly has not the effectof increasing the importance of the livery, but seems ratherto disparage them, and is reconcilable with the original electionsby the inhabitant householders ; because the mastersand wardens who were to attend might be also inhabitanthouseholders of the wards, and therefore citizens. Theother persons to be specially summoned for that purposemight be the ancient representatives from the differentwardmotes. If the order had any other meaning than this,the legality of it might be reasonably questioned. Andstill more the legality of the ordinance in the 15th year of 1475.the same reign, in which it was agreed, " that the masters andwardens of the mysteries of the city in their halls, or otherSee before, p. 1044. f Lib. L. fo. 53.6l 21988 Tendon.QvoTte I- " fit and convenient places of the city, associating with themselvesthe honest men of their mysteries, beinff clad in Tharlivery, should meet together at the Guildhall, for the elationof mayor and sheriffs of the city, and thai quiteothers except the good men of the common council ofthe city should be present at the elections"*This ordinance, partly made by members of the mystene&,who had no authority to interpose in the making of bye la we,altogether changed the right of election from the citizens atlarge, who were the householders, and were accustomed tomeet in the different wards in their wardmotes, to the commoncouncil, which appear to have consisted, amongst others,of the masters and wardens of the mysteries, assemblingin their halls — an unjustifiable alteration of the constitutionof the city, and an indication of the manner in which thetrading companies encroached on the municipal rights.There could be no possible ground for supposing that til*masters and wardens of the mysteries, assembled in theirown halls, could have any right to interfere with the governmentof the city, or its officers, either in their election, wotherwise ; and, therefore, there can be no doubt that thiswas another of the usurpations of those bodies.The weavers, in the reign of King John, had been Bap-pressedfor their usurpations upon the citizens ; and in lh«reign of Edward III., an effort had been directly made bythe trading companies to assume to themselves the electionof the deputies or representatives of the wards, instead oftheir selection by the wardmotes. A proceeding, as we haveobserved before, altogether unauthorized by the law or thechartersIt is a striking proof of the difficulty which is experiencedin removing a usurpation once commenced, that this illegalpractice continued, without any considerable resistance, tillthe period of the Commonwealth.In the reign of Queen Elizabeth, :J it has been seen, thatHome attempts were made to restrain the power of makingLONDON. 1989freemen by redemption, which was the great abuse committed George I.by the trading companies. But the regulations then made 1650.did not altogether remove the effect of the former ordinancewhich was not expressly repealed.A committee was appointed to consider this subject,and a report made by them, upon reading and debating theold charters, and ancient records ; which stated, that it appearedby the ancient charters, that the election of the mayorand sheriff was by the commons and citizens — that is, byseveral persons chosen out of the several wards joined withthe common council — a method consistent with the principlesacted upon by other cities and boroughs, when the grandand petit juries occasionally did acts for the whole body ofthe citizens or burgesses — and London being divided intoseveral wards, had several juries, some of whom, as representativesfor the whole ward, went to the common council,which was the aggregate meeting of the persons from therespective wardmotes.It appeal that on the occasion of this discussion, thecompanies also made a petition upon the same subject,many of the citizens being, as might be expected, membersof the companies.Their petition alleged, that the elections had been madein several ways, and with continual alterations, and disturbances.In the reign of Edward III., by the mayor andaldermen, with the most sufficient men of the ward.In the eighth year of the same king, by the " aldermenand most discreet citizens'' In the twentieth year, by themayor and all the aldermen*' and twelve, eight, or six, ofevery ward, according as the ward should be great or small.All of which was consistent with the view before taken ofthe elections, as ordinarily made throughout the country ;and these elections appear to have been by the " com- Commonmon counsel" of all the parties assembled — sometimes describedas the " whole commonalty," and sometimes by othernames. Which imports that they acted, according to thefamiliar meaning of the words, by their common counsel orconsent, and not as a body called the " common council," towhich any peculiar or artificial character could be attributed.1990 London.°*"^g°' - In tile petition, it is said, that in the 50lh year of Edward1690. III., the election was made by a number of the men ofMjitBrie*. '''^ fisheries; but it seems to want proof; and, at aUevents, if that election were so made, many immediately susequent were by the " men of the wards ;" so that the clby the men of the mysteries seems only occasionally to hawbeen exercised, and more frequently snpersed'Hl—aQd therefore,at the most, it amounts only to a disputed usage,cannot be supported ; particularly as the general tenor of thecharters and records, and the principles of the law, would biopposed to it.In the leigh of Edward IV. it is stated, that the tn^sterimagain interposed, which seems probable, from the orderwhich we have before referred.The petition rather strongly asserts, that " a great part seCoBipi- " the government of the city was settled hi the companies'which might be much doubted, and certainly never ought Mhave existed.Ii»ery- It IS also asserted by the liverymen — but considering tac""'■ illegality of the order of the 15th of Edward IV., it is hwdlypossible— that they had for nearly two hundred years togetherenjoyed the right of electing the mayor ami sheriffs ; and isthe prayer they describe themselves as for the most part themost ancient and able citizens of the city, which alone canexplain their interfering at all — for as " citizens," accordingto the tegul definition of them, they would be entitled to interfere;but not as members of the companies or mysteries.These petitions were referred to another committee, andanother petition was presented by the " citizens and inhabitants,"which stated, that by the ancient liberties of the citythe freemen only could vote in the choice ; and complain ofthe liverymen having interfered in such elections; and praythat the representatives of the freemen, chosen by everyward, might be authorized to choose the supreme officers.The respective petitioners were directed to be heard bycounsel, and after hearing them the following order wasmade :* —itjii. " Whereas by the ancient charters ■zTaated and confirmed• 41h Nov. Iii. .Tor. ib. fol. liS b.LONDON. 1991ititti4ti€€ito this city, the election of the mayor, sheriffs, and other George I.officers ought to be by the citizens or commonalty there 1651.of, whereby it is evident that the whole commonalty, Citizens.either personally (if without confusion it might be done),or by their representatives chosen by them for that purpose,were to have a vote in all such elections ; but oflater times the masters, wardens, and liveries of the several Liveries,companies of this city, have used, and taken upon them(with the exclusion of all other citizens), to make the saidelections ; which practice of theirs seems to be groundedupon an act of common council, made the 23rd day of September,in the seventh year of King Edward IV. ; before'* which time the same elections had been made by a certainnumber of persons chosen out of every ward for that purepose, as appeareth by an act, or order of the common hall,made in the 20th year of King Edward III., whereby (to** avoid inconveniences happened before that time in generalassemblies of the citizens) that method of elections by representativeswas appointed ; Now, forasmuch as diverscompanies of the citizens of this city have no liveries atall, and so have no manner of vote in the elections by*' liveries; and for that, by the constitution of most of theother companies, the liveries thereof are not chosen by thewhole brotherhood but by a few — as, namely, the wardensand assistants only ; and thereby the greatest part of thecitizens, members of those companies, are also excluded** from having any vote, either in person or representation,** in the elections before-mentioned ; and so that great privilegeof choosing their mayor, sheriffs, and other officers, iswholly taken away from them, to their great grief, occa-^* sinning thereby their often complaints : For remedy whereof,and to the intent the ancient charters of this city, touchingelections, might be pursued and kept inviolable ; be itenacted and ordained, that from thenceforth the election ofthe mayor, sheriffs, burgesses for Parliament, and all officersof and belonging to the city, formerly used to bechosen in a common hall, should be made in the commonhall of the city, at such times as had been formerly usedtitttiutttttttttttttiittt992 LONDON.ieotge I, " ill that blair, and by such persons, and in such muuuerjiii. " as there-iiiider mentioned ; that is to say, that the aldermen and common councilmen of every ward of the atfand the like number of other honest men of each ward, bT]be chosen yearly for that purpose, in tie wardmote to beheldby the inhabitants of the ward, should be representativesof all the inhabitants of each wait, as touching"every such election, and should forever thereafter be theonly electors in every such election in the comnioD hall,and should be, from time to time, returned by the waitsinquests of every ward, respectively, in their presentationsas representatives and electors, for, and ou behalfof the inhabitants of the same wards ; and should be dulysummoned to the common hall, when any election was to bemade there by the lord mayor of the city, for the timebeii^, or his officer thereunto appointed : and that everyelection of any of the officers aforesaid, which shouldbe made by the aldermen, common council, and the otherpersons to be chosen in every ward for that purpose, orby the major part of them, assembled in the commonhall, should be good and effectual to all intents and purposes,as if the same had been made by all the citizens ofthis city, in their own persons ; and that no person or persons,save only the electors thereby appointed, should be atany time thereafter admitted unto, or have any vote in anythe elections aforesaid : And it was further enacted andordained, that all former acts, orders, and determinations,theretofore made by the court of conmion council, or by thecitizens of this city, in any court or meeting, for, or touchingthe election of any the officers aforesaid, should be, andwere thereby repealed, and made null and void, to all in-tells and purposes."liBagK- It does not distinctly appear what was the usage immediatelyafter the making of this order; and considering thatthe Restoration followed a few years afterwards, when allthe corporations were re-modelled under the corporation act;and considering also the violent proceedings in the reigns ofCharles II. and James H., the usage could nut, under anyLONDON. 1993circumstances, be relied upon ; and as it illegally superseded George I.the ancient constitution of the city, it may be assumed tohave been set aside, and the ancient course restored by thestatutes of William III.Had the order in the 16th of Edward IV., produced thesubsequent usage which is attributed to it, it is singular thatno trace of the interposition of the liverymen is to be metwith in subsequent charters ; and in concluding the observationswhich should precede the statute of George I., it mayberemarked, that there seems hardly any usurpation in thehistory of our municipal institutions which has less supportof legal principle or warrant, or less foundation in charter orgrant of any kind, than the claim set up by the liverymen ofLondon to interpose in the municipal elections.The guilds — mysteries — and trading companies — doubtlesshave done, and still are capable of doing, essentialservices to trade and commerce; and abundant reasonsmight be urged for supporting them in their wealth — influence— and privileges ; but their interference should besolely confined to trade and commerce, and they should notbe allowed to interpose in the municipal government.The statute of George I. is intituled " an act for regulating 1724.the elections in the city of London, and for preserving the cap 18.peace, good order, and government of the city."It was preceded by much discussion ; and petitions werepresented both in support of it and against it. One of themstated, that " at the elections by the liverymen numbers ofpeople who had no right to vote, broke in with noise andviolence upon the legal electors, and polled in their own"and borrowed names, and personated absent electors:" —Complaints necessarily arising out of an election to be madeby such extensive bodies as the liverymen of differentcompanies, not known to each other: but which wouldnot be likely to occur, if the elections were by the inhabitanthouseholders of the different wards, sworn and enrolled atthe ward-mote or by their representatives, the inquest jurymen,or other selected persons.With respect to the elections in the wards, other grievancesUMrRc I. were suggested in the petition, some of which arose from1724. the obsolete qualifications of" birth and service ; and theBirth. exercise of the power of admission by redemption, by whichmany inhabitant householders of proper station in societywere excluded from being; freemen, so that persons calledUnfixed freemen," who contributed to the charges of the wards,complained that they had not a right to vote in the electionof the ward officers; to which the freemen answered, thatthe " freemen" would not entitle themselves by purchasingtheir freedom, though they carried on considerable branchesof commerce in the city, and yet were exempt from all theoffices therein. And reference was made to those who paidSei. church and poor, which was contended to be paying their scot.Upon these petitions being presented to the House to bringin a bill, it was carried by a majority of 67 ; there being 1 \Hfor the bill, and 49 against it.Some of the aldermen petitioned against the bill, allegingit to be destructive of their rights and privileges, to whichthe citizens were, by ancient charters, entitled.Another petition was presented by the mayor, and partof the aldermen, in favour of the bill.An order was made that the clerks of the several liverycompanies should lay before the House the particular grantsor constitutions by which they were created, with the numbersof their liverymen. And the returns were accordinglymade by the Goldsmiths, Stationers, Scriveners, Bakers,Tallowchandlers, Glaziers, Coachmakers, Haberdashers,Merchant tail ore, Clothworkera, Salters, Apothecaries, Glass-sellers,Cooks, Fletchers, Painters, Signers, Grocers, Drapers,Waxchandlers, Turners, Joiners, Skinners, Vintners, Borderersand Pewterers, Fishmongers, Armourers and Bniziers,Brewers, Barbers and Surgeons, Landholders, Poulterer, Musicians,Pattenniakers, Saddlers, Carriers, Leather-sellers,Blacksmiths, Corners, Upholders, Butchers, Farriers, Glovers,Needlemakers, Fruiterers, Cutlers, Dyers, Tyler andBricklayers, Weavers, C(X>pers, Ironmonger, Plumbers,Distilleries, Frame work-knitters. Masons, Carpenters, Plasterers,Cordwainers, Founders, Girdles, Bowers.Statutes-LONDON. 1996It should be observed, that many of these companies have George l>been, comparatively speaking, of modem creation ;* as they 1724.have gradually increased in number, and therefore they cannothave any claim to prescriptive privileges. The presentnumber is said to be 75, and the number of the liverymen12,080. In the register for 1833, the number of liverymenwere 9,616 — of inhabitant householders 8,790. In 1834,the number of liverymen were 9,272, and inhabitant householders9,016, being a decrease from the whole number of18 from the preceding year : the householders having increased226, and the liverymen decreased 244.Counsel and witnesses were heard, and many records produced;after which a debate took place upon the bill;and in the publications of that date it is said, *' that thebill created a gi'eat ferment among the citizens." Theywere invited by public notices to assemble at Guildhall toconsider it. The lord mayor and aldermen, as it is saidin the published debates, " resenting this attempt upon theirauthority, ordered the gates of the Guildhall to be shutas soon as the business of the common council, whichwas then called, was finished. And having acquainted thegovernment with what had passed, the guards were thereupondoubled at St. James's Palace, Leicester House, andSomerset House ; and by those precautions (as it is said),all things were kept quiet ; and a printed paper was dis*perse for the satisfaction of the citizens, and to warnthem against the inferences which might be drawn againstthem, if they were precipitated into any acts of disorder, asat the elections, which the bill was introduced to prevent."The discussions upon the bill continued in the House ofCommons, from the 16th of December, 1724, till the following19th of March. It was at last passed by a majority of66 : the number for it being 139, and against it 83.In the House of Lords, a petition was presented by theI'iie foHowiog list lias been taken from a report recently published by order ofthe common council of London : —No. of companies. No. of liverymen.A.D. 1501 . - 51 - - 1,458A.D. 1725 . - m - - 8.614A.D. 1832 - . 75 . - 12,080uterine, and commons, iii common council usseni-I7M, bled, against parts of the bill which they described asprejudicial and inconvenient ; destroying the former qualificationsof voters in the wardmote ; and substituting in lieuof it, new, complicated and uncertain qualifications.On the other hand, the major part of the aldermen petitionedin favour of the bill. It long remained in committee,and it was afterwards proposed to take the opinion of thejudges — " whether the bill repealed any of the prescriptionsprivileges, customs, or liberties, restored to the citizensby the act of King William," and the motion passed inthe negative.Two protests were presented, one against the decision notto refer to the judges, upon the ground, that it tight interferewith the rights confirmed by that statute : and the otheragainst the general principle of the bill. Amongst the reasonsagainst the bill, it was asserted, " that it created anew constitution in several particulars, and waB notframed upon the ancient rights, proved or pretended to ordisputed on either side ; but was a new model without doeregard to the antecedent rights, as claimed by either side,and was a precedent of the most dangerous consequenceto all the cities and corporations of the kingdom." It concludedby expressing an opinion, that " the petition of manythousand freemen of the city against the bill, ought to be offar greater weight than the petition of 15 aldermen for it."The bill received the royal assent, and the following isan extract of the preamble.That of late years great controversies had arisen in thecity of London, at the elections of citizens to serve in Paflianicnt, and of mayors, aldermen, sheriffs, and other officersof the city, and tJiitt many persons having no right of rating,had iinlau-fuUy intruded themselves into the ussemblif of thecitizens, and given votes in violation of their privileges."That many wealthy persons not free of the city, didinhabit and carry on the trade of merchandise, and otheremployments within the city, and did refuse to become freemen,by reason of an ancient custom, restraiiiiii<; the freemenfrom disposing of their personal estates by will.Statutes-LONDON. 1997That great dissensions had arisen between the aldermen Georgeand commons, of the common council, concerning the making 1724.ordinances in common council ; which if not determined,might occasion great obstructions to the public business ofthe city.For remedy thereof, it was enacted, that in parliamentary Eleciioiw.elections, and those of mayors, sheriffs, chamberlains, bridge-masters,&c., and other officers, to be chosen by the livery-meritand upon all elections of aldermen and common councilmenat the wardmotes ; if a poll should be demanded, the Poll,presiding officers should appoint a proper number of clerksto take the poll. And an oath was to be taken in allelections by the liverymen, that they were freemen and Uvery-liverymen, and had been so for 12 months, and in theelections of aldermen or common councilmen, the voterwas to swear that he was ^freeman and a householder**Directions are also given for taking the poll : that of the PoU.liverymen being required to finish within seven days ; andthe wardmotes within three.The sixth section requires, that the mayor should issue g^^ g^his precept requiring the masters and wardens of the livery Livery-companiesto return two lists of the liverymen within threedays, one of which was to be delivered to the candidates.The seventh section relates to the election of aldermen and Sec 7.common councilmen, for the different wards, which is declared belong to the freemen paying scot, as mentioned in the Scot andact ; and bearing lot when required in their several wards.The houses of the householders were to be of the value of Sec. 8.lOZ. a-year at the least ; and the voters are to be the soleoccupiers, having been actually in possession for twelvecalendar months.The scot is defined to be the church, poor, scavenger, or Sec. 9.plans, and watch and ward rates : and such other annualrates as the citizens of London inhabiting there, should beliable to pay : except annual aids granted by Parliament.And any householders, who paid all those rates, or 30*. a-year to all or some of them, were to be taken as personspaying scot. Partners in trade were allowed to vote, paying Sec. 10.I 1008 STATUTES.-tA>NDON.^"^*'' '■ their scot ; the house being oftlie yearly value of as many sumsI7M. of 10/. a-year, computed together, as there were partners.Sec. II. That two inhabiting the same house, not being partners,each paying scot, and severally paying 10/. per annum fortile house they inhabited, might vote.Bee. 12. A clause is added, giving the right of voting to thosewho were exempted by act of Parliament, charter, or writof privilege from the payment of scot and lot.Sec. 13. Provisions are also made for appeals against the aasese-rents.Sec. u. By the 14th section, the persons excluded from votingI are all liverymen wiio had not been upon the livery for thespace of 12 calendar months before the election, and hadnot paid their respective livery fines, or had received themback; and all warden who had within two years beforeI the election been discharged from paying their meo andtaxes, or received alms.Sec, IS. The 15th section enacts, with the intent that no ordinanceI shoidd be passed in common count without the consent of1 the representative bodif, according to the ancient constitutionof the wane— that no act should pass without the assent ofthe mayor, aldermen, and commons.Sec. 16. An exception is made as to the elections of common Serjeant,town clerk judges of the sheriffs'court, coroner, &c., whoare to be appointed by the mayor, aldermen, and commons.Sec. IT. Persons becoming free of the city after the first of June,1725, are enabled to dispose of their penal estate as theythink fit ; provided, that if any freeman should so bequeath6«c. 18. his property by will, or die intestate— his property shouldbe distributed according to the custom of London.Sec. 19. And in the 19th section it was enacted, that the followingwords should be omitted from the freeman's oath : — " Yeshall know no foreigner to buy or sell any merchandisewith any other foreigner within the city, &c." And likewise," Ye shall lake no apprentice." The words immediatelyfollowing shall also be omitted, that is to say — " hut ifhe be free born, that is to sais, ho bondman's son, nor ther/iild of any alien," &c &c.men.Statutes-LONDON. 1999In the recital of this act, it is stated, that " many persons George I.having no right of voting, had unlawfully intruded them 1724.selves into the assembly of the citizens," — which could not tioM.*"be said with more truth of any class than the liverymen. Liveryalso recites the refusal of many wealthy persons tobecome free ; which it will be remembered is contrary to theancient principles of the constitution. They obliged everyman who was of free condition to be enrolled and swam.The evil therefore here complained of, was one which theprinciples of the common law, had they been regarded,would have prevented.The third complaint, of the dissensions which had arisenrespecting the making of bye-laws, would also have beenprevented if either of the ancient principles of the law, or theearly practice of the city had been regarded.The first enacting clause, relates to the taking of the poll inthe elections of members to Parliament ; and some city officers: in none of which is it possible, according to the spiritand intention of the charters, and the nature of the ancientconstitution of the city of London, that the liverymen couldhave had any right of interposing: and yet without anyreason or evidence assigned for it, the liverymen are assumedto have the right of voting.It has been already shown, how clear and distinct the Livery-usagewas against the right, till the 60th year of EdwardIII.; when an attempt was made to introduce persons chosenfrom the mysteries, which was sanctioned by the interferenceof the king ; but in the same year, and from that time till thereign of Edward IV., the elections were by persons chosenout of the wards. In the ninth of Richard II., the men of themysteries*' were expressly excluded ; after which, theusage continued in the same manner, till the seventh ofEdward IV. The illegality of the order made by themselvesat that period, to give them a pretence of interposition, hasbeen already shown. From that time till 1650, their claimwas, at the best, questionable and uncertain. At that periodtheir pretensions were negatived, by the clear and expressordinance already quoted.men.Giorit I. If they enjoyed any power of interposing from that ()eriixl,M. il iiiHy fairly be referred to the Usurpations of the Liince ofCharles II. and James II. : — and subsequently, in all probability,to the effect produced by the publication of Dr.Brady.It therefore appears surprising that the legislature shouldhave 80 readily assumed that the liverymen possessed thisright; and it is now difficult to account for it. The corksituation of the city appears, in the course of the argumentsui^ed upon that occasion, to have been involved in muchmystery and confusion.It must therefore ever be regretted, that the Legislatureshould have sanctioned so great an innovation as this changeof an ancient municipal institution: particularly with referenceto so important a place as the metropolis, where thealteration might serve as a precedent for others.The effect of the change was to introduce non-residentfreemen ; for as they were only required to be freemen, andnot householders — they might reside at any distance : whichwas a just subject of complaint by some of the petitionersagainst the bill.The oath of the liveryman, that he had been so for a year,was in analogy to the common law.7. The provisions relative to the elections of aldermen and^ common councilmen in the different wards require, in thepure spirit of the ancient law, that they shall be by thefreemen, being householders paying scot and bearing lot.Removed, at the present times, from the feelings and prejudiceswhich probably guided those who adopted the provisionsof this act, it is impossible to conceive how, with soplain a description of the real citizens of London — so consistentwith the ancient gene-al law — the particular usagesof that city — and the decided cases upon the point — thelegislature could, so unnecessarily and wantonly, havesanctioned the introduction of another class of voters: — thewardsmcn being a class so easily ascertained, and soidentified with the city : — while, on the contrary, the liverymien depended upon the capricious selection of the wardensStatutes-LONDON. 2001and masters of the companies, and they might be altogether George I.foreign to the city and unconnected with it. 1724.It must not be overlooked, that in the clause of this act Sec. 19.relative to the oaths, the most convincing confirmation is tobe found of the position, that the right by apprenticeship was Apprentices.connected with villeinage and that such right ought now vicinage.to cease. For in that part of the oath which relates toapprentices, it is directed, that for the future, the followingwords should be omitted : " If he be free born, that ii tosay, no bondman's son'' From which it appears, that thedistinction originally was between those who were free, orbond born ; and being no longer necessary, the Legislaturedirected it to be omitted from the oath. But in a passagein the Liber Albus, as late as the reign of Queen Anne, theliberos inhabitantes " are spoken of; and they were clearly y^^^*the ancient liberi homines of the common law. That termwas also used in Bristol ^& descriptive of the jurors, as lateas the sixth of George IL*After this act, it is useless to inquire further into the constitutionof London. This legislative stamp placed upon theprior usurpations effectually confirmed them, and preventedfurther discussion as to their legality.The Reform Act has still further established the abuse,and provisions are made in it for making lists of the twosupposed classes of citizens the liverymen and the freemen;it has also given full effect to the mischief of non-residentliverymen, to the extent at least, of seven miles round thecity.Before closing the extracts as to London, the ancient pre Ward-keptto the alderman of the ward to hold his wardmote,should be noted. It speaks of the jury as being for the Seel,whole year — provides for the appearance of all who were Sec. 3.required to attend at the wardmote — directs the watching Sec. 4.and lighting of the wards, and that elections should bemade of the common councilmen, constables, scavengers. Sec. 5.beadles, and rakers.Also that a roll should be kept of the names, shames,• See 2 Strange, 941, Ball v. Knight.6 MGeorge I. dwelling places, professions and trades, of all persons circlingwithin the ward, and within what constables' precinctsthey dwell; than which a better, and at the same time amore simple mode ol' enrolling the householders within theward cannot be devised — the whole being placed under thesuperintendence of the constables.Sei:. 8. The next section requires the constable to certify thename, minime, dwelling place, profession and trade, ofweryperson tt/io shall newly come to dwell within the precinct,whereby the roll might be kept perfect, and the conslabk itHoU. for that purpose to make and keep) a perfect roll. Pointingout most distinctly the simple method by which the list ofthe citizens from time to time might be correctly perfected,from the returns made by the constable.AH indulgent are directed, according to the ancient law,to give notice to the constable of every person who shalllodge or sojourn in his house more than two days, beforethe third day after his coming. Which the reader will rememberis a provision recognized by all the early text scionupon the law,Time constable is also directed to give the same notice toH"t«e- the alilciman of the ward, and householders are prohibitedfrom lodging suspected persons, or those of evil fame.Sec. 10. The 10th section requires every constable, once in themonth at the furthest, and oftener if need require, to makesearch and inquiry what persons be newly come into his precinct,to dwell, sojourn, or lodge.Sec. 11. The 11th section states, that of late there was more resortto the city of persons evil affected in religion, or otherwise,than in former times; and therefore directs diligent inquiryif any persons be received to direll or abide within the ward,Ffnnk- that is not pat under frankpledge, as he ought to be by thecustom of the city; and whether any person hath continuedin the ward for one year, being above the age of 12 years, andnot sworn to be faithful and loyal to the king, in such sortas by the law and custom of the city he ought fo be,Sec. 12. The beadles are to be assistant for this purpose ; stocks, &c.are to he provided ; as well as engines, &c, for the preventionLONDON. 2003of fires : — the streets are to be kept clean : — hunters of ale George I.and beer are to find sureties : — the measures are regulated : —aliens are prohibited from holding offices : — and there arealso provisions against vagrants and for the selection of thejuries: — and all of them are directed to be given in charge tothe wardmote inquest.These articles are so directly connected with the commonlaw, that they require no additional comment or illustration.CHARTERS.The only charters granted by George I., which are enrolledat the Rolls Chapel, are one in 1722, 9 George I. to ; and another in 1724, 11 George I., to2%verton.The latter has been already given.* The former grants to Henley.the mayor, aldermen, portreeves and burgesses, power toelect a high steward, to be of the rank of a baron or knight ;and that the government of the town should be confided tothe mayor, 10 aldermen, two bridgemen, 16 burgesses, arecorder, town clerk, &c.PARLIAMENTARY CASES.As to the parliamentary decisions in this reign, it will be 1715.only necessary to observe, that in Westburyjf Horsham,^and BeerahtoTij^ the same effects followed which have been 1721.noted before, from substituting the freehold owner of theburgage, for the actual occupier.In Reading although the freemen of the corporation had 1716.before acted as burgesses, together with the inhabitants, thelatter aid were declared to be entitled to vote as burgesses :a decision correct indeed in substance, though confusedin form ; because the declaration should have been againstthe right of the non-residents to be burgesses; and thatthe inhabitant householders paying scot and bearing lot, andsworn and enrolled at the court leet, should be considered asthe burgesses.• See before, p. 1587. t 18 Journ. 154. t 18 Journ. 172.§ 19 Journ. 579. |! 18 Journ. 453.() M 2!■ In Litchfield* the freemen were required to be enrolled,and to pny scot and lot.In Dorchester tlitr Inhabitants were properly required lo-paytil the diurrh rate, lie well as to the poor, that being ftpart of the sent of the bi)roui>;h. And the same was decided 'as to Warunck.\In CalTte,^ the right was most properly declared to lee mthe " indent burgesses :" although that d etc rmi cation viassubsequently perverted to sanction a strange usurpation, bya small exclusive number of persons, not adnntlcd into anycorporation, but mom at the court leet of tuiotlier maux',14 miles distant. But tn this place we shall have occasionto refer hereafter.Besides the above decisions, there were others in wbtdlthe inhabitant householders paying scot and lot, were, ineffect, decided to be the hnri/exurji, although the boroughswere inrorp orated.LAUNCESTON.Petition were presented against the return for Lma-weston by the candidates, and the major part of t/tr inhabitantswithin the borough ; the hitter stated, thut the Tiijhlof election was in the freemen, and those who had servedlegal apprenticeships with freemen of the borough, and noneothers.The report stated, that the petitioners' counsel insisted, thatthe borough was first incorporated in the time of Philip andMary; and that the right of election was founded on thatcharter ;^ which incorporated the mayor and eiiiht aldermen,(all described as inhabitants;) and it gave them power'. to admit inhabitants to be professes or freemen ; which wen"synonymous terms in the charter. They also contended, thatthe right of election was in the mayor, aldermen, and freemen,being inhabitants at the time they were made free, and nolreceiving pay of the parish.Launceston. 2005The sitting member's counsel insisted, that it was an an ^«o'8e !•cent borough, and before their charter sent members to Partial 1723.ment time out of mind ; that the charter confirmed all their n^'^^^.ancient rights and privileges, but neither did nor could alterthe right of election,* which was in the mayor, aldermen andfreemen, sworn before the mayor and aldermen, or the majorpart of them, whether such freemen were inhabitants or notat the time of admission.That the charter of Philip and Mary, granted that the Charier.borough should, for the future, for ever be a free borough;and incorporated the burgesses thereof, by the name of " themayor and commonalty :'* and all their ancient rights,customs, and privileges were confirmed, except their electionof portreeves, who were abolished.That the mayor, commonalty, and their successors, mightadmit such and as many of the most discreet men of theinhabitants to be burgesses and freemen of the borough, asto them should seem proper; with a power to remove anyfreemen or inhabitants guilty of offences within the borough.And that the mayor and commonalty might elect twoburgesses to Parliament.They also insisted, that the prescriptive right was evident,from the whole tenor of the charter, which began withrecitals by inspeximus, of no less than eight ancient charters,seven of which were granted by fonder kings, viz. EdwardVI., Henry VIII., Henry VII., Edward IV., Henry V.,Henry IV., Richard II., and Richard, Earl of Cornwall;all which charters, and the liberties and customs containedtherein, and all ancient privileges and immunities, whetherby grant, custom, or prescription, were confirmed, exceptthe election of portreeve.They also produced returns of the first, second, and third ofPhilip and Mary, by the mayor and burgesses ; of the 26thand 30th of Elizabeth, by the mayor and other burgesses ;and of the 16th of Charles I., by the mayor and freeburgesses.They also offered to prove that foreign burgesses had joined ,^o'^«»?«•^ ' J i' if J burgesses,• See before, Glanville.2006 Launceston.C'"^' ' ■ in returns Ui Parliament, ainee the charter of Philip andMary ; which the petitioners' counsel admitted to have beendone in and since the reign of King James II. But iiiftistfl^ithat the foreign burgesses had no right, and thatcharier of Philip and Mary mu the first charter of incarcerationof the borough, and the only one under which thaiburgesses acted; and observed that all preceding grants,charters of eouhrniatiou of privileges, were none of tlcharters of creation or incorporation. The counsel for pitt.Bitting members called witnesses, who said they knew, in oDelections, for 50 years past, the out-freemen voted, and wheneverobjected to ; though they did not live in* the corporationat the time they were made free.Evidence of reputation was also given, that ouZ-inr-gesses had voted, and were always allowed to be as goodvotes as the in-burgesses, and enjoyed the same privileges;and the out-burgesses were never denied voting, in thememory of man : and particularly the agent for Sir WilliamGendarmes, in his election in the year 1714, insisted on theright of the out-burgesses to vote, but owned he was notat the poll.In answer to which it was proved on the other side, thatat Sir W. Gendarmes' election. Sir W. objected to the oat-burgesses; that he took the poll, and marked the out-burgessesas they came up, but did not take down any of them uponSir W.'s poll, but said, he could not tell whether they weretaken or not by the town clerk, who took the poll for themayor.The committee resolved, that the right was in the mayor,aldermen, and freemen, being inhabitants at the time thetfwere made free, and not receiving pay of the parish.Seventeen of the voters for the sitting members wereobjected to, us not being inhabitants at the time keg veremade free; and twelve were admitted to be such: one wasobjected to as a sojourner, and not an inhabitant.To prove a right to the freedom by servitude, it was shownLAUNCESTON. 2007that there had been a mandamus in 1684, to admit a person George I.as freeman, who had served a seven years' apprenticeship, Manda-andtherefore the corporation, after advising together, admittedhim ; and it was also proved, that after that time nonewere denied, till of late the corporation have taken upon themselvesto refuse all but their own party, and to swear thosethey admitted, never to be against the mayor and aldermen.It was also proved, that there was never any refusal ofsuch freemen till the late difference about members of ParUament;and Pearce said, upon an election, 24 years since,the mayor admitted to freedom persons that would promiseto vote as the corporation would have them, and refused allothers.And it was proved that one Tingcombe had often demandedhis freedom of the corporation, and was alwaysrefused, because he was not of the right party, and for noother reason ; for he produced his indenture, and they allknew of his service.That it had been usual for the grand jury to present per- Grandsons,who had served seven years' apprenticeship, for nottaking up their freedom ; and upon such presentment theywere admitted, or amerced for their refusal.The sitting member's counsel denied, that servitude gavea right to freedom in this corporation, other than for exerciseof trade, and enjoyment of particular liberties and immunities,but not to vote for members of Parliament, which dependedupon the charter, as before stated ; and insisted, by the charterand constitution of the borough, the admission of freemenis perfectly discretionary in the rnayor and aldermen, whomay admit or refuse, as they please.The petitioners' counsel agreed, the mayor and aldermenlead a discretionary power to admit inhabitants who werenot entitled ; but denied they could exclude such as had aright, by serving apprenticeships.On the part of the sitting member, witnesses werecalled to show, that the consent of the mayor, and majorityof the aldermen, was necessary to admission to freedom ; andthat there was no right acquired by servitude, or otherwise.- tier Hiiy wHyii to tpiiii freedom, but by consent of the corporation.Evidence was also given to show, that the time who wen-objectedto, as not being inhabitants at the time they weremade free, in point of fact Used within the borough.For the petitioner it was justly insisted, that in admittingfreemen, the mayor acted not judicially, but minutttruUtg.It iii impossible not to observe from the above evidence,which was laid before the committee, that at that time, andfrom the reign of Charles 11., the period at which such proceedingswere openly sanctioned by the crown, that thecorporation had persevered in a long system of violenceand usurpation. ITills case affords another instance of the introduction of inott'Tesidrnt freejtien, after the interference of James II. withthe corporations ; as well as the mischiefs resulting from thecorporation being allowed to exercise their own will iu theiidinission of the freemen, Instead of their being presented bythe grand jury at the cool Ice, which appears to have beenUie ancient practice of the borough, in the same manner as itwas ill East and West Look ; and from the entry it is evident,that persons who were (qualified to be burgesses were presentedby the ;«ry if they did not take up their freedom,as in the former cases of Yarmouth, Ipswich, and Lynn.However, the discretionary power of the mayor and aldersmen to admit or refuse as they pleased, was peremptorilyinsisted upon on the one side, and conceded on the other asto persons who were not entitled.The real grounds and nature of the discretion which themayor and aldermen possessed, have been before so fullystated, that it is unnecessary here to repeat them.In the seventh of Geoi^e 11., upon another report touchingan election for this borough, the committee resolved, "thatthe aldermen of the borough ought to be elected out of thelegal freemen of the borough only." And the resolutionstated above, of 1723, being then read as the last determinationunder the statute, no further inquiry could arise asto the bui;;e>;^cs of thi'* jihtcc.HONITON. 2009George I.HONITON.In the 10th year of George I. there was a decision re- 1724.speaking the borough of Honiton, to which we have beforereferred,* by which that class of voters called " potwallers"were in effect declared to be the burgesses.This absurd and anomalous right demands a few remarksas to this borough and its burgesses.We have seen that it was not described as a borough inDomesday, nor does it appear when it was created. It,however, returned members to Parliament in the 28th of 1299.Edward I., (which is the first mention of it as a borough,) andalso in the fourth of Edward II. It afterwards ceased until1640, when it was restored ; Mr. Maynard having reportedfrom the committee of privileges, "That in the 28th ofEdward I. the town of Honiton did send two burgesses toParliament. It further appeared, as a concurrent proof, thatthis town, being still a borough, did pay the charge ofborough towns; tenths, and not fifteenths."In 1701, upon a petition of Sir Rowland Gwyn against SirWalter Yonge, the right of election was agreed to be " in thepotwallers not receiving alms."The parliamentary rights of this borough came under discussionin 1710, in consequence of a petition being presentedfrom the potwallers and inhabitants, stating, that the right ofparliamentary election had ever been in all the householders 1726.inhabiting within the borough, who were commonly calledpotwallers. That at the last election, the port reeve polled potwaiien*.all such potwallers; without making any distinction in thepoll book, who paid scot and lot and who not : nor was anyobjection then made to the potwallers^ right. But the porecontrary to all returns before made, had returned SirWilliam Drake and Mr. Sheppard, as chosen by those payingscot and lot; and Sir William Drake and Sir WalterYonge, as chosen by the populace.To prove the right of those paying scot and lot, five per- Scot andsons stated, that tidy had known the borough 30, 40, and• Sec before, p. 165.'9010 HO»noN.Veoret I. 50 years : that at one elfctioii, 40 years since, the potwaUenwere refused, and none but scot and lut voted then : that Uall elections liiuce, the potwallere have claimed a right tovote : tint, at an election in 1679, upon a report being spread,that they would be refused, they pulled down the place builtto take the poll in, and the balcony of the house to whitthe poll was adjourned : that since that time they have beenreadmitted for peace sake, but the returns were made by the\ Hot and lot men only ; and that they had been toM by severalancient men of the borough, who are now dead, that theright of election was in the scot and lot men only.To prove the right in the potwallers, the returns of 1661,1079, 1680, 1G88, and 1705, were produced; and seven ofthose who signed the returns were potwallers — that pot-waltersvoted in 1 661, and in all elections since, and were notWiicii excepted to, if they did not receive alms — performed watfiK*" *"' " and ward — and served the town offices.The Journal of 1701 was produced, for the purpose of provingthat the right had at that period been agreed to be iii thapotwallers not receiving alms. Upon which evidence the 'Riehi. committee resolved, " that the right was in the inhabitantsof the borough paying scot and lot, and in the pott callers notreceiving alms."Amendments were subsequently proposed to leave out thewords — " and in the potwallers not receiving alms," andthereto add the word, " only," which was agreed to, and theresolution and amendments were approved of by the House.1724. In 1724, the right again became a subject of controversy,it being argued, that Honiton was a borough by prescription(which might be doubted), and had, time out of mind, sentmembers to Parliament (which was certainly untrue).Peiiiionm. Tie petitioners insisted, that all the inhabitants potwallers,that is every inluibitnnt in the borough who hud a family andboiled (I pot there, had a right of voting in elections to Parliament.*TJiis was denied by the other side, who insisted, that thoseonly IdkI tiu' ri'^ht who paid scot and lot within the borough.• Sec bufoic, observations on staunton iiiiij TttBuny, p. 1226.uiiHONITON. 2011To prove the petitioners' case, two persons were called, one George ^'of whom spoke for 24 years, the other for 40, during which 1724.period, until 1711, potwallers were constantly admitted to ^oivizX-1619 •vote, and had never been objected to unless they receivedalms. That it had always been understood in the borough,that the potwallers had a right to vote equally with the restof the inhabitants, whether they paid scot and lot or not, andused to sign the returns.The Journal of 1701 was also produced. I70i.Against which evidence the Journal of the third of Fe 1710.february, 1710, was read, determining the right " to be in theinhabitants paying scot and lot only."Upon which the committee resolved, " that the right was Right,in the inhabitants housekeepers within the borough, commonlycalled potwallers, not receiving alms :" to which theHouse agreed.CASES.A few legal authorities will be necessary to complete theextracts for this reign, particularly some relative to the illegalclaims of the non-residents to be burgesses. ^f^'^ , ° , residents.The first relates to the important question of the propergrounds upon which an officer or burgess might be removed.A mandamus was issued to the mayor and common count 17*21.cil of the borough of Carlisle to restore one John Simpson Carlisle.to the office of a capital burgess of the borough.They return the charter of incorporation, with a power tothe mayor and aldermen to remove any capital bui^ess forany misdemeanor ; and then set forth an amotion by them forbribery at an election of the mayor.*The chief justice and Powys held, that there ought to havebeen a previous conviction.But Eyre and Fortescue, justices, said, that this offence,being plainly against his duty and oath of a burgess, the corporationmight remove him without conviction.• Rex V. Mayor and Aldermen of Carlisle; Fort. 203; 9 Co. 99; Earth. 173;Lord Uaym. 1283 ; I Burr. 339 ; 2 Burr. 723 ; 4 Burr. 1999.CASKS.— CARLISLE.Add ile all agreed thai a bui^esa may lie reimivei] fur anscience for which no indictment will lie.Chief-justice — " If a burgess be convicted upon au indictmentfur an offence at onion law, this court may order,•' iLH piirt of the punishment, that he be disfranchised"*But Eyre and ^or(«cue, justices, denied it.Not only should bribery be a ground of amotion from anyofEcG, but it should also be a total ground of disqualificationfor all purposes. For till this offence is suppressed, all otherrelations, either for parliiiniciitury or municipal elections,are nugatory, and must be framed and executed under greatdifficulties. Nor will bribery ever be effectually prevented tillthe powerful and decisive aid of public opinion is brought tobear upon the subject. Whenever a person who is known tobe guilty of receiving a bribe, stands disparaged amongst }ianeighbours, and has the finger of scorn directed against him,no further law will be necessary to prevent the crime: andtill that ed'ect is produced, the wisest and strictest laws willbe evaded, and ineffectual.'■ A rule was made for the mayor of Tenterden, to showcause why an information should not go against him, fortaxing several persons who lived out of the corporation, to hecontributory to building a bridge, and other charges withinthe corporation.-l-The mayor showed for cause, that though the persons thustaxed, did not Iwe within the corporation, yet they dwtUwithin the liberties thereof, and were entitled to the likeprivileges as those who lived within the corporation; onewhereon was to he exempted from all taxes in the county atlarge ; so that it is reasonable they should be contributory toIn Ihe caw of (lie KmR r. the Mayor anal Alilfrr.ien of CarlislE. Ihe Mlicitot.general, in \'m rouse of the argiiniunl. upon llrailliwaifs ease being; cited, slit.that 11 was a '■liangc eit. wherein the judges a.-^sertcil Ihe power of the King amtihewaJlaof fl (own, so il might he they wont uimii such an order. And every bodyknows mailers of prerogative wcnl very high M llwi time. I[e nha said. thai norecord of tlm rase was lo Ue found.was given «licn judges «erc worked up to >o iilriiN ,151111 .1 pitch, ^ to avert suchI The K^nK.-ihciMajoiot l\ntcr.iin, H .Mod. IN.CASES.-TENTERDEN. 2013the charges within the corporation* when they had the George I.benefit of the privileges thereof — besides, the tax now in 1722.question had been paid by such out-dwellers time out ofmind.But the court directed, that this matter should be triedupon an information, and that for two reasons : — 1st, becausea single person might not he able to contest this matter in anaction against the whole corporation : — ^2ndly, because if averdict should pass for or against such single person, it wouldnot end the contest which might happen against the rest.In this case, the distinction between the borough and thecounty at large, which has appeared so clearly from theearliest periods of our history, is distinctly marked, as wellas the reasonable ground of exemption from the countycharges, upon the consideration of paying them within theborough. But the whole of those reasonable usages werethrown into confusion by the allowance of out-dwellingburgesses.In an information in nature of a quowarranto,f against ^723.Jones and Powell, for pretending to be burgesses ofBrecknocky nock,in Wales, and to show by what authority they claimed to beburgesses, &c., upon not guilty pleaded, the cause came onfor trial at the assizes in Hereford, and upon hearing theevidence, the counsel for the king desired that the mattermight be found specially : for that it appeared by the charterof this corporation, that the burgesses, and all other officersthereof, should be chosen de inhabitantibus, and that thedefendants, Jones and Powell, were not inhabitants ofBrecknock,But there being evidence that the usage had been againstthe charter, the j ury gave a general verdict upon the usage,viz., that the defendants were not guilty.And now it was moved to set aside this verdict, for tworeasons : —First. Because it was given against evidence.This is a repetition of the erroneous application of this word, before noted inthe Launceston case.— See before, p. 2006.t The King, v. Jones, 8 Mod. 201.IICABES.-BBECKNOCK.Secondly. HccauBe tbc jury refuse to find a special verdict,which they ought to have done when it wan required.And because of the difficulty of the case, this questionwas referred to all the judges of England-whether a verdictby vthit'h the defendant i^ found " not guilty," on an informationin nature of a quo warranto, could be set aide, wh)n new trial granted.And the judges were equally divided, two against two ineach court, so that not one court wat; unanimous in opinionof either side ; but six of them were of opinion that theverdict might be set aside ; and six were of a contrary opi»itM,And it being now moved again to set aside this verdictfor the reasons before mentioned, &c., Pratt, C. J. said — Ifthis is not to be looked on as a criminal prosecution, Ishould readily grant a new trial. This lately hath beenmade a question, and was referred to all the judges, whowere equally divided in opinion, gix against six, and eachcourt was also divided. 1 was for a new trial.Fortunate, justice. — I was against a new trial, and am soStill. Indictments are sometimes used only far trying a right,and yet it was never pretended to grant a new trial in them.It is objected, that this is a mixed sort of a prosecution, andnot entirely criminal. If so, still it is criminal. Its objected,that the fine imposed is always small, but it may be large.Raymond, justice. — These informations are only method totry the right, and ought to be looked on as civil actions ; andthough a fine is imposed, yet that makes no alteration; forsometimes in actions confessedly of a civil nature, a fine isset, as in actions of trespass vi et armis. This is my presentopinion ; but I would advise.The court was of opinion, that the verdict was againstlaw ; for the charter is to be understood negatively de inha-bitantibus, and so destroys the visage ; and where a jurybriuii in a verdict against law, agreeable or not agreeable to thedirection of the judge, time verdict ought to be set aside, dfc.One Hunt was bailiff of the corporation of Christchurch,*m Hampshire, in the year 1722, at which time Bachelor's• The KiiK i- IIuiIli, 8 Moil. 34<).CASES.~WHITCHURCH. 2015chosen mayor by the jurors summoned by Hunt; and the George l«mayor continued him bailiff for the next year, viz. for the 1724.year 1723, being the year of his mayoralty.Thereupon an information in nature of a quo warranto, wasgranted both against the mayor and Hunt, suggesting thatno man could be mayor or bailiff there who was non-resident yand chosen by non-residents, as the fury were ; against which None' . . residents.the inhabitants protested as contrary to their ancient usage;and that both the mayor and bailiff were non-residents andtherefore had usurped a franchise.The counsel for the defendants showed for cause againstthis rule, that all the officers of this borough are to be constantlychosen by freeholders thereof; and that some of the Freehold-inhabitantswho were freeholders, were summoned to be of theJURY ; but they refused to appear, pretending they would notserve with those who were not inhabitants of the borough,but out-dwellers y and therefore excluded from being of thejury; and thereupon others were returned who would serve.That ever since the year 1641, the out-dweller Sy "who had Out-dwellerfreeholds in the borough were returned jurymen, whichappeared by the entries made in their borough-book, andsuch out-dwellers had served in all the offices thereof.That Christchurch is an ancient borough by prescriptionand that the jury thus impannelled, did not serve in a Jury.court leety but in the borough court; for if it had been to leety.serve in a leet, then it midst have been by inhabitants; but in aborough court, or court baron, none but freeholders are to be Boroughof the jury, which freeholders might be out-dwellers so asthey had a freehold within the borough. That all the juryhad freeholds in the borough, and by such a jury assembledat a borough court, the defendants were lawfully chosen.But the rule was made absolute, by two judges against one,there being but three in court ; for this being a matter ofright, it was fit to be tried by a jury, who are the properjudges of evidence.The court at another day, was moved for a trial at bar,upon some affidavits that the freehold to the value of a thousandpounds might come in question.Cases Christchurch.But it was denied, for no other rc&eon, but tliiit it wa dborough cause.And at the trial, a verdict wasfoantl far the vmyur, thai bewas an inhabitant rffitUni ; ami against Hunt, tint he wetnon-resident ; and thereupon the mayor named one Page toix bailiff.The qitettioa now was, — Whether the mayor could nailft new bailie; because, by the constitution of the corporation,ft bailiff', duly elected, is to continue in his office for a yeas,I and until another is duly chosen : and Hunt was never daljr\ chosen, because he was non-resident. ]This being a controverted point, another information, AO(i'was granted to try it.One of the usurpations which occurred so frequently iothe boroughs, seems to have been attempted to be justifiedin this case, by the assertion, that these were proceeding*at a borough court, and not u court leet.But the whole current of authorities from the earnesttimes, is decisive to show that this was a court leet, and notaborough court. For all such officers were by the commonlaw required to be presented at the court leet by the jiir]^ iand sworn there ; the only court at which such oaths cous 'properly be administered.The other borough courts were either courts baron, nothaving juries, but homages; or courts of civil jurisdiction,whose functions were altogether of a different description.IRELAND.1717. An act was passed at this period, "entitled an act forGalway. better regulating the town of Galway, and for strengtheningthe Protestant interest therein," in which the followingFreemen. clause relative to the admission of freemen occurs: " Thaino person shall be elected mayor, or sheriffs, or commoniniwbituitB" councils, who shall not be an inhabitant within thetown, at the time of being elected ; and that hath not beenresident for the space of one whole year, before such election; and that all persons who profess themselves of anytrade, nivstorv, or liandicmft, that d() or shall come tottIRELAND. 2017^* reside in the town of Gal way, in order to follow their George I.respective trades, shall be free of the town and corpora 1717.tion, and also of that company or corporation to whichtheir respective trades belong, without paying any thingfor such freedom; and shall continue freemen of suchcompany or corporation as long as they dwell in the town,and no longer.Provided, that no persons are to have the benefit of theirfreedoms, unless they have been professed Protestants forseven years, or upwards, next before their demanding their"freedoms, pursuant to this act; and shall also take the*' usual oaths of freemen ; and also the oaths of allegiance,supremacy, and abjuration, and make and subscribe the'* declaration against transubstantiation, before the mayor ofthe town, who is required to administer the same."CORK.We find at this period, several bye-laws agreed to at a 1721.court of d 'oyer hundred for Corks which commence with arecital, that " for some time past the common council alone,and sometimes a few members thereof, had assumed a powerto dispose of the public money and issue their orders for thesame, to such uses as they thought proper, without the consentof, or consulting the commonalty ; and forasmuch as thedue application of such money is of general concern to thewhole community ; it was enacted —That from thenceforth, none of the public money should*' be issued, unless it should be first proposed and consentedto by the mayor, sheriff', and commonalty, in open court ofd'oyer hundred assembled.That the mayors of the city, for some time theretofore, hadcollected several petty duties from the freemen at large,contrary to their rights and franchises ; which duties, and allpretence of right to the levying the same from the freemen,from thenceforth should be abolished.*' That for some time past, the common council had assumedIt appears that previous to their being past, the pannel of freemen was calledover, and each freeman that was present gave his assent thereto.() Nait'■a power of taking up money at interest, for the preteiule^use of the corporation, without the cousent of the other freemenand nienihere thereof: whereby the revenues of the idlywere often loaded with unwarrantable debts.And as this is a matter of general concern to all theEtituent parts of the whole community, and ought, therefore,to have the most public consideration and sanctionsfor avoiding the like mischief for the future, and that ill-citymight not thereafter contract any debt, but what shouldbe judged absolutely necessary, and receive the most pubbfassent, t^ was provided, that no money should be borrowedat interest for the use of the corporation, unless the cisent of the mayor, sherifTs, and commonly, was first fainopen court of d'oyer hundred,That all unnecessary law-suits might for the futunavoided, and that it might not be in the power of ft fmembers thereof, alone, without the consent of the rest,engage the corporation therein, and to make use of Ipublic money for carrying on such suits, whereby gnslmischiefs and inconveniences had arisen ; it was providesthat from thenceforth, no law-suit should be commencedor defence taken, on the part of the corporation, unless thesame should be first consented to by the mayor, sheriffs, andcommonalty, or the major part of them, in open court ofd'oyer hundred."A recital then occurs, " that by the charter and ancientusage of the city, the aldermen of the card, and al! theseveral officers and ministers of the corporation, used to beelected in open court of d'oyer hundred, by the mayor,sheriffs, and commonalty, there assembled r But that for thefuture, whenever any vacancies should happen in any of theplaces of the aldermen, or in either of their officers or ministers,they should be chosen by public constant in open courtof d'oyer hundred, and not otherwise.■n, " That for the future, no freeman at large should be made,who should not first petition the mayor, sheriffs, and commoncouncil, and should after I)e approved of in open court ofd'oyer hundred. Provided, that nothing therein should beIRELAND. 2019any ways construed to extend to any persons of great George l-distinction, who should happen at any time to be in the city, 1721.and to whom the council should think fit to make a presentof their freedom — such person or persons, however,not being under the degree of an esquire; nor should itextend to bar such persons as had a right to their freedom,by having served seven years as an apprentice to afreeman at large, or by being the eldest son of such freeman.That the commons having been at a considerable expence Commons.in the defence of the rights and privileges granted them bycharter, and in opposing the arbitrary proceedings of thosethat endeavoured to deprive them of their rights, amountingto the sum of two hundred and twenty-five pounds, twelveshillings, sterling — it was ordered, that they should be paidout of the public revenues of the city.That several members of the common council of the city Common'Ihad of late (through refractoriness) often neglected or re- ^^^^ 'fused to meet and attend at the council chamber, accordingto the summons duly given, requiring their attendance ; andthat such visible refractoriness giveth just reason to fear,that several may likewise hereafter neglect or refuse to appearand give attendance, on such due summons as the mayormay find necessary to issue, which might very much retardthe necessary and lawful proceedings in all affairs belongingto the city, and also be attended with numerous other evilconsequences, if not timely provided against." And thereforepowers are given to remedy the grievance.That notwithstanding the freemen were by charter exemptedfrom all tolls, taxes, murage, pavage, pontage, andkavige : it had of late been attempted to establish severalcustoms of collecting gatage, and other taxes, from the freemen,with a design, in process of time, to perpetuate thesame on them by pleading the force of such customs equalto laws against them.* Therefore it is enacted, by the mayor,sheriffs, and commonalty in court of d'oyer hundred assembled,that all taxes and gatage theretofore collected from• See po-t. temp. Geo. IV., Truro case.G N 22020 IRELAND.ticorite !■ freemen at large, t'nr any goods of their own property.^1. which ivan by such freemen lawfully bought and contractedfor before the same entered the liberties of this city, thcollected contrary to charter or law ; and that, therefore, apretended custom or authority for collecting such taxes fnuBfreemen at large, should from thence be null and void,"The few following facts will close all that is necessarybe inserted as to the city of Cork.I7i6. " That great inconveniences having arisen by the not eotepApi>rea- Big and enrolling the several apprentices' indentures of thiscity, whereby several indentures have been ante-dated, andthereby several apprentices have not been skilled in theirprofessions : it is ordered, that all apprentices.' indentureswhatsoever, be entered and enrolled in the town clerk's office,at the time of entering into, and perfecting such iudeDture'iiand witnessed in the office."1728. Upon reading the several orders relating to the e)ectioa<^alderman of the ward, it was ordered, " that the manner ofelection of alderman of the ward for the future should be,that all the aldermen for the time being, that were not justicesof the peace or aldermen of the ward, should be setupon the elections and whichever appeared to hai-e the majoritythe suffrages or votes of the freemen in opencourt of d' oyer hundred assembled, should be declared to beduly elected alderman of the ward."The elections of the aldermen and common councilmen ofLondon, so recently before the reader in this reign, cannotfail to suggest a comparison with these ward elections inCork, as well as the previous regulations for enrolling theindentures of apprentices,George II., in the eighth and 21st years of his reign,granted two charters to Cork, one constituting all mayorsupon their departure from office, justices of the peace; theother granting two fairs.I7T2. By '•*■ special verdict of this date, it appears that the eldestsons of freemen, being twenty-one, were entitled to the freedom; but that it was immaterial whether the father wasliving or not when the son became 21.IRELAND. 2021And one Peter Simon was admitted in the 47th of George ^^^g^ ^'III. to the freedom at large, under the statute, upon pay Cork,ment of 205., being a Protestant stranger.GEORGE II.STATUTES.The first material statute to be considered in the reign of 1729.Cap. 24.George II. is the Bribery Act, in the midst of which, afterthe oath directed to be taken by the returning officer, whichis contained in the third section* — and before the declarationas to the effect of falsely taking that oath, which is in thefifth — the fourth is interposed, declaring that " such votesshall be deemed to be legal which have been so de declaredby the last determination in the House of Commons ;which determination is directed to be final to all intentsand purposes whatsoever, any usage to the contrary notwithstanding."Nothing else in the act relates to the samesubject; and there is therefore scarcely a specimen in thewhole statute book of a provision thrust in so inopportunelyinto the body of an act relating to other matters.It requires some explanation, which can easily be supplied.This clause was introduced as an amendment in the Houseof Lords ; who also increased the penalty from 501, to 500/.,and made the act in other respects more effectual.The fourth section, however, was not pleasing to theHouse of Commons ; but satisfied as they were with the restof the bill, they adopted the amendment rather than run therisk of losing the whole measure; and the question foragreeing with the amendments made by the Lords wascarried in the affirmative by a majority of two voices only—91 to 89.The effect of the clause was in substance to make that• 2 George 11., cap. 24.LGvo^ell. provisions general which the statute of Willieacted only as a direction to the resuming officer :ing into a legislativ^act the effect of the resolution of theHouse, excluding tm evidence contrary to the lust determination.It had also the effect of sanctioning, withoutany inquiry as to the justice or equity of the last detennina-liouB, all the varieties of rights, and the anomalous usa^tt, .which had previously existed — most unreasonably perpetuatingthose ysnges, where there happened accidentally to be adetennination, but leaving open to dispute those places wherethere happened to be no decision. — A principle which fromnecessity must introduce a variety of rights, and perhapssome contrary to other determinations, where, nevertheless,the facts might be the same. Nor was this the only inconvenienceresulting from this enactment; it also containedthis inconsistency :^a usage, however short, which badbeen sanctioned by a decision of the House of Commons,was to be sup ported —where as, if there had been a usage ofever so long a continuance, subsequent to the determination,it was to be disregarded ; as if, for instance, there shouldhave been a decision in the reign of James I., when the determinationsare preserved, and there had been a usage contraryto it till the reign of Geo^e III., yet a committeewould be bound to disregard that usage : a consequence veryinconsistent with the general disposition to support thedoctrine of usage.NORWICH.In the third of George II., an act was passed for the better■ regulation uf elections in the city of Norwich, and for preservingthe peace, good order, and government of thecity. It recited that many coiitroversiesi- had arisen atthe elections vf citizens to serve in Parliament, and ofmayors, sheriffs, aldermen, and common coiincilmen, touchingthe legality of votes of numb persons ; that the time appointedby the charter was not sufficient to elect so greata number of common romicilmtti for each great ward, as areStatutes-NORWICH. 2023thereby yearly directed to be chosen when such elections George ILhappen to be controverted. That great dissensions have 1730.arisen between the mayor, sheriffs, and aldermen, and thecommons of the common council, concerning the makingordinances in common council or assembly of the represented Representedbody of the city, which had often obstructed the publicbusiness.For remedy of which grievances, oaths are directed to betendered at the elections ; and the votes of those refusingto swear, are to be disallowed.Three common councilmen for each great ward are to electthe remaining number of common councilmen — the vacanciesare to be filled up in 48 hours after notice — none but inhabitsants are to be chosen sheriffs — no act to be valid without theassent of the major part, Sc, — the mayors are to nominatethe officers as customary — and a penalty is enforced on absencefrom the quarterly assemblies.It should be observed, that this is a distinct legislativerecognition; that the common council of Norwich was adelegated Bid representative body, as the common council of Delegated.London. — A circumstance material to be remembered hereafter,when the modem Wycomb case, of the king and Westwood,comes under consideration.There is also another statute in the ninth of George II., 1735,relative to Norwich ; which recites,* that anciently the chiefmanufacturers in the city of Norwich, and the makers ofrussets, &c., were by an act in the first and second of Philipand Mary, obliged to become freemen ; by means of which,there was a constant supply of able magistrates: but themanufactures having been for several years disused, andothers introduced in their stead ; by which the offices ofmagistracy often fall to persons who are not the chief manufacturers,or the most substantial inhabitants ; and frequentdisorders happen in their elections, occasioning great riots.For remedy of which mischiefs and inconveniences, andfor preventing the same in future ; it was enacted, that allpersons who were manufacturers or makers of any sort of• Statutes, vol. 5, 434, c. 9.fTAttJTES.-NOIlWICH.Gmrt«I{. gtuffe, &c., who are not journeymen or servants for1735. master weavers, and master wool-combe, and persons deaing or trading as such, or employing servants or journeymenill any such manufactures, or having any mterirst in sobmanufactures, inhabiting or living in the city of Norwich,shall be made free of the city, and admitted freemen thereof i(that is to say,) all person inhabiting or living in the city ,or county of the same, now being such manufacturers, shallrequest to be made at any court of maifomlty or\ auemhly of the mayor, sheriffs, citizens, and commonalty, be ,L admitted and made free of the city, paying only 21 shillings |r their admisaimi and freedom : and all manufacturers whohereafter shall be liviai/ or inhabiting in the city, beii^ *foreigners, shall upon their request to be made at any assemblyof the corporation to be holder for the city, be admittedand made free ; paying a sum not exceeding 51., upon takingthe usual oaths.Any persona (servants and apprentices during their service■ excepted) who shall be such manufactures, not being admittedand made free, shall, after the 21at of June, 1723, forfeit10/. for every calendar month.1746. That all persons elected to the office of mayor, should beexcused thfitfrom , if they swear they arc not worth '2,000/.over their debts ; and upon payment of a fine of 50/. ; or, ifthey swear they are not worth 3,000/. over their debts, uponpayment of a fine, shall likewise be excused.1745. In the 19th of George II., an act was passed for regulatingthe election of members to serve in Parliament, for that classcities.&c. of cif/cs and towns fi'ei]uently referred to before, which wereCoaativsot counties of themselves: and it seems erroneously to haveassumed, that the 40a-. fi-eehukleis iuul a right to vote forthose places; which, for the ivasuus wc have given before,coidd not be the case — unless tiicy were altogether treatedus comites, and the right of the burgesses abandoned;because the statute of Henry VI,, which creates that qualification,is ill tile negative, anil i.-\cUi(lrs ul! ^.tlier right ofvoting. And if that statute applied to lliuf.efitios;iii{l towns, noSTATUTES.-NORWlCH. 2026other right ought to exist within them. The truth seems to George II.have been, that it was never intended to have such an ap 1745.plication ; and it is strange that this statute should haveproceeded on a contrary assumption — particularly as ithas since been decided, that other general statutes, whichrelate to counties in general, do not apply to these peculiarand inferior county jurisdictions.*WESTMINSTER.A statute of the 29th of George II., for the appointment 1756.of constables in Westminster, recognizes the impannelling, «r*^. *by the Dean of Westminster, or the high steward, or his »ter-deputy, calling to his assistance the burgesses of the city and Burgesses.liberty, if the dean, his high steward, or deputy, shall deemfit, of 40 substantial householders ; out of whom they are to House-nominate30 to be the leet jury for the year — taking care Let jury,that one or more be nominated out of each of the parishes •and they are to be sworn to present to the court, properpersons to be chosen and appointed constables for the yearnext ensuing — that is to say, for St. Margaret's, 28 ; for St.John's, 8; for St. Martin's, 28; St. George's, HanoverSquare, 24 ; St. James's, 28 ; St. Anne's, 16 ; St. Paul's,Covent Garden, 12 ; St. Clement's Danes, 12 ; St. Mary leStrand, 4. Out of which number, the court shall, in themanner and proportions before directed, appoint 80 to beconstables, to serve for the city and liberty. Fines areimposed upon persons refusing to appear to execute theoffice oi jurymen and constables they being called upon toserve only once in seven years. A high constable is also tobe appointed for the year; but none to serve for more thanthree years together.And in the 10th section of the statute, reciting, that Sec. 10.obstructions in the public ways, and other annoyances andoffences contained therein, are partly owing to the want of asufficient power to compel persons to take upon them theoffice of jurymen, to present nuisances and other offences,it was enacted, that the dean, or high steward, or his deputy,• See Ilex i'. Ilaythornc, 5 Barn. & Cr. 410.N 'CwiEclI. the' two chief bitrgfi»sea of Westminster, Mnd the other burst.fffsstn, for the time being, or any five of their, (whereof the idear, high steward, or his deputy, or one of the twin chief 'but^essee, should be do), are twice in the year to issue their 'Precepts to immanuel and return 80 gnbstnniiul householdand trade, residing and dwelling within the parishes ofWestminster, in the proportions before mentioned; out ofwbou} they art:, at the court, to nominate and appoint 6amany as they shall think proper, not exceeding 48 : takingcare that one or more be nominated out of each of theAoDor- parishes : and they were to bi: called the " annoyance mary," 'I**" ''''^' and were to take the oath prescribed by the act.The duties of this jury are pointed out in the Statute : — 'which, aroongsl other things, includes the supervision of iweights, balances, and measures ; and provision is also Imade that they shall not serve more than once in IbxMyears. 1It appears, therefore, that as the whole city of Londonis under the jurisdiction of the courts leet or wardmotes — aoalso that wealthy and important part of the rest of hitgreat metropolis, which is included in the parishes of StClement's Danes, St. Martin's-in-the- Fields, St. Margaret'sand St. John's Westminster, St. James's and St. Anne's, andSt. Geoi^e's, Hanover Square — is at this moment under thecontrol and direction of the court leet.PARLIAMENTARY CASES.A short reference to some of the decisions which occurin Parliament during this reign, will be all that is requisite.1728. In Tendon, that of the inhabitants being housekeepersIlendoa. , .and p an sh lovers, f1728. In Peterborough, in the householders 'habitants payingborough. scot and lot.ij;• 21 .mourn. |). 7fl. ( lb. p. 131. ; lb. p. |62.PARLIAMENTARY CASES. 2027George 11.WELLS.In Wells the right was determined to be " in the mayor, ^^29.** masters, burgesses, and freemen, admitted to their freedom,in any of the companies within the city, entitled** by birth, servitude, or marriage'*The history we have before given of Hythe, equallyapplies to Wells ; where, notwithstanding the early documentsshow distinctly the necessity of residence, non-resin Non-restdents.dents were gradually introduced, to an extent subversive ofthe rights of the inhabitants.Thus in 1700, it was agreed, that H. Portman, Esq., (who ^^oo.probably lived in Dorsetshire) should have leave to be admittedfree of one of the companies of this city, and then tobe sworn a burgess, if he desire it of the mayor. Andafterwards, in the next year, by the general assent of the ^^Ol.house of the burgesses, he was admitted a burgess for thiscity, being finest elected into the company of mercers.The fine paid by strangers on their admission to burgess-ship,subsequent to the ordinance of the fifth of Elizabeth,and the form of the admission subsequent to the charter ofthat queen, varied at different times, as appears by the followinginstances.At a general convocation, held in the fourth year of Queen 1705.Anne, John Prose, Esq., and William Berkeley, Esq., were Dec. lo.admitted burgesses; and at the same time, gave each onedozen pair of gloves, according to the custom, to be distributedamong the burgesses then present ; but it not beinga pair for each, they voluntarily made up the deficiency, andthey both being strangers paid 20*. each.Two years afterwards, Mr. W. Bevis, Mr. W. Salmon, 1707.and Mr. Richard Copper, were admitted burgesses of thiscity, at the same time they gave one dozen and a half ofgloves, and paid 20s. as being strangers, and Qs. 8rf. each,being: the fees of the house.In the 10th of Queen Anne, Mr. Charles Taylor, had the nil.consent of the house to be admitted a " burgesses of this city,• 21 Journ. 329.tieotgell. and he was admitted accordingly, having first taken theusual oaths."In the 1 th year of the same reign, the following order WBSmade, reciting, that for preventing partiality and disputes inelecting inferior burgesses, un the death or removal of tiny oCthe 16 burgesses, being of the common council oi the city orborough, others are to be chosen in the place of the chiefbui^ess, happening to die or be removed, to fill up the nuiiHber of 24 chief burgesses.That it was anciently ordained, such inferior burgesses <thoiiUl not be elected or made at tke pleasure of the mayorfor the time being, or any other particular person, but shouldbe elected, nominated, and chosen, with the consent of thamayor, cruisers, and chief burgesses of the common council Ibrthe time being, or the major part of iceni, at the convocationor common assembly; which custom and usage has, for •great number of years, been observed without interruption.And tint the books or records wherein the ordinancewas entered or enrolled, by reason of the alterations made Mthe corporation in the times of King Charles II. and KingJames II., or other accidents, have been lost, mislaid, ordestroyed: — for ratification of the custom or usage it ia ordered,that the mayor, and two or more of the present masters,together with the chief burgesses of the common council orthe major part of them, who thereunto subscribed their namesin pursuance of the power given by the charter of Elizabeth,made an ordinance that every inferior bui^ss should benominated and elected by the mayor, masters, and chief burgessesof tke common council lor the time being, or the majorpart of them, at their convocation or common assemblies, inthe shine manner as they then were ind had been for these 20years k>t, and by no other person or persons whatsoever,under forfeiture, &.c. of lou.This order was twice declared by committees of the Houseof Coupons to be arbitrary and illegal.1718- In the third of George I., 33 persons were admitted burgesses,seven of whom, apjKircntly gentlemen of the neigh-foreigners.byurhood, uio dcsciibcd as being foreigners, and not havingWELLS. 2029any claim by birth, servitude, or marriage ; and nine are Geoi^fe ll.described as " resiants/^ but having no claim by birth, ser 1716.virtute, or marriage.The burgesses were admitted by their prolocutor upon peg Provocation,paying their fines and fees, of which the following is aspecimen, although the admission was disputed at the time.In the fifth of George I., at a general convocation, Wil 1719«lias Bridges, Esq., serjeant-at-law, was presented to themayor by two of the mercers' company, and prayed hemight be sworn a burgess of the city ; to which the otherburgesses objected, for that none ought to be sworn a burgessbefore he has, at a regular meeting of the mayor and corporation,obtained their consent and approbation, which theSerjeant had not, as was alleged; and prayed that the bye-law,made in the time of Robert Taylor, mayor, might beread — ^and which was read accordingly ; and great contentionand strife arising, it was at length proposed and agreed, forpreventing the ill consequences of the present disorder, thatSerjeant Bridges should be sworn burgess (salvo jure); andso as the same should not be drawn into a precedent forthe future, nor infringe the laws, customs, and ordinancesof the city — and thereupon he was sworn on those terms, andgave gloves, and paid his fees, and left 5^. in the hands ofthe receiver, to be expended in wine for the entertainmentof the burgesses.In the second of George I., there was a petition by the 1715.citizens or burgesses, and freemen inhabitants of the city ;and on the report in the next year, the right was agreed to bein the "mayor, masters, and burgesses:" but the questionwas, whether they should be sworn burgesses.The petitioner tendered the votes of 56 members of the Petition,companies who had before demanded of the mayor to besworn burgesses, claiming their right by servitude, or byhaving been admitted into the companies : and he objectedto 60 of the sitting members' votes, for non-residency. Theywere honorary burgesses. The sitting member insisted, the Sittingright was in the community or select body, and not in the freemen: and that it was necessary to take the burgess's oath,raosoOrariell.toaccording to the uiiage tis well bet'ure as eiiici^ the charter;and that the adiumsiuii iiitu the companies was for thv {tui^pope nf uniting. The right was resolved by the conimitUeto be " in the mayor, masters, and burgesses ;" the same asthe resolution in 169^, except the omission of the wort"only;" and the petitioners were seated. So that lh« voM«or the freemen, who Ind claimed to be sworn, appear to basebeen admitted ; and, in all probability, the tutn-rnadenU^or fumnritry buTgetiteg, were excluded : and the bye-law ef1712 wit declared to be arbitrary and illegal.In 1717, the right was again agreed to be " in the may**masters, and burgesses." But the sitting member ag^n ivsinlcd, that they must be siwn-» ; and the petitioner aj^oiaobjected lo the non-residents : and he waa seated.In 1723, the right was agreed to be " in the mayor, Ria»>ters, burgesses, fia freemen ;" which appears to be the fifrtinstance In which the latter body are expressly recognised asvoting in that capacity. The qualification of the freemen yetthen discussed, and the present anomalous right of votingappears to have arisen out of that discussion. Freemen andburgesses are strangely confounded together in some places,and in others, whimsically distinguished. In this place, afreeman's apprentice, and the eldest son of a burgess, and thehusband of the daughter or widow of a bui^ess, are qualifiedto be freemen ; a singular arrangement, that the principalsshould be burgesses, and the derivatives freemen ; andthe sitting member contended, that the consent of the mayorand common council was necessary previous to the admissionto the freedom. In the early entries of the corporationthere is no distinction as to eldest sons ;* but all sons weretreated alike. Nor was the admission by the consent ofthe common council, but of all the burgesses ; and all wereadmitted as " burgesses" — not as freemen. The real explanationbeing, as stated before, that these only of free conditioncould be burgesses ; and being a member of a trading company,was evidence of being free ; because villains could nottrade— all their property bi'liniging to their lords. This affordsituuWELLS. 2031the real clue to all the apparently contradictory evidence Georgcll.stated on the Journals. The committee finally decided the i723.right to be ** in the mayor , masters and burgesses* as before ; Right.but added, ^' and in such persons as are, by the consent ofthe mayor and common council, admitted to their freedomin any of the seven companies being thereunto entitled bybirth, servitude, or marriage*' which latter part of theresolution, though it was binding and conclusive as a lastdetermination under the statute of the second of George II.,is contrary as well to the tenor and spirit of the ancient commonlaw, as to the charters and early usages of Wells.*The petitioners then objected to many of the votes for thesitting member, and, amongst others, to a non-resident. Thesitting members were confirmed in their seats.After this followed the decision of the second of GeorgeIL, which is, in effect, the same as that of 1723.It was reported from the committee, that the petitioner's 1729.counsel alleged, that the city of Wells was incorporated by reiiuoncr.the name of mayor, masters, and burgesses, and that theright of being admitted freemen in the companies was bybirth, servitude, or marriage, and insisted, that all personshaving any such qualification, had a right to vote at theelection.The sitting member's counsel insisted that the consent of Sitting^ , "^ member.the mayor and common council was necessary before theywere admitted freemen ; and said it was settled by the resolutionin 1723.To which the petitioner's counsel replied, that there were Petitioner,several precedents of the right being settled otherwise.To which point the following evidence was given :The Journal of the 18th of February, 8th of William III.The Journal of the 26th of May, 1716.The Resolution of the 30th of May, 1716, as to the bye-lawin 1712.The Journal of the 11th of April, 1717, whereby it appeared,that the right of election was agreed to be in themayor, masters, and burgesses.• Cap. 24., see before, pp. 766, 768, 1006.GBorgell. John Lovell said, he had known the city 40 years — thou1729. the light of election was in the strom burgesses, freemen, andcompanies, and xXxaX freemen were admitted by seclude, marriage,or birth — said, he hud heard that Mr. Hall carried hiselection by freemen, which was then 60 years ago — that thesoil if a freetaaa had a right to be made free.That nobody had a right to be sienna a bursts bat whowere free of one of the companies : and that such freemen badaright to vote in elections, whether they were sworn burgessesor not.That, about 2(J years ago, he tens admitted a freeman — that ■he never heard of the mayor and corporation's admission b^fore they could be made free, till of late years — that he votedat the election of Mr. Coward and Mr. Peers, as a freemanand there was no objection to him.That the bye-law was made to affect the companies : — bulno bye-law of any one company could affect the others ; andthat several had been admitted of the company by ftetii^sons of freemen, but did not name any one in particular.SiuitiH Xhe sitting member's counsel proceeded to prove thaiiDinibcr. ^ ' 'none could be admitted freemen of any of the seven companieswithout the consent of the mayor and common council; and objected to the right proposed by the petitioner'scounsel, insisting upon the last resolution of the 2nd of May,1723. And the following evidence was also produced, via. —A charter of the 31st Elizabeth, for granting power to themayor and common council, to make bye-laws, for regulatingthe traders and artificers of this city.The ordinances and laws for the company of tailors, &c.,leave. and confirming ordinances made in the 34th of Elizabeth,for the better government of the stocking makers, andagainst admitting any persons into the companies withoutexamination, and proof, before; the governing part of suchcompany, of serving seven years' apprenticeship ; and withoutpresenting such person to the common council, andhaving their consent previous to such admission.The rest of the ordinances relative to the other companieswere admitted.WELLS. 2033An order in the convocation book, directs that the com- George n.any of grocers, and all other companies, having no mas 1729.ters, should assemble and choose a master, and bring him goth ^*ug!before the mayor and recorder, to be sworn by a limitedtime, on pain of 40*., otherwise the recorder and mayorshould choose their masters, and swear them.Orders were made that no master or wardens of any com- ^^-any should receive or admit any to be made free, without March 8.allowance of the mayor, and consent of the common council.And that the eldest daughter of every burgess, on marriage 1670.with a stranger should thereby make him a freeman, and Sept. 14.that he should be of such of the companies as the mayorand council should think fit.As many as 200 instances were admitted by the petitioner'scounsel to be in the corporation books, of applicationsmade to the common council, for leave to be admittedinto some of the companies, from the year 1670, to thetime of the last resolution of this House, 2nd May, 1723.Dutch said, it had been usual for all the seven companies,to apply to the corporation before they made freemen ; thatthe qualification was by birth, servitude, or marriage; — thatthe burgesses were exempted from several troublesome offices,which the freemen were not : — that the latter could not beof the common council, without being sworn burgesses : —that he did not know of any freemen being refused to bemade burgesses, who asked for it : — and that freemen hadbeen admitted to vote, particularly in the years 1714 and1719.The committee resolved, that the right was as stated Right.above.To which the House agreed.Upon another petition, in the seventh of George II., 1734.the order of the House for restraining the counsel, at thebar, or before the committee of elections, from offering evidence,touching the legality of votes for members to serve inParliament, for any county, shire, city, borough, cinque port,or place, contrary to the last determination of the House ofCommons, was also read ; as well as the determination of(i o'the House, of 1729, concerning the right of election forWells.■ The counsel for the petitioners having produced a copjlof the poll taken at the election, and having in orderdisqualify several p^aons who voted for the sitting mehers, delivered in several lists of such persons, exuininedseveral witnesses, to prove that the mayor was guilty oftpartiality, in favour of the silting members ; — and that Im^ examined many of the electors, upon oath concerning tbeiftright of voting, and others in contradiction to tient : uakrefused to admit the votes of several electors, vrho wouldnot take the oath required.The counsel for the petitioners also offered to producesevidence to disqualify the persons named in one of the lifitiupon account of their not being legal burgesses of the city.To which evidence the sitting member's counsel, havingobjected, and read the resolutions of the House, of t)weighth of William HI., concerning the right of electionsthe counsel for the petitioners then proceeded to exatnhw Jseveral witnesses concerning the usage of the city ia respeofifto the admission of burgesses anttjreemen, and their respecting jrights ; and read the resolution of 1716 concerning the bye-lawmade in 1712.Upon a motion being made, and the question put, that thecounsel for the sitting members be directed to proceed intheir objections to the petitioners producing the evidenceoffered by them to disqualify several persons who voted forthe sitting members, upon account of their not being legalburgesses of Wells, it was resolved in the affirmative.The sitting members proceeded in their objection: andread the resolution of the House of 1716 and 1723, concerningthe right of election, and the report of 1729 : as well asthe report of the llth April, 1717, touching the evidenceof Richaid Thomas. And a motion being made, and thequestion put, that the counsel for the petitioners be restrainedfrom giving evidence, that it is a necessary qualification ofa bui^ess of the city of Wells that such person, previousto his being made a burgess, should be a freeman of the city.WELLS. 2035admitted to his freedom in one of the seven companies en George ILtitled to such freedom by birth servitude, or marriage, it was 1734.resolved in the affirmative.The House afterwards proceeded on the further hearingof the petition, and finally resolved, that the petitioners wereduly elected.This concludes all that is necessary to be mentioned of theparliamentary proceedings respecting Wells. Other proceedingsin the courts of law have occurred respecting the electionof the different officers of the corporation, but they containnothing material to our present inquiry.The reader will perceive how intricate and complicated thequestion as to the burgesses of Wells was rendered by adeparture from the simple course, which appears from theentries, to have been practised in early times ; and particularlyby connecting with the municipal body of the burgesses,questions relative to the trading companies. The result ofthis confusion and intricacy, was the unrestrained admissionof non-resident burgesses which overwhelmed the voices ofthe inhabitants and rendered the proceedings of the boroughso complicated, as not to be intelligible even to those residentin the place.But to pursue the few other extracts from the Journals.In Newtown, in the Isle of Wight, the burgage tenure right 1729.was established.*In Beatimaris — the select body consisting of the mayor, 1729.bailiff, and capital burgesses only.fIn Stamford — the inhabitants paying scot and lots 1735.In Scarborough — the town council, consisting of two 1736.bailiffs, two coroners, four chamberlains, and 36 bui^esBes.§In Weobley — the inhabitants of the ancient vote houses 1736.of 20^. per annum!! residing in the houses 40 days beforethe election ; and also in the owners of such ancient votehouses, paying scot and lot, who should be resident in suchhouses at the time of the election — a strange determination,• 21 Journ. 237. f 21 Journ. 473. % 21 Joura. 616.12 Journ. 694. 1| 21 Journ. 770.6o2JOlTRNAIJt.'■ founded ill i-ubstaiice upon the common law, but so mythfind as tu be hardly capable of solution. The residence of40 diis is in conformity with the ancient law, as is alcovepayment of trot nid lot ; but tli<; limitation to ancJoithouses is not supported by the law, as shown before ; tndlthe requisite of 20*. per annum is a fanciful distinction fll(this place, not warranted by the practice of any other. Tlwowners being entitled to vote, provided they were rcsidea||in the houses, is only a bad description of the ancient co:"^^"mon law right of inhabitant hottsrhoUUrt ; but 90 wordedto produce doubt and uncertainty.The right in Flint was strangely stated to be "in the \habitants renting lauds ot tenements,* for which tim-landlordsonly paid scot and lot" — a right totally irreeoo^cileablc with any principle <if law. fIn Heron, the freemen by descent, or by apprenticeship U'resident freemen, or by an honorary gift, were said to hnvfthe right.In Warehnm, it was declared to be " in the nnayor toAmagistrates;; and in ouch of the inhabitants as paid Mtfand lot ; and in the freeholders who had bona fide to their "iown use, or in their actual occupation, or were in the receiptof the rents and profits, of such lands or tenements, for thespace of one year next before the election, except the samecame to them by descent, devise, marriage, marriage settlement,or promotion to some benefice in the church :" — asingular mixture of the common and statute law ; and theborough and county right of election.In Worcester, the right was declared to bes " in the citizensadmitted to their freedom by birth, servitude, orredemption."As to IIiisli'Difre, the committee resolved, that " in thelast determination in Iftfil .Sj that the inhabitant freeholdershad only voice — by the word 'freeholders,' was meantonly freeholders of messuages, lands, or tenements, lyingwithin the borough or manor, whether they paid rent tof 2JOURNALS. 2037ftitthe lord of the borough or manor, or not, exclusive of anjr'^®®^^^'lands or tenements, which have been parcel of the wasteground of the borough or manor ; and any messuages orbuildings which should be standing or being thereon."This appears to be the climax of complication in the definitionof a burgess. Nor can the dispassionate reader failto remark the variety of conclusions at which committeesof the House of Commons have arrived upon the simplequestion of who are the burgesses of the different boroughs,when all the early laws, charters, documents and recordsspeak with one voice, that they were all originally the same.CHARTERS.The following were the only charters granted by GeorgeIi:—1.— 1732, 6 George II Lostwithiel.2.— 1737, 1 1 George II Lynn.3.— 1738, 12 George II Radnor.4. — 1741, 15 George II London.5. — 1747, 21 George II Weymouth.6.— 1747, 21 George II Maidstone.7. — 1761, 26 George II Liverpool.LOSTWITHIEL.That to Lostwithiel commences by reciting, that James I., 1732.in the sixth year of his reign, granted* that the borough.should be a free borough, and the mayor, burgesses, and in- inhabitantshabitants a body politic and corporate, by the name ofthe mayor and burgesses of the borough of Lostwithiel,".&c. &c.That the mayor and many other burgesses and inhabitantshad petitioned, that they should be re-incorporated, with all-their ancient privileges, and such in addition as might bedeemed expedient.The king therefore granted, that it should for ever be afree borough, and that the mayor, burgesses, and inhabitantsshould be incorporated by the name of " the mayor and bur incorporated.Pat, 6 George 11., p. 2, n. 14.LOSTWITTIIEL.fen^fll- gesses," with the usual corporate powers ; and the governmentof the town was intrusted to the mayor, recorder, aitcapital heiresses, 17 assistants, &c. The mayor, late mftyoi^.and recorder were to be justices of the peace. A court ofrecord — b court leet — return of writs — with all other privilegesusual in modem charters were also granted.LYNN.That to Lynn gave to the mayor and aldermen,* power t»administer the oath of office to such coroners of the boroughas then were, or thereafter should be duly elected into tlittoffice.We have before observed, that no persons had power todirect the administration of an oath but the king ; and hetrtily for public purposes.In the instance above, it appears that a charter wasgranted for the express purpose of authorizing the act, whichno bye-law nor other private authority could do.-|-RADNOR.1T38. That to Note Radnor commences by reciting, that it was aaancient borough, and anciently incorporated. "^^ That theiniuuunti present inhabitants thereof, and those who in ancient timeshad inhabited the same borough, predecessors of the presentinhabitants, had enjoyed divers liberties, &c., from diverselord marchers and kings of England.That Queen Elizabeth, in the fourth year of her re*had declared it should be for ever a borough, by the BBme'rS^"" of "the borough of New Radnor;" and also incorporated theburgesses and inhabitants, by the name of "the bailiffs,aldermen, and burgesses." That there should be for everone bailie*, two aldermen, and 25 capital burgesses andcouncillors, of which the bailiff and two aldermen, werealways to be three; who were to be always called the"common council " of the borough — which the king re-grantsin a subsequent part of the charter.i'at. 11 George 11., p.i. I Rex v. Dean and CLaptcioi Dublin, 1 Su.SSS.RADNOR. 2039That the common council were reduced to so low a number, George n.that for want of sufficient members, no bailiff, aldermen, or Number*capital burgesses, could be chosen and sworn, pursuant tothe directions of such charter.That at the petition of the seven remaining capital burgessesand of divers others inhabitants of New Radnor, the Xnhawtaut«king granted that the borough and town of New Radnor,and the manor of Radnor fore, &c. should be for ever aborough, and called the " borough of New Radnor;" thatthe burgesses of the borough, and the inhabitants of themanor of Radnor fore, &c. now being, were to be burgessesof the borough, and one body corporate and politic, by thename of" the bailiff, aldermen, and burgesses of the boroughof New Radnor." The usual corporate powers follow, andthe nomination of the corporate officers, &c.The king then grants the borough, manor of Radnor Burgesses,fore, and other lands, to the burgesses, " with his annualrent of sixpence."That no bailiff, alderman, common councillor, chamberlain,coroner, and all other inferior officers of the borough,should be or remain in such office longer than he, togetherwith his family, should be abiding, residing, and inhabiting Residing,within the borough, liberties, or franchises, of New Radnor.A court of record — view of frankpledge of all burgesses,inhabitants, and resiants, within the borough — return of allwrits — assise of bread, wine, &c. — all issues, fines, andamercements, &c. are granted.That all men abiding and residing within the borough,manor, and liberties, &c. should be contributors to scot and Scot andlot with the burgesses, in all aids, tolls, taxes, &c.That no freeman should implead another freeman out ofthe borough for any debts, or contracts, &c., entered intowithin the borough.That the common council should have power to makefree burgesses for the borough out of the inhabitants, and to inhabitbind them by oath to obey the common council in all lawfulthings ; with other clauses usual in the English charters.UIJfUON.Thitt tu London provided, tli&t the niKyor,quid all the uldcrnioii of the city uf London forbeing, should be justice of the peace within the city Beniliberties, kz.*WEYMOUTH.Tliiit to Wiymonth^ waH aii explanatory charter, diieelilgthat the aldermen and the capital and principal burgesses ofthe borough and town for the time being should be capableof beiii^ elected to the ofHces of mayor and bailiffs, hoth M.the annual elections, and on every vacancy that fthonl4^I happen ; and concluded with a confirmation of all prestonliberties and privileges.MAlUSiONE.n«. That to MaidittoaeX commences with a recital, that tuft.lohdUioiit. inhabitants had enjoyed divert liberties, &e. by the name ofthe " mayor, jurats and commonalty," and re- incorporate!them by the name of the " mayor, jurats, and commonalty."The charter afterwards proceeds to grant, amongst otherusual privileges, that 13 of the inhabitants should bejuratS)and one of them mayor. And that 40 of the remainingprincipal inhabitants should be of the common council. Arecorder, deputy recorder and serjeants-at-mace, are thenappointed. And it provides, that the mayor, jurats, and com-Adnuuioo. monalty might admit any person, an inhabitant, or not aninhabitant, as a freeman of the town.This borough has been mentioned before, and its charter,1559. ill the reign of Edward VI., extracted. Queen Elizabeth,in the second year of her reign, granted another charter tolaiubiuuu the inhabitants, and incorporated them, by the name of themayor, jurats, and commonalty," with the usual corporatepowers, and provisions for the annual and other elections.The commonalty were exempted from serving on juries, andMAIDSTONE. 2041the mayor, jurats, and commonalty were to return two mem George II.hers to Parliament.In the same reign many bye-laws were also made, resemblingthose we have previously quoted, from other places,particularly the Cinque Ports.The returns to Parliament were chiefly made by the mayor, \eoo,jurats, and commonalty. In one return, in the 43d of Elizabeth,they are emphatically described in the indenture asbeing — in the language of the conmion law — the free andlawful men of the borough and parish.James I., in the second year of his reign, granted Maid ironstoneanother charter, again incorporating the inhabitants by inhabitantsthe same name, with the usual corporate powers and provisionsfor the elections.In the 17th of James I., there was also another grant of gig.the markets and fairs; and the charter referred to thatof Elizabeth, as to the election of jurats, and gives furtherdirections to remove doubts respecting those elections. Aclause is also inserted for the making of freemen, similarto the one quoted above in this reign.In the 19th of James I., there was also a declaration by i62i.the king as to the privileges of Maidstone.The same course of the surrender of the charters, and the 1682.grant of a new one by Charles II., with the revival of the jo . . Surrender,former grants by James II., occurred with respect to Maid *tc.stone, as in the other boroughs at that period.The abuses of non-residents had grown to a great extent in Non-thereign of George II. ; and in a letter (among the South-wellMss), from the Earl of Winchelsea to Mr. Southwell,in the seventh of George II., he speaks of 400 persons comingfrom London to vote at the elections.At the same period, there were also some legal proceedings,which ended in the dissolution of the corporation.The two following should be inserted : —Application was made for leave to file an information in 1736.the nature of quo warranto,* against the defendants, whohad been chosen jurats of the corporation of Maidstone by aKing V, Tomlyn and othcfb, Case temp. Hardwick, 316.30^^f>i%eU.gf.igct number of itt/uilnUints, ihc charter directing the choihceto be by the inhabitants ; which refers to & majoris oj thtthule of that bodt/. [t was objected against granting theinfomiiition, that there had been a long usage to chouse themin this manner. — But the court granted the information;Lord Hardwick. euxine, that " though according to the caseof corporations,* where a charter directs the election tobe by the matson, jurats and commonalty, the body maymake a bye-law to vest the power of election in anyselect number; yet here, the question being, whether thenis such a bye-law or not, the court cannot determinethat upon motion, but it must be tried; and therefore,in the case of Brecknock, though the especial verdict found,that the defendant's election was according to a very longusage, yet not having found expressly that there was abye-law for that purpose, judgment was given f^abist thedefendants : — for no usage, how long soever, in case of acorporation by a charter, can support an election made otherwisethan according to the words of the charter, unless the"jury find there was a bye-law for that purpose; thoughpossibly it may be otherwise in case of a corporation bgprescription."It has been sufficiently shown, that in fact there were nocorporations by prescription, and therefore this point nevercould arise. If it could, it would appear difficult to establishany effectual distinction upon it,1738. In a case of quo warranto, respecting Maidstone^'f- it k^feared that " by letters patent, 2 James I.," it was grantedthat the mayor and jurats should choose jurats out of thefreemen only.And that by another charter in the 17th James I., it wasrecited that by the charter of Queeti Elizabeth it was grantedto the mayor, jurats, and commonalty, (when it should havesaid, "mayor and jurats only") that they might choose jugout of the inhabitants ; — and that by the charter of 2DdJames I. it was granted, that the mayor, jurats, and commonaltymight choose jurats out of the freemen only ; thereSoc before, p. 1448, tl ^q. t King. Blunt, Andrews, 293,MAIDSTONE. 2043afore to prevent all doubts, &c., it was ordained, " that it George.should be lawful for the mayor, jurats, and commonalty, tochoose jurats out of the inhabitants at large J^ inhabitantsThe question upon demurrer was, whether, upon the constructionof this last charter, it be necessary for the commonaltyto concur with the mayor and jurats, in the electionof a jurat in the case of death; the defendant's elected appearingto be by the mayor and jurats only. 'The whole court were of opinion, that upon the constructionof the last charter, the right of election urns in the mayorsjurats, and commonalty — for the words, " it shall and maybelawful," are express words of grant.In consequence of this decision, the election by the jurats 1619.and common council, which had prevailed from the grant of 1716.the charter, in the 17th of James I. till 1714 — nearly anhundred years — was set aside, and seven of the jurats were 1738.displaced — judgments being given against two, and five disclaiming— leaving only three. Three assembled with threecommon councilmen, and 54 freeholders, and elected 16 personsas common councilmen ; three of whom were electedand sworn as jurats.But subsequently the title of the three remaining juratswas attacked : a quo warranto information being filed againstone of them ; which was tried at bar, and a verdict beingobtained against the defendant, and judgment of ousterentered against him, the two others disclaimed : which wasfollowed by a quo warranto against one of the six newjurats, which being also successful, the other five disclaimed,and the town was left without a jurat. In consequence ofwhich, the corporation was reduced to such a state, thatit was unable to act, and it became necessary to apply to thecrown for a new charter. Accordingly, two petitions werepresented to the king, in which the inhabitants ]0\aeA ; andbeing referred in the ordinary course to the attorney andSolicitor-general, they recommended that a new chartershould be granted to the inhabitants, agreeably with thecharter of the 17th of James I., excepting in the alterationswhich they proposed : upon which basis the charter quotedUvorti II. above was founded : being still an incorporation of the inhabitant,and granting them, under their corporate name, altthe usual privileges.UVEllPOOL.The charter to Liverpool* was merely explanatory — grantingthat every mayor of Liverpool should continue to be, aiuJact as one of iliKJuiticat to keep the peace in the town, IJbei^tics and precincts thereof. That the four aldermen for thetime being, next the senior alderman, whilst they remainmembers of the common council of the town, should beadditional justices to keep the peace within the town andliberties thereof. That the recorders might appoint deputiesduring their absence or indisposition ; and that the mayorbailiff's, and burgesses might ciijoy all their former libertiesand privileges.Common lialb or assemblies of the inhabUanU seem, aboutthis time, to have been held for transacting the business ofthe town.But in this year, during the mayoralty of Edward Halssll,n a bye-law states, that " thei'e had formerly been a custom,that the town should Ordered by a common round!,without the rest of the commonalty, as in other corporations;•]■ but that such custom had been so defaced by theusurpations of the commons, that, in effect, there TemaixetAno memory thereof at all : saving that 24 burgesses, onceevery year, being impannelled, ^c, have, for some remem-." trance of the former customs, taken upon them to prescriberules and orders for the government of the town."It is then ordered, that " the late usurped assemblies shallbe abolished, and the ancient custom of common councilrestored," &c.Notwithstanding this order, the burgesses still continuedto assemble together to tniiisact their own concerns. Andin confirmation of the point so frequently urged, that thecommon council" were the jury ; the bye-law above speaksn Ui. i!ia.ly.LIVERPOOL. 2045tit€€of them, in the language applicable to such a body, as being George II.'* annually impannelled."But their right to elect and admit the burgesses was disputedin the following case in the beginning of this reign.In Easter Term, the third of George II., a rule was made 1729.upon William Pole,* one of the bailiffs of Liverpool, andupon Richard Norris and others, twenty-two of the commoncouncil, to show cause why an information in the nature of aquo warranto should not be exhibited against them, to showby what warrant they, without the mayor, and not beingtwenty-five of the common council of the town, claim to useand enjoy the liberty, privilege, and franchise of electing,** approving, and admitting persons to be burgesses of the Burgesses.'' town."Which rule, after several enlargements, was, in Michael i730.mas Term, fourth of George IL, made absolute.And in Easter Term, in the same year, rules were givento plead to an information, which had then been accordinglyexhibited against them, and a plea of disclaimer was entered.CASES.Some few decisions in the courts of law of this reign, willrequire to be inserted ; and that they may explain each other,they will be quoted in their chronological order.Upon a writ of error, in the House of Lords, in the secondof George II.,t in a case relative to a capital burgess and 1728.common councilman of the borough of Brecknock, it was Breaksdecided that the acceptance of a new charter, whereby theelection of burgesses was directed in a manner different fromthat which had obtained from the 15th of Elizabeth tillthe second of George 1 1. J — upwards of 200 years — suchancient usage, being inconsistent with the new grant, can nolonger subsist, but is determined by the acceptance of thenew charter, which must afterwards be the only rule bywhich the election of burgesses was to be governed.• Rex r. Pole, cited 4 Burr. 2261, in Rex r. Breton. t 2 Bro. Par. Ca. 298.J 2 Bro. Par. Ca. 298, in error, Powell v. The King.IfscMeI GMtc«lI- Some cases also occurred with reference to the ufiur|>iitioiwof wm-rendents. Thus in one relative to Gloucester.t^, Mr. Will moved for an information, in the nature of a.quo warranto, against several persona, for acting as freemanWit of Me city of Gloucester * wet Texulinij there at the timeif.^' their election. The point nn which this question turned yntfwhether the corporation, that is the acting part of the body*t'Mwran' of tie city, can make honorary freemen,Now, he observed, that no corporation can do this, aiI they suive a prescription or a chiiige in their charter to supportthem in it. But in the present case, though indeed they'L have Sometimes complimented noblemen and others of the sint^^^^^^^^ft distinction with this privilege, yet that was only a thing^^^^^^^^K lived at, and can be no warrant to them in what they hare^^^^^^^^V done, making 1 19 strangers free at one instant. Decides, loop^^^^^^^H in this corporation there are very particular privilt^s give^^^^^^^^B to the freemen, and one above all in being toll free tbrooglk'^^^^^^^B out the kingdom : now by the same way of reasoning, as they^^^^^^^^V may make 1 19 free, they may make every person in EngtatA^^^^^^^P 80, and by this means take away from the king this part of tfaa''' revenue. But if they should claim auy colour of a prescriptionto support them in what they have done from these fewand uncommon instances, the charter of King Charles tieSecond, which they accepted of, has clearly taken it froaithem, by incorporating them by the names of ave, reftdenies, and inhabitantes of this city.But the court said, that they were of opinion that everycorporation may make what person they willie of it, andthis is an incident belonging to them, de jure, unless Liveis a prescription, or express words in the charter to the astray,restraining them in some particular cases. The courtobserved further, that this complaint was only of the imprudentexercise of a privilege, and not of the illegality ofit; and, therefore, this application was not proper. Theysaid too, that the charter could not make a difference ; forall incorporations are in this manner. Accordingly theyrefused even to make a rule to show cause,I Ilaiaatilislon, 137. AooDTinous.CASES. 2047Another case also occurs in the fourth of George II., relay George II,live to Exeter. Upon a rule* to show cause why an inform Exeter.nation, in the nature of quo warranto, should not go againstthe defendant for taking upon him the office of common countcilia of the city of Exeter. The case was, that the city ofExeter was incorporated in the third of Car. /., and thecharter provided, that de cetero in perpetuum the commoncouncil should be elected de discretioribus civilis et in-habitations civitatis praedicta; and further ordered, thatin case any freeman of the city should refuse to execute anyof the offices within the city, he should be grievouslypunished. The defendant was elected into the office of commoncouncilman, being a freeman but not an inhabitant ;and whether this was regular, was the question.Mr. Fazakerly said, that in general it must be allowed tohim, that where the inhabitants of a town are incorporated,and no provision made out of whom the officers of the corporationshall be elected, they may be elected out of thefreemen at large, as well as the inhabitants ; and so was itdetermined in the case of the toum of Hertford, and likewisein the case of one Power, for the town of Brechnoch. Thedifficulty, then, in this case arises from the words of thecharter, which seem to make inhabitancy a necessary qualificationto a common councilman. But as to that, he thoughtthe words might well be construed by way of direction tothe electors, as pointing out what would generally be mostproper, rather than by way of restriction, as making this absolutelynecessary. To which purpose the case was cited ofthe borough of Truro, where there was a clause, that thealdermen should be ^' annuatim eligendi ;" the first sense thathas been mentioned was put upon these words, and not theother. It was however said, that what would effectuallydetermine this question, was the subsequent clause in thecharter, whereby all the freemen, inhabiting or not inhabiting,I Bamardiston, 416.t The reader will remember that the doctrine of words in a statute being directory,was first introduced by Lord Coke, in order to excuse his sitting in the Houseof Commons for Buckinghamshire, though not resident in the county, contrary tothe words of the statute.'■ tir ro'niireil lo \io piinisbt'doHiceii within the corporationThe rauTt saul, that this clutter tax provided erpregdj/ immany other instances, thut the eleclvms should be out of titfreemen at urge, aa well tut ifnum inhabiting within tie dtyiand, therefore, tht-y thought the construction of this sabresquest clause initial well be construed reddened singulaKgulia, \\\al fri-men should be punished for refusing toI those offices which they were capable of executing; — and Utltihefreemai, inhabitants, should only be punished for execute those offices, of which they were capable. Aoj flB8 to the words civis fit inbahitantibm, they thought /»£*qualifications must concur in the same person, and tttat thawords must be construed by way of restriction. Accordingly,the nile was made absolute.Another cose occurred in the fifth year, relative to AoifiMr.ltOn a rule to show cause, why an information in the natni^;.'of a quo warranto should not go against the defendant totexercising the office of capital burgess in the token of A'flw'»- Radnor, not being an inhabitant at the time of his el(>ctioi^Mr. Reeves said, that the clause of the charier only declared,that no capital burgess should exercise his office any longerthan he was an inhabitant in the corporation, which is noexpress declaration that they should be inhabitants at thetime they were elected. And besides, the present defendantcame with his family, and inhabited in the town before themotion was made for the information. He submitted thatthe court would determine this point on the rule for showingcause, and would not put the defendant to the expence of aspecial verdict. Accordingly he observed, that the courthad determined a point of much gi-eater difficulty than thisin the case of the town of Pomfret, when that matter camebefore them in the same manner as the present. There thecharter required, that no person should be mayor unless heten.* an inhabitant at the time of the election, A personcame and lodged at an inn for a month ; and the courtCASES. 2049determined that to be a sufficient inhabitancy to qualify him George ir.for such election. However, the court made the rule ab Radnor.solute, and thought this a matter proper to be decided in amore solemn way.The law also with respect to foreigners, arose in the fol Ipswich,lowing case relative to Ipswich :* — In an action upon thecase, the plaintiffs declared, that the town of Ipswich was aborough by prescription : and that during all that time theburgesses of the town were an incorporation, and for manyyears past, had been incorporated by the name of thebailiffs, burgesses, and commonalty of the town or borough*' of Ipswich." That within the borough there had been anancient and laudable custom, that no foreigner, not free ofthe borough, should keep any shop within the borough, townor liberties thereof, without a license from the corporation.Nevertheless, that the defendant did keep a shop there, beinga foreigner, without any license. To this, the defendantpleaded not guilty. The plaintiffs counsel offered to provethat there had been anciently courts held within the borough,before the bailiffs ; and this they submitted wasevidence of the borough's being very anciently a corporation.But Mr. Baron Corals was of opinion, that it was no evidence; because a borough is of itself capable of holdingcourts ; and therefore that evidence was not allowed. Thecounsel for the plaintiff then said, they would prove, thatanciently the borough enjoyed lands, which they submitted,was evidence of the borough's being at that time a corporation;which evidence the court allowed. And to answerit, the counsel for the defendant said, they would prove,that there was a time when there was rio seal in this borough;which would be evidence, that at that time therewas no corporation in it. They said further, that the corporationwas erected by charter of 6 John ; and relied uponthese words in it, burgesses habet guilds mediatorial.The judge was of opinion, that these words anciently would*The Bailiffs, Burgesses and Commonalty of the town or borough of Ipswich, v.Johnson, 2 Barnardiston, 120.6i'2060 CASES.George II. create a corporation; and for that purpose said there wasIpswich, an authority in Rolle's Abridgment.The counsel for the plaintiff then went into their eridoiceto prove the name of the corporation : and produced a recitalof a charter made in Edward IVth's time ; by which theburgesses were incorporated by the name of " the bailiffs,burgesses and commonalty of the town of Ipswich." Thedefendant's counsel objected that this would not prove thename of the corporation, as laid in the declaration. Theyagreed that such variance would not have been material inany action brought against the corporation; but in everyaction brought by them, they must prove the same strictlyas they have laid it. For this purpose was cited a case oatof Bro. Abr. But the court was of a different opinion, andcited Dr. Array's case, 1 1 Rep.The last thing endeavoured to be proved by the plaintiffwas their custom. In order to do which, much evidencewas produced, and a living evidence owned, that he neverknew butchers pay foreign fine money; neither did he everknow any foreigner pay it, living within the liberty and outof the borough; and that freemen's widows were alwaysthought to be exempted during their widowhood. Thejudge said, that he thought these would be material exceptionsagainst the custom, as laid in the declaration. Butthe great difficulty with him was, whether any of thewritten evidence had proved the plaintiffs custom. Theproof, he said, was beyond contradiction, that the foreignershad been for a long time past fined for keeping shop withouta license j which he agreed was strong evidence that thecorporation had a right to those fines. An action of debttherefore, he thought might be well maintained for them.But the doubt with him was, whether this evidence wouldamount to proof, that the corporation might totally excludeforeigners from erecting shops arbitrarily at their own discretion.He said further, that he was far from being clear, thatthe custom, as laid in the declaration, was good in point oflaw. But that question was unnecessary to be argued now,because his opinion was, that the evidence did not maintainCASES. 2061it. Accordingly, the plaintiffs counsel agreed to be non George IT,suited. Ipswich.The doctrine asserted by the learned judge, that a " guild"or "mercatoria" made a corporation, seems to have beenadopted from Dr. Brady; upon whose work observationshave already been made.The. following case also as to Oxford will show the opinion ^^"^^which was at this time entertained by the courts as toresidence.On five informations in the nature of a quo warranto,against several defendants for exercising the offices of capitalburgesses in the borough of Oxford there were four issuesjoined in each of them; Fir sty that the defendants were not Notingat the time they were chosen, which the charterrequires they should be. Secondly, that Robert Duffin whopresided at their election, was not mayor. Thirdly thatthe defendants were not duly elected. And lastly that theydid not take the oaths proper on such occasion.* Oaths.In evidence on the first issue, the counsel for Male, oneof the defendants, proved that he was born in the town ; thathe served an apprenticeship with his father; and lived ajourneyman with him ever since. On the other side itwas submitted, that this was not sufficient to make thedefendant an inhabitant. He ought also to have been ahousekeeper ; 2 Inst. 703. The judge declared his opinion. Housekeepers.that to make the defendants inhabitants within the intent ofthe charter, they not only ought to have been housekeepers,but even to have paid scot and lot to the poor.Accordingly a verdict was directed against three of the defendants,for their not being able to prove such inhabitancy.In two other of the informations, the defendants counselwere able to prove such an inhabitancy ; upon which theywent on to prove their second issue, that Robert Duffin wasmayor at the time he presided; and submitted, that theproving him to be so de facto, would be sufficient ; but thejudge was of a different opinion, and said, that they mustThe King v, Male and others, 2 Baraardiston, 406.6p2'■ prove him in all respect to be mayor de jure ; and for thispurpose directed them to show thai he had taken the oathto the government duly according to the statute. Alien the (defendants' counsel proceeded in the proof of that fact, itappeared that the sessions held for the borough wherein hetook these oaths, were not held at the time limited by tbccharter; accordingly, a verdict went for the king on themI two informations, as well as the others.The following case relative to the same borough sbonUbe added, for the purpose of showing the necessity ofL irthahitancy, and also, lliat the whole corporation sbonld ■join in the corporate acts.*Mr. Abney moved, that « rule lo show cause might btmade absolute, for granting an information in the nature of ia qtio warranto, against the defendant DufGn, for acting H'mayirr, of the borough of Orford ; and likewise HfcainA-Several other defendants, for acting as capital burgeaeM ofthe borough ; the validity nf whose election dependedelection of Duffin.The constitution of the borough consisted of aeight footmen, and 12 capital burgesses who had the poMfof nominating two of t/it-.ie portmen, tn the inli/ihitnntj.f amiappointing one of them to be mayor for the year eosutug.The charter-day is the Monday before the feast of St. MichaelAnd when Dufiin was chosen to be mayor on the chartered,no mayor was present at the assembly, by reasonthat Scolden, the former mayor, had at that time judgmentin quo warranto given against him. Upon this state ofthe case, Mr. Abney submitted, that the election of Duffinwas illegal : and the court inclined to be of the sameopinion. The chief justice said he did afrree, that whereverany business was to be done by a particular part of a corporationonly, the presence of the mayor was not requisiteat the assembly ; but wherever the business was tohe done by the whole corporation at large, the presenceof the mayor was absolutely necessary. In the presentCASES. 2063case, he thought all the members of the corporation had a G^^ggH *voice in the election; and accordingly the rule was made Orford.absolute. " ^'^^'There is a third case, which also establishes the necessityof residence, by the charter : the words of which areset out in the case. But the courts appear at that timeto have yielded to the usage in favour of non-residence,and disregarded what seems to be the clear import of the 1734.charter.On a rule to show cause, why quo warranto* informationsshould not be granted against the defendants, for exercisingthe office of capital burgess and other offices, in the corporationof Oxford Mr. Draper said, that with regard tosome of the defendants, he should not oppose the rulesbeing made absolute, but as to Scolden and Brady he submittedthe rules ought to be discharged.With regard to Mr. Scolden, he said, the change upon himwas for acting as mayor ; and he could not deny but therewere two entries made in the corporation books, that he hadacted in that capacity. But those entries were made bymere mistake. With regard to Mr. Brady, the charge was,that he had acted as capital burgess, after he left off residingwithin the borough, and the words of the charter are. Thatno person should continue a capital burgess longer than heteas an inhabitant within it. He said he should not contend,but that Mr. Brady chiefly resided in a village nearadjoining. But he had many affidavits to show, that Mr.Brady occupied a house within the borough, which waslet out partly in lodgings, and the other part was in hisown hands : that he was rated for this house ; and achurchwarden this very year. Mr, Shelton, on the sameside said, that a person might be an inhabitant in two ini»wuntplaces at one time; for which purpose he recited 6 Rep.67; and 2 Inst. 173. Mr. Abney argued on the otherside, and said that he should not contend, but that theoccupying land or a house in a pjBirish, would to somepurposes male a man an inhabitant ; but conceived that resin Residence.The King r. Scolden and others, 2 Barnardiston, 439.2064 ^^^•George II. deny was essentially necessary in the present case; and forOrford. this purpose mentioned the case of the borough of Airnor J where the paying taxes for land was held not to besufficient. The court said that it was only sworn in theaffidavits, on which the rule was obtained, that Mr. Bradyresided in this other village ; without any word* as to kitresiding within the borough. And they thought it sufficientlyappeared by the affidavits, on the part of the defendants,that Mr. Brady was considered an inhabitant in this borough,within the intent of the charter. The chief justicesaid, in the case of Sir William Other, the court refusedgranting an information against him for exercising an officein the borough of Pomfret, though it appeared that hetook a house in the borough, to qualify himself only theday before the election. He said likewise, that there wasno pretence to make the rule absolute as to Mr. Scolden.Accordingly the rules relating to him and Mr. Brady weredischarged,mSHREWSBURY.There is also a case as to Shrewsbury respecting thenecessity of residence for an alderman ; upon which groundhe was removed from his office.1737. Upon a mandamus to the defendants to restore C. Kingstonto the office of alderman, of the town of Shrewsbury, theymade the following return :* — they set forth their charter,which requires that all the aldermen should be residentwithin the town, and so continue always, unless some contagiousdistemper was in the town : and that the next servingalderman should always be from time to time, electedmayor ; that Kingston was duly elected and sworn an alderman,but had absented himself from the town for theResidence, space of three years, and resided in places remote and unknown,and that there was no contagious distemper there ;that one Floyd was mayor of the town, and in his mayoralty,a court was duly assembled, and it appearing to thatAbiding, court, that Kingston was not abiding in the town, thereCases temp. Lord Hardwick, 147, 295, 377.CASES. 2066fore the mayor j &c. be adjudged that he should be removed George II.from his office of alderman ^c* 1737.The cases before quoted, for the purpose of showing thenecessity of residence for all persons filling offices withinthe boroughs, may properly be followed by one, which willestablish that all the inhabitants (assuming always thatthey were of sufficient ability, and proper and fit personsto be chosen,) were liable to be elected for the several publicoffices and functions within the boroughs : — being in fact,that liability, which was by the laws of William the Conqueror,and has been ever since described as bearing ^^ Zo/."And therefore, when a body, having the right to make Woking-bylawsto govern the inhabitants, and to make secondaryburgesses out of the inhabitants, and capital burgesses outof the secondary burgesses, made a bye-law, that everyinhabitant chosen a burgess, and refusing to serve, shouldforfeit a penalty; it was held a good bye-law; but that itrelated only to inhabitants refusing to be secondary burgesses,and not to the secondary refusing to be capitalburgessesROCHESTER.Besides the bye-laws which we have before extracted *^^-from the records of Rochester]: others were at this periodenacted, which commenced by reciting, those previouslypassed respecting the necessity of residence for the municipalofficers : and then proceeded to enact —That if any person should be elected an alderman orassistant of the city, and should absent himself for more thaneight weeks together; or should absent himself from hishabitation for the major part of any six montis, to be takentogether, without having assigned a reasonable cause, orobtained the written permission of the major part of thealdermen and assistants, should be deemed and taken not• By Lords reversed ; 2 Straw. 1051 j And. 85, 104.t Mayor of Wokingham v. Johnson, 2 Com. Dig* B. 2, 15.t Vide ante, p. 1711, etseq.tS'WB' "■ to be "most i-oiumoiity and ordinarily resident i" but to1737. have wilfully departed and absented himself from his duties,and for that cause should be removable by the mayor,aldermen, and assistants, who should have power to appointa Successor.HASTINGS.1736. We have seen the burgesses of Hastings mentioned inDomesday :* and the services the barons performed iu thereign of Henry II., and King John. Us custuraal, has also beenreferred to, and it has been shown that the men of the town, inSeoiBoJ the reign of Edward II., paid scot and lot — that it returnedmembers to Parliament from the reign of Edward III. — notwithstandingwhich, it appeared the House of Commons, inthe reign of William III., decided the right of election to bein the freemen," and not, according to the ancient documents,either in the burgesses or barons. This necessarily involvedthe borough in all the questions connected with corporation1736. law ; and in the 10th of Geoi^e II., a mandamus was appliedFreemen. for by Mr Henry More, to admit him as a freeman, upon onallegation of a custom, that the eldest sons of freemen bornr in the town, after the admission and swearing of their fathersW as freemen, had a right tu be admitted on the payment of areasonable fine The custom was denied, and an issue wasCiutumal. joined to try the fact. Upon the trial the custumal wasproduced — which has since been lost— undoubtedly a justground of complaint. But it is immaterial to our presentinquiry, as the principal part of it is still preserved in theState Trials, and it in substance corresponds with the othercustumals of the Cinque Ports, already quoted. Probablyit ought, with more propriety, to be considered as the cussof the whole body; rather than of Hastings, individually.Many entries were also read in evidence of the admissionof freemen from the year 1577 ; but which are in substancethe same as those we have already extracted, respectingHythe, and the other Cinque Ports. They were at firstHASTINGS. 2067at the court leet; as they are stated to be " at the court pf Oeorgeil.our sovereign lord the king." But, subsequently, as in i736.other places, they were, without sufficient authority, transferredto the corporate meetings; though sometimes theywere, as in Hythe, at the " full court." And, notwithstanding,some of the forms of the old law were still continued ; asgiving their pledges* — describing those who were admittedas inhabitants — and binding those who were not so, to becomehousekeepers — and to pay scot and lot, and do watchand ward, and all duties incumbent upon freemen — add ifany one of them should depart, or dwell out of the town forayear and a day, they were to lose their freedom : — yet, bydegrees, the mayor and jurats claimed for themselves theright of electing and admitting such freemen as they thoughtLit, and admitted many honorary freemen, as members ofParliament, captains of ships, &c.It also appeared in evidence, that there was a roll of the Roll,freemen, as anciently required by the common law — andLord Hard wick, in summing up the case to the jury,properly observed, that " it was an extraordinary custom foraman to have a right to be admitted a freeman who was notresident ; and yet the corporation could disfranchise a man^^ for non-residences He particularly referred to that part ofthe custumal of the Cinque Ports, which we have before cited ;by which, if a foreigner resided for a year and a day in theCinque Ports, he might come before the bailiffs and jurats,and be admitted to the freedom upon taking an oath — ^which,with the exception of its not being done at the court leet, isin perfect accordance with the common law. Nor is it contraryto the common law, that in the intervals between thecourts, the bailiff, or presiding officer of the king, shouldadmit and swear such persons as had resided there for ayear and a day.Lord Hardwick added, '' that as to the right which hasbeen set up for the defendants, that all is at the will andpleasure of the mayor and jurats, and that there is no rightat all to be free ; it was such an extraordinary custom as heSec before, Huntingdon, Wells, Lynn, Yarmouth.ititG«irE«n. " hardly ever heard of , and knew no such instance any WJ1736. " Some right there must be," &e.He also commented upon the inconsistency of admitnon-resuIe7tt honorary fi-eenien ; when the custumal expreflai|rec|uirGd that they ehoutd be commorant and resident.The jury found, That the eldest son of a freemana right to be made free. Thus, apparently, limiting the coBhi!mon law right by birth, to the more restricted right ofmagnitude : the applicability of which had been before'shown.* And in defiance of the custumal, they found thatresidence was not necessary.NEWCASTLE.An officer oS Newcastle was removed from his office ifbecause he had been absent from the corporation twenl^W9years, and resided at a distance of two hundred miles /rthe borough; which being considered as a total desertionthe duty of his office, it was holden to be a good causeDONCASTER.li. The following case also relates to the subject of »«residence; but it will be seen that the court began first todoubt about the power of removal ; and next as to the groundfor it — apparently sanctioning a residence a short dutatu*out of the borough. Which, if once admitted, introducesgeneral non-residence : because, beyond the limits of theborough all the jurisdiction ends; and if the boundary isonce passed, there is no other limit,A residence, therefore, two or three miles out of the borough,should be considered the same as if it were everso remote ; because the principle is equally destroyed, andthe whole is then left in doubt and uncertainty. However,the following is the case, which relates to the borough ofDoncaster.'^• See before, pp. 22, 349, 687, &c.i lteir.MajDrofNeivcasl1e,M.T.31,Gea.II. Say. 39, cited ibiRex V, Major and Aldecmca ur Doncaster, Say.37.DONCASTER. 2069To a mandamus for restoring John Beale to the office of George H*alderman the return was, that he was not resident in 1762,the borough at the time of his election, but lived at thedistance of three miles from thence, and had not since residedin the borough. That, upon his being present in acommon council, he was charged with, and accused of, nonresidenceand non-attendance; and that not offering anydefence, the common council had removed him.Lee, C. J. It does not appear from this return, that a powerof removing from an office, for good cause, is vested in thecommon council. Such a power is, indeed, incidental toevery corporation : but it never can be exercised by a part ofa corporation, unless it is vested in that part by charter orprescription.If it had appeared from this return, that a power of removingfrom an office, for good cause, was vested in the commoncouncil, the cause returned for the removal of Beale wasnot a good one : as he resided so near the borough, that hemight attend the duty of his office. And it does not appearthat more than one common council, at which he did notattend, was holden whilst he was in the office of alderman.There was not therefore such a total desertion of the duty ofhis office, as was a good cause of removal; and it wouldbe very strange to hold, that the residing two or three milesout of the borough, which officers of a corporation frequentlydo, is a good cause of removal from an office.In the case bf Newcastle, the officer removed had beenabsent from the corporation twenty-two years, and residedat the distance of two hundred miles from the borough ;which, being considered as a total desertion of the duty of hisoffice, it was holden to be a good cause of removal.This return is bad for another reason ; namely, that itonly charges a general neglect and omission by Beale, of theduty of his office ; whereas it ought to have shown the particularinstances of neglect and omission, that the courtmight have adjudged, whether such neglects and omissionsare a good cause of removal.In the case oi Doncaster, Lord Raymond, 1666, the returnaoooG»orii«ii. to a mandamus for restoring Scot to nn office, was, til S"63. had oh.4tiniLtfly, and voluntarily, refused to obey sereneorders and laws made for the good) of the borough, coiitruryto the duty of his office. This return was holden to be insufficient,because it did not show th piirlictilar arden orlaws which Scot had refused to obey.It has been said, that Beale was incapable offering electedan alderman, on account of his non-residence in the boroughBt the time of his election ; and that therefore he ought notto be restored. But us he was, in fact, elected, it is not agood return U) a nmndnmus for restoring liii, to say that A<wag incapable of being etched. The proper way of trying,whether he was incapable of being elected, being in an informationin the nature of a quo warranto.CARMARTHEN,upon a rule to show cause,* why a mandamus should notbe awarded for proceeding to the election of a mayor of theborough of Carmarthen, it appeared, that by b bye-law madein the reign of Queen Elisabeth, the rii/hl of electing a mayorof the borough was vested in the viojor part of the centumeouncilment : that upon the day appointed by the charter forthe election of a mayor, a mob took possession of the town-hall; that upon the succeeding day, another mob did thesame ; that upon the latter day J. S. was elected mayor bythe burgesses at large ; that J. N,, who presided at the electionof J. S. was not the next person in rank or office to thepresent mayor: there being, at the time of that election,three other persons nearer in rank or office to the presentmayor than T. N. That the common council, when complete,consisted of twenty persons, at this time consisted only ofeleven; and, consequently, that as not less than elevencommon councilmen could elect a mayor, if a mayor wasnot elected before one of the present common councilmenshould happen to die, no person, supposing the right of electingto be in the major part of the common council, could■ Ren I. Ncw5.liam nnd olhtis, coniinoQ councilmen of Ihe borough of Cit-marian,3a>.-Jll.CARMARTHEN. 2061ever be elected mayor. And by Ryder j C. J., the court does Oeorgell.not mean to give any opinion as to the right of election ; but i755.in whomsoever that may bes the election of J. S. appearsclearly to be illegal. It was in a riotous manner ; and theproper person who ought to preside thereat was absent.The circumstance that the common councilmen were reducedto the lowest number which could elect a mayor, was likewiseof great weight in the present case ; for if the rightof election were in the major part of the common councilmen,and any one of them should happen to die beforethere was an election of a mayor, there never could beanelection ; and, consequently, the corporation must bedissolved.DURHAM.In the case of the King against the mayor of Durham* it 1767.appeared that the town was incorporated in the 44th ofElizabeth, by a charter from the Bishop of Durham, in whichthere was a clause, giving a power to *' the mayor, aldermen,and 24 common council," to admit freemen, &c. : but that thebye-laws regulating this admission had been made by themayor, aldermen, and commonalty."Lord Mansfield, in giving judgment, observed, ** that the'* power of the select number is to make bye-laws, not intheir own names but in the stead, for, and in the name ofthe whole. Though, therefore, this law was really madeby them, they might do it in the name of the whole."aIPSWICH.A quo warranto had been filed against Thomas Richard 1758.sons to show by what authority he claimed to be one of theportmen of Ipswich.The defendant pleaded the charter of 17 Charles II., which,amongst other things, directed that the portmen, upon anyvacancy, should be elected by the others, or residue of theportmen for the time being, or the greater pert of them.The plea also stated the customary mode of election, and,• Lord Kenyon's Rep. 524. 1 1 Burr. 517.2062 IPSWICH.Curie 1 1, amongst other things, that the portmen ought to be rested175a. and inhabiting within the town or borough. And alsothe dismissal of certain of the portmen for not attending athe great court. And that the defendant, being a burstof the borough, resident and inhabiting viiiiin it, and a fitsand proper person to be elected a portman, was elected ithe place of one of the portmen then vacant.To this plea there was a general demurrer. The absenceof the portmen from the great courts was held not to be flBulGcient gi-ound for removal ; and there being, therefore, noVacancy, the defendant was held to be unduly elected, andjudgment was given for the king,A petition was also presented, at this period, to theHouse of Commons, against the return for this place, but3 the question turned entirely upon bribery and treating,I it affords little information upon the subject of our presentinquiry.*It appears, however, from the proceedings at this election,that upon a mistaken application of the determination in1710, non-residents had assumed the right of voting: andthe extent to which that prevalent evil had gone in thisplace is proved by the fact, that of the 297 voters for Mr,Cato, 139 only were resident, and 158 were non-resident.The election was declared to be void : which shows theopinion of the committee, that the proceedings were unconstitutional,and contrary to the freedom of elections. Oneof the colourable modes of bribery which was then resortedto, was the payment of travelling expences, and the expenceof living and loss of time, during the absence from homeof the non-residents ; some of whom received infinitely morethan their travelling expences could, on the most exaggeratedcalculation, have amounted to.The ready means which are afforded by the non-residenceof voters, to the concealment of bribery and corruption, issurely one of the strongest reasons for rejecting their votes,in order that the law should not be supposed to sanction it.• 1 Ud. p.21.NEW RADNOR. 2063George II.NEW RADNOR.An information, in the nature of a quo warranto, was or ^^^tered to be exhibited against Thomas Lewis, clerk,* to showby what authority he claimed " to make and swear free'* burgesses of the borough of New Rculnor, without theconcurrence of the bailiff, aldermen, and capital burgessesof the borough ;" and an information was exhibited againsthim accordinglyThe following cases will establish that the court leet was Court leet.lido.in full exercise in this reign ; and will also show the coursewhich was adopted, and the period at which it should beheld; although, in this particular case, it was decided, thatthe rules relative to the leet did not apply.An information in the nature of a quo warranto, was filed Gramspound.against the defendant for exercising the office of mayor ofGrampound,^ It appeared that it was a borough by prescription,and consisted of a mayor, eight capital burgesses orfreemen, and an unlimited number of free burgesses or freemen.The question that arose was, whether the defendant,who had been legally sworn according to the provisions inthe 1 1 George I. c. 4, rendered it necessary for him to complywith the following constitution of the borough: '^ Thatthe person elected ought to be presented at the next courtleet, before the jury of the court, which is holden always Leet*'* within one month after Michaelmas yearly, and to besworn in and admitted before the town-clerk, or his deputy,at such court, which is holden always within one monthafter Michaelmas yearly, and to be sworn in and admittedbefore the town clerk or his deputy, at such court, in thepresence of the preceding mayor; and that the defendantDance was not presented at the court leet, nor swornthereat."But the court decided, the defendant having complied• Rex V. Lewis. Cited 4 Burr. 2262, in Rex t>. Breton.t See before, Rex v. Scolden and others, Orford. t I've King v. Dance.3004 GRAHPOUND.Oeott»ll . with the statute, tlierc was no obligation upon liii to tie {isentcd at the led.149, Again, an action of debt was brought ibr an aijMi. in a cottrt leet, under the following circumstances.*It appeared that the plaintiff was seized of the manor 4St. Giles-iu-the- Fields, and that a custom e):ist«d for six acorners to be appointed by the steward, who were to jany baker whose bread was dc6cient in weight ; that at ■court leet of the 13th of April 1746, six ale corners wereappointed ; and having gone to the house of the defendant toweigh his bread, lie refused them permission, for which, atthe next court leet, the defendant was presented to the court,who amerced him, which amercement was then afieercd bythree affeerors at 39ji.158, It was urged for the defendant, that the court Icct wasnine. derived out of the toum, am) was a kind of inferior tuuni,-•«. granted to lords of manors, who otherwise were formerlydisobliged to appear at the sheriffs toum ; and as thr^ur^ in thetourn were of the very essence of that court, so they mustlikewise be in the leet, which is derived out of the toum :+and therefore it is contrary to law for six jurors to presentoffences in the leet.Tile Statute of Westminster, 2, c. 13, was made to preventsherifTs in their turns from fining without a jury of 12 menat least, and it extends to presentments in the leet ; as LordCoke, in 2 Inst. 338, expressly says : and that it is onlydeclaratory of what was (before) the common law ; for thereis no saving of any customs in the statute. If this customto present by six jurors was in this court leet before thestatute, it is now abolished by it. If the leet was taken nutof the tourn since the statute, this custom is bad, beingcontrary to it, Time steward and jury constitute the leet,for without these it cannot exist; the jury is to present,and the court to pimlsh ; and a cnstoin to take away theoffice of a judge and a jury of 12 men is against law,The offence for which the defendant is amerced is not• Uutc of Belford V. Alcock, 1 Wilson, 948. » 2 Inst. 71 , 72.ST. GILES' IN THE FIELDS. 2065within the jurisdiction of helmet ; for if it was, what occasion George ILwas there for the statute, 8 Anne, c. 18, which gives power 1768.to justices of the peace to enter bakers' shops, and weightheir bread ; like the statute which gives a similar power toinspect apothecaries' shops. And this authority, given bystatute, could never have existed at common law, for no mancould enter another man's house ; and if the defendant beobliged to permit his bread to be weighed in his own house,it would be for him to find evidence against himself. It wasadmitted they had power to prerambulate the leet, and mightbuy the defendant's bread ; and if the same were under dueweight, might convict him in the leet by a proper jury: butthis custom to enter a man's house, in the manner it is laid,is very inconvenient, and inconsistent with the liberty of thesubject.Ford for the plaintiff. Court leets have been time out ofmind : and it appears by our most ancient statutes, that theyhave had jurisdiction of almost all offences against thepublic* A presentment by six jurors in the toum wouldbe bad ; but it docs not from thence follow that it wouldbe so in the leety for the words in West. 2. c. 13, " et sicobservatory de quolibet balivo libertas," do not includethe steward of the leet.fThe only true standard and criterion of a court leet isthe custom and usage of the place. J And where the customonly extends to affect the person by a jury of six, that maybegood; but if the freehold be concerned, there must be ajury of 12. The presentment by six jurors is not conclusive;the party who thinks himself aggrieved may have a replevinAnd an action of debt lies for an amercement in theleet-ll• Stat. 51 H. III. de pane et cervisia. t Co. 2 Inst. 388.X Neil. 140; 1 loll. Abr. p. 11, 12; Hard. 56; Lane, 55, 56; Cart. 177.Cro. Jac. 683.II Rest. 151 ; Old Book of Entries, 63 b ; Cro. Jac. 582 ; 1 Brown Went. 154, 168,169,170,171.OqIRELAND.To establish still further the identity of the Irish citie*boroughs with those of Eiighind, the following oath of tlDnWin citizens of Dublin, which is dated in this reign, and theof Brutal, are here insertedYou shall swear that you shall be good and true toSovereign Lord King George the Second, and hisObeysant and obedient, yoii shall be to the mayorministers of this city; the franchises and customs thereofyou shall maintain, and this city keep harmless in all thatin you is; you shall be contributory to all janitor of clutrga,within this city, as summons, watcfwt, contributions, tasks,talliages, lot and scot, and nil other charges; bearing yourpart as a freeman ought to do. You shall colour no foreigngoods, whereby the kmg or this city, might lose theircustoms or advantages. You shall know no foreigner t<> bustor sell any merchandises, with any other foreigner withoutthis city, or franchises thereof, but you shall warn the mayor,thereof. You shall take no apprentice, but if he he free-bon,that is to say, no bondsman's son; and for no less term thanfor seven years : within the first year you shall cause him tobe enrolled, and at his term's end, you shall make him freeof this city, if he have well and truly served you. You shallalso keep the king's peace in your own person, and shallalways, whilst you are able and in your power, keep a goodmusket, carbine, or fusee, in good, clean, and sufficientorder. You shall know no gatherings, conventicles, norconspiracies, made against bis majesty's peace, but yooshall warn the mayor thereof, or let it to your power. Youshall not be free baker, butcher, or fisher, without you paycustom; and whatsoever office you be lawfully called untowithin the franchises, you shall not refuse.All these points and articles you shall well and trulykeep according to the laws and customs of this to yourpower. So God you help, and by the holy contents of thisbook. God save the king"*• Sec Dr. l.uras^ letters.IIRELAND. 2067The following is the substance of the oath for a burgess ^l!2![5l!l*of Bristol «"^i«»*oath,You shall be true unto his Majesty King George III.And to the lieutenant master mayor of the city of Bristol,and the ministers of the same, in all causes reasonable, youshall be obedient and assistant."You shall keep the franchises of this city, and also thehinges peace here, you shall endeavour yourself to maintain; you shall be contributory to all manner of summons,as watches, taxes, lots, scots, and other charges within thecity to your power, &c. &c."You shall not colour the goods of any foreigner orstranger, or know any foreigner or stranger to buy and sellwith another foreigner, within the precincts of this city; butyou shall give knowledge thereof unto the chamberlain orhis deputy without delay.You shall not implead nor sue any burgess of this city,in any court out of this city, for any matter whereof you mayhave sufficient remedy within the city.You shall not take any apprentice that is bond ofblood,* and none other, except he be born under the king'sobeysance, and for no less term than seven years : andthat he be bound by indentures, to be made by thetown clerk of this city, for the time being, or by his clerk.And at the end of his term, if he have truly served youall his term, you shall, if he require you to it, presenthim to master mayor, or to the chamberlain, to be made aburgess''Colonel.The following case relative to Clonmel, will also show thatthe proceedings with respect to the Irish boroughs, were, inall respects, similar to those in England.Error of a judgment given in the King's Bench, in Ireland,against the defendant, in a quo warranto brought againstSee also before, the part of the oath for London directed to be omitted by thestate Geo. L c, 18, 1725. See also another form of the Bristol oath, 2 Lud. 99,and also the Liverpool oath, ib. 101.Gq2gesses, &□<! commonalty, or the major part of them,empowered to assemble themselves upon such a day,choose one of the free burgesses, whereof there were to 1iiiber, for mayor; who wits to be sworn intobefore the mayor for the last preceding year, in the preof the free burgesses and commonalty, or the majorof them. It was also found that an ancient bye-law(without eayingwhen) by the mayor, bailiffs, free buiand commonalty, debito modo, directing that, fromforth, upon every election of a mayor, bailie's, free burgesses,and commonalty, the mayor and bailifl's shall withdraw andnominate three out of the /rpe burgesses, whereofI be elet'tcd mayor, and that no person not so nominated shsUbe elected. An act of Parliament, niade in the 13thCharles II., was also set out, whereby the lord-lieutenantIreland, for the time being, was empowered to make ordinancesfor the (jocemmenl of the horvui)h ; and in pursuancethereof, on the 23rd of September, 1672, Lord Essex, thenlieutenant, made an ordinance, that on the election of anyofficers for the borough, the names of such persons shouldbe, within ten days after the election, presented to the lord-lieutenantfor the time being, for his approbation ; and indefault of such presentment or approbation, they should beincapable of acting, and the corporation might proceed to 8new election.It further appeared, that in 172o, one Hamilton waselected mayor, and approved by the lord-lieutenant ; but aquo warranto afterwards was prosecuted, and a judgment ofouster obtained against him. And in 1726, three free burgesseswere nominated for mayor according to the bye-law,which was the first instance, as fur as it appeared by the evidence,of its having been ever exercised, whereof R. MooreThe King r. Castle, Andrews, p. 119.IRELAND. 2069was one ; and he was chosen mayor by some of the burgesses George 11.and presented to and approved by the lord-lieutenant ; and Clonmel.was also sworn into the office, and exercised it till the year1727, when there was judgment of ouster against him; andit appeared, that at the time when Moore was chosen mayor,and also from that time to the year 1731, one Morgan waselected by the major part of the burgesses, but without anynomination or approbation by the lord-lieutenant ; and otherpersons, from time to time, were also elected, and werenominated and approved, and acted as mayors ; the last ofwhich was said to be John Power. And, on the charter day1731, the defendant, 2ifree burgess, was nominated, with twoothers, for mayor; and was chosen by some of the personswho acted" as mayor, bailiffs, rec burgesses and commonalty:Morgan being also elected into the office by the majority,without any previous nomination; and the defendant wasafterwards presented to the lord-lieutenant, and approved byhim, and was sworn, "as well in the presence of James Power,quam plurimorum liberum bui^ensium ;" and he exercisedthe office of mayor.The principal questions in this case were, 1st, Whether thebye-law set out by the jury was a good one ? 2nd, Supposingit was, whether the defendant appeared to be regularly chosenand sworn into the office of mayor.Kindle.The following letters will also exhibit the manner in whichnon-resident freemen were introduced into the borough ofKinsale, and their number increased, as well as the mode inwhich the influence in the borough was managed.Letter from Mr. Edward Southwell, to General Parker.*London, 9 th January, 1735-6.Sir, — Mr. Smith has sent me an account of the election ofthe eight freemen I desired you to nominate, and I am glad Ilive been able to give your interest that additional strength."This affair has given the corporation great alarms againstSouthwell MSS.J070 inELAXD.^ IhwK H . Hie; and others of iii frieculs have t^xpoHtulnleit with luc un aKiiinie. £tej> taken without their knowledge ; and the town has beeoivery free with luy character Lor introducing ao many nec bur 4gesses, in violation of my own law of keeping all such oulf^which is no grateful return after five years' services and e)>etice, and being a slave to all their wants and importunitiesand their agent in every distress and application by sea audland, aud here and in Ireland.I do not doubt of your being convinced of my having dmy utmost for your service, and, as I have now rased yourinterest to the highest pitch 1 am able, you shall have thecontinuance of mine as an auxiliary, but I am not paUcot norwilling to bear the constiinl heat and fatigue of the day sI the principal ; and, therefore, if you think it worth while to jsupport and cari-y on your own interest, you shall have my IfBelp and concurrence, but the people are really grown so iw ]r fortunate to me in every shape, and link my interest eijiial to Iall they can wish or want, and that their corporation is dearer jand superior to me than any return I can make, that I nwithdraw myself from so great a dependence, and dense mfliberty. Your name and family is natural to them ; your residencenear tlicm, and your character and behaviour will winthem over to such a patron ; nor will they be unreasonable intheir demands from you, though they have no pity on me;and because 1 will not deceive and disappoint, they trulythink I will not grant every request which it is out of mypower to gratify. As to general services to the town in general,1 shall be ready to do them all ; but to satisfy the privateviews and ambition of every particular person for himself andfamily, it is impossible for the best interest to ctTect ; and it isa drudgery 1 would not undergo for an estate : my choice anddesire being, ' freedom and independence, more than anyhonour at the expence of both.'"The town will be obliged to treat you in a more decentmanner; and, therefore, if you will undertake the interestagainst Sir Richard Mead, you shall be welcome to mine.Had any vacancy happened, you would have been alreadyin possession, but the thing is still in your power, if it isIRELAND. 2071but in your will, and you may reap the benefit of all my ^^^'K^ILlabours. Kinsale.I have not forgot your letter in relation to your brother,and assure you I should be glad to serve him ; but, to dealtruly with you, I am unable. I have relations now on myhands, whom I must provide for with my interest or mymoney ; and they would be glad of such a place as your brothernow has, and I have not been able to succeed ; and forplaces of the value he desires and deserves, I am sure it is invain to attempt them ; and if I offered to deceive you both,I should not act as an honest man, or as becomes,Sir,^' Your affectionate friend and servant,Edward Southwell."General Parker, to Mr. Southwell.^* Inside, 25th January, 1 735-6. 1735.Dear Sir, — I had the favour of yours, and told the peoplehere the reason why you recommended the making so manynew burgesses ; and as it was at their own election whether theywould agree to it or not, they have nobody to blame butthemselves.I shall never desire you to break any engagement on myaccount, but I think there was no occasion to enlarge Mr.Towers interest in this corporation, when yours, with theassistance I have always given it, could not be hurt. 1 believeMr. Stowell to be a worthy man ; but, remember, I tellyou you are getting up another country gentleman — if I hada mind to put myself on the foot of my own interest, / haveit in my power to make as many burgesses and freemen asI pleased ; but as I have no view of my own, I shall not takeany such steps.As I love to speak plain to my friends, I do assure you, ifI should put myself out of the question, you would find yourinterest but very small here, and a good deal owing to yoursteward's ill management; for I never knew any man sothoroughly hated since I was born as he is in this place, butI suppose you will discharge him'* &c. &c. &c.^■ gw<»II. Mr, Southwell, to General Parker.KiHd«. "27M January, 1735-6.Sir, — I received the favour of yours of tht 25th, and Iobliged to you for every support you give my interest, bul Imust own 1 did not imagine you would seem piqued at trecommendation ufafew bargftsea, when I never took noteven of your choice of Sir Richard Cox, who disUnguis'himself against mc, and is, and will continue so.You are pleased to bid me remember your pmcer of maii^Mas vuiny freemen and burgesses as you dare ; and to tell iplainly that my own interest, without yours, ia but ismall at Kinsale; and, to speak as plainly, if my ownterest is so inconsiderable and so dependent, it is not wortfclmy while to undergo a constant trouble and expence for tsupport of a cause wherein 1 am only a nominal person, jmy family interest must ever receive laws from personal at-Mheresy of every governor of the port, in return for my many fservices of all kinds to the town.If you please to oblige me, 1 should take it as a favoacflif you would concur in Sir Richard Mead and Mr. Stoweir»Hdividing the coloration, and settling at once all these differences,and you shall come in at Down whenever a newParliament happens. If you are determined to oppose Mr.Stowell, 1 will then make him the offer of Down ; and as tomy interest at Kinsale, it may e'en take its chance, and turnoutas the people please, whenever a new election happensthere ; for, whatever my interest may be in the town, my interestelsewhere is of more consequence to them than theirvotes can be to me.It is my desire to act with honour both to yourself andMr. Stowell, and to satisfy every wish you can have for yourselves,and every expectation from me ; and, when my intentionsare so very fair, I think I ought to have some littleinfluence in the manner I propose of accomplishing theseends, and that all parties should in friendship concur inmy ease and satisfaction, especially since alt my engagementsarose from the support of your election,"IRELAND. 2073Mr. Edward Southwell, to General Parker. George II.London th Fehnmryy 1736-6. Kinsale.Sir, — Last night I received the favour of your most obligingletter of the 27th of January, and take the first opportunityto assure you the just sense 1 have of your honourable andcandid behaviour to me, and think myself very happy that Ihave such a friend and gentleman to deal with.The freedom and liberty you have so generously grantedme, will, I hope, turn as much to your advantage and satisfactionas it does now to your honour; for, I assure you, I willnot consult my own ease and time without a due regard foryou, and their resolution has really put me under moretrouble and difficulties, and made me bear more inconveniencesthan my constant contest with my rival.I have been long convinced of the dependent situation ofmy interest at Kinsale — neither Sir Richard nor I can prevailagainst each other without the assistance of the governorof the fort. Either of us may have the honour of electing thegovernor, but neither can properly stand on their own bottom— our mutual and real interest was to keep together.Sir Richard was pleased to think and act otherwise, and Icannot, or ought not, to venture or depend on a treaty withhim as safely as I could with Mr. Stowell.In order to satisfy the balance of power, I wrote a frankand free offer of my interest at Down, in August, 1734, incaseof a new Parliament, in case I should bring in two membersat Kinsale by his assistance. 1 owed all my engagementsto you, and my sole view in mortgaging anotherborough was, that he might not be alarmed at my enlargingyour interest, and yet you see how much he has resentedmaking a few of your tenants free, even though 1 never yettook notice of his absolute choice of Sir Richard Cox, whohas distinguished himself against me; who, as my designnow is to oblige General Parker, has to declare plainly eitherto rest satisfied in the promise of Down, and to concur in myschemes at Kinsale for you, or else to abide by Kinsale, andleave Down free.If he chooses Kinsale, and the honour of a popular interest,[074 IRELAND.I peorgill. which will muiul wdl at thecttilk, he is welcome; as it will belie.in vain for me to support an interest which inst cither bedependent upon the laws of the fort, or on any treaty withmy rival, since 1 am an absentee : ait as to Down, it is aborough, the seneschal at my nomination — no election of oa-nid magistrates — and no possibility of a contest i—but whit amember of Parliament is chosen, my servant it the cotutatttseneschal — almost ena-y house and demesne are my men, taut Ihave thereby mate the townsmen so dependent upon me, anddone the town such services, that although I never rely ongratitude from a multitude, yet 1 may depend on their notdaring to disoblige me far their own interest," ^c. 6fe. ^c.NtlWTOWN.In this same reign, an important case relative to theBMidimcc. question of residence, occurred respecting Newtown, iaIreland, in which the disinclination of the court to give fulleffect to the objection, was still further apparent. This wasthe case of the King v. Ponsonby ;* eight others occurredin this reign. It was a quo warranto information againstthe defendants, for usurping the office of free burgess of thatborough; and judgment had been given against the defendants,in the court of King's Bench, in Ireland, upondemurrer. Against which judgment, a writ of error wasbrought in the King's Bench, in England, where it was arguedthree times, and upon great consideration, the judgmentwas reversed. One of the objections was founded upon'^'f'" the non-residence of the defendant.The Chief Justice in giving his judgment, erst observedupon the nature of the judgment of ouster ; after which hecommented upon the ground of objection of non-residence asagood cause of amotion, the parly having left the boroughfor four years, and gone many miles distant; upon whichhe stated that it was not necessary to give an opinion; becauseit was not a ground of ouster until they were actuallyamoved ; and upon its being suggested, as the fact frequentlyhas been, that a corporation might from some core1 Ives. 1 ; 1 Lord Kenyon Rrp. I ^ Sayerf,24&i 5 Bro. Pari, Ca.aiT,itIRELAND. 2076rapt motive, neglect or refuse to exercise that power, whereby George ll.there might be a failure of justice; — the Chief Justice said, Newtown,that ** it was not to be intended that the corporation wouldact so corruptly, and if they did that, there would not beafailure of justice, because a mandamus might in such acase be awarded ;" but in a previous case relative to Truro* ^''^^•it had been held by two judges against the chief justice, thatnotwithstanding a charter required residence, non-residencewas not an immediate forfeiture, but that there must be aprevious amotion ; for which reason a mandamus would not lie.As was subsequently stated by the court, with reference tothe same place, in the first George IV.,t to which we mayhave occasion to refer hereafter.In the course of the ailment, the counsel cited Dr.Brady; and decidedly adopted his doctrine, that burgess Brady,ship was to be referred to trade, and not to jurisdiction — anerror which has already been observed upon.This is not precisely the question — it is not di forfeiture bymisconduct; but as far as the individual himself is concerned,a waiver of the franchise by changing his residence; and asfar as the town and public are concerned, a cesser of hisliability to the burdens of the borough, and consequently acesser of his title to enjoy the privileges.In the sequel of the argument and judgment, it will beseen that this distinction is important ; as the oversight ofit was the source of error, through both ; and led to thefallacious assumptions which mainly contributed to thedecision.It was assumed that non-residence was merely an act of Non-residence.misbehaviour, for which no authority is stated; when inpoint of fact, residence was not only the condition, but thevei*y essence of being a burgess by the common law. Thequestion therefore, which is founded upon this erroneousassumption, namely, whether it is a forfeiture or not, falls tothe ground.Another point raised in this case was, whether by theexpress or implied condition of the charter, non-residenceRex V. Slade. f 3 B. & A. dOO.3076 IRELAND.Ceomll. was a forfeiture, or a determine nation of the title. If thisHfwiowD. point had been limited to the determination of the title Ithe franchise — omitting the forfeiture that would have been threatand indeed the only question — for, if it is a determinationof the office or franchise, the subsequently using ov exercisingit is a usurpation, and might be inquired into by ywo KorranlaWhilst on the contrary, if the office or title to the fraDchiqB not determined, then the original election being good, sI the title continuing, the party cannot be disturbed by qawarranto — so that the third question la answered by tlMsecond, as stated before.As to the argument which was used iu the case, that tlthe crown gave the power of amotion, it would be inconsistentwith it that any misbehaviour should be judged ofI before amotion : — it is probable that the learned couiisdlI meant, that as the king by his prerogative, when he createthe corps oration, could appoint before whom the question ot^I amotion from the offices of the corporation should be deterI mined ; if he gave that power to the corporation, it in eSeetf^rousted the jurisdiction of the Court of King's Bench, till theamotion had been effected. If this was the drift of theargument, surely it is going too far to say, that the king byhis charter could oust the interference of the Court of King'sBench, by the prerogative writ of mandamus, wherever thecorporation failed to carry the king's charter into effect:or prevent the court from directing an information in thenature of a quo warranto, to be filed against a party whoheld an office contrary to the words of the charter.In another part of the argument, the learned counsel ismade to say, that the first question must depend upon thegrant ; but it is in terms referred to the common law, andproperly so, — because noneof the charters define the duties orprivileges of free burgesses accurately. They depend upon thecommon law ; as appears froth manner in which the questionwas put by the counsel: namely, whether the privilege of aburgess is of a local nature, or a mere personal privilege tobe enjoyed in a particular place, and no more than a freeman;the answer to which must certainly be looked for inIRELAND. 2077the common law. If indeed the charters are referred to, the George II.strongest possible implication will arise from thei, that the Newtown,very existence of a burgess is altogether local ; as all theirprovisions are confined to the bounds and limits of theborough.The assertion that the genuine meaning of the term " burgess,"is a tradesman dwelling in a burgh, for the sake oftraffic, is the gratuitous assumption of Dr. Brady ; and canby no means be treated as the proper description of burgesses,at least in England, where they have existed fromthe time of Edward the Confessor, if not earlier. At whichperiod, and indeed ever since, till usurpation in the time ofthe Stuartss, began to alter their character, their existencechiefly arose out of the existing system of police ; and wasmost intimately connected with local and privileged jurisdiction.The authority referred to in Riley's Placenta Parliamentary,appears not to j justify the conclusion drawn fromit. It is a petition of the mayor and burgesses of Bristol Bristol,praying that the men who hold lands and rents of themasters and brothers of the temple, in the town of Bristol,(who clearly were not burgesses,) should contribute to thetalliage of the king, for the town, with the burgesses asthey carried on merchandise, and used all the liberties andeasements which belonged to the town. Which is in effectsaying, that though they held ecclesiastical property, they sofargave themselves up to temporal affairs, that they dealtin merchandise, and therefore they ought not to enjoy theexemption of ecclesiastics; but as they enjoyed the privilegesof the town, they should also share the burdens.Carrying on merchandise, is at all events, only one of theprivileges the burgesses enjoyed, and certainly not theircharacteristic privilege; because many other places enjoyedit, although they were not boroughs. The authorities alsoquoted by Brady,* in the passage here referred to, by nomeans support his assertion, for they only show that marketsand fairs were amongst the many privileges granted tofree burghs; but by no means is this their characteristicPage 33, of the 8vo. edition.2078 inw.ANo.(iooreell. privilege ; iii-ed it rather appears from some of the do*Newton. meats quoted by Brady, particularly the charter of Bridgewater,that the giTtnt of ft free market was distinct andseparate from the grant of a fi'ee borough. Nor will theauthority of Lord Coke, in the First Institute, cstabliathis point, if duly investigated ; for although he stateliuriEeu. roundly, that a burgess is a man of trade, yet there jnothing in the textof Littleton, which justifies that assertionnor will his authorities support it. Bracton, as cited in Amargin, only uses the word burgesses, without any allusion)to trade ; and indeed the passage in that author is only Itranscript of the claiifte of the statute of Merton, which iquoted by Littleton in his text; 20 Hen. III., c. G ; whitspeaks of the lords marrying those whom they have award to villains or others, as burgesses. Glanville also, wkiis cited by Lord Coke, only uses the term burgess, addthat he is to be esteemed of age, when he knows how facount money, and to conduct his father's business ; haviripreviously stated that a military tenant was of age at 21'and a socage tenant at 15. Britton, in the passage referto, does not mention burgesses at all ; nor docs the parliament'roll. Lord Coke's assertion therefore, is by no means supportedby his authorities, and there are many documentswhich raise a strong inference to the contrary. Thus, inCotton's Abridgment of the Records, p. 18, in 13 Edw. IIL,the merchants are mentioned by name, as apparently a distinctclass by themselves ; and again p. 23 and 24, 14 EdwardIIL ; and page 28, the merchants of cities and townsare mentioned ; and p. 29, a merchant of Hull, and anotherof Beverley is spoken of, and nothing said of their beingburgesses. In p. 39, 14th Edward HI., the custom of woolis stated to have been granted by the merchants, which didnot bind the commons.In a variety of other instances in that and the succeedingreigns, the mercknnis are constantly spoken of; and that evenin cities and towns, without any reference to their being eithercitizens or burgesses. The staple and the merchants are alsomentioned ; the former is appointed to be held in some placesIRELAND. 2079certainly which are boroughs ; but by no means in all the George llplaces which are so. The charter in the 31st of Edward I., Newtown.to the merchant strangers, granting them certain liberties,*amongst other things enables them to deal (mercer), that isin gross, in all cities, boroughs, and merchant towns (willismercatoriis) ; which shows distinctly that the privilege oftrading was by no means confined to cities and boroughs,but that it extended to other towns. Privileges are alsosecured to the merchants by the same charter, in all fairsand markets ; which evidently are not confined to burghs ;and the provision that in all places, there shall be a jury,half of merchants, if there are sufficient, and half of the goodand lawful men of the place, seems clearly to establish thatthe men of the several places enumerated, were a distinctclass from the merchants, who are described as a society ofthemselves.Lord Coke, himself, in another part of his works seems,with much more propriety, to treat corporators as traders ;which certainly is much nearer the fact, and more consistentwith history. He speaks of corporations as trading intoforeign parts, and at home ; which, under the fair pretence oforder and government, in conclusion tend to the hindranceof trade and traffique, and in the end produce monopolies ;a thing in trade not even to be tolerated — but when it extendsto power, influence, and the exclusive exercise of theelective franchise, it requires immediate suppression.Lord Coke refers, as a further authority for his position,that a burgess is a man of trade, to the Mirror, chap. 2, sec.17 ; that section, however, relates solely to burglary, andcontains nothing of the kind. In the 28th sec. of the samechapter, which relates to villainage and neiftg, burgesses arementioned,;}; after describing villains as tillers of land, dwellingin upland towns, and so far showing that their classisdenoted by their residence, it is added, " for of will comethvillain, and of borough, burgess, and of city, citizen ;" which,however, proves but little, any way — certainly nothing infavour of Lord Coke's position. Page 114 speaks of the♦ 4 Inst. 23. t 2 Inst. p. 640. t Page 113.Ottonte II. ancient iiifeoflbient, of earl*, of eiirliloms — barons, of baronetNvwiown. — knights, of kuigbtsfees — Serjeant, of t>erjeaiitries — villainyofvillaiuages — borgcasesantimwcAiwirt, of boroughs — nbich,if it proves anything, shows that burgesses were not merchants; for the copulative (conjunction here has the effect ofimporting a dittttiict class.It was certainly common after the reign of Charles II. (obe a burgess of several tuwus; because the king insertedin many of the charters he granted, clauses giving to Uwcorporations the power of electing non-resident burgessesbut it is contended that such clauses were void, and thai theking had no power to grant such a privilege. Before thaiperiod, as far back as the reign of Henry VIII., it had beenBBunl to admit persons as freemen of the trading gilds,whether resident or not ; which no doubt might bu dons,as that was purely a personal privilege. The usurpationI arose by giving the power of creating burgesses in the samemanner', by assuming, as is here done by the counsel in hiaargument, that such freemen and burgesses were the sumclass of persons, which in feet they were not.The customs of the Manse Towns, which were referredto in the argument, can surely not explain the custom ofEngland — particularly, for the purpose of setting up the'drar^ doctrine of non-residence — so inconsistent with the geniallaw of England and ail its analogies.The authorities which were cited to support the doctrine,that being a burgess was a mere personal privilege, in norespect apply to that point. The first is the case of Rexn. Clyde,* relating to an alderman, and establishing thatresidence was necessary for that office, from the very natureof the thing. The same case ;is reported in Skinner, andwhich is also Referred to, is, if any thing, directly contraryto this doctrine; for it shows that the privilege was purelylocal ; as Lord Holt says, that " if a person removes withhis family from a place, he ceases to be a citizen."As to the point which was raised, that the office wasa freehold, and that some act of ceremony was necessary tu• 1 M«<i. 36.IRELAND. 2081put an end to it; it should be remembered, that in cases of George II.incompatibility, nothing of the kind occurs, but the accept Newtown,once of the second office, is considered as effectually puttingan end to the first. So also the argument derived fromMagna Charta, that no man should be disseised of his freetenement, is not only a misapplication of that passage, butit is also answered by the observation, that the person whoquits the borough and goes away, is not disseised, but putshimself out of the place.Nor does the power of amotion affect the question, becausethat is applicable to cases of misbehaviour; and not tothose of a removal out of the borough.But it was said, that it would be impossible to ascertainwhen the forfeiture happened. However, the common law,and the practice of the court leet, would, in the course of its Court leet.ordinary jurisdiction, have ascertained the fact by the pre present-sentientof the jury, that the party had ceased to reside in "**°^'the borough.It was also contended to be absurd to say, that the forfeiturewas inchoate, and that it could be ripened by time : —and yet this is the constant practice of the law with respectto settlements, which are by time consummated and destroyed.The difficulty surmised of fixing the time when the forfeiturebegan, must be founded upon some supposed doubtin ascertaining when the person ceased to reside. If thequestion merely arose on absence, there is no doubt there Absence,might be some difficulty to establish the time when theabsence should amount to a forfeiture; and therefore, absenceought properly to be treated as a fault, the extent of whichshould be considered by the corporation, and upon theirsustaining an injury by the absence, they should necessarilyhave the power of relieving themselves from it by amovingthe party. But non-residence is altogether a different thing. Non-reignabsent member of the corporation they might summon,and amerce if he did not attend ; but a non-resident theycould neither summon nor fine. Non-residence entirely vacatesthe office, and that from the time when the non-residence6 R3082 lRF.r,AND.Uo(irg«I[. begums; which cau always be readily ascertained; becausee* low n. ion-residence at one place, implies residence at another.But in fact, the law never Ind any ditGciilty infilling residence. On the contrary, it has for ceutunolacted upon residence ; — in matters of police, by the law ofthe touni and leet ; — in matters of offices, from the earliestperiods, as sheriffs, constables, justices, &c. ; — and as rights,by fixing the persons over whom the county court has ajurisdiction, as in Welch v. Troyte;* Tube V. Woodward ^^and as to the j jurisdiction of the court of requests in London,Webb 17. Brown, J and Brooks v. Moravia und as toNewcastle, Busby v. Fenron,]| As to the court baron ofSheffield and Eubsale, Rex v. Danser;^ and respecting theUniversity ot Oxford, Lord Camden stated, in the case ofHayes v. Long, that " the consideration of the gi-ant of thecharters to the university, was the condition of their reftidit^there."Notwithstanding the respect, therefore, which inlet everbe due to the decisions of the court of dernier resort in thiscountry, yet it is justifiable with respectful discussion tocanvass the propriety of the principles it has adopted.After a careful investigation, therefore, of the grounds ofthis judgment, which seems to have been founded upon theerroneous doctrines of Brady; it may be suggested, that itcannot be maintained as a satisfactory decision, but the originaljudgment in Ireland, may be considered as the betterdetermination.t. of Wcslm, 1. cap. 35; 2 lust. 229-231 ; Dalton. H,•2H,Black, 29.t 6T.R. 175; sp.412.I 5T.Rep. 53.1.II 8 T.U, 2:)fi.GEORGE III.STATUTES.In the third of George III., the mischiefs arising from the 1763.increase of honorary freemen, of which so many instanceshave been seen in the progress of this inquiry, had grown tosuch a height as to call for the interposition of Parliament.And an act was passed to prevent occasional freemen fromvoting, which recited that " great abuses had been com-*' mitted in making freemen of corporations in order toinfluence the election of members to serve in Parliament,to the great infringement of the rights of the freemen ofsuch corporations, and of the freedoms of elections ; and forthe prevention of such practices for the future, it wasenacted, that no person claiming to vote as a freeman** should be allowed unless he had been admitted to the*' freedom 12 calendar months before the election ;'' andsuch person is subjected to a penalty of los, But theact was not to extend to persons entitled to their freedom bybirth, marriage, or servitude, according to the custom orusage of the borough ; nor to London or Norwich.This statute, therefore, distinctly confirms the positionbefore taken, that the mischiefs had arisen from the abusesin making freemen ; and they are properly described as aninfringement upon the rights of the corporations, with a vietof controlling the election of members to Parliament,Had the real nature of the abuse been considered, and themunicipal as well as parliamentary view of the questionbeen taken, the remedy would not have been confined tothe restriction in voting for members to Parliament, whichleft the municipal usurpation uncorrected; but the capriciousand occasional making of freemen would have beenaltogether prohibited, and the admission by the presentmentof the jury would have been substituted in its stead, whichmight now be re-adopted, though late.Gr21- The period of 1:2 months was properly borrowed from thecolumna law; and the preservation of the titles by birth,iDarriagc. or servitude, might also have been justified, hadthey been referred, as they ought to have been, to the generalcoition law, and nut as they arc improperly in the statute, tathe custom or usage of the boroughs.Upon what ground London or Norwich* could have beenexcepted from the statute, seems difficult to explain, as tbnmischief equally existed in both those places. Their exempt*thou is probably to be attributed to vigilance or importunity.The general observation, which would also apply to thisstatute, is, that it assumes the right of the freemen to vole;and so far sanctions that abuse, as sell aa the substitutionof froenien for burgesses, contrary to the general tenor of thelaw — the charters — and the writs and precepts.It is a curious fact, and establishes the danger of legislatingupon any point with respect to which the common lawis already plain, that the Durham Act was in the Bristol casein1 775,+ cited as an authority to support the votes of freenieawho had been admitted after the teste of the writ — the evilthe Durham Act was intended to prevent.The next statute necessary to be remarked, proceeds uponthe assumption of another legal error, that the freeholdershad the right of voting in cities and towns, counties of themselves:in which the loose introduction of" town" instead ofborough" should not be overlooked.There is an act of the same year for the further preventionof fraudulent and occasional votes for knights of the shire,and counties of the cities and towns.In the recital it justly adopts the principle, that it is essentialboth for the candidates and the electors, that the proceedingswith respect to the qualifications of the lattershould be public ; and therefore recites, that the annuitiesPerhaps Norwich wa; excepted from the ncl. because in lliesiime year aiuinlcwai passed to eicluite all fran voting as liurgtsstt in Norwich who lead aot beenadmitted 13 calendar months; and the same observation may be applied (a London.See before 11 George 1. c. 18.I See I Doug-237.STATUTES. 2086and rent charges being of a private nature, are liable to o«ojnBe^-fraudulent practices, to the prejudice of the candidates and 1763.the electors. After which, contrary to the express words ofthe statute of Henry VI., it further recites, that " the rightof election in cities and towns, counties of themselves, isvested partly or in the whole, in freeholders of 40s. ;" whenit is obvious, as before observed, that if the statute ofHenry VI. applied to those places at all, the 40«. freeholdersonly would have had the right of election ; and no such instance,it is believed, exists.After these recitals provisions are made for preventingfrauds in these respects, by requiring certificates upon oath,and memorials of the qualification.In the 10th year of this reign, the important statute was 1770.passed for the regulation of trials of controverted elections,which from the proposer, is generally called the Grenville Act,and which was intended to obviate the evils which had arisenfrom the previous imperfect mode of trying those questions.Lord Glenbervie, speaking of the statute of George II.which makes the last determination final, says,* " that nothing^' but the gross and repeated contrarieties in the decision of theHouse previous to the passing of that statute, could have^^ justified the clause rendering the last determination final;"an observation which the whole tenor of our inquiry hasshown to be well founded in fact ; but which seems strangelyillogical in reasoning : for the gross contrarieties in the decisionsupon points where the law would sanction and requireuniformity, appears an extraordinary reason for perpetuatingthose contrarieties by making them final.In trttth, the real fault, from the beginning of these inquiries,arose from not investigating the subject historically, andgenerally from its commencement.The same noble author attributes the law to which wehave referred to the acknowledged caprice or corruption ofthe old j judicature.The evils, therefore, which demanded remedy, seem to• 4 Doug. 79.2086 STATUTES.^^'*^"'' have been allowed upon all hands ; the question is, whetherthe course adopted supplied the remedy required.The act recites, that " the existing mode of decision uponelection petitions, frequently obstructed the public business— occasioned much expence, trouble and delay to the^' parties — was defective, for want of those sanctions andsolemnities, established by law in other trials — and wasattended with many other inconveniences." The time,therefore, for taking the petition into consideration — themethod of balloting for the committee — and the personswho were to be eligible for that purpose — their number—with one nominee, to be appointed by each party — the modeof reducing the number balloted to 13 — the appointmentof a chairman — the power to send for persons and examinewitnesses upon oath — and to try the merits of the return,and finally determine the seat : — these and some collateralprovisions for regulating the proceedings, compose thestatute.As far as constituting a better tribunal than before existedfor the trial of these questions, there can be no doubt butthat this statute was ver' effectual : and with the modem improvementsupon it, has produced an essentially improvedsystem. But the grounds upon which that court was to proceed— the necessity of fully investigating the subject — andlaying down principles which should be generally applicable— and instead of supporting the varying usages, restoringuniformity by disregarding them — was left essayed,and to the present moment, no useful attempt has beenmade towards the correction of those abuses as far as themunicipal rights are concerned : although the Reform Acthas, to some extent, but without any previous investigation,or establishment of general principles, connected some of theparliamentary mischief.As far as regards the reducing the description of theBurgesses, burgesses, to one plain uniform rule, nothing was practicallyeffected by the grenville Act — on the contrary, the decisionswhich followed upon it, commencing with the Crick ladecase — upon which we have already observed — and sue-statutes.2087needed by the other determinations reported by Lord Gren- o<^o'ge^iJ'bertie, to which we may refer hereafter, were as muchcharacterised by variety and the absence of all generalprinciple, as those which had preceded them.The 11th of George III., chap. 42, added some further 1771.provisions to the last statute, merely for the purpose of removingsome difficulties in its execution.And both these acts were made perpetual by the 14th ofGeorge III., chap. 15, and was further amended by the 28th GrenvilleGeorge III., chap. 32 ; particularly providing against frivolousand vexatious petitions, and directing statements of theright to be given by the conflicting parties, when it was disputed.— The 32nd of George III., chap. 1 — 34 George III.,chap. 83 — 36 George III., chap. 59 — 42 George III., chap.84—47 George III., chap. 1 — and the 53rd of George III.,chap. 71; were for the same purpose, and the whole wereat length consolidated in the 9th of Geoi^e IV., chap. 24.The 55th chap, of the same year, carried into effect the shorchom.resolutions of both the Houses, against the persons who hadparticipated in the corruption at New Shorthand by incapacitatingthem from voting. And this act was still furtheramended by enabling the freeholders in the Rape of Chamberto vote. And, as a novelty, defining, by a legislative act,the persons who were to vote for the borough of NewShoreham, referring to the custom and usage in the borough,and prescribing the oaths to be taken by them.In the 12th of George III., an act passed for giving facility ^^^^^,to proceedings upon writs of mandamus for the admission of Manda-freemeninto corporations, and, like other proceedings of thesame period, it recognizes the absurd distinction between bur(messes and freemeriy and includes towns corporate in the provisions,as well as the cities, boroughs, and cinque ports; andprovides, that every person who is refused to be admitteda freeman after one month's notice of his claim, shall beentitled to a mandamus, to compel his admission, and themayor is subjected to costs. It also provides for the inspectionof the entries of freemen, subject to a penalty forrefusal.mus.20BB STATUTES."*"'«^''"- In the 14th of George III., an act was passed for repealing1774. the statute of the 1st of Henry V., and so much of the 8th,Cap. 6B. 'BwUeori'. 10th, and 22ud of Henry VI. as relates to the residence ofpersons to be elected members to Parliament and of their'electors.It recites those statutes, and, in an unprecedented manner,states, that the provisions \a them have been found, by loilineage, to be unnecessary, and " urere become obsolete ;" and,Therefore, to obviate all difficulties upon the same, such partsof those acts as related to the residence of the persons electedor electing, were repealed.This appears to be the only instance in our law of anystatute being declared to be obsolete, and it is, in all probability,a precedent which will never he followed ; for it isSuiuto clear, according to the miles of the English law, that no statutecan be obsolete by disuse.*The fonder statutes were of a different description, sod'were founded upon the ancient and not the modem usage.The 23rd of Henry VI., chap. 14, recited the statute of theIst of Henry V., tint ti'uly added, " that the citizens andburgesses had always been chosen, in cities and boroughs,by the citizens and burgesses, and none other." And recitingbesides, the 8th of Henry VI,, chap. 7, it then directs,that all those statutes should be duly kept in all points. Andno doctrine can be more repugnant to the principles of thelaw that an act of parliamentary be abrogated by desuetude,whatever dicta may be recorded to the contrary.-f-It is not surprising that at the same time our Legislatureshould have declared one of our ancient laws to be obsolete,that it should also have sanctioned a departure from ourancient customs. Thus we find in a statute of this period,I"''- the freemen and burgesses are strangely confounded : —freemen. being first mentioned as "freemen" or " bui^ esses," asif they were synonymous : and afterwards as " freemenBurgesses. " asd burgesses," as if they were distinct classes ; obviouslya loose and inconsiderate mode of expression, and probably■ 2 WouE.p.221.t Sec the alroDs obseiviiione by Liii G I tuber vie, 1 Doug. p. J4I,STATUTES. 2089founded upon ignorance or misinformation of the real dis Qeoygciii.tinction between the two. 1774.This is to be found in an act for confirming to the residentfreemen or burgesses, and the resident widows of deceasedfreemen or burgesses, their right to the herbage of the town-moor,&c. of Newcastle-upon-Tyne, within the liberties of thetown ; and the freemen and burgesses are mentioned togetherin other parts of the statute.This privilege, however, of participating in the enjoymentof the common, unlike the more valued privilege of votingfor members of Parliament, was confined, as both ought tohave been, to the resident freemen and burgesses.The 2 1st George III., chap. 54, is a statute for regulating 1780.the elections for Coventry, and it recites the last determinationof the right of election for that place, which isdeclared to be in the freemen, having served seven years'apprenticeship to one trade, such freemen being duly swornand enrolled. And the recital continues that great fraudsand abuses had been committed, in clandestinely admittingpersons having no such right to the freedom of the city,during the last election, in order to influence the election,to the great infringement of the right of the true electors,and in violation of the freedom of elections ; for the preventionof which practices it was enacted, that an open councilshould be held at St. Mary's Hall, in the city, on the firstand last Tuesday in every calendar month ; for the purposeon the first Tuesday in each month, of receiving and proclaimingaloud the names of every person, who should thenpresent, or cause to be presented, an account in writing, ofhis claim to the freedom of the city ; and for the purpose,on the last Tuesday of each month, of admitting those personswhose claims should be admitted.The particulars of their claim being first verified upon oath,no greater fee being paid than 3s. over and above the expenceof the necessary stamps. And no person was to be received,who did not produce evidence of regular indentures of apprenticeshipfor seven years, and declare upon oath the nameof his master, the trade to which he served, the place of^-BOSK) STATUTES.'"- residence, &c. during the time of service, and hit the tiiii«of his claiming to be admitted. Lists of the claimants anythose admitted, are required to be stuck up on the doors ofthe churches ; and none are to be admitted after notice isgiven of any elections of members to Parliament, till aterthe tibial close of the election ; and an oath is provided fiwthe elector at the election. These provisions are enforced'kirby penalties:, and a strange proviso is introduced, that theiI act should not extend to any freeman, but such as had a[tight to vote for members of Parliament, assuming thml*[habere were two classes of freemen; as the general provisionsI of the act assume, with equal error, that the freemen wereWtlhe burgesses ; and the statute concludes with directingLlhat the indentures of apprenticeship, should be registeredU'Wtth the town clerk.The preceding acts had each of them advanced a littleBeyond the other in confirming some of the former ueurp&-ens. This statute goes still further, and adopting the freemenand the modern notions of the right by apprenticeship,Trail. connects the parliamentary right of election with trade, butstdl preserves the ancient requisites of their being swam andenriched'The prevailing fault of all these statutes was, that theywere founded upon the former errors, and confirmed themwithout consideration, and without any regard to principle oruniformity.It is extraordinary, that having in view the public investigationof the claims of individuals to be made burgesses, andtheir public enrolment and swearing, that the Legislatureshould not have adopted the ancient, simple, and publicmethod of presenting, enrolling, ami swearing the burgesses,rnurtl«ti. ivhicli had been practised in this country at the court leet forcenturies, and even in this reign ; iiiid that they should, insteadof it, have adopted the novel and imperfect modedescribed in this act.1782. The 22nd George 111., c. 3\, was an act for the preventionCiictiaJc. of bribery and corruption at OickUide, and added the 40j.frceholclcrs of live hundreds tu the former voters of that placeSTATUTES. 2091an expedient highly objectionable as it gives an unequal ogo^yn^'ascendancy to freehold property in those districts ; as a 40«.freeholder within them would have a right to vote for thecounty as well as the borough of Cricklade ; and the residentowner of a freehold house in Wotton Basset , being entitledto vote for that borough as well as Cricklade and the county,had six votes ; giving a fictitious value to property in thatplace.This act also erred in adopting the custom and usage ofthe place (the anomalous nature of which has been beforepointed out) instead of reducing the right to some general anddefined principle.In the 26th of George III. the inconveniences were also 1785.found of having departed from the ancient system of havingthe burgesses presented, enrolled and sworn at the courtleet ; and the general right of the inhabitant householderspaying scot and lot being admitted without a due regardto the import of that qualification.It therefore became necessary to check the evil of inhabit occasional. Inhabitantfancy for the purpose of obtaining a vote, and, therefore, astatute was passed to prevent occasional inhabitants from Cap. 100.voting for cities and boroughs, which commences with arecital — that " it had frequently happened in cities and boroughs,where the right of election was in the inhabitantspaying scot and lot — or in the inhabitant householders —housekeepers — potwallers legally settled, or in the inhabitants— householders — housekeepers and potwallers ; or in the inhabitanthouseholders — resiants ; or in the inhabitants," &c.(which must be considered as so many terms descriptive of theburgesses) — " much trouble and litigation was created by theoccasional voters, to the great prejudice of the real inhabitantswho bear the burdens of such cities and boroughs, andto whom the right of sending members to Parliament belongs'*And the statute provides, that no person should vote underany of those descriptions of inhabitants, unless he should havebeen actually and bona fide such an inhabitant for six Sixcalendar months previous to the day of election, under thepenalty of 20/. The proof of inhabitancy lying on the partyIt'I- claiming to vote. But the act was not to csteDd to any personacquiring the possession of a house by descent — devise —marriage or marriage settlement — or promotion to any officeor benefice; and it was to apply only to such inhabitants asare mentioned in the statute.It was a remarkable act of forbearance in the Legislature,when it became necessary to introduce into the recital of theact such strange descriptions of the burgesses as voters, thatthey should have refrained from putting ail ejid to so complicateda system, by reverting to the ancient mode ofdefining resiancy at the court leet; and that the nature ofscot and lot should not have been declared. This can onlybe accounted fur, by a disinclination to affect the rights ofelection which had existed for some time, or an indispositionto trace those rights to their origin.In the 32nd of George III., an act was passed for theamendment of the law in proceedings in quo warranto, which.' recites that it would tend to secure the freedom of elections,end the quiet, tranqtiitlilt/ and good order of citie, boroughs,and towns corporate, if a certain limitation of time wereestablished, beyond which no member or officer of uny suchplace should be disturbed in the enjoyment of his office orfranchise, which he should have enjoyed for such time, andgives six years as the limit for that purpose. It secures alsoderivative titles — and gives an inspection of the corporationbooks, under a penalty for refusal.This statute, though no doubt intended for the laudablepurpose of checking litigation, nevertheless had the eiTect,to a considerable extent, of protecting usurpation, and givingan artificial sanction, after a certain lapse of time, of titlesto offices, and franchises acquired without legal claim. Andsuch must ever be the effect of fixed limitations. Thedilemma between unrestrained litigation on the one hand,and protected abuses on the other, can never be reconciled,unless due precautions are taken before such statutesare passed, to place the rights in question upon soplain and simple a footing, that abuse or usurpation wouldbe instantly detected and prevented. And under those cir-STATUTES. 2093substances, and those only, can an arbitrary line of limits Qgo^seJ"'tion be justified.No such precaution was taken on this occasion ; andtherefore the statute has had a strong tendency to confirmusurped titles, and has led to some strange discrepancies insupporting defective claims, where others depending uponprecisely the same grounds have been defeated.PARLIAMENTARY CASES.The same, if not greater variety in the determinations asto the description of " burgesses'' who were entitled to votefor members of Parliament, is to be found in this reign asin the preceding.Seaport.Thus in the first year it was determined,* that the word 1761.^^ populace' (a term totally unknown to the law, and withreference to our municipal institutions, so uncertain as notto admit of a definition), was declared by a committee toextend only to the inhabitants housekeepers paying scotand lot. A description of a burgess, perfectly in accordancewith the common law, when taken with its necessary consequencesof being sworn and enrolled at the court leet ; butaltogether distinguishable from the meaning of the wordpopulace," according to its common acceptation.A determination similar to the foregoing, was made in1792 and 1795.t }^In Downtouy the right was limited to the burgage tenants. 1775.Melbourne PORT.From the report of the case of Milbome Ports by LordGlenbervie, it appears, that the officers of the borough wereappointed at the court leet held for the borough. A ques Court leet.tion arose as to the day for holding the court, upon whichthe right of the returning officer depended ; and they resolved,that the return made by one of the officers wasillegal — and two other returns to be so complicated together,• 29 Joiirn. 89. f 4 Dour. 506. % \ Doug. 97.MtLRORMB )K)HT.y'"- that tlujy tlioiieht it their iliity to go upon ths merit* of thaielection. And a cjuestiun thfiii aroscr, whether the aiDftlbnilifli; were entitled to vote ; and an to the general body of 1the elcctont, questions as to rating were discussed ; und th Icommittee confirmed Mr. I.uttrftI, and Mr, Wolsey,their seat.Westminster.To the peculiar circum stances of the city of Westminster,we have before referred ; and the existence and ^^eneimljurisdiction of the court bet within it, is recognized by anact of Parliament of George II.In the 15th of George III., a case arose upon its election; Iin which, strange to say, considering the importance of thisplace, Lord Gienbervieremarksjthat there had been no general ]I termination as to the right of election for WestminsterI Bud, with a singular want of precision, it is added, that " itseemed to be agreed to \x in the inhabitant householderpaying scot and lot."The necessity of the burgesses being householders appearsto be confirmed by the resolution in 1680 — that the king'sfilial senate had no right to vote, because they had doproper houses of their own within the city.The reader will probably remember, that in almost all theinstances of ecclesiastical establishments, of which Westminsterwas one, the inhabitant householders paying scotand lot have been established to be the burgesses ; as inEvesham — Abingdon — Reading — kc. &c.BRISTOL.At Bristol, the mischief that was complained of in theDurham Act appears to have been carried to a gi-cat extent ;as it is stated, that In order to influence the election, greatnumbers of persons were admitted to the freedom of the city,after the date, and issuing forth of the writ.Lord Gleiiberiic also states, with respect to this importantplace, with similar indistinctness, that there appeared to beno determination a*; to the ritjlit ; but that "it seemed to beBRISTOL. 2096taken for granted, on both sides, that it was in the freeholders Q^'^"^-having freeholds of 40«. a-year, and the free burgesses."The impropriety of the first part of which definition ofburgesses,'^ there has been before occasion to observe; thelatter is the proper common law description, if it had beenapplied in its purity.In order to show the extraordinarily varying grounds uponwhich any usage claimed, was attempted to be justified, theobjection to the freemen admitted after the teste of the writ,was founded upon a supposed custom at Bristol, instead ofbeing assigned, as it ought to have been, to the general principlesof the common law, prohibiting occasionality.It is impossible to read this case, without being satisfiedthat the greater portion of the abuses which became prevalentin the different boroughs, arose from the ancient method ofadmitting burgesses at the court leet being abandoned, andthe introduction of the system oi making burgesses ; and thatif the former ancient practice had been continued, all theseabuses would have been prevented.RADNOR.In New Radnor,* it may be collected from the report, thatthe committee held, that the burgesses who did not reside,as well as those who did, had a right to vote ; a decisionin opposition to the general history of burgesses.DORCHESTER.There is scarcely any place which affords a more striking 1791.illustration of the strange descriptions which have been givenof the term " burgess'* than Dorchester; — none in which more Burgess.marked traces can be found of its having possessed thoseingredients upon which the modem rights of burgess-shiphave been founded ; though it still preserved some featuresof the ancient municipal institutions, disfigured by a seriesof absurd departures from its simplicity, which are to beattributed to the disregard of the real question — who werethe burgesses?• 1 Doug. 317.liaRCHESTEn.There are In this borough decisive Imcea of huT^agea hBurgage by burgage tenure: — and iu the reigns of James I. iCoupons Charles I., express charters of incorporation were gnintet^in the common form in which other boroughs were iopointed. In the charter of Charles I. the freemen are utoned as well as in subsequent documents, and their oath ilspoken of; and yet in this place, neither the burgage tenantsnor corporators vote as burgesses.The earls history of Dorchester runs back to the moteremote antiquity.It appears to have been a station of much importance, Hlur as any inference can be drawn from the remains in tuiRoniaTM. neighbourhood of it, even in the time of the Romans.Aiheiiun. In the reign of King Athelstan two mints were ordainedthere, which appear to have continued till the timeWilliam I., as they are mentioned in his survey.It is said to be a borough by prescription; and is mentionedI Domesday* under the terra regis, as a place of impistance, and its customs are enumerated, but it is not called1 borough.It returned members to Parliament in the 26th of Editsancient presiding officers were the bailiffs ;\ and theburgesses were, at that time, called, as was common, " thegood men. good men of the borough"* We have also seen in the reignof Edward III., a grant to the burgesses, and that they presenteda petition to Parliament in the reign of Henry VI, §1604. In 1604, a person is described in a certificate returned toParliament as being, "according to the strictness of theRMiant " late proclamation, a resiant burgess, but that he was unablefrom illness to attend, and therefore the burgesses requestthat another writ might issue, for them to elect anotherperson."1720, In the seventh of George I., the buri:;esscs were describedto be the inlmbiUints paying to church and poor in respect of■ Sec before, p. 158 ; and see Gale's nh. AiieI. Soripl, vol. ili. p. 764.tRcebtfore, p. 534, and Fine Roll, 17 Mwar.l 11.Sue before, p. frj4 ii. 5 See before, p. &54.DORCHESTER. 2097personal and real property — which was also again agreed to ^^"^^'^^^be the right of voting in the ninth of George I. 1722«In the 15th of George III., this borough came again 1775.before a committee.* The petitioners contending that thelatter part of the resolution in 1720, related to the occupiersonly; whereas the sitting members maintained that it meantthe owners. The case was discussed at much length ; and thecommittee resolved, that the persons who paid church andpoor rates, in respect of their real estates, were entitled tovote, though they were not inhabitants or occupiers : whichwas also adopted by another committee in the 31st of ^'^^•George Ill.-f-TAUNTON.As to Taunton, where in a former resolution, in 1715, thepersons entitled to vote as the burgesses, were described asthe inhabitants being ^^ potwallers ;^ it was in the 15th of Po^'^a***''George III. agreed, that a "pot waller" was a person whofurnished his own diet, whether he was a householder or onlya lodger, 1^This explanation, therefore, added to the former, and withthe further qualification of possessing a parochial settlement,(which was also agreed on the same occasion), must be takenas containing the full description of a burgess of Taunton. Burgess.The right of lodgers is clearly contrary to the early laws Lodgers,against inmates, which continued in force for many years,and was a frequent subject of parliamentary inquiry anddetermination in the reign of Queen Elizabeth. In 1689,in the Cirencester case, lodgers were expressly excluded from Cirencestervoting. And it is impossible to suggest any valid groundupon which inmates or lodgers could, at Tauntorij be entitledto be considered as burgesses; whilst the contrary was thelaw at Cirencester.It should be observed also, that the payment of scot and Scot andlot the general common law requisite, was not held to be anecessary qualification at Taunton.• 8 Doug. 347. t 4 Doug. 482; 48 Journ, 281.X 1 Doug. 370.6 sSHREWSBURY.ShrnesliuTt/ ii.i!>n affords another MiiguUr instance of the 1maimer \a which the buTyettes live hen defined. It u Iborough hj prescription: itt argue* irc mcntJonod inDoiDPsday, In the reign of Henry 11., all were prohibitedScot ud from Selling within the tKimiigh aaiess obey were in scot aadht, and in assises and talliagcs with the bur^-a!*c«.* Acharter, similar to that of Lincoln, wits granted to the bxr-goes in thei reign of King John, which was (x>nfirined tothem find their Ars in the reign of Henry 111,; and the pci*«Bona inhabiting and dwelling within the town are recognizingHH the burgesses. It sent members to Parliament in thereign of Edward I. before it was incorporated.iiM. In f()04, double retnms were made by the bailiffs andIts. bulges ses.In 1709, the petitioners instead, according to the coouDonScot and law, upon the right of the bui^enees paying itcot and of, andHYing within the borough.The sitting members contended for the bui^sses, botluNm-reti- resident and non-resident. And returns were produced inevidence in the reign of Queen Mary, by the burgesses andCommo cormorants within the town.Parol evidence was given for the sitting member, that theout-bui^Bses, or country burgesses, had voted.The committee properly confined the right to the boregesaes, only inhabiting within the borough, and paying scotand lot.1713. In 1713, the petitioners insisted upon the right of the burgessesat large — the sitting member, on the burgesses inhabitingand paying scot and lot, according to the former determination.In the course of the evidence it appeared, that the returnshad properly been always made by the burgesses. And thecommittee also correctly decided, that the right was in themayor, aldermen, and burgesses.1723. In 1 723, the same question was again agitated ; the returns• !<ee hffoie. pp. Maj, S-W. WJ, 38B.ISHREWSBURY. 2099in the time of Queen Mary by the cammorcmts, and the ^^'^'"-former decisions were given in evidence, as well as some 1723.other returns, made by the commonalty of the borough.And it appeared distinctly, that before the incorporation thereturns were by the " bailiffs and burgesses," and after theincorporation by the " mayor and burgesses." It was said,that in the reign of William and Mary, some burgesses, notinhabitants, were allowed to vote. And in the reign ofHenry VL, some ordinances were referred to, by which it wasdirected, that the commons assembled together on the ringingof the common bell should choose the members to Common. . bell.Parliament. That the inhabiting burgesses have a cow'spasture, which foreign burgesses have not. That foreignburgesses did not pay tolls ; but if they came to live withinthe town, they had all the privileges of other burgesses.An act of Parliament of the sixth of Edward IV. c. 1, s. 17,for the confirmation of their bye-laws, was referred to ; oneof which was quoted; and, according to the ancient principlesof the municipal institutions, related to the conservationof the king's peace, reserving the rights of persons bornin Shrewsbury, but residing out of the borough.The committee resolved again, that the right was only " inthe burgesses inhabiting paying scot and lot* inhabitantsSome questions afterwards occurred respecting the boundariesof the borough, but they are immaterial to the presentinquiry, excepting that a charter of the 11th of Henry VII. 1496.was given in evidence, which granted to the bailiff and burgessesa view of frankpledge, and the return oftorits. disbanda charter was also given in evidence of the 28th ofElizabeth, which recites, that the inhabitants had extended 1585.their buildings into the adjacent vills ; and for putting theinhabitants of those vills under the same jurisdiction as the inhabitantstown, it was ordained, that the freemen and burgesses of thetown, suburbs, and parishes named, should be incorporated,by the name of the bailiffs and burgesses of the town. Andthe same privileges are granted to the inhabitants of allthose places, as had been before enjoyed by the burgessesof the borough.6s 2QJOQ SHREWSBURY.Ot^^ifi - No cliarter could possibly be framed more entirely inli. accordance with the common law than this of Elizabeth,which might form a fit model for such grants even atthe present day. It added the inhabitants of the adjoiningvillages to the burgesses of Shrewsbury, and put them allunder the same jurisdiction : — as Edward IV. united theinhabitants of Southtownto Dartmouth.*This charter described the objects of the grant as " tkefretcmen and burgesses" — that is, the liberi homines, or men offree condition, who inhabited within the borough, and, therefore,were called " burgesses :" and the liberi homines, orfreemen of the villages, which not being before any part ofthe borough, were not called burgesses, but only freemen,till after the clause of incorporation, by which they wereadded to the borough, and then were incorporated by thename of the " bail's and burgesses."1638. A charter of the 14th of Charles I. was also givai inevidence, which recited the former one of Elizabeth, and corporate the burgesses and inhabitants by the name of themayor, aldermen, and burgesses.An old book was also produced, beginning in the reignof Richard II., for the purpose of showing what vills andhamlets were within the liberty of Shrewsbury. But thecommittee decided that the parishes were not within theborough.In the further course of the evidence, it was said, that aselect committee had been appointed for admitting burgesses,for the purpose of carrying the election ; — anotherinstance of the abuses which arose out of the unrestrainedright of making freemen.1775. I» the 15th of Geori;;e III., the decision of 1723 was read ;but the petitioners insisted upon the votes of some personswho had been rejected as freemen, but who were stated tobe entitled to their freedom by two immemorial customs —Apparent one in favour of apprentices for stnen years to one oi thetrades of the 14 ancient couipanie;i ; and the other in favourllotn. of those born within the borough.SHREWSBURY. 2101These supposed customs were afterwards tried upon a ^*^'^"^'mandamus ; and at the trial it was said, that they had theirorigin in bye-laws of 1642 and 1763: which, however, was Jl^*argued, upon the other side, to be only declaratory of theancient custom. The jury, however, found in favour of thecustoms; and a similar verdict was given upon a secondtrial.The reader who has pursued this inquiry from the earlyperiods of our history, will readily perceive how much thesecases were misunderstood, by ascribing to particular localcustom that which was derived from the general law: andby not adverting to the real nature of these supposed rights,the one was improperly mixed up with the trading com- 'panics — and the other as improperly attributed to the simplefact of birth within the place ; instead of referring the right,according to the general law, to the birth from free parents.The committee, however, considered the verdicts given inthis case as conclusive ; and supported the votes of the personswho had, on those grounds, claimed to be admitted asfreemen.Nelson.The impropriety of attempting to remedy the fraudulentmaking of freemen for election purposes, by prohibiting themfrom voting if they had not been admitted 12 months, hasbeen already pointed out — as well as the more effectualremedy, of altogether preventing the arbitrary selection offreemen, by restoring the legitimate presentments at the Present-courtleet. Court leet.An unexpected result from this statute, occurred abouttwelve years after it was passed in the case of Helston, wherea new charter which we shall mention hereafter, beinggranted in consequence of the incapacity of the corporationto act from a defect of their numbers, an election occurredbefore twelve months had expired from the grantingof the charter, under which many freemen had been created :and the question arose, whether persons so made burgessesby the charter, were within the operation of the Durham Actecommittee held that they were ;the king was held to be within the fraud contemplated by ithe preamble of the Durham Act. The result wag, that thesmall body of the whole corporation, who had negligently or .wilfully allowed that body to got into such a state, that ithey were incapacitated by law to act, were euflercd toreturn the two members to Parliament.By which means it is obvious, that the whole subject was iinvolved in unnecessary difficulties ; when if the common lawhad been preserved in its purity, none would have arisen.The burgesses would, at the annual court-meet, have dulypresented all their officers, as well as persons who were bythe law qualified and bound to be burgesses, and therewould have been no necessity for a fresh charter by thecrown. Dut if such a charter were granted, it should havebeen for the mere purpose of restoring it as borough; and, onthat account, should have continued it as separate from thecounty, and by incorporating the burgesses, have given themthe power of enjoying their rights in perpetuity, the burgessesbeing defined by the court leet. Under which circumstances,no such incongruous question could have arisenas to the exercise of the prerogative in granting a charter tothe place.BtUFORL).1705. '" tli^ ^^^^ '^^ Bedford, in the same year, a whimsicaldistinction is stated by Lord Glenbervie, between a " burgess"and a " freeman ;" that all the sons of the former areentitled to be burgesses, but only the eldest of the latter:*how totally such a distinction is without the pretence ofany support by the general law, has been already abundantlyifflo. On the behalf of the petitioners it was contended, that theHouse requisite of being householders, according to the last determinationin 1G90, applied as well to the burgesses andfreemen, as to the inhabitants; which was discussed atmuch length. The committee permitted evidence to be given,• 2 Doug. 70.holder.BEDFORD. 2103for the purpose of establishing the usage subsequent to the ^^^^^"-last resolution ; with which the committee were satisfied, in Usage,favour of the non-resident votes. The usage spoken to, however,was only for a period of 40 years. Objections werethen taken to the votes, on the grounds of their beinghonorary burgesses, and occasional but they had all been Honoraryburgesses.made more than a year, and were not within the DurhamAct.To establish these points, evidence was given, that in1654, Sir Bulstrode Whitelocke was admitted. And six i6&4.others, who had been admitted gratis in 1666, were 1656.declared to be improperly admitted, because they were introducedby force, fraud, and surreptitiously, contrary to therights, customs, and privileges of the town; and thereforethey were not to be of the guild, but to be considered asforeigners.In 1769, five hundred freemen had been objected to as 1769.non-residents, and who were made on paying one guinea.On the other side, evidence was given of entries from theborough books, commencing in 1654, for the admission of 16S4.pei-sons who had no previous title, without the payment ofany fine, or even of the usual fees.The committee decided, that '' the being householders did Right.not refer to the burgesses and freemen, but to the inhabitsants only." So that this substantial qualifications, uponwhich so much of the application of the common law depended,of being householders, was held to be requisite for the inha- ^\^'bitants, who were the persons for whose benefit the privilegesof the borough were granted, but was not required for theburgesses and freemen, who were persons to be made at thewill of the corporation. In truth, the burgesses ought onlyto have been one class, and all these supposed distinctionsbetween burgesses, freemen, and inhabitants, have no substantialfoundation in law.The committee purposely abstained from delivering anyopinion in favour of the right of the corporation to receivehonorary burgesses.WIGTOWN,As to the case of Willow,' it should be observed,the statute of the seventh of George II., it appearsReaanu. chief magistrates of the borough should be " rrslanls" withinit, as well as the counsellors, whose dwelling places artspoken of.It Hpfwurs by the warrant for a poll election, in ScotlandHoDoniy honorary kuri/emeg are expressly excluded from votin);.+And the election for magistrates, in Scotland, app<^tanhave been popular.l-OOLE.Upon A jieliliun against the return for Poole, the petitioner[insisted upon the right of the inhabitant and householdpaying scot and bearing lot.The sitting members insisted ui>on the exclusive right ofthe burgesses.Pciiuooer- The counsel for the petitioners relied upon the doctrine iiGlanville, in the Cirencester and Pomfret cases, andWhitelucke's Commentary; und the definition of a burgessill Selma's Glossary, uii<IiVladox's Finuu Burgh.In the course of the ai^umcnt it was asserted, that thedoctrine of Glanville could not be maintained or deducedfrom history ; but it has been shown in the progress ofthis work that it can be so supported. It was said thatthe early periods of representation were too obscure toauthorize any general system ; but documents and authoritiessufficient have been adduced to show the general applicationof the law, and of the term burgess, as the foundationof one uniform right of burgess-slip.The counsel for the silting member said, that the right o1"election in Poole did not depend upon any of the charterswhich had been produced, but on prescriptive right, whichwas not the fact ; because if it had been, it was an argumentwhich, if rightly apprehended, should have weighed for thepetitioner; Hir il' it were a prescriptive right, it must have• 2 Doug. 187. t Stc Wisiit, App. ai.APOOLE. 2105existed in burgesses before the time of Richard I., and no Q^'^^y-authority can be shown for disputing that burgesses were 1775.THEN the inhabitants of the boroughs.The sitting member's counsel also said, that though " burgesses" and " communitas '* might in some boroughs comprehendall the inhabitants, there were many more instanceswhere they were used for a limited part of them. Theanswer to which is, first — that "communitas," unless communistas.means the same as burgesses, has nothing to do with theelection of burgesses for Parliament, by burgesses. If itmeant the same as burgesses, then the question falls tothe ground ; and as to the ancient application of the term,it is denied that it ever was referred to a limited portion ofthe inhabitants, otherwise than as exclusive of peers, women,minors, villains, ecclesiastics, &c.The counsel mainly grounded their case upon the usage ofthe place. The proper doctrine of usage has been already Usage,sufficiently stated, and the reader himself can readily applyto it the facts of this case, and ascertain if it affords anyground for the determination of the committee.The tautology of charters might in truth well be insisted Charter.upon ; but it would have been difficult to show how thatargument could have helped the sitting members.It was also truly observed for them, that the corporationmight have certain corporate rights and franchises under thecharters, and yet not have a right to vote for members ofParliament. That is undoubtedly true; because corps corporationsreally had not any thing to do with the electivefranchise; and it would be incongruous if they had, becauseas they were the creatures of the crown, it wouldin effect place the elective franchise at the mercy of theexecutive.It seems altogether to have been overlooked in this case,that the last irresistible argument by the counsel for thesitting member, was directly against the right claimed bythem ; namely, the corporate right.The parol evidence in that case, on either side, is tod recentand unsatisfactory to require any comment.It was confidently asserted, that there wax no iiuitanceCDBinDa of a common seal closing to inhabitants nt large. ItIT7G. ^i" ^f' recollected, that it has beeii before shown that thenwere many instances of that Liii.*It tK therefore submitted, that tht! decision of the committeein this oaiic, was erroneous.And it will be Been, that there is some reason for thinkingthat Forti Glenbervie was of that opinion — for at the end ofthe case, tiiore are added in the notes by that learned nobleman,the cases of Boston, Jiridport, and Wartcich — whichgo a great length to establish the error of this decision, undto prove that no usage within time of logos uicmoty, cannarrow the right of election; — as also to show (which ismaterial in the case of Poole) what occurred immediatelyafter the decisions reported by Serjeant Glanville, sml tathose better periods of our parliamentary and constitutionallaw, as to the luterjM^tation of the word " commonalty."IJ76. An inhabitant householder of Poole, in Easter Terra, 17ll>George IIL, moved the Court of King's Bench, for a mathiasto the corporation to admit him to the office of freemanu it being contended, that the inhabitants were an integral partof the corporation, under the name of " commonalty." Thatthe corporation in its origin consisted of all the inhabitants, andno mode was provided in the institution for continuing thesuccession. That according to the constitution of the town,burgesses and inhabitants were synonymous terms, and thegoverning part of the corporation could not withhold fromthe latter their privileges. Lord Mansfield refused theHuge. application, because there was no usage alleged in favour ofthe claim, the borough being prescriptive ; and as the chartercontained no directions about the electing or admittingfreemen, or burgesses, usage alone could explain what theprivileges were, when the charters were silent; and lieadded, that the claimants wanted no admission at ell, iftheir construction of the charters were right; but became• Ste 2 Il. l!a.-AlJborouKii-Pic.ion-Wind=oi~Bridpoil-Sh»f(a,biirj-SI. Germains-and ste hcfore, pp. 443, 405, 55S. 1370.I Surely a/r«nuii cannot be tait to be an officer.POOLE. 2107entitled to the privileges they claimed ipso facto, by being ^^^g*"'-inhabitant householders. 1776»The same error appears to have been committed in thismotion, as by the petitioner in the election case, by placingit on the ground of a corporate right, and relying upon thecharters, when it should have been rested upon the commonlaw ; and then the reason given by Lord Mansfield, for refusingthe motion, would have operated the other way. The usageagainst the common law, should have been shown, by thosewho strove to except themselves from it ; and for that purpose,it must have been some usage existing time immemorially,or at least, a usage so proved, as to raise thepresumption that it had been immemorial. The observationof Lord Mansfield, as to the charters being explainedby usage, is certainly accurate, if the right was claimedunder them ; but being a prescriptive right, as observed bythat noble lord himself, it stood aloof from the charters,and its prescriptive character, instead of being an answerto the application, should have been the strongest reasonfor assuming that the inhabitants were entitled to be burgesses;because, at the time of legal memory, burgesseswere the inhabitants of the boroughs.As to the further observation of Lord Mansfield, that theclaimants required no admission, — it is with submissionurged, that he must have overlooked that by our early law,and even by modern statutes, inhabitants were not recog- inhabitedsized, without some enrolment, or notice of their inhabitancy: and there can be no doubt, but that before the time oflegal memory, it was necessary for them to be presented,enrolled, and sworn at the court leet.Another petition was presented against the return for this 1791.borough, under which the petitioner insisted, that the inhabitantshouseholders, within the borough and county, paying House-scotand bearing lot were, as such, part of the corporate bodyof the borough, and legal voters.Other petitioners stated the right to be in the mayor andburgesses only : and the sitting member stated the right in thesame way, which was confirmed by the committee.I■ 5108 POOLE,o™^"'- The Btutcment of the first petitioners waa incorrect inclaiming llw? right for the inhahititnta as corpiiralors ; and thedetennination of the committee, fixing il la the matfor andburgesses, is, undoubtedly, accurate in terms. But still Uiequestion rcnmin?, who are the burgesses ? certainly not thecorporators ; but the inAahilnnt householders, presented, ,mid (OTwra at the court Uet ; so being the free tadbacful men* (the liberi ct legates holiness, and, as such, pityingscot and bearing lot.CARDIGAN.'^5. In a case respecting Cardigan.^t this periods the two courtof the borough are mentioned, Uie one called the town course*•«'■ for the trial of civil actions the other, the court leet, which Hholden twice a year, at Michaelmas and Easter; the mayor^Jarr^* **^''"g ^ steward there, and jury of burgesses is edom binquire into all matters belonging to the borough. It is Miid(,.1that " new burgesses are, properly speaking, elected by tFroEni. "jury, for they present such persons as they think fit to btflmade free of the borough :" thus — " We present I. F. to be'*^-A burgess of the borough of Cardigan ; and the person !«opresented might come at any future time and take the oathof a burgess, which is administered by the town clerk, inthe presence of the mayor. No previous titles is necessaryin order to be made a burgess ; and it appears to have beenthe visage to adjourn the court leet for the purpose of presentingburgesses."This appears to be, in substance, an accurate descriptionCouitlevt. 0f jig proper proceedings at the court leet of a borough,according to the ancient common law ; excepting that, asusual, it is il) some slight degree perverted: as for instance,■'"'*'■ it is stated, that ihc jury had the power of election, becausethey could present such as they thought fit. If that meant,A return id the 14th of Kliiabcth, 1572, was by many persons named, who wcieDescribed as " free and laurel men. duelling ami residing."t 3 Doug. 175.CARDIGAN. 2109as we have had occasion before to observe, that they had ^^^^g^^" -the power of arbitrarily and capriciously electing whom 1775.they thought fit, it is an incorrect statement of the law, and ^^^cuon.cannot be supported. But if it means that they had the power,according to their oaths and their consciences, to present such Present-persons,suitors at their court, as resiants, whom they thoughtfit and proper to be burgesses, then it is an accurate statementof the law ; and the further assertion, that no previoustitle was necessary, is also correct ; as well as that no titlecould give them an absolute right, because their being ornot being admitted as burgesses, must, after all, dependupon the judgment the j ury should form of their fitness forbeing burgesses, by station, condition, and character.It is also stated, that the burgesses were originally presentted, sworn, and enrolled in the court leet book, upon alist called the suit roll, till the new system was resorted toupon the passing of the stamp act. Opposite the namesof the persons was written, "t/i/r," or "*S.'' And after some,A." and " S.," which were explained to mean, " appearedand sworn." Against some, the letter " R." is written, which,formerly, meant "rejected;" but in more modem presentmentsit meant " registered."In 1653, a common council, which was no part of the 1653.ancient constitution, was established in the following manner.At a court leet, the jury presented that it was necessary that Commona council of twelve, being aldermen, and sufficient burgesses,should be added to the mayor, to advise him for the goodof the borough. Twelve persons were accordingly namedin the presentment, and were the first " common 'Council ;"and vacancies by death were afterwards presented by thejury, and filled up from time to time, by the majority ofthe survivors.Aberystwith, which was one of the contributory boroughs, wItJfhad also a court leet, likewise holden twice a year, the Leet.mayor being the presiding officer.Lampeter and Atpar, possessed similar privileges; the Lampeter,portreeves presiding, and the burgesses being presented by|l4j]]0 CARDIGAN.f Owivriii. jf,g jm^ j„ time game manner, and they were alleged to bniTTfi, boroughs by prescription.It is stated in the report of this case, that all the burgesses,whether resident or not, bad a right to vote, which19 manifestly contrary to the law ; for as they were all to beadmitted and sworn, at the court-leet, there can be nodoubt but that they ongbt all to be renwtnts. The objectand effect of their being assumed to be otherwise, in suffixgently apparent, for within twelve months before the election,which was then in question, 4000 persons* had beatadmitted as burgesses, in the small borough of Cardigan, inconsequenceof which, during the poll, a scarcity of provisionswas apprehended from the large concourse of people;and at the election the mayor said, he would admit everypenon to poll, who would say he was a burgess of one ofellie four boroughs, and bad polled at a farmer election.On the other side it was contended, they ought to bare[their admission on stamps.DERBY.In the case of Derby it was saidii* that there had been wfprevious deteruiiiiiition of the right of election upon whichthe parties agreed amongst themselves as to the right; andas usual, in such cases, adopted a usurpation.It was argued that every member of the corporation had aright to vote. It was truly asserted that it was a boroughThe unliiuileil right of corporations la aadmit rr«enieii at their pleasure, aadto reject vhoni ihcT will; In admit Doti-retideDts. and exclude whom they pleaseof the inhabitants, hii been ao long prevalent, and the noon of ti being l«c>1,has >o long existed, thai it appears almost an insurmountable difficulty, tobut I^rd Coke's analogy may be properly applied to this subject ;— " As gold"and silver may, as current money, pass even with alio proper aililic<T,•' though it hail loo much alloy, until he hall tried it with the loucli-stooe,even so this assumed right may pass with the Irarntd as justifiable, in respector the outside, by vulgar allowance, until he advi^ly looketh into the■' toot£ of it, and tea it by the rules of law ;" and Lord Coke rapidly-adds as 10ibe Court of Reijuosts, of which he wi" speaking. " to say the truth, I myself did ;•■ but, erroresad sua principii .eferte. ct .«fellere.'-4 Inst. B7.t 3Dougl.2e9. SeBb«fon'.pp.-)IO. 467. tfJ4. 883, 1181, 1522.DERBY. 2111by prescription. For it has already been seen,* that it is Q«»8»'J' *mentioned as a borough in Domesday. It was alleged to be Domesday,a corporation by prescription, which was not correct ; for itwas not incorporated before the reign of Philip and Mary.It also afterwards received charters from Kine James I. in Iii.the ninth, and Charles I. in the 14th year of their reigns.It returned burgesses to Parliament from the 26th ofEdward I. : and therefore the original burgesses could nothave been, as argued by the parties, the members of thecorporation.In the second of Edward III., the members were returnedby the " burgesses ;" and in the 12th of Henry IV. by cere commentarypersons named, and many others of the " commonalty." * *^'In the reign of Charles II., all their prior charters, and alltheir liberties and privileges were surrendered into the hands Surrender,of the crown, and a new charter was granted in the 34thyear of that reign, incorporating the mayor and burgessesand nominating a mayor, nine aldermen, and 14 brothers(contraire), 14 capital burgesses, a common clerk, and suiindefinite number of burgesses.The mayor is chosen annually upon Michaelmas day, fromamong the aldermen, by a majority of the voices of thealdermen and brethren. The aldermen, brethren, and capitalburgesses hold their offices for life, unless removed for illbehaviour, or non-residence. Vacancies are filled up by the Non-residence*choice of one of the brethren, by the majority of the mayorand remaining aldermen. The vacancies among the brethrenare supplied from among the capital burgesses, by the electionof the majority of the mayor and aldermen, and remainingbrothers ; and a vacancy of the capital burgesses fromamong the burgesses, inhabitants of the borough, by the inhawuntselection of the majority of the mayor, aldermen, brothers, andremaining capital burgesses. The aldermen, brethren, andcapital burgesses, must be constantly resident and dwelling Resident,in the borough.The particulars of the municipal officers and elections ofthis borough, have been given with more detail than usual,• See before, p. 263.Ifrom tKfl circumstance of the original constitution of it1779. not having bt-cn disfigured by any decisions respecting it..floidmrn And it will not fail to be observed, that it is probably to brattributed to tic sanie cause, that the residence of the music*'pal utlieers continued to be required without question or doubtThe point most discussed in the progress of the cawVrMiDvn. W8S, as to the legal mode of admitting freemen or btirgeaet,which were assumed in Derby to be synonymous ; andto a ccrtniu extent, properly ao ; bttcauso, by the originallaw, every burgess must have been a freeman, that is of freecondition; but not ^ converso. — So that every freeman wasnot a burgess ; for he was not hu unless, as in the CardiganDnrtteH. case, he was presented by the Jury as tit lo be a burgess, andwas therefore sworn and enrolled.Some persons were said to be entitled to be admitted, andhad demanded their admission, but were refused; and these*were claimed to be added to the poll ; and some Amtmrtrybnrt/esiieii, admitted within the year, were objected lo; aff<well as some who had been admitted upon the title of.servitude."Hie principal point of usurpation was according to thecommon piiictice admllled, for it was Agreed upon bollsides, that the corporation was in possession of the power ofMaking bestowing the freedom, either by purchase or favour, uponfreemen. i ■ ipersons who had no antecedent titles, and who were calledhonorary freemen."Informations in the nature of quo warranto were, betweenthe election and the trial of the petition, applied for in theCourt of King's Bench. But strange to say, the opportunityof trying the question was refused, and the petitioners didnot therefore discuss the question before the committee.The rights by birth and apprenticeship were insistedujKtn, and a clause of the charter of Charles I. was cited,for the purpose of showing by whom the officers and burgessesought to be sworn. And in the course of the ai^i-nient it was urged, that the intention of the charter inOath , imposing the oaths was, " that those who were admitted"should first prove ihcuisehes to be loyal subjects, andDERBY. 2113€€proper and fit persons to be received into the freedom of Q«>'«^^^-the borough." And it was justly contended, that the ^'^^'charters not specifying the mode of admission, it must bediscovered by the general law, or the uss^e ; as to which theysaid, that the usage had been to admit the freemen at the Usage,common hall, which was a meeting consisting of not lessthan twenty members of the common council, of which themayor was to be one.But it is obvious that there is no authority given by thecharter for a body exercising this power ; and without suchauthority, it is submitted they could not be entitled io do it.It seems clear that this usage had been founded upon a substitutionfor the j ury at the court leet.The committee held, that the charter was not sufficientlyconclusive to exclude other members from participating inthe right of admitting freemen.A bye-law of 1743, given in evidence, expressly spoke 1743.of the "freedoms " or" burgess-ships" as synonymous ; andalso of the rights having been investigated at the commonhall by a " committee " of the corporation — which term ofitself seems almost sufficient to justify the assumption thatit was a modern innovation.It further appeared, that in consequence of a variety ofconstructions being put upon the charter, different mageshad prevailed at different periods in the borough.It was stated that there was no fixed time for holdingcommon halls for the admission of freemen, but the mayorwas to call them at his discretion, giving three days* notice —a course very likely to lead to abuse, and, as might beexpected, agreed to by the parties.It should be remarked, how much the regular holding ofthe court leet, at fixed periods of the year, of which all the Leet.inhabitants of the place would have notice, is to be preferredto this irregular and uncertain method of assembling.It was argued in the case — according to the known legalprinciples — " that ignorance of the law does not excuse thedeparting from it ; and that every man should be consideredas acquainted with the law." It is clearly, therefore,6 T"*"»'"'■ theboundeiiduty of the Legislature to lake care, for the sake1775. of the public, that the law 19 so plain, thai it should be ubJct-stood by the people ; and therefore all these intricacies whichhave been introduced by abuse and usurpation, should beabated, and a more simple system adopted for borough utdLord mmiicipBl government; and, as Lord Mansfield justly observed," in sill question concerning the rights of bontuglu,it ia moist desirable and necessary that the law should becertain ; not only in respect of the matter, but also in re-sjieft of the f'onii and manner of all their proceed ing».'"*ICRICKI-ADF-No determination had been made as to the burgesses clCricklnde. But there had been a succession of agreementmatt to the right of election, the substance of which w»»repeated again in this year.-fThe question arose as to the boundaries of the borough.Aiiotlicr statement was also properly made, that it was nol'necessary that the houses for which votes were claimed,should either be ancient houses, or built upon ardent sites:notwithstanding what was decided in the case of Petrified,Chippenham, Steyning, Tewkesbury, &c.; and the rec)uis!leof residence for 40 days was insisted upon.These positions were controverted upon the other side.An objection was also raised to some votes, that they weresplit. !t was stated, that Cricklade was a borough by prescription; which is correct; as its burgesses are mentionedf. in Domesday It was also properly admitted, that it was notincorporated. The baits was the presiding officer, and heand the constables were chosen annually, by theory, at theMichaelmas coiirl lee, before the steward of the manor.The viitcii and u-nrd of the borough was mentioned in thecourse of the evidence : hind the court led repeatedly, as beingthen in practice. It was stated to be the custom of theborough, that evciy inhabitant took it in his turn to make(T list of the inhabitants within the borough.CRICKLADE. 2115The committee came to a resolution, which seems to Q^'g^ ^^^'involve a strange description of the burgesses of Cricklade. 1776.The right was declared to be in " the inhabitants possessing*' houses within the borough, who were freeholders, copyholders, or leaseholders, for any term not less than threeyears, or for any such term or greater, determinable uponlives ; such freeholders, copyholder, or leasehold, having** been in the occupation of the house 40 days*'The following further resolutions of committees in thisreign, may be stated, as showing the singular descriptions,which were given of burgesses in the different boroughs,although they had probably all the same origin.In Camelfordy the right was declared to be " in the freemen ^^gg"**being inhabitants, and paying scot and lot.* The capitalburgesses having no right to vote, unless they were freeburgesses, inhabitants paying scot and lot." The latter wasno doubt a correct decision, because, although the names ofdignity of the superior officers of the corporation, are oftenmentioned in the determinations as to the right, yet itshould always be remembered, that they did not vote in thosecharacters, but were all to be considered as exercising theirrights under the general title of burgesses.The right in Great Grimsby y-^ was decided to be " in the Grimsby.^^ freemen admitted at 2l full court y by the mayor, aldermen,common councilmen, and burgesses ; such freemen beingresident and paying scot and lot, in all cases — except norate has taken place subsequent to their admission."In Malmesbury^X the right was declared to be " in the Malesand 12 capital burgesses, only." A surprising 1797!decision — considering that Salisbury had been a boroughfrom so very remote a period, and had burgesses, and returnedmembers to Parliament, so long before any suchselect body could have existed.The right in Newcastle-under-Lyne^^ was declared to be ** in Newcastle.the freemen residing in the borough." 1792.• 4 Dour. 478. t 4 Doug. 487.4 Doug. 491. $4 Doug. 496.() T 2sue'^*°^'"- In Steyning,* the right of election was determined to bes**TniaE- " in the inhabitants of ancient houses, and houses burst onthe sites of ancient houses, within the borough of Steynin^being householders paying scot and lot." But io the nextyear, it was simply decided, that the right was in the *' constableand householders, inhabitants within the borough,paying scot and lot ;" a variety a» to the description ofthe burgesses of this borough which could not have occoncdif the ancient system had been pursued.TB*rk«»- Jq Tewhesburtf,f the right was declared to be " in thefrt^-1707. '• men at large; and in all persons seized of an estate of freehold,in an entire dwelling-house within the ancient limitof the borough."Warwick. As to Warwick the right was determined to be " in suchpersons only as paid church and poor in the borough,whether inhabitants or not."WMtmin- In Westminster the right was determined to be in theI'M. inhabitant housekeepers paying scot and lot. Which »^arepeated in 1795.LV M E.1780. As to Xj/wieJ a question arose as to the right of election :the petitioners insisting, that the freeholders, and freemen,resident in the borough, and they only, had a right to vote —the sitting members contending, that the right was ia thefreemen only, whether resident or not.Petition. One of the petitions stated, that one Davis, Coade, andothers, had conspired together, since the year 1778, to preventa legal election of mayor, with a view to acquire anundue influence at the then approaching election. That theyprocured Coade to be illegally placed in the office, on the1779. 4th day of October, 1779. That an information, in thenature of a quo warranto, was filed against him, and thathe fled from the process. That the majority of the capitalburgesses, being denied their rij^ht of voting for mayor, onthe 30th of August, the usual day for the election, assent5(19. t4Dou(;. 512. )4nou(!. 514.{ 4 Doug. 510. II See PMllips^ Election Cites, 'in.LYME. 2117bled themselves on the following day, according to the stag Q^***^"-tune of the 11th of George I., and then duly elected one 1780.William Paterson into that office ; who, on the day of election,took the poll. That he declared the petitioners to havethe majority ; and, accordingly, returned them. That Coadehad also taken a poll ; and having admitted a large numberof unqualified persons to vote, declared Mr. Hartford andMr. Dwell duly elected : they, therefore, prayed relief, &c.For the petitioner , it was said, that Lyme was the ancient Petitioner,demesne of the crown : which is not correct, for it is notmentioned in Domesday. But it was truly stated, that itwas represented in Parliament before it was incorporated :for it returned members to Parliament from the reign ofEdward I. ; and was not incorporated previous to the reignof Queen Mary — from which fact it was said, the inferencewas strong, that the members were originally returned by thefreeholders or tenants of the crown.It was made a free borough in the 12th of Edward I.,* and 1283.the bailiffs are stated in the return for Dorchester in thatreign, to have the return of writs. Another charter wasgranted in the fifth of Edward III. to the men of Lyme. Anda charter of inspeximus in the first of Richard II., stated apetition of the inhabitants, complaining that the town hadbeen much injured by the sea, the jury having found (in allprobability the jury of the court leet of the borough) thatin consequence of that fact they were unable to pay their fee-farm,and the tenth. And in the reign of Henry IV., on Hen. IV.account of their poverty, they were released from all arrearsof their fee-farm. In the reign of Henry V., the town was Hen.V.granted to Thomas Cook and his wife. In the reign ofHenry VII., we have seen the burgages mentioned. In the Hen.Vll.reign of Henry Vii, on the petition of the burgesses and Hen.Vlllinhabitants the town was granted to the burgesses, providedthe burgesses and inhabitants should repair the cob. QueenMary also, in the 11th year of her reign, granted a charterto Lyme.fQueen Elizabeth also hinted a charter to that borough ; Elizabeth.See before, p. 529. t See before, pp. 794, 823, 1061, 1137, 1200.tdfl^ wliicli, like uiaiiy charters to other places, did notstate the facts eomiecteil with the borough; ,contrary to direct proof, that it was an ancient demesne ofthe crown : and that asBcrtiou appears to have given birth tomuch of the subsequent error and discussion.The return to Parliament in the ninth of Queen Elizawas by the mayor, burgesses, and inhabitants of the LownId the fifth year, entries commence respecting the c<leet: and presentments are made in the usual form,are continued for many years.In the 32nd year of the same reign, the first entryin the court of hustings book, of the election of a ma;recorder, and coroner, by three classes of persons : first,those who are of the council ; — secondly, by certain freeburgesses who are not of the council; — thirdly, by certainfreemen, who are neither burgesses nor of the council.It is necessary to explain that portion of this entry whispersof itiefreetnen who are not burgesses. The fomierdocn-ments have shown that the inhabitants were the burgesses ;and therefore, if there were in the borough any persons offree condition, that is to say, "liberi homines" they wouldbe entitled to be burgesses.From other entries in the same reign, it appears that considerableconfusion had been introduced into the records ofthe borough, by confounding questions of tenure, with questionof burgess-ship ; and the court heel, with the courtbaron. The possession of a freehold was particularly mentioned,in an ancient paper amongst the records of thecorporation, as entitling a person to be sworn as a freeburgess. Which was no doubt strictly accurate, provided theperson was in possession of a freehold house ; and therefore,■ was a householder within the borough.From the same document it appears, that those who hadnot freeholds, but who wished to be free,* were made so uponpaying the line and taking the oath, and they were calledfreemen. So that in fiict, the names before given of burgessesaiitl frectiieii arc contained, and in effect are alike,LYME. 2119although the qualifications upon which they had been recog- Q«>'^"J-sized as freemen were different. The identity of both these 1780.classes appears to be established by the returns of this l^^*"'****period. That in the 28th of Elizabeth, is by the mayor andburgesses. In the 30th of Elizabeth, by the mayor, and burgessesand the inhabitants and commonalty. There aremany similar changes in subsequent returns ; and as it isnot possible that the elections could have been made bydifferent classes of persons, it may fairly be inferred, thatthese returns describe the same body of individuals.In the first year of James I., there was a charter of incog AmeliorationAnd in the seventh year of that reign, there isan entry in the hustings book of the election, which statesthat the mayor, with the greater part of the freemen andthe burgesses who had voices in the election, had electedMr. Jeffersonthe 10th year of Charles I., a charter of incorporation charles I.was also granted by that king ; and it appears that at thattime the wages of the members were paid by the inhabitants.*The entry of the determination of the mayor and burgessesrespecting the persons who were to contribute to the wages ofthe member of Parliament, is in the following words : — " Thisday, at a court holden in the moot-hall, it is agreed by themayor and burgesses of Lyme Regis, that the burgesses and*^ freemen of the town, as well inhabitants as not inhabitants,'' and all other inhabitants, shall contribute to the paymentof taxes and impositions to be levied towards the charges^*of the burgess of the Parliament." It is signed by themayor and six capital burgesses, and 14 other persons, anddated 1684.This bye-law appears, upon the face of it, to be illegal andvoid ; for the mayor and burgesses would have no power ofimposing this charge upon those who did not inhabit in theborough, within which their jurisdiction is limited.The returns purported to be made by the burgesses. Inthat same reign, it appears from the entries in the freemen'sbook, that non-residents were first introduced: Sir John .• See before, p. 1672.LYME."- Jeffrey, Sir Robert and Sir Richard Strode, who appear tohave been niemb^rn for the borough, were made free.But as a proof that non-resident were not, at that timegenerally admitted, the order book of IG31 shows, that oneperson having left the town, were ordered to come and relictin it, or else to be dismissed froai the corporation. ^Vnd inan entry of 1637, three capital burgesses having removesfrom the town, are stated to have resigned their offices, whichhad been accepted hy the corporation ; and they were dischargedand dismissed.I- lu the 36th of Charles II., that king granted a charter forgivingthe power chiefly to the common council, consistingof the mayor, 15 burgesses, with the recorder. But theelection of members to Parliament, was granted to the mayor,capital burgesses, and freemen, or the greater part of them,as theretofore, in ancient times had been used and accustomed.t. The proclamation, however, of James II. put an end to thischarter; and all the old magistrates and burgesses wererestored.Upon a petition in the first year of James II., it was proposedon behalf of the petitioners, to prove that residence Unnecessaryin order to give the right of voting.Several records of the corporation were produced, andparticular entries of names and facts were read.The most material proofs or inferences of residence weremade out in the following manner, viz. :The names of the voters who signed several returns, wereread; and lists were produced of resiant freemen of nearlythe same dates. In many instances they corresponded ; thesame names being found in both lists.Several others who signed the returns, were also found inother lists of the commoners ; and many among the y«rors ofthe leet : some at the hustings court. And from the whole itappeared, that freeholders and freemen resident in theborough had elected the members to Parliament.'In 1689, upon another petition, it was insisted, for the• Pbil.34l.LYME. 2121petitioner,* that the right of election was in the mayor. ^^'^"^'burgesses, and freemen at large ; and it was contended, con- contraryto the fact, that the charter of Edward IV., had madeit a corporation ; so that the borough and corporation werecoeval. Five foreign freemen had voted for the petitioner ;and in the course of the evidence as shown before, non-residentshad been introduced after the act for the regulation ofcorporations ; and the right of the freeholders was attemptedto be established, but it appeared that they had been beforerejected. However, the same question was again agitated inthe reign of Queen Anne, a petition having been presented ^^^*'stating the right to be in the mayor, capital burgesses, freemen,and freeholders, inhabiting within the borough; andthat a few days before the election, the mayor said he wouldadmit the freeholders to vote ; but finding several come tovote for the petitioner, he refused them, and declared theother candidate elected.The return of that date purports to be made by the mayor, 1702.capital burgesses, and freemen, being all inhabitants of thesame borough: but the words "being all" are interlined.Another petition was also presented a few years afterwards, 1708.of several capital burgesses, freemen and freeholders inhabitantswithin this borough, on behalf of themselves and others,stating their right to vote, but that they had been rejected.The return was also on this, and many subsequent occasions,by the mayor, capital burgesses, and freemen, inhabitantsof the borough.Such is the history of Lyme, to the period when the inquiry 1780.we are quoting occurred, upon which the committee reported,that all the four were not duly returned, and the election Election• J void.was void.A new writ issued for another election, after which apetition of Mr. Hartford and Mr. Daniell, and another ofvoters in their interest, were presented.On the hearing of the case, the petitioners again insisted, Petition-thatthe right of election was in the freeholders and freemenresident in the borough, and them alone.• See before, p. 1874.LYME.'■ Tlit^ xiltinif manbiTx touleitiied, llml the iiglit of electWHS ill Jrfi'Tutn only, whether Ouy were resident or not.^ Fur tlit^ |>etilioiier, aoiongtit other things it was stated,that the mayor aud bui^esEcg, from time immemorial, had,held a court of hastings at the guildhall every Monday*where tlicy hold pleas of hind, &c., and admitted person Imthe freedom of the borough.That the court leet wh« licUl by tbc steward twice everyyear, ou Die Monday after Michaelmas, and on a day mihiafter Easter.That the mayor, since the year 1680, was chosen on th(Monday after the feast of St. Bartholomew : the aiayor and)burgesses meeting at the guildhall, and recommending twoburgesaes, who were of the council ; one of whomelected mayor by the common burgesses ; and sworn in by thtsteward at the leet, ou the Monday after Michaelmas. 4Other documents and entries from the records of the bfarou^Ii were produced, to prove that freeholders ibnncrlfvoted for members of Parliament, and that it was pieces*italy that the electors should reside in the town.In the summing up of the evidence for the petitioners, Bradywas quoted. Representation in Parliament was assumed to befounded upon territorial right. And though it was properlyui^ed as a striking feature of the ancient constitution of theplace, that the mayor was still sworn at the court leet ; yetit was assumed throughout the argument, that the bui^eseeswere of a corporate character ; and, strange to say, it wascontended, that " liberi homines " were comparatively wordsof modem date.The counsel for the sitting members justly disputed theauthority of Brady ; and relied upon Lyme being a corporation,and upon the long usiiye for the non-iet-ideiits.The evidence which was adduced, was also founded uponthe assumption, that the term " bui^ess" was a corporateterm; and it was a striking circumstance of tic inquiry,that they grave in evidence, in proof of the right of the non-residents,the entries which rc(|uircd the burgesses to returnand reside in the town, under io pvnl of disfranchisement.LYME. 2123The committee decided against the right of the freeholders, o««rgeiii.and held that residence was not necessary. Right.In the 23rd of George III., another petition occurred,* 1783.which alleged, that none but residents ought to have beenadmitted to vote. And the petitioners insisted first, thatnone but inhabitants could vote ; and secondly, that freeholders,subject to that limitation, had the right as well asthe freemen.Many returns were read, which however it is unnecessaryto state, as they were in substance the same as those mentionedbefore.In the course of the evidence, reference was made to thecourt leet and the juries ; and also to the presentments of theresiants, and the swearing of the defenders to their fealty.The oath made by a burgess was given in evidence, whichbound him to be contributory to all manner of taxes, chargesrates, and impositions within the town ; and that he shouldcolour no foreigner's goods, nor know any foreigner to buyor sell within the town. And it was said, that the oath of anhonorary burgess differed from this. If it did so, there couldhardly be stronger evidence of their usurpation : because itis certain that there could be no authority but to administerone oath to all the burgesses ; and if the honorary freemenstood in such a position that it was necessary to make anew oath for them, there can be no doubt that their title wasnot sanctioned by law.An ancient resiant roll was read, which was intituled. ResignNomina omnium inliabitantium villsB ibidem tam burdens 'sum et liberum hominem quam aliorum ejusdem ville."And other resiant rolls at different periods were also givenin evidence; and in one instance, in an entry in the corporationbook, there were two lists of 24 names, eachdistinguished by a circumflex, which seem to have beenthe two juries. *There appeared to be no books prior to 1569; and after 1569.1714, the term freemen* seems to have been adopted, in-2Ludere, 3.^' Head of the more proper appellation of " burgessesthat the freemen were Dot the same as the burgesses 'vtproved by women beg admitted as the former, who couldnot be the latter.The usual consequences followed, upon the freeholder*being supposed to have a right of voting : Mr. Henry havingmade several freeholds for election purposes.The strange argument, that the word " burgess" bad indifferentmeanings ; was asserted upon this occasion, 8«, the'inhabitant of a borough — a burgage tenant — a borough free-bolder— a corporator — or a member of Parliament. And it wasadded, that its particular application was to be discovered bythe constitution of the place. A stronger mode can hardly beadopted of showing the futility of these distinctions than theenumeration of the terms, which is sufficient to prove that(hey are all resolvable into the same common point. An inhabitantof a borough was not a burgess unless he was ahouseholder. A burgage tenant was a burgess, be-cause, ifaccording to the primitive import of the word, he occupiedthe house, he was also a householder. A borough freehold)was not a burgess, unless he was an inhabitant, and occupieda house in the borough ; and if he did, he was not less a burgessbecause he had a freehold interest in his house. A cor-oratorwas an inhabitant householder, and therefore a bui^ess,having also the superinduced additional qualification of beinga member of a body corporate. A member of Parliament isonly another name for a burgess, according to the duty hehad to perform; because, by the statutes and the writs, themembers were to be burgesses of the borough.It should not be overlooked in this case, that, notwith-Leet. standing the earliest admissions were at the court leet, yetBirth, the rights by birth and servitude were, in this borough, attributedto the corporate rights ; instead of being deduced, asthey ought to have been, from the common law.But the custom to this effect, which was insisted upon withreference to the borough of Lyme, was, after trial, negatived,Non-resin and the questions of non-residence and disfranchisement, uponhence. '^\LYME. 2126that account, were put in a course of judicial investigation ; Owg^jin.but were not brought to trial in consequence of their being 1783.stopped by technical objections.*The counsel for the sitting members relied, as usual, upon Suingthe usage. But it should be remembered, that on subjects of Usage,this description, where the right is to be exercised but atintervals, often passing without contest, it is the height oferror to rely upon the usage, unless the accompanyingcircumstances, or the nature of the usage, give it the additionalsupport of reason and expedience. But it is monstrousto adopt a usage in such cases, where there is so strong adisposition to usurp — so little inclination or power to resist,and the usage in itself oftentimes so unreasonable and anomalous.But there are not wanting instances in which usagehas been disregarded. In the constitutional proceedings ofthe committees in the reign of James I., a usage for 69 yearswas disregarded; and a user for 300 years was not allowed Chippingbe considered as an objection.In the case of the King and Birds a usage of nearly 205years was described by Lord Ellenborough as too recent toadmit of being used as an argument in a court of justicesThe unfounded supposition that the charter of Edward I.incorporated Lyme, was much relied upon — upon this occasion; as well as upon a quo warranto in 1784 : — and the doctrineof Brady was quoted at length and insisted upon.The committee determined, that the right of election was Right.in the freemen only, as well resident as non-resident." Sothat the municipal and parliamentary rights given by thecharters and law to the burgesses of Lyme, were to be enjoyedby any persons scattered over the kingdom, or eventhe world. For when once the local limits of the boroughare passed, no other restraint can be placed upon residence.• Doug. 79, 132, 144, 168. f Vide ante, p. 1 190. % 13 East, 367.See also Morgan v. Palmer, 2 B. & C. 729; Rex v. Hadley, 7 B. & C. 496,post.; and King v. Solway, 2 B. & C. 424.2126 Salts.Oeorgf III.Salts.1785. The question, who were the burgesses of Saltash? — was discussedbefore a committee of the House of Commons, in 1786.*Like the other boroughs of Cornwall, it is not a boroughby prescription. It is not mentioned in Domesday. But inJohn, the reign of King John, it received a charter from Reginaldde Valle Torta, who was lord of the honour and castle ofTrenton, and as such, lord also of Saltash. He granted tothe burgesses of Esse, (the then name of Saltash,) andtheir heirs, a charter, fixing the rent of their burgage andgranting that they should not be impleaded, except in thehundred of the town, and that they should be bound ioattend the hundred court only three times in the year.The provost, or port reeve, is mentioned in the charter, whois to be elected by the burgesses. It also fixes the amercementsthe burgesses are to pay. And grants that their marshallhave their goods and lands, fixing the relief which wasto be paid. It gives them also pasture — limiting a sum tobe paid for every head of cattle ; and directs that no shipshould pass the Rock of Esse, to make any merchandise bybuying or selling — with a i^rant of a fair, &;c.1381. Richard II., in the third year of his reign, confirmed thecharter of Reginald de Valle Torta, to the burgesses, theirheirs, and successors.1552. la the 26th of Edward VI., Saltash first sent members toParliament, by the mayor and commonalty ; and in the firstof Queen Mary, by the mayor and burgesses. And Queen1584. Elizabeth, in the 27th year of her reigns reciting the chartersof Reginald de Valle Torta — and confirmations by Richard II.,Edward IV., and Henry VI II. — establishing that the privilegesof the burgesses continued the same to that time —confirmed all their former privileges, stating that they had enjoyedthem by prescription ;\. and at the petition of the burgesses,incorporated them — making Saltash a free borough,2 Lutes. 107. t See Carpenter's Saliasli Case, 18f)8. p. 19, et seq.t It was prol)abIy from this statement in the cliarter of Elizabeth, that the partiesagiecJ in a case at law, that Saltash was a borough by prescription. - 5 Hur. 2681.salts. 2127by the name of the " mayor and free burgesses of Saltash." ^^'*°**^'"'There were to be 10 aldermen, one of whom was to be '786.annually chosen mayor, by the mayor, aldermen, and freeburgesses ; and the charter further granted, that there shouldbe two burgesses to Parliament, to be elected by the mayorand free burgesses.Little information is to be obtained respecting the earlyhistory of Saltash, as all its documents, down to the year1 742, appear to have been lost or destroyed, in a manner notto be accounted for — but supposed to have been in consequenceof the modem dissensions in the borough.Nothing can establish more clearly the desire there wasin the different boroughs, to involve their early history indoubt and mystery, and by those means give an opportunityfor the establishment of their modern usurpations, than thepains which were taken — of which we have seen many instances,*— to destroy, mutilate, or alter their ancient documents.There was one exception in the destruction of the recordsof Saltash. A constitution book, of the time of QueenElizabeth, was given in evidence on this occasion, manyleaves of which had been cut or torn out ; in order to concealwhich, it had been regularly paged — which, however, itwas obvious, had been done subsequent to the mutilationThe book was found in the house of a person who hadformerly been town-clerk of Saltash, but was at the timeresiding abroad.It contained ordinances made at the law court, or court Court leet.leet, in the time of Queen Elizabeth, before the mayor anddeputy steward, as well as the different oaths of the jurieswho were to be sworn to choose the mayor; who is describedin the oath, to be " such a one as is fit to have the governmentand conservation of the borough." Other oaths ofthe officers of the borough, and of fealty, as well as the oathof the jury, are given.One of the constitutions read in evidence, ordained that Constitutions.• See Kant Looe, West Looe, Colchester, Poole, Portsmouth, Winchester, &c.t See (carpenter's Saltash Case, pp. 31, 32.2128 Salts.George III. u j^jj foreign burgesses should be contributory to all the1785. " reasonable charges for the maintenance of the liberties andfranchises of the town, as should be taxed by the mayorand his brethren, or else to be disfranchised." And " thatevery such freeholder should enter his fine for his suit tothe courts, or else pay the common amercements." Alsoit was enacted, that " no person should enjoy the liberties ofthe town, except he had lands or tenements within thetown, in fee to him and his heirs for ever. And that heshould bear yearly of high rent to the town, 3rf. at the'^ least ; and also to pay unto the town all such customs,'^ suits, and services, as to the same appertained ; and topay for the new making of the passage boat, as of old'^ time had been accustomed, or else not to be passagefree, and to pay for a relief, 2^. 6d., whether it be awhole burgage, or half a burgage; and to serve at thethree law courts there by the year. And to do his fealty atthe next court, after he is found tenant, and to pay his'* fealty 8rf., whereof to the steward 4rf., and the commonbox, 4rf." And this ordinance also declared, that no freeburgess or inhabitant within the town, should implead anyother free burgess or inhabitant in any other court.A survey of the borough in 1650, under the Commonwealthcommission, was also given in evidence, which specifiedthe high rents or rents of assise of the borough, speakingof the burgages and half-burgages, and the inheritanceof them by the heirs. The total number of the burgagesbeing 105, making together the sum of 3/. in high rents.1675. In the 27th year of Charles II., one of the aldermen inopen court, declared that he had aliened his land unto hisson, and thereupon desired to be dismissed of his aldermanship,which was consented to by the mayor and aldermenthen present, and he was discharged accordingly.Another alderman desired to be dismissed of his aldermanship,which was consented to by the mayor, for thatthe land by which he was made burgess, was only a trust.In the next year, one entered his deed, and was sworn afree burgess — and numerous similar entries were to beSalts. 2129found in the book to the year 1723; but on one occasion, in George in.1714, a person was sworn and admitted 9. free burgess with 1785.out any reference to his lands, deeds, or fealty.It appears that the charter of Queen Elizabeth was, in the Surrender.34th of Charles II., surrendered to the king by the hands 1682.of the Earl of Batli. The king thereupon granted another,dated in the next year, which altered the constitution of theborough, as has been seen in other places; particularlygiving the mayor and aldermen the power of electing asmany free burgesses as they thought fit. But the proclamationof James II. was said in this case, as in others, to haverestored the previous charters; and that of Charles II. wasstated by the petitioner never to have been accepted, noracted upon. The petitioners gave in evidence, entries subsequentto the charter, to show, that those members of thecorporation who were appointed under it, had possessed freeholdsin the borough before the granting of it.The returns to Parliament, till 1714, were by the mayorand burgesses, but in that year, and 1718, the return concluded,that the mayor and free burgesses had placed theircommon seal— and also the free tenants by tenure of theborough, had placed their separate seals.In the course of the inquiry it appeared, that the usualconsequences of a freehold right of voting were produced ;and faggots, or persons with sham votes, who had only Faggots.colourable titles, or other persons* deeds to vote upon, hadvoted in the election in 1 723, which was called the Dukeof Wharton's election.Parol evidence was given in support of the right of thefreeholders ; in the course of which it appeared, that old ruinswhere a house had stood, were stated to give a right to vote,as well as a house.And a strange distinction appears to have been taken, asif there were two classes of burgesses. The witnesses callingthe freeholders tree burgesses, and the members of the corporation,sworn free burgesses; notwithstanding the evidenceestablished that all of them were sworn : — and in otherrespects the parol testimony exhibits the confusion and6' u2130 Salts.<^*"^'"' intricacy which was introduced by these damned d ifleiqiiins. rights.On the behalf of the sitting member, besides serial le-turns,the surrender of the charters — the charter of SimilesII. — and the proclamation of James 11. — th modem tUmthter of the I4th of George III., granted after the diaaolotiaain the preceding year, and the poll of 1772, were given mevidence, as well as facts to show that the charter of CSnilaiII. had been acted upon.The question on this occasion was, whether the iarjismiwho were to vote, were the members of the eorpa^nilem, orthe freeholders of ancient houses or their sites, within theborough, held by burgage tenure.^f^i^^oBmn. The petitioners insisted upon the latter — the sittingJ^^ members supported the former — and if the freeholder hadthe right, it was agreed the petitioners were entitled to Asseat.There had been no previous decision with respect to theright of election. But there had been two nnsnoeesiMim petitions in 1780 and 1783.The committee decided, that the sitting members wereduly elected, and thus affirmed the right of the members ofthe corporation, and negatived that of the freeholders.In the latter they were no doubt correct: — although itmust be admitted, that the charter of Reginald de ValleTorta, and the entries in the ordinance book of the date ofQueen Elizabeth (if it be taken to be genuine) go further toestablish a freehold right than the documents of any otherborough; yet, strong as this evidence may be, it cannotbe considered as sufficient to establish that the freeholderswere the burgesses, and that burgess-ship depended upontenure, contrary to the effect of all the general documentswhich relate to the kingdom at large.There is no ground for supposing that Saltash should havehad a peculiar constitution, differing from other boroughs;and the inference to be drawn from Domesday Book — ^firomthe general early law — as well as the nature of boroughs,and their jurisdiction, all tend to show that they were notSalts. 2131founded upon tenure, but were connected with the local ad 0^*8*^'^ministration of the law, with respect to the inhabitants of the 1785.place, who by the general common law, were bound to dosuit and be sworn at the court leet. And it is obvious thatthe difficulty which was created at Saltash, arose from theconfusion of the court leet with the court baron. And thereseems also to have been another court held at the guildhallbefore the mayor and aldermen, which was called the conventioncourt. The entries were clearly those of a ccmr^ Court leet.leet, with its jury : and the oaths were to be administeredwith reference to the municipal officers, who were engagedin the government of the borough : — but still the freeholders,their fealty, and reliefs, were all introduced into the argument,though they relate to the functions of the court baron.The charter of Charles II., gives the power of making bur Burgesses,gesses to the mayor and aldermen, and declares that nonebut those so made should be the burgesses, which wouldtend to introduce further confusion into the borough, ifthat charter could be relied upon as an authority. Butprobably the more correct view of that document would be,to consider it as void ; and that the corporators under itcould not be the burgesses.Upon the whole, therefore, notwithstanding the documentswhich have been quoted with respect to Saltash — and thecharter of Charles II. — it would seem that the real burgessesof that place, would be, as in other boroughs, the suitorsat the court leet, or the inhabitant householders paying scotand lot.In the next year, another writ was issued for Saltash, which i786.was followed by another petition, upon the same questionas to the burgage tenants.The evidence was nearly the same as on the former occasion,but the committee decided, that the petitioner was dulyelected.Saltash was once more before a committee of the Hqusq ^^0®-in 1808; when the petitioner contended, that the right wasin the mayor and free burgesses, being members of the corporation,"b u2'- Tic sitting member, on tir. contrary, stated the right tiin those persons seised of an estate for bfe, or some greaisestate, in an entire ancient burgage tenement, situate witluDthe borough, wherever un nn(;ient dwellin^-hoiixie now t^tandtor formerly stooci, and in no other [persons.*And the committee decided in the first instance, tattleright waa in the former; but upon itt being intimated to tbtnthat an ambiguity existed in the mode in which the rightwas stated, they then determined, " that the right was in thematson awl Corporation only :" an extraordinary determination,considering that the borough was not incorporated untilafter it had returned members to Parliament.Carlisle.In the year 1786, the question as to the fiurgesttt rfCarling came before Parliaments and again in the followingyear. There had been no previous determination upon the subject.But in the year 1711, the right had been agret^l to bein the mayor, aldermen, bailiffs and freemen, resident or not"resident:" probably because it was the interest of bothparties so to agree. Otherwise, ae the mischiefs resulting froiDthe arbitrary admission of freemen had been felt in the place,they would probably have abstained from such an agreementUpon the inquiry in 1711, l.^o voters were objected to: 41of whom had been admitted to their freedom after the testeof the writ: and 32 others very recently.It will be seen, that this same evil was subsequently continued.And therefore it may be material to give a fewfacts connected with the history of this place.It is not mentioned in Domesday, because the northerncounties are not roiiirncd in thai record. It received acharter in the reiijn of llciiry III.; and sent members toParliament from the p;irlie>it times. It has also been seenin the reign ol Edward fl., that the king committed tlifcustody of the city to the citizens. JSte CariKntcr'H Heporl ortlii. ra^r.-Lnml. \S%.CARLISLE. 2133Subsequent charters were granted to it, particularly one ^*^'^"''in the 13th of Charles I., by which the government of the ^®^'town was given to one mayor, 11 other aldermen, twobailiffs, and 24 capital burgesses, forming the commoncouncil, and an indefinite number of freemen. The capitalburgesses were elected by the aldermen out of the freemen ;but the charter contained nothing relative to the making offreemen.There were also in the corporation eight trading companiesor guilds: the merchants, tanners, skinners and glovers,butchers, tailors, weavers, shoemakers, and smiths.Persons born the sons of freemen, or having served aregular apprenticeship to a freeman, and having been admittedto the brotherhood of any of those guilds, were entitledto the freedom of the city.The reader will not fail to perceive, in what an extraordinarymanner, the rights of free condition under the common law,are mixed up with admission into the voluntary associationsof the guilds ; which is the more extraordinary, as, accordingto the right, here defined, any apprentices serving in anyother trade than the eight specified above, would not beentitled to their freedom ; and it has already been seen, thatin London there were before this time a great many othertrades not contained in these eight. The effect, therefore,was, to give to these eight guilds a monopoly, which, underany circumstances, must have been untenable.The point in this case turned upon the freemen who hadcarried the election not being legally made, as alleged bythe petitioner; because they were elected by the commoncouncil, who had no power to make them ; that they had noprevious qualification for admission to the brotherhood of oneof the guilds ; and because they were fraudulently and occasionallymade.Parol evidence was given to disprove the right of the commoncouncil to make honorary freemen, or to confer thefreedom upon any who were not nfiembers of the guild,acquiring the right by birth or servitude ; and to show thatthe first attempt to make honorary freemen laid only been2134 Cable.*'*"''''" • about (Rt w 70 tears before, and that they were1786. « mushroom freemen." A record of the corporation ithe " Dormant Book," of the date of 1631, was given]evidence, subscribed by the mayer and council, with (of every occupation in the city, in the name of the wholecitizens and inhabitants. The book in its title purportedlahkUunu to be the register of the common wealth of the xnhabiUaiU.It chiefly related to preserving the money and property ofthe city ; and there was in it an order respecting the makingof the freemen, in the following form :Stet. That the mayor of himselfMay alone shall shall not hereafter make anymake no freemen of freemen, without the advice of theoutmen. moste parte of the counselof everie ocatpacm which is agreeable to the auncientcustom and constitution of the citie.men ^HiOriginally it stood without the words in italics, which wereadded in the wide margins of the book, so as to become apart of the order, and of the marginal abstract. The handwritingof the additions appears to be very ancient ; the wordstet" was prefixed to the greatest part of the orders inthis book. Many of them had interlineations and alterati<KiBin a different hand.This appears to be another instance in which an irregularmode is adopted for the purpose of giving the companies ashare in the municipal government : and there is a subsequentorder, empowering the mayor and council with four of theelection of every occupation to displace certain officers.It appeared from the book that many entries had been made iuit subsequent to the original writing, and incorporated amongthe ancient writing;, in the wide margin of the book.The court leet is mentioned in l(iO:2, the first year of thereign of James I.In I57y,i disfranchised for haimgwith.drawn himself, but comines again to reside there, he was aEfainadmitted as a freeman, and to his former lice.CARLISLE. 3135In 1689, many freemen having been unduly elected, were ^^'g*^"*ordered to be disfranchised. 1689.In 1713, it was ordered, that none should be made free I7i3.who had not served their time to some one who had a right totake apprentices, or had a right to claim their freedom bybirth.In 1741, the order of 1713 being considered doubtful and 1741.uncertain, was ordered to be repealed.In 1736, a person was admitted an ex gratia freeman; but 1736.in 1750, the making of ex gratia honorary freemen was com- 1760.planned of by the other freemen, as an encroachment upon freemen,their liberties, and very prejudicial to their rights ; and anorder was thereupon made that no person should be admitteda freeman unless he was entitled by birth or servitude ;and steps were taken to prevent any other admissions.In 1757, there appears to have been some disputes 1757.between the common council and the freemen, upon thesubject of making honorary freemen when a compromisetook place involving the abandonment of that practice.In 1758, another order was made expressly for the same 1753.purpose; but the proceedings were stated to have arisenout of some personal altercations in the city. And in 1759, 1759.an order recites, that the former directions had been foundinconvenient, by excluding from the corporation persons ofprobity and distinction, who might be useful to it. And,therefore, the order was annulled, and the common councilmenwere authorized to make freemen, as it was stated they hadimmemorially done — an observation which is obviously inaccurate.These orders being all repealed, on the following day, 1195persons were made free ; and between the months of September,1784, and February, 1785, no less than 1443 freemenwere made — and between 1688 and 1784, the numberadmitted was 1520.Quo warranto informations were obtained against three ofthe new freemen, upon which they all suffered judgment ofouster to pass against them, there being demurrers to thereplication, which they declined to argue.The new freemtfii appeared to have bet'ii made Iron Iprepared for the purpose — one mail !ia*iDg a list of a600 persona, cliietiy colliers.In the evidence and docunienU produced upon the bpJBof the sitting member, the inquests were spoken of: and anyfreeman departing the city, for a year and a day, was to losehie freedom. The mayor was prohibited from making freemenalone ; suit no freeman, beirig out of the city, was totake an apprentice.It appeared that the guild books were only extant from1608. The committee decided, that the petitioner was dulyelected, and thereby properly negatived the right of theh oaora ry freemen.After this decision, a son of a freeman who had not bee»iadmitted into a guild, obtained a mandamus to be admitted.This was suspected to have been done by the concurrence ofthe common council. Application was therefore made to thecourt by other persons, to be admitted as parties, to preventa collusive judgment upon the writ; and they were allowedto defend the prosecution upon the behalf of the guilds.The return to the mandamus brought the question of theprevious guild right to issue, and the cause was tried bya special jury, before Lord Kenyon, in the sittings afterMichaelmas term, 1780, when a verdict was given for theprosecution against the supposed right.i. Thus, also, was the connexion of the guilds with th*: vaad-cipal constitution of the plctce properly annulled.*About the same time, a quo warranto was tiled againstone who was made free in 1784, and who was also an aldermancalling upon him to show by what right he claimed to beafreeman. He pleaded charters, kc. in support of the rightof the common council to make freemen. The prosecutorreplied a denial of their right — the rejoinder took issue uponthe replication, and the cause was ready for trial at the summerassizes of 1790, but the ilefeiuUuU withdrew his plea, midjudgment of ouster was ;ii i;ui'd iitiainst liirii.Thus, after a nuiLiiif in(|uirv, two of the great lenses wereCARLISLE. 2137stopped at Carlisle; and the previous assertions oT their ille ^^'^'"'gality thus confirmed. 1786.In 1791,* the right was determined to be in the freemen 1791.duly admitted and sworn, having been previously admittedbrethren of one of the eight guilds or occupations, andderiving their title to such freedom by being the sons offreemen, or by service of seven years' apprenticeship, to afreeman resident during such apprenticeship within the city,and no other : — another striking specimen of the complexityin which these questions may be involved by the doctrine ofcorporations, and containing only two circumstances whichrefer to the original nature of burgess-ship, viz., their beingotfree condition and being admitted and sworn.The same right was repeated in 1796.Sterling.The report, by Mr. Fraser, of the decision in 1792, as to 1792.Stei/ninff, to which we have before cursorily referredshows, in the course of the evidence, that there was a courtleet within the borough, at which there was z-jury^ and thescarborough, as the under constable, always returned a listof persons liable to serve on the jury; and that the juryreturned one constable for the next year — and the constableof the year named another, one of whom the steward appointed.Another witness stated (according to the commonlaw) that all the inhabitants within the borough were summonedto the borough court leet. Another witness spoke ofpersons, a short time before the election, boiling their potsin the streets to make themselves conspicuous as inhabitants;and the steward of the borough was called, and producedproceedings at the court baron and court leet of the borough. Court leet.from 1675 to 1723; and it appeared that those courts wereusually held upon the same day, but no court baron hadbeen held since 1730. Presentments at the view of frankpledgej were produced, as well as at the court baron with respectto the tenure, fealty, and reliefs.In the result the committee, by their deteimi nation, which• 4 Doug. 480. t See before, p. 97.Right<^]3g Sterling.I"- we have previously given, decided most properly thut gibe17OT rigiitof voting or burgess-ship was foot confined to the householdersof ancient burgages ; but according to the pHacipletbefore urged, it extended to ail the inhabitant households'in the borough, whether old or new.LisKKAIlD.The court-let is also mentioned in the reports uf theLiskeard cases by Sergeatil Peck well.This place* had been created a borough in the reign ofI Henry lll-i- Its duenna was mentioned in the time oftRichard Il.,:[ and received a charter of incorporation fromf Queen Elizabeth.It became the subject of parliamentary investigation ulthe 44th of George ill. upon a petition of appeal, understatute of the 28th George UL, c. 52, b. 26,% againstdecision of the committee in 1803, who had decided that ths.elective franchise was vested in the " mayor and burgess of,the borough," and not " in the inhabitants paying, or liaUsito pay, scot and lot."\\a To support the claims of the latter, the constitutions <rfthe borough, which had been made in the 30th of Elizabeth,were produced in evidence ; commencing by a recital, that forthe better government of the burgesses and inhabitants, themayor and eight chief counsellors, (in accordance with thecharter of Elizabeth) had, together with the general consentof the residue of the burgesses and inhabitants, agreed — thatnine of the chief inhabitants should be reputed to be thesuperior burgesses, chief masters, counsellors, and governorsof the town.That there should be fifteen others of the most sufficientof the residue of the burgesses, who should be reputed theinferior burgesses, as the homages at law days.K Thatthey should not be removed from their offices during life,except they departed or dwelt out of the town or borough, ^fc.• Sec bf fore, p. 4t>4. i See beforp. 753. t Sm before.a Peck. p. 175.II SCO Pick. p. 111.U The Un dey ij clearly ihc ccufl U: bul Ic fti.m,<sfri belongLISKEARD. 2139That no persons should be elected mayor, constables. &c. ^^'*'^"'who was not at the time of such election, a burgess com- 1804.marat inhabitant and dwelling within the town.*That all offices to be disposed of by the town, should beheldonly durante bene placito.That no burgess or inhabitant should sue or implead out ofthe borough, any burgess or inhabitant in any foreign court,concerning matters determinable within the same, uponpain of fine and disfranchisement.That every burgess should once a year pay one penny ofsilyer,t in testification of his burgess-ship.That if any burgess, or other inhabitant, received or admittedany stranger to dwell in any of their houses withinthe borough, without license of the mayor, five of the masters,and eight of the fifteen, and did not remove suchstranger within one quarter of a year, after warning from themayor, should forfeit lOZ.That every town-bon child should pay for his fine of 5^. ; and every stranger 13«. 4c2. The differencein the fine between a town-bon child and one who was astranger, is reasonable enough ; but there is no other distinctionas to the right of any other inhabitant householdersto be admitted.That no inhabitant be made a burgess, without the councilof the whole town be called for receiving him.j:The following entries are to be found upon the court 1497.rolls, commencing in the 13th of Henry VII., and terminatingin the third of Charles II.At this court, came W. C, and J. C, and did fealty to 1496.the mayor and commonalty, to become free burgesses of theborough, and each of them gave for a fine 2s. 6rf.*'8 Henry VIII. — At a law court held on Thursday next 1517.after the feast of the Epiphany, J. R., and J. M., madeThese would form the proper description of a suitor at the court leet.t This is the cert money — certum lets— or cense money— of which mention hasbeen before made.I This also is consistent with the general law, as the other burgesses were to judgeeither by themselves or the jury, of their fitness by condition* station, and character.LI»KI!AR1>.'■ fine to lie free litirgesscB, and they were skwh, and gaveu fine '2ii. fid."22 Henry Vii.— At this court, came J. R., and J. aiand prayed of the mayor and commonalty license toburgesses within the borough, according to the aiiciuitt citorn of tho borough, and they were admitted leyoaths"*2 JamcH ]. — The following lists arc contained iu the coinbooks : —1. Names of the free leiiants , . 65.2. Names of the burgesses , . . 69.3. Names of the resiants 53.It appeared that some of the names had been struck onVof the last list, in consequence of the persons having beesadmitted to the freedom of the borough, ou payment of fioetand being sworn.4 James I. — At a law court and vieio of frankpledge, ibtfjury present, J. T., for that he keeper a public shop wtthiitthe liberty, not being a burgess," fccAt this court, S. P. is admitted to be a burgess withinthe borough, and to have the liberties, privileges, and fran-fledged.chases : and he finish pales (or his fine, and is fined t3». 4rf.,because he was born without the borough."There are three other similar entries — " R. C.'s fine was 5*.,because he was born within the borough."1686. In the 36th Charles U., a writ of quo warranto wasbrought against the borough, upon which the mayor andSurreoilcr. capital burgesses surrendered their liberties to the Earl ofBath.James II. granted the burgesses another charters bywhich 21 persons were declared to be free of the bough —most of them of hia:h rank, and 7/i»i-rexi{lcnts.II Llkabvtli lead al«»nLISKEARD. 2141In the fourth year of the same reign, in consequence of a Q^'g*^^^''clause in the charter, eight burgesses were disfranchised by 1688.order of the king, amongst whom were the Earl of Radnor,and Sir John Corydon, &c.Liskeard first sent members to Parliament in the 23rd of 1294.Edward I.The indenture of return in the sixth and seventh of EdwardIV., was made by " the bailiff of the borough and allothers his comburgesseSy^ who elected two burgesses com-moran. In the first and second of Philip and Mary, bythe " mayor and burgesses, inhabitants of the borough."In the fourth and fifth of Philip and Mary, " the whole townand burgesses elected." In the 26th of Elizabeth, " by themayor and burgesses, with their unanimous consent." Inthe 12th of Anne, "ex unanimity consensus." 1 George II., bythe mayor, six capital burgesses, and 29 other names." &c.Evidence as to the usage was also given, from which itappeared, that, in 1761, a Mr. Forehead, upon an election,canvassed none but the^e^m^n — and the usage, as far backas the testimony of aged persons went, proved that " themayor and freemen only," exercised the elective franchise.The committee decided, that the right was " in the mayor Right.and burgesses of the borough :" which, in form at least,was a determination consistent with the general law, howeverthe term burgess may have been misapplied.Cheltenham.Chippenham,* the history of which we have already detailed,became again the subject of parliamentary investigation,in 1803 : and the following statements of the right were 1803.delivered by the partiesFor the petitioner — that it was " in the bailiff, burgesses. Petitioner.and freemen, being householders of, and resident in, theancient burgage houses within the borough."For the sitting: member — that in was " in the bailiff and Sittingo member.burgesses at large ; that is to say, being inhabitantswithin the borough, paying, or liable to pay, poor' rates."• See before, pp. 153, 1181, 1189. t I Peck. 260.CHTPPBNHAM.>■ In the course of the discussion, the foUowiiig propositionwere acquiesced iii by the committee ; showing the iutricttc;in which the right of eUctwit in Chippenham was involved,by departing from the simple system of the inhBhitfttilhouseholders voting — and adopting the technical groundsupon which the supposed right of the ancient houses wasfoumIe<).1. "The vote of n freeman, being the bona fide householderof, and resident in, an annmt burgage houwt withinthe borough, was good, notwithstanding he had taken tOtohis house lodgers or inmates.2. " The vote of such person wits good, though boomstable, malt-house, or outr-buildiug, yard, garden, or field,which could be proved to have been at some former timeoccupied together with the house, was in the occupation ofa different person.3. " The vote of such person was good, though his boos*did not cover the whole site occupied by the former howe ;no vote having been ever tendered, ncr any burgage privilegeever exercised, in respect of the residue.4. " The vote of such person was good, though anotherhouse stood on part of the old site; no vote having beenever tendered, nor any burgage privilege ever exercised, inrespect of such other house."The committee decided, that the statement delivered bythe petitioner was the right of election — and he was seatedaccordingly.Evesham.One other case, which has already been the subject ofsome observations, requires to be mentioned.'JSres/iam wus orifrrniilly an ecclesiastical possession : butiu the reign of Edwaiii I. it had its burgages. It is said tohave returned niemberw at that period ; but that fact is doubtful.The " good men" of Evesham received a charter fromthat king, and another from Henry IV, Its law lay, or courtleet, and the steward andjuri/, are mentioned in the reitrn ofEVESHAM. 2143Edward IV. And further minute particulars respecting that QgoigeJ^i'court are to be found in the reign of Queen Elizabeth ; and 1502.the franchised and disfranchised men are spoken of. It wasrestored to return members to Parliament in the reign ofJames I.In the third year of which reign, the following charter ieo5.was granted to it; commencing with a recital, that theborough was ancient and populous — that the burgesses had,from time immemorial, sometimes been called by the nameof bailiffs, aldermen, and burgesses of the borough; and sometimesby other names, and had enjoyed divers liberties, &c.by reason of charters, and divers prescriptions and usages,within the borough anciently accustomed. That the town ofBeng worth adjoined the borough of Evesham, and that manydissensions and violations of the peace were committed,without punishment, within the town of Bengworth, throughthe defect of good government, to the great damage, as wellof the resiants and tenants within the town, as of the burgessesand inhabitants of the borough of Evesham ; for whichreasons, as well the bailiffs, aldermen, and burgesses of theborough of Evesham, as the tenants, resiants, and inhabitantsof the town of Bengworth, had humbly besought theking to create, as well the bailiffs, aldermen, and burgessesof the borough of Evesham, by whatsoever name or namesof corporation or incorporation, they theretofore had beenincorporated, as the tenants, resiants, and inhabitants of the Corporate,town of Bengworth, into one body, corporate and politic, bythe name of the " mayor, aldermen, and burgesses of theborough of Evesham, in the county of Worcester." Theking, therefore, granted, for the better keeping of the peace,and for the government of the borough and town, and of thepeople there inhabiting, and of all others thereto resorting,that the borough of Evesham, and the town of Bengworthshould from thenceforth be one undivided and free borough, Freeborough.of itself; and that as well the bailiffs, aldermen, and burgessesof the borough of Evesham, as the tenants, resiants,and inhabitants of the town of Bengworth, and theirsuccessors, whether theretofore lawfully incorporated or'^- not, shoiiltl ht; from tltencpfortli one body corporatepolitic, by tli(t name of " mayor, atdftmien, and bta-gesaia dthe borough of Evesham, in the county of Worcester'?Ike. Sec.Powers are then given for the election of seven buigesMifwho were to lee called " aldermen" — and 12 burgesses, 1were to Iw called " capital burfjcsscs" — and to have ■B recorder and chamberlain — nil of whom were to beI" common council, from which one was to be annual]'elected aa mayor. Also 24 burgesses of the borough, whdlwere to be called assistants — to be aiding and assisting themayor in all business, ice. respecting the borough.The mayor, aldermen, recorder, chamberlain, and cavilburgesses, to make statutes and ordinances for the ^>vo-rRent of the borough, the inhabitants, and rcsiants, &c. TlF first mayor, aldermen, and capital burgesses, were nantI and appointed.The aldennen, as vacancies occurred, were to be elecUdiby the common council, froui the capital burgesses. Hhcapital burgesses, by the common council, from thegesses.». That one of the resiants and inhabitant of Bengworth wasto be elected to the mayoralty every seven years : and fourof the twelve capital burgesses — and eight of the 24 assistants,were to be inhabitants and resiants within the parish ofBengworth.The high steward, recorder, and chamberlain, were namedand appointed.> And it was directed, that there should be, within theborough, two burgesses of Parliament; and that the mayor,aldemicn, burgesses, and their successors, upon any writ ofelection of bui^esscs of Parliaiiieiit, to them directed, mighthave power and authority to elect and nominate two discreetand honest men to be burgesses of the Parliament for theboroMKli.A grant of fairs and markets thou CjIIows, with a clausethat no straagcTf not being n burgess of the Through, shouldsell, or expose to sale, any merchandise, &c. except in gross.EVESHAM. 2145within the borough or liberties, unless in the time of fairs or oeoigeiii.markets, &c., under pain of the goods being forfeited." 1605.A view of frankpledge of all the inhabitants and resiants Francisgranted to the mayor, aldermen, and burgesses, " and themayor, aldermen, and capital burgesses, have authority tochoose as many persons inhabiting and residing, as wellwithout the borough as within, to be burgesses,* as to the Burgesses,mayor, aldermen, and capital burgesses should seem mostconducive to the public good and advantage of the borough,in the same manner and form, and under the samecorporal oath, to be taken by every of the burgesses sochosen and assigned, as the burgesses within the boroughof Evesham used formerly to take ; and that such burgessesmight enjoy all liberties, &c. which had been granted to thebailiffs, aldermen, and burgesses of the borough of Evesham,by that or any other name or names whatsoever theretoforeincorporated," &c.It appears from the recital of this charter, that Eveshamwas previously a borough ; and in the subsequent descriptionof the place, it is stated to be an '* ancient borough."The burgesses are said to have enjoyed, time out of mind,as well by reason of charters as by " prescription," diversliberties, &c. But considering the documents before stated,the prescriptive existence of the borough appears decidedlynegatived; and some of them seem to import, even to aperiod but little antecedent to the charter, that Evesham,though a town of importance, was not a borough.It has been erroneously assumed, that the recital of thiscliarter " affirms the prescriptive existence of the corpora corporations''but there are no words to justify such a conclusion,the prescription being confined to the borough.If the charters to Evesham, coupled with the resolution of1669, be accurately considered, it will be found that theright of election is constitutionally vested in the " burgesses*'at large. The only question is, who they are ?This charter, like many others, speaks only of the " burgesses ;" not of the freemen: and yet the freemen are the persons who, in modern times, have exercised theprivileges.6xThere was before this charter no express provision (atmaking or electing bui^essea ; and therefore there mnsl haw*■ been Borne mode by which they were previously niftd^ ordesignated. Considering the documents before fitted, inperson can reasonably doubt that t)iey were the inhabitantof the borough — that they were designated as such by beingSuitors of the cohort U^t, as residents; and that they wetniide, by being strong at the court let, before which thiefwere not, in fact, " leges homines ;" nor, in reality, knownor recognized by the law, otherwise than as villains, iuinateitor vagrants.Evesham received another charter in the third year «fJames I., commencing with a recital in every respect similarto that of the preceding ; with the usual corporate powers.The boundaries of the borough differ materially from thouof the first charter.The appointment of the mayor, aldermen, recorder, andcapital burgesses is then regulated, with a clause respecting:the 24 assistants.It should be observed, this clause does not appear to b»'now acted upon, us there are no assistants : though, from ^cdocuments hereafter referred to, it is clear the assistant*existed in the borough for a long time after the visitingof this charter ; and should this integral part of the corporationbe extinct, and not capable of being revived, it maybean important question, how far the corporation in or is notthereby dissolved.This charter, containing provisions in every respect substantiallythe same as that granted in 1603, it is not necessaryto make any further extracts.It has been assumed, that it draws an evident distinction«■ between the burgesses of Evesham, who were incorporated ;and the resiants, tenants, and inhabitants of Bengworth, whowere not incorporated ; and therefore it becomes requisite toconsider the constitutional effect of that part of the charter.It seems that Bengworth, before that time, formed noI. part of the borough, the resiants there not owing suit at thecourt leet of the borough, nor being incorporated. The con-EVESHAM. 2147sequence of which must have been, that they owed suit as Q^oni*"^*resiants, either at the sheriff's tourn, or at some other leet; 1005.from neither of which could the king's charter altogetherdischarge them; though it probably had the power to changethe place or court to which such suit should be due. Sofarthe charter could be effectual. As it might also be toincorporate the resiants, tenants, and inhabitants of Beng-worthwith the burgesses of Evesham: and in that mannergive them a share with the burgesses of the privilegesenjoyed under the charter of the king. This the king hadthe power of granting; because that which the king couldgrant, he might, by the consent of the grantee, communicatealso to another. So likewise with respect to the extensionof the jurisdiction of the mayor, aldermen, and recorder ofBengworth : for it has ever been the undoubted prerogativeof the crown to create, new model, abridge, or extend anyof the local jurisdictions, as a part of the executive authority,frequently exercised in the establishing of new jurisdictions,and in the ordinary case of special commissions. But as tothe right of electing members to Parliament, that beingonce vested in any class of voters, could not be transferredto or shared with others by means of the king's charteralone : and, consequently, as the burgesses of Evesham onlyreturned members to Parliament before the second charterof James I., without the parish of Bengworth (which mustthen have voted for the county members, and contributed totheir wages), that charter could not have enabled the resiants,tenants, or inhabitants of Bengworth to share the right ofvoting with the burgesses of Evesham: or have exoneratedthem from voting for the county of Worcester ; or paying theknight's wages. And this for the most obvious reason;because if the executive power had that prerogative, by theexercise of it the crown might so change the electors in eachplace, by subtracting from one and adding to the other, as togain a universal ascendancy over the voters in general, and soengross in its own power that of the commons — a thingtotally contrary to the vital principles of our constitution.This charter seems also to justify a conclusion against the6x23148 EVEailAH."fB*i" - elective rights nf the c('r|)oralioii» : and to cstablUii ilens. burgess-this w;»b distinct from incorporation. The urgesiMotpn- of Evesham »ppearto have been the sanie class of pet*BuriwH. as the refiariU, Ivaantu, and infiabUanU of Ben^wort}i,whom they were joined : the latter being called by bowname) because they dwelt in the county at large; andthe former denotninntcd " hiirgtssex," Iwcaiisc they r^Bidcil within a harleigh. Rvitiancy aud inhabitancy — andnot incorjHinition — bring the real characteristic of both thoseclasses.The clause as to the creation of burgesses does not apokof freemen ut all; still less of honorary freemen; and onlyenables the " mayor, aldermen, and capital burgesses, to elect80 many persons, as wull inhabitant and cmiversiint withoutthe borough as within, to be burgesses, as they shoutthink most useful lor the public good of the borough."At all events the persons here described are spoken ufInhibli- with reference to their inhabitancy and commorancy. If theselect body had the general power of making as honoraryfreemen whom they liked, without reference to any localhabitation, then those terms were unnecessary: because theinhabitancy and commorancy would be altogether imnntterini.To make, therefore, the whole of the words intelligible, someother meaning for the clause should be sought for. And ifit can be found, so as to make the whole intelligible andconsistent with the other parts of the charter, and the generalBeng. law, it should be adopted. Now the charter adds Beng-worthto the borough ; without therefore any straining of thewords of the charter, the extra burgum may be applied toBengworth, and then the power would be to make anyperson inhabiting or coniuionitil within the borough of Evesham,or without the borough in Bengworth, u burgess ofEvc^^hani ; which construction is confirmed by the directionat the cloi^f of the clatter, that the persons so made burgessesshould take the same oath as the burgesses had beentheretofore accustomed to take. That oath was an oath atthe court Icett, wjjicb none could take but resiants.The eHcct i)f the clause would then be, to give to the selectEVESHAM. 2149body of the corporation the power of adopting or rejecting with ^"'*^^^^'regard to their condition, station, and character, any of the in- 1605.habitants or cormorants of the place ; which selection usedbefore to be made by the jury at the leety under the sanction leety.of their oaths and not arbitrarily, or at their pleasure. Thepower, so given to the select body, if confined to admissionto the corporation alone, might be legal ; but if it was intendedto extend to the suit at the leet it was illegal, becausethe king could not dispense with that suit, and of coursehe could not give to his grantees the power of enforcing ordispensing with it at their pleasure, but only subject to theabove considerations.It is equally illegal if it extended to the elective franchise,for the reasons which have been given before. As the grantof the king it should, if possible, be taken to be legal. Andtherefore should be treated as applied only to admissioninto the corporation, and not to the suit at the leet, or thevoting for members of Parliament, or, in other words, not tothe original burgesses.In the reign of Charles I, and Charles II., a few municipaldocuments require to be mentioned.In the fifth year of Charles I., it was ordered, that 1629.Mr. Davis, minister — admitted into the liberties ofthis borough and made a freemen thereof* — should take nobenefit: but the admission by Mr. Hollam,late mayor, shouldbe void, which is done, not out of any dislike to Mr. Davis,but the same not being done by the public consent of themayor, aldermen, and burgesses.And it is ordered, that the mayor hereafter shall not,without the public consent of the mayor, aldermen, andburgesses, admit any one in the liberty of the borough, normake any one free under the penalty of 201.Signed by the mayor, recorder, and 10.In the 23rd of Charles II. is the following entry: — i67l.Whereas by the interruption of the late times, it hathbeen omitted to enrol and swear many persons within thisSee note before, p. 2145.2150 EVESHAM.""'«'"'■ borough, as was heretofore usual ; therefore it is order16C». that all such persons, inhabiltmtx of thu borough, as (to take the oath, do, upon summons to them given, aptbefore the mayor and chamberlain to be sworn.Si*. Three years afterwards an order recites, that for di*years last past, and specially in the time of the tate maythere were many omissions and neglects incurred within Icorporation, touching the government thereof; in^ooiacb,that unto this present time it labours under the inconvenienceswhich then took root, and especially many mistakesare arisen, and like to arise, by reason of the noa-earolmeiitof apprentices, and enfranchisement of them, according tothe ancient and laudable custom of this and all other regulated cities and places. And forasmuch as the grandintfUfst of this borough, at the last Michaelmas sessions,present the premises as a great grievance, it is ordered,that every tradesman that shall take an apprentice withinthe borough, shall within one week, cause the same to beenrolled in the chamberlain's book. And it is ordered, thatevery person who has a right to his freedom, shall comeand appear before the mayor and chamberlain, at a certainday aud time to be fixed, to be swum an accustomed.1099. Evesham, like other places, surrendered its charters inthe reign of Charles II.: and was restored by the proclamationof James II.Freedom by apprenticeship, commorancy and inhabitancy,are mentioned in the records of the borough of that reign:as well as the companies and fraternitiesIn the 21st of Charles II., a report upon a petition fromthis borough, stated the question to have been — whether themayor, aldermen, and capital burgesses only, or the burgessesRight, at large, had the right of election.Aud it was resolved, that the common burgesses had voicesin the election, and that the choice by the mayor, aldermen,and chief burgesses, was not good.The House subsequently confirmed the decision of thecommittee.£Evesham. 2151At the election in the 42nd of George III., the votes of ^^'^ "'-the freeholders were tendered ; but they were objected to, ^^O^*and after consideration rejected. This was the first and onlytime, in which their votes were called in question ; till thepetition in 1808, when their right was negatived. In consequenceof their requisition in 1802, actions were broughtagainst the mayor ; hut they were afterwards discontinued,and costs paid to him.The parliamentary rights of Evesham, were again the sub ^®^-sect of contention in 1819."*^ And it was questioned whetherthe right was vested '' in the mayor, aldermen, capitaland other burgesses, members of the corporation ;" or "in Petites*"'* the mayor, aldermen, and freemen of the borough, and in „,^^^*[the inhabitants of the borough, paying scot and lot :" theprincipal question being, whether under the resolution of1669, " common burgesses" only meant such members ofthe corporation as did not come under the description of'* the mayor, aldermen, and chief burgesses."The petitioners gave in evidence the charters of the Evidence.first and third of James I. The parliamentary returns fromthe first of James I., to the 21st of Charles II.; andthe determination of 1669. It was urged for the petitioner,that to ascertain the meaning of the wordburgess," it was requisite to refer to the charter ofJames I., as no evidence could be found of an earlier date.That the returns to Parliament had since that charter beenmade by the corporation ; and that if the other inhabitantshad not taken a part in the election, having a right so todo,it was but just they should suffer for their negligence ;fand that if the inhabitants had a right, the committee in1669 would have named them in their resolution.For the sitting member it was contended, that in the Burgess,ancient chapter the word " burgess" imported " inhabitant," inhawtwiffor which position the cases of Aldborough, Abingdon, andSt. Ives, &c. were cited, and it was urged that neither theCorbett & Daniel, 26.t It should be remembened, that the right of returning memben to Parliament isa right for the public— or rather a duty— which could not be lost or thrown off byneglect or non-user.^152 Evesham,"■"y'lt- charters, returns, nor usagt-j could confine ibe interpretation1819- of that word " burgess," to mean members of the companytion only.Kifht. The committee decided, that the right was in the " nuyor,atderraeii, capital and other burgesaes, members of tfcecorporation,"This is the moat express decision io favour of the rightof the corporation, to be found in the reports ; and couldhave proceeded on no ground, but the assumption shalthe right was given to the corporation, by the charter ofJames I.: — a position which appears to involve the unconstitutionalprinciple, that the kin by his charter coulddeclare what class of persons should be the electors ofmembers of Parliament.*LIVERPOOL.Liverpool is a place of too much importance to be passedwithout a few remarks.It is not mentioned in Domesday ,t hut its burgesses arereferred to in a charter, quoted in the reign of King John :Jand in the reign of Henry III. the burgesses obtained acharter to them and their firlrs: ibid the tyrants of KingJohn, Henry III., and Edward III., were confirmed by Richard11.,^ and again by Henry !V, and Edward IV.A long petition to Parliament occurs in the reign ofHenry V., in which the burgesses and their burgages arementioned.In the second and third years of Philip and Mary, the previouscharters were inspected and confirmed ; and it has beensaid, that one was granted by Queen Elizabeth, but nonesuchis to be found.The iie\t which appears is in the second year of Charles I.which commences with a recital, that the town of Liverpoolwas an ancient and populous town, and the sole port inthe county palatine of Lancaster.• It *as c.pr,.»-ly anrljusily dcclsreil liy Lord .Mansfield, thai tl.e i^senibl.n^ luportion of WdU. S Iter. 4003.f Peebcfoie. [1.413. ; SceUrifrc p. 46L ^< See hefnif. p. 73fl. 7W,LIVERPOOL. 2163That the mayor, bailiffs, and burgesses, from time imme< ^^''^"^'moral, had enjoyed divers liberties, &e., by reason of charters ^®^'that had been granted to them, by the name of " mayor, bailiffs,and burgesses, of the town of Liverpool, in the countyof Lancaster," and also by prescriptions and custom.That the mayor, bailiffs, and burgesses, had besought theking for the government and advantage of the town and port,by whatsoever name of incorporation, or whatsoever namesof incorporation, the mayor, bailiffs, and burgesses had beenincorporated, or whether they were incorporated or not —to create them a body corporate, &c.The king accordingly granted, that the town of Liverpoolshould for ever be a free town of itself, and the burgesses andtheir successors, one body corporate and politic, by the nameof " mayor, bailiffs, and burgesses, of the town of Liverpool;" and that they should have perpetual succession, &c.That there should for ever be one burgess to be mayor —two to be bailiffs.A power is then given to the mayor, bailiffs, and burgesses,to assemble and make bye-laws for the governmentof the town, upon public notice given for that purpose.The first mayor, (Lord Strange) and two bailiffs, are thennamed and appointed.And it was granted that the mayor, bailiffs, and burgessesmight assemble yearly, to choose and name one of themselvesto be mayor, and two of themselves to be bailiffs. Mayor.That the mayor, bailiffs, burgesses (and a clerk, appointedto take recognizances) might have power to take recognizances,according to the form of the statute merchant, andstatute of Acton Burnet.The first common clerk being named and appointed, themayor and senior alderman were directed to be justices of Justices,the peace ; with the same powers within the town, as justiceshave in the county.All the lands, &c., which the mayor, bailiffs, and burgessesever had, are confirmed to them ; reserving the usualrents that had been hitherto paid.The borough was governed under that charter, till the 29th 1677.year of the reign of Charles II., when some persons Surreptitiouslyobtained another charter of that date, giving theiprincipal power of the borough to a common council of fiO.^BBut the burijeiues at lat protested against that grant, amisseveral of the common councilmeii refused to act underit. Nevertheless that body appear to have continued toexercise their authority until the charter of the eevenUi ofWilliam III.:t and their proceedings against the inhabitantsappear to have partaken of the violence of those times.■ Chief Justice Jefferies demanded a surrender of their cbar> Jter ; which was delivered to him, but noon after returned.However, it being affirmed to have put an end to the petri**leges of the town, an application vras made to James 11. ia new charter, which was accordingly granted in the fiyear of his reign ; and confirmed the former mode of eing the common council.It contented the objectionable clause, making all tlieohers of the corporation removable at the pleasure of Icrown ; and having been forced upon the burgesses, it «not accepted ; but declared null and void.At a court at Windsor, the !4th of August, 1687. Theking's most excellent majesty present in council. Whereasby the charter granted to the town of Liverpool, a power isreserved to his majesty, by his order in council, to removefrom their employments any officers in the town ; and ibismajesty having received information of the misbehaviourof Oliver Lyme, deputy mayor of Liverpool, and SylvesterRichmond, justice of the peace there, hath thought fit thisday in council, to declare his pleasure, and doth accordinglyorder, that the said Oliver Lyme, and Sylvester RichmoiKlbe, and they are hereby removed and displaced from theirrespective offices in the town of Liverpool."'flic king having exercised this power, the corporationbecame alaniied ; and in the 12th of September in this year,they made an oriler, that " with all due submission and durabledeference to the power of removing any officer in thiscorporation, James Prescott, Esq. mayor for the time being,Sec bolurc, p. 1704. t See before, p. 1710.1606.Liverpool. 2155** should safely keep the wand, mace, and sword, with all oeai^uh'' other real and personal estate of the corporation, and all iflas.*' that concerned the same, for the defence of its rights, wherewith he was intrusted, until a successor should be sally** chosen and sworn, according to the charter and the ancient*' custom of the corporation."Soon after the Revolution, the damnum council obtained a will. III.new exemplification of the charter of Charles II. and disownedthe charter of James, as having been founded on apretended surrender which was never recorded. And in thesame year in which the charter was granted by WilliamIII., the common council made an order, in which theysaid, that '^ endeavours were used to take away or makevoid the charter of Charles II., under which the corporation derived many great privileges and immunities ;" anddirected, that '^ the mayor and bailiffs shall, at the charge*' of the corporation, use their utmost endeavours to preservethe same."The king subsequently granted the charter under whichthe corporation is now regulated.It commences with an inspeximus of the charter ofCharles I., which it confirms; and then recites, 'that afew of the burgesses of the town, by a combination among*' themselves without the assent of the greater part of the^* burgesses, and without a surrender of the charter of CharlesI., or any judgment of quo warranto, had procured the'^ charter of Charles II. ; in which sundry material changes*' were designed to be made in the government of the town,which had caused many differences and doubts concerningthe liberties, franchises, and customs of the town ; and also'* concerning the election and appointment of the mayor, anddivers other officers'*The charter then appoints a common council of 41 burgesses,one of whom was to be mayor, and two bailiffsby a subsequent clause, it directs, that upon the removalor death of the mayor, recorder, town clerk, bailiffs, orcommon council, another fit person should be elected by suchpersons, and in such manner, Hie, and form as in that parti"Liverpool.Ill, cttUir was used iiitd accustomed, before the making the charrT of C/uirles II.This cliiusc is in the euiiie words ne that uf the charter ofJames W-, excepting that in the hitter, the election it) directedto he " Of heretofore accustomed," aadlothal of William 111^ill the same manner as before the charter of Charles 11.;'^,• at which time, the common council did not exist by cAaridjjI lliit by deviation fruDi the burgesses.The charter of WUhani 111. further direct, that the maye*I mtd hailili^ should he chosen hy the burgeaesout of the commascouncil.Under ilia charter it might have been expected, that leurbulletins would again have entered upon the exercise fl£f their riglita ; but the new common council were soon aware m\\ the power they possessed.By the charter of Charles 1., now again recognized asL part of the constitution of the place, no common hall orI assembly of the largesses could be held without the assentand presence of the mayor, and one at least of the bailifTit.The council then existing — without adverting to the dish'tinction between the charter of James II. and of WilliamIII.j respecting the choice of their members— still continuedto elect each other ; and therefore it was not likely that thisbody would call together the burgesses for the purposes ofmaking bye-lawE, or being present at such meeting : andconsequently nearly a century has elapsed without the burgessesat large having availed themselves of the privilegesintended to be granted to them.This extinction of their rights however, was not submittedto without various struggles. In 1735, the mayor of thetown, with the concurrence of the bailiff's, called together theburz/essfx in common hall. The assembly was accordinglyheld, and sundry bye-laws made. But the mayor dying thenext year, the common council again assumed the authorityand dismissed the two bailiffs from their office of commoncouncilmen; declaring in express terms, that in holding thecommon hull they had acted manifestly in breach of the trustreposed in them us common councilmen.LIVERPOOL. 2167The common council, however, seem not to have been o«>»g« "'•able to divest themselves of some doubt as to their power ofmaking bye-laws for the government of the town, under thesubsisting charter. In order, therefore, to prevent all oppo- 1761.siphon, they applied, in the year 1751, to George XL, to givethem a new grant; stating in their petition their formercharters, and particularly that of William III. : which theyinaccurately describe as ordaining, that " for the future, topreserve the peace, tranquillity, and good government of** the tovYUj^ there should be, for ever, forty-one good and^^ discreet burgesses, who should be called the commoncouncil'* &c., omitting (as they say) to give them the leastpower in express terms ; though it was the manifest, if notthe sole intent of that charter, to give the forty-one thepower of making bye-laws, as in 'King Charles' charter, in Bye-laws.order to prevent the populous meetings of the burgessesupon every trifling occasion, the town being so much increasedsince that time. They then suggest to the king,that it may thereafter cause disputes, unless the charter wasexplained for this purpose, by adding the clause of KingCharles' charter ; or in such manner as his majesty shouldthink fit. They therefore requested that the king wouldgive to the select body of the common council the samepower of making bye-laws which the body at large possessedunder the charter of Charles I.; and they conclude withpetitioning, that the mayor might act as justice of the peacefor four years ; and that the recorder might have power toappoint a deputy.This petition was referred to the then attorney, and solicitor ,general, Sir Dudley Rider, and Mr. (afterwards lord) Mansfield,who recommended that the whole should be withdrawn,excepting so much only as related to the appointment ofjustices of the peace, and the nomination of a deputy recorder.To which recommendation the common council prudentlyassented. And on the report of the attorney andsolicitor-general, a new charter was obtained, which granted Newtheir request, and confirmed all former privileges ; but leftthe common council, as to their legislative authority, in theriii-MUue Mtualion in which they stooci under the charter ofSL WiUiamlll.lint conunon couch), however, still continued to makebye-Uwfi-but they were rarely acted upon — and, in camof resistance, were never enforced by legal proceedings. Fewof them have at present any active existence.The receipts and expenditure of the large income ofthe corporation have rested entirely with the codjiimhi Iai. council. IIn 1791, a majority of the render burgesses, presented apetition to the mayor and bailiffs, recruiting them to calltogether a general assembly of the burgesses in the commonhall.These officers complied with the requisition. And audmeeting was accordingly held, and numerously attended.Measures were taken for bringing to trial at law, the Importantquestions which had been so long the subject ofdebate among the burgesses, viz. — in what part of the cor ;poration the making of bye-laws, and electing the commonlit. council resided.A cause respecting the bye-laws, was tried at the assizeat Lancaster, in the same year, before Baron Thompson.Verdict. Mr. Erskine being leading counsel for the select body, andMr. Serjeant Adair for the burgesses. The jury found thatthe power of making bye-laws was under the charter ofCharles I. — recognized by that of William III. — expresslygiven to the corporation at large ; the Judge having directedthem that " no evidence of a custom ought to be admittedagainst the express words of a charter."yf" A motion was afterwards made in the Court of Kine'strial. ^Bench, for a new trial; when, after a long argument, theJudges of that court were of opinion that the evidence of thecustom ought to have been admitted, and directed a newtrial, which came on the following year. The recordsof the town were produced and given in evidence to provethe usage; but the second jury were also of opinion that nopractice could be legal which was in direct opposition tothe clause in the charter of Charles I,, giving the power ofLiverpool. 2159making bye-laws to the mayors bailiffs, and burgesses, on ^^**'^"^public notice far that purpose. And they gave a verdict 1792., . Verdict.against the claim of the common council.A third trial was then moved for, which the Court of King'sBench, on what ground does not appear, thought proper togrant. But the expences incurred in these proceedings,deterred the burgesses from a Rather prosecution of theirclaim. And the common council, notwithstanding the opinionof the two juries, still continued to exercise the exclusivepower of the corporation in the same manner as before theproceedings were commenced.*The question respecting the right of electing the members Commonof the common council, was also tried. The burgesses contended,as the charter of William III. referred to the custombefore that of Charles II. — at which time the common councilexisted, not by charter, but by the appointment of theburgesses — that they had the right to elect. The commoncouncil, on the contrary, contended that the charter of Williammeant to refer to the actual practice before the charterof Charles II. On this point the jury were of opinion infavour of the former custom, and gave a verdict accordingly.The event of this contest, and the celebrated Chester cause,in which a solemn decision of the House of Lords was obtainedby the exertions and expence of an individual, withoutproducing the least change in the practice of the corporation,shows how essentially necessary it is that some change shouldbe effected on general and uniform principles.The population of Liverpool amounts to upwards of 80,000 inhabitants. In1830, 4,001 voted as freemen — 360 of whom were non-residents : — notwithstandingthe charters speak only of burgesses and evidently refer only to local privilegesto be enjoyed by residents. The Reform Act has also continued the rightof the freemen and non-residents within seven miles.Charters.The following are the charters granted by King George IQ1.-1762. 3 George 111 Colchester.2. — Winchester.3.— 1763, 4 George III Bath.4. — Carmarthen 45.— 1769, 10 George III Exeter.6. 1773, 14 George 111 HeUtoii.7.— Saltash.8.— 1793, 36 George II I Northampton.9. 1797, SSGeoigelll Bodmin.,0.-.803,44Geo„e . ! S^^ Is1 1.— 1S09, fiO George III Mammon.12.— 1813,54George III Lampeter.13.-1818, george III Lancaster.1. Colchester, we have already seen, was in consequenceof the corporation then existing, not being able to act.*2. Winchester wae merely a grant and release of part ofthe fee-farm.3. Bath was a charter of incorporation, but its history hasalready been given. +4. Carmarthen was also a charter of incorporation, butimmaterial to our inquiry.5. The charter to Exeter was granted for the purpose ofgiving additional justices,6. The Helston charter was in consequence of the old corporationbeing reduced to such a state that it was incompetentto act.The following is a short extract from that charter, as aspoliation of grants of this description.It conimonccs with a recital of the chartei":- of the 27thElizahetli.and the IGth of Charles I. ;+ afti-r which it slates,• Set before, p. imH ; aiiJ i Dig. M. t Sec lief.ire. p. 1965.Nelson. 2161that it appeared by petitions from the merchants, tradesmen, ^^'^^"^inhabitants, and freeholders of the borough of Helston, l'^*-that several disputes had arisen, and informations in thenature of quo warranto had been prosecuted in the Court ofKing's Bench, and judgment of ouster obtained against Outer.several persons, for acting as mayors within the borough —and also against one of the aldermen, and divers of thefreemen ; — and by the natural death of other aldermen, thecorporation was in danger of being dissolved, and incapableof exercising its liberties.The king then incorporates the burgesses by the name of Burgesses.the mayor and commonalty, with all the usual corporate privileges; and intrusts the government of the city to a mayor,four aldermen, and an indeterminate number of freemen : Freemen,the clause for the election of whom is as follows — " Thatthe mayor, or his deputy, and the aldermen of the boroughof Helston, or the major part of them, shall for ever hereafterelect and admit such, and so many of the more discreet,honest, and quiet men, and inhabitants of the borough, Men.to be burgesses and freemen, as to them shall, from time totime, seem necessary or proper."7. Saltash being similarly situated with Helston, alsoreceived a new charter.8. The next grant was to Northamptonshire the early his 1796.tory of which was given in a previous part of the worksThis charter is peculiar, and commences by reciting, thatNorthampton was a town, very ancient and populous, andfrom ancient times had been a town incorporate ; and thatthe mayor, bailiffs, burgesses, and the inhabitants, had held inhabitantsdivers liberties, &c.That the king had been besought to confirm all the char Petition,ters, &c., granted to the mayor, bailiffs, and burgesses, ortheir predecessors, by any name of incorporation whatsoever;and whether such mayor, bailiffs, and burgesses, were thena corporation or not — with such additional privileges asshould seem expedient for the public good of the town, &c.• Pat. 36 George III. p. 6, n. 1.t See before, pp. 219, 247, 467, 883, 1037, 1181, 1741.6 Y21^ Northampton.owics*iii. xii king then graiiU, that the town of Northampton1765. should be a free town ; that the burr/eMM, and their ''' censure, should be one body, corporate and politic, batheNonne. name of " the mayor, bailiffs, and burgesses, of the town ofNorthampton" — with the usual corporate powers. Th ohof the most honest and discreet burgesses of the townshould always be called the mayor ; two of the most holiestand discreet burgesses should he called the bailifis; quidforty-eight honest and discreet men, telling and abidingwithin the town, who had never been mayors or bailiffsthe company of eight-and-forty, Jkc.^- 9. Bodmin also received a charter of incorporation.10. The next to Weymfrnth, was explanatory of some of theprivileges which had been before granted.1 1. The 11th was a charter to Maldon, which, like thoseto Colchester, Helen, and Saltash, waa in cooseqacDoe ofthe former grants having become ineffectual.12. The 12th to Lampeter, was a charter of incorporation,giving particular regulations and authority for the fiittueswearing of the office and burgesses, in conscience of the iold corporation being unable to act.13. The last to Lavrmler, was a cliHrfer of incorporation.CASES.Notwithstanding the encroachments upon corporationsmade by Charles II. and James II., and the doctrineattempted to he established by Brady, in support of theselect bodies — in the reign of Geoi^e III,, particularly duringthe time of Lord Mansfield, some better principles of corporationlaw pro elicited and adopted by that learned andable judge.The doctrine of bye-laws had bren carried to a great extentby the extra-judicial opinion of the judges in the coiporation case. But in the 3'3nil of George II., a bye-lawmade in the borough of Carmarthen, transferring the rightof electing the mayor, from the mayor, burgesses, andcommonalty, to the mayor and burgesses only, was held tobe illegal, and the mayors elected under it were ousted : andCASES. 2163further limitations were superinduced, upon the generality o^o'f"^ -of the rule in the corporation case, by subsequent deci- I7fi8.sons.Thus it was held, that a bye-law which alters the constitutiongiven by the crown, is bad ;* though if that constitutionwere not in the way, it might be good : as when thefreedom of the town was to be conferred only on such aswere entitled by birth or servitude, or by a particular modeof election pointed out — a bye-law that any person shouldbe admitted to the freedom, on payment of a sum of money,was held to be bad, for it altered the constitution]; Soalso it was held, that a corporation by charter could not makebye-laws contrary to the directions of the charter ; as whereit directed an election to be by the mayor, jurats, andcommonalty, they could not restrict it to 60 seniors of thecommonaltyBut in another case from the same borough, it had beenbefore decided, that the number of electors might be narrowedby a bye-law ; but not the number of the eligille.\\However, where a power of creating freemen was shownto have been once vested in the body at large of a prescriptivecorporations the exercise of it could not be sustainedin a select part of the same corporation, continued by chartersunder other names of incorporation; there being noexpress grant of such a power to the select body bythe charters, nor any bye-law to that effect, even supposingsuch a power could be transferred by a bye-law fromthe whole to a part of the same corporation, although itwas stated in the plea and admitted by the demurrer, thatthe same power which was immemorial exercised by thewhole body down to the period of the granting and acceptedV. Spencer — Maidstone case, and see before, as to %L$age at Maidstone,2041—2043.t As birth is one ground of parochial settlement, so was it, by the ancient law,the foundation of the claim to betide in a particular place. And on that principlea bye-law was framed, that no one, not cam in such a town, or an inhabitantthere /or three years, shall be allowed to inhabit without a testimonial of his goodbehaviour. — Hard. 56.X Rex V, Breton, 4 Bur. 2260. $ Rex v, Cutbush, 4 Bur. 2204.II Rex r. Spencer, 3 Bur. 1827. f The King i>. Holland, 2 East, 70.6y22164 *^*SES.*•■»<■'"• once uf the charters of James !. and Charles H., bad tIts. since those charters, &c. continually exercised by the sbody in question ; and although such charters containedconfirmation of all former privileges, &c. under whatnames of incorporation theretofore enjoyed.The following cases — some relating to maidenalso in this reign.University OF Oxford.The first as to a claim of cognizance, by the Univenutyof Oxford, in an action upon the case, in which the plaintiffdeclared that she was never guilty of keeping an improperbouse, but that the defendant, in the county of Oxford,accused her of doing so, and caused her to be arrested,and carried to Oxford iu custody, before Thomas Randolph,Dad., and that the defendant at the Quarter Sessions forthe county of Oxford, maliciously prosecuted an indictmentagainst the plaintiff, upon which she was acquitted, to theplaintive damages, &c.*The university of Oxford claimed conusance under thecharter of the 14th of Henry VIII, ; by which conusance ofall causes, where either plaintiff or defendant was a memberthereof, was given to the chancellor, though the cause ofaction arose in any part of the kingdom; and it was provided,that no justice (particularly mentioning the Judges ofthe Common Pleas) should presume to intermeddle in anycase arising within the jurisdiction of the university. Whichcharter was confirmed by an act of Parliament of the 13Mof Elizabeth.The defendant swore in an affidavit, that he was, and for21 years past has been, a member and student of the collegeof Christ Church, and that he was resident there. Whereuponthe court made a rule for the plaintiff to show cause,why the claim of conusance should not be allowed.Upon showing cause, an affidavit was produced by theplaintiff, swearing that the defendant generally resided, andwas obliged to reside at Benson, adhere he had a college• jMify HajM Samuel Long, WiU^na BepoiD, 311.CASES. 2166living, and though his name remained upon the books of the o«o«i^"-college, yet he had no room or chamber there to reside in ; Oxford. , Universeit was insisted for the plaintiff, that conusance of city.the plea ought not to be allowed to the university for two reasons: — First, Because the cause of action arose at Benson, outof the university. Secondly, That the defendant had no rightto the privilege of the university, he having ceased to residethere as a student and member thereof.In answer, it was said for the defendant, that the plaintiffwas indicted at Oxford, for keeping an improper houseat Benson, and therefore the cause of action arose at Oxford;but however that was, the privilege extended all over thekingdom ; and secondly, he was sworn to be a member of theUniversity, sometimes residing there, and sometimes upon acollege curacy at Benson.Lord Camden : — " The charter extends to actions arising inany part of England ; but surely it could never intend thatscholars as the plaintiff should have the privilege of suingin the university, in causes of action arising in any part ofEngland ; but when they are defendants, this privilegeextends all over England.The charter was granted and confirmed by Parliament, tothe members of the university, in consideration of their beingresident there, and the privilege extends from the highestmember, to the lowest servant there residing.The superior courts construe this privilege very strictly,therefore it ought to be made to appear clearly to the court,that the defendant is a scholar residing. Great numbers of Residence,persons remain on the books, long after they have left theuniversity, on purpose to vote for members, &c.Many who are fellows of colleges never go thither atall ; I myself was one a long time, and never went there ;it would be strange if this court should allow conusance incases where such persons are defendants; it is thereforeabsolutely necessary that residence should be proved to thecourt. The claim under the seal of the university, says notone word of the residence of this defendant, and so we cansee why the courts have required affidavits of the residence ;O"***"'- yet if the clwiicellor should certify falsely, that a person a~ Oxford resident who is not, there ia no doubt but an action uponSty" the came would lie guinea him, and therefore the chancellordo not choose to certify residue; and I am iDcUned Wthink the chancellor knew this defendant was not resident,and so did not certify that matter. The defendant's affidavitis a subterfuge under the word ' residence,' which isindefinite. If a man resides for one night, and swears hewas resident, he could not be convicted of perjury. It iscertain he is curate of Benson, and has a family there, andfrequently resides at Oxford, but he does not say how longtogether."BEDFORD.a About twenty years after this case, a different doctrinewith reaped to residence, appears to have been held in theimportant case of the King and Heaven, which pursued theauthority of the King and Ponsonby,' already a subject ofobservation.That case was cited, and it was argued that it had entiretydone away with the necessity of residence.Upon a motion for leiive to file nn information in thenature of a quo warranto, for usurping the oflSce of aldermanof the borough of Bedford the affidavit on which the indewas obtained stated, that Bedford was a borough and corporationby prescription : — the latter assertion being inaccurate,as has been already pointed out. It wa£ also swornthat it was governed by a mayor, recorder, 2 bailiffs, and13 common councilmen, and that there was an indefinitenumber of freemen.That it was the custom of the borough, for every burgesswho had served the office of mayor, to become an alderman ;iJeot. which office could only be held by persons resident withinthe borough, and every alderman removing from the borough,and no longer continuing to reside therein, thereby vacatedhis office. The defendant served the office of mayor from176^ to 1769, fi-boni which lime he executed the office of• See before, p. ia. < Rex ,, Heaven, i \. U. 773.CASES. 2167alderman, but about 13 years since, he removed from Me^'^ov^-boroughs and has not since resided therein, Bedford.The defendant denied the usage and custom ; — and furtherstated he had kept apartments in the borough for the greaterconvenience of attending to the meetings and business of it ;and that he had upon all occasions been ready to attend atthe borough, whenever his presence was requisite.The defendant's counsel also urged, that the necessity forresidence within the borough, was entirely done away bythe case of the King v. Ponsonby — that the corporationhad refused to interfere, and that it did not appear any particularduty was required from the defendant, or that thecorporation had been injured by his non-residence.With respect to the constitution of the borough, relativeto non-residence vacating the office of alderman, they reedupon the analogous case of Vaughan v. Lewis,* Lord Holthaving declared, ** the clause was declaratory of the commonlady and that the non-inhabiting within the borough, was agood cause to amove a member ; but that it did not, ipsofacto, determine his office without an actual amoval.''Lord Kenyon in giving judgment observed, that '^ on theconvenience of the thing — on reason by analogy to othercases — and on authority — his ceasing to reside in the boroughdid not, ipso facto, put an end to his corporate existence.First, in point of convenience ; — at what time can it be saidthat he ceased to be a member ? Was it at the first momentwhen he left the town ? And shall all those persons whoderive their title under him during these last 13 years bedeclared unduly elected ? Such a doctrine would be productiveof infinite confusion and hardship on third persons.Then consider this by analogy to other cases : the statuteof Westminster, 2, c. 1, which respects the operation offines, declares, that fines levied contrary to that statute shallbe ipso jure null; and yet it has been repeatedly determined— that they are only voidable, and must be reversedby writ of error. Then as to authorities : it is true, indeed,that the case in Cartier (who in general is a good re-• Carl. 227.i^ porter) uxu not a judicial avlkority. But theI- themselves referred the (juestioii to Lord Holt, a laveof the greatest eminence, and a» far as a point can denieauthority from aoy one person, the opinion of Lord Holtupon this subject has great weight; and he thought, thatthe ofFice of onion councilman did not become ipso fkchivacant by nou-residence, and that the party did not lose hisfranchise till a sentence of amotion by the corporation busbeen pronounced. Therefore, I am of opinion, on reason, ooanalogy, and oti the case cited, (there being no contrarydecisions that there must be a judgment of amotion againstthis defendant by the corporation of Bedford, for non-residence,before we can interpose by granting an informationin nature of a quo warranto against him."The argument of convenience insisted upon by the ChiefJustice seems to be questionable. Certainly that part whichassumes the difficulty of ascertaining when the residencewould cease seems to be untenable, as residence and nonresidence,a point so necessary)' to be established, and in somany instances determined in practice, upon cases of settlement,constables, magistrates, coroners, sheriffs, clei^y, Ac.Nur was it any greater hardship that those who had tentativetitles under persons so circumstanced, should lose theiroffices any more than on any other ground. But, on thecontrary, it would seem a less hardship, because his nonresidencemust have been notorious ; and all who took underhim must be assumed to have had knowledge of the factAccording to the principles before quoted from Lord Mansfield,*that " it is requisite that all law with respect to boroughsshould declarant distinct," it would nodoubtbavebeen a much more simple rule to have held, according tothe charter, that the notorious fact of non-residence shouldput an end to the office, rather than that it should depend uponthe will of the corporation whether they would remove theperson or not: lie in the meantime continuing in office contraryto the spirit of the king's grant ; and therefore it seemsthat the latter doctrine would be much more productive ofCASES. 2169confusion and uncertainty than that which was to depend ^^*^'^^"'upon the overt act of non-residence. Nor does the analogy Bedford,between fines void or voidable appear to apply to a case ofthis description which relates to public and not private rights.And if the consequence of a rule of law is to be considered,it should be remembered that under this class of cases, numerousinstances have since arisen in all parts of the kingdom,where non-resident officers of corporations, not being removedby their fellow corporators, who are themselves also oftennon-resident, have continued in their offices in defiance of thecharters : the courts of law not being in any degree ancillaryto their removal, and no remedy, in fact, existing for the mischief.The Chief Justice said that Lord Holt, as a lawyerof the greatest eminence, gave great authority to the opinionhe had declared, " Amicus Plato, sed magis amice Veritas ;"and as to there being no contrary decision, it would seem torequire no authority to establish the position, that if a charterrequired a corporate officer to be resident, and provided thatif he left the borough his place should be vacant, and itshould be filled up by another, that his ceasing to be a residentshould put an end to the office.In fact, on a subsequent occasion, in the case of the Kingagainst the commissioners under the Brighton paving act,50 Geo. III., ch. 38, the court so determined : by holdingthat where the act provided that, on the removal of a commissionerout of the parish, the other commissioners shouldcause notice to be given to the inhabitants for electinganother in his stead ; upon a commissioner removing out ofthe parish, and occupying no house there, but only comingto the place as an occasional visitor, the office was held tobe actually void.LEICESTER.A return to a mandamus to restore an alderman of Leices- 1767.ter, removed for non-residence,* was disallowed, because itdid not set forth a total desertion from the place of which theparty was alderman.Hex V, Mayor and Aldermen of Leicester, 4 Bur. 2067.Ot(»s>in.PORTSMOUTH.In the case of Rex v. Carter,* the question waa whether thedefendant, Ijeing elected at the age of five ytyirs old, » burgessof Portsmouth, and sworn in at 21, was duly elected accordingto the teniia of the charter of the third of Charies I,Lord Mansfield. — " There is no more in the case than this,that the king has given them a power to choose and swearin burgesses; and the question is, whether he gave them apower to grant an inchoate right, when no oath could beadministered to them. I am clearly of opinion no such poweris given by the charter."LONDON.Pursuing the doctrine of non-residence — in the celebratedcase of the citizens of London against the corporation of Lynn,it was holden in the Common Pleas that " the freemenof the city of London had a right to be exempt from thepayment of all tolls and port duties throughout all England(except prises of wine) in whatever place they reside."With respect to which it was forcibly observed by Mr.Justice Railer, in giving judgment in editor, in the King'sBench,'t' that "it had been contended by the counsel forthe city:( that the word, ' citizens,' included aU the freemen,whether resident or not: — if it did, such a etutemcould not exist in point oflaw.^ If such a custom could besupported, it might be attended with the most serious consequences; since it would be in the power of the city ofLondon, which is one of the oldest corporations in thekingdom, to sell the privileges of every other."Mr. Justice Grove also, at the termination of hie judgmentin the same case, said, " I believe it has been decided, thatthe word ' citizens,' ex vi termini, means resident citizens,However, I do not wish to give any decided opinion oo thispoint."And in a subsequent case, of the Corporation of London o.CASES. 2171the Corporation of Liverpool, which was tried at bar, in the ^^^^«^^^'Court of Exchequer, in Easter term, 1799, the jury, underthe direction of the court, found that ^*2l freeman is not exemptfrom toll, unless he be a resident inhabitant j and in scot'' and lot:'Seaport.Notwithstanding the difficulty which the Court of King'sBench appeared to have felt in the case of the King andHeaven, as to fixing the time when non-residence began,no difficulty was found in the following case, in fixing theperiod when residence commenced; — in fact they are correlativeterms; for the commencing a residence in a newplace, generally fixes the period of ceasing to reside in a y^^^former. Thus a person in Seaford,* having prior connexionswith that borough, previous to his election to the office ofbailiff f for which residence is a necessary qualification, tooka house at first for four years, but afterwards, at his landlord'srequest, for one, and slept there one night before theelection, and did not return again for near a month afterwards,when he stayed two days, but retained possession of hishouse, under his lease, the whole time ; — the taking of thehouse appearing to the court to be bona fide, that washeld a sufficient legal residence to satisfy the qualificationrequired.But afterwards an information in nature of quo warrantowas granted, in order to try whether a residence in the same Evidence.borough of Seaford, previous to an election, which requiresresidence, were bona fide or not — it appearing that the defendant,though in treaty for a house in the borough, had onlyhired lodgings there, and had resided a very few nights inhis journey to and from other placesCARMARTHEN.The two following cases were also decided in this reignon the point of residence. JA charter which required that the mayor should be an• The King v, John Sargent, T. R., 466.t The King v. the Duke of Richmond, 6T. R. 560.t The King i;. G. Williams, 2 Maule & Selwyn, p. 141.1813.I*'"- inhabitant reliant within the borough, on pain of forfeitingduc. such sum as should be imposed by the mayor, recorder,aud major part of the common council, not exceeding 100(.,does not require reaianci/ as a qualification for holding theoffice, but under a penalty. ^^AflLIVERPOOL. ^^1>!*■ By charter 7 Wilbam III., the mayor of Liverpool* i& appointedto be elected out of 41 common councilmen, and everymayor is made an alderman ; and it is granted " quodquodcunque accident aliquam majores, &c. aut aliquamvel aliquis de b-dllivis, vel de communi consilio villaepraedicta pro tempore existence obire, seu ab officio auo, Telab officiis suis mover, vel seceders, sive stare reciisare,quod tunc et in quolibet tali casu, alia idonea persona, orelalia donee, persons, de tempore in genius, ad et in officiumilium, vel ad et in officia illorum sic amotonim, Tel obeun-tium sive stare recu5antiumeligetur,"&c. ; and by subsequentcharters every alderman is appointed justice for thrown. Itwas held, that the defendant, who was a common councilman,and had once served the office of mar/or, and acted as justice forthe town, but had since quitted it, and resided four miles distant,having only a bank there, and was an acting magistrate forthe comity, was not entitled to refined to stand at a subsequentelection as mayor, though the serving that office would compelhim to remove his residence to the town, and prevent lusacting as magistrate for the county; and therefore the courtgranted a numdamus to him to take upon himself the office hehaving been elected at such subsequent meeting.CHESTER.The case of the King r. Ameryy, in the 26th of Geoi^ III.,from the city of Cfaester,t affords a striking demonstrationhow strong the general impression was, that the existence ofcorporations hy prescription could not be disputed. LordMansfield saying, " all questions concerning trials at barCASES. 2173must depend upon their own circumstances. Many inform oeotge iii.nations in the nature of a quo warranto, upon which the Chester,existence of corporations depended, have been tried atnisi prius, and many at bar. The only rule therefore to goby is, the judgment which the court shall form on the natureof the issues, and their dependencies. Now, it seems to measclear as possible, that no question of magnitude can arisein this case to render a trial at the bar of this court necessary.Many of the issues will admit of no objection, stick as,that it is a corporation by prescription; and the granting, in Preicrip*fact, of the charter by Car. II., and some others, are onlyconsequential. The great question is, on the acceptance ofthe charter of Car. II., but that cannot involve in it much Chartersdifficulty. We know tke obloquy kick charters granted at Charles.that time lie under. As my Lord Hardwick said, ' theyhave never received any countenance in Westminster Hall ;and he would never give any opinion in support of them ;unless the strongest evidence was laid before the court oftheir having been accepted, and uniformly acted under;'therefore there is no ground in this case for a trial at bar."This place affords another instance, in addition to thosealready shown in the history of so many boroughs, whereeven the parties which have contested the right of the selectbody of the corporation to control the municipal and parliamentaryelections, have themselves assumed, without sufficientgrounds, the existence of a corporation from timeimmemorial — the foundation upon which the greater portionof the errors on this subject are founded — and affording toogreat facility for the support of the corporate usurpations.For if they really existed before the time of legal memory,it might be very difficult to prove that the citizens and burgesseswho returned members to Parliament after that period,were not members of those bodies : the records of the earlyperiods of parliamentary representation, being so scanty asnot to afford a decisive negative to that supposition. And,therefore, if the question stood on these grounds alone, itwould probably be decided in favour of the corporate right. Corpora-butif, on the contrary, it can be shown that no municipal °**g]74 Corporations.°*°''''" - corponituinii existed before the time of legal memory, norChsiar. till long hither; but that bui^eaaea existed iu this countryfrom the earliest time;; and were connected with the coi»-mou law, and the system of police which at that tinexisted ; that the present corporations can be distinctlytraced, both by general history, and the records of oakparticular borough, to have been first created long since tfaetime of lefi;al memory ; then the question would indeed sunton very different grounds. The modem usage and practicewould lee attributed, as they justly ought, to usurpation;and their encroachments would be sanctioned with caution.BnrgmMs. Whilst, on the other hand, the early existence of burgagebeing established, and that they included all them insidetant householders within the limits of each borough, account*ing to the gentil principle of the law, their claim would bcreceived with a predisposition to support it.To assume, therefore, the existence of prescriptive corporationsabandons the strongest grounds for the establishmentof the right of the inhabitant householders,* and unjustifiablyconcedes to the corporate right the atrot^est baskfor its support.Thus, in this case Lord Mansfield adopts the position ofCJ^'*'- Chester being a corporation by prescription as incontrovertible; and in the elaborate report of the great case connectedwith Chester, the same doctrine is assumed by the author,who nevertheless published his work and tried the cause, tonegative the right of the select body.That author also errs in his conjecture as to the origin ofCompiuiia Companies, which he rests on hypothesis, instead of advertingto the facts disclosed by history. The first companies in thiscountry, it is clear from the instances statim by Mailnx, werereligious associations ; from which other companies afterwardssprung for the pui-posos of trade, and both the oneand the other wore distinct from the institution of boroughsand burgesses.aldennen. Tile assertion that aldennen arose out of these companiesCORPORATIONS. 2176is also inaccurate. • The ealdorman was originally under our ^^^^gni'Saxon government, the principal legal officer in each shire. Chester.An officer of the same description existed in each burgh, Burgh,which was a limited district carved out of the county : andwhere the boroughs were very large, and such a subdivisionwas necessary, there was an alderman presiding over eachward of the borough, as in London, Canterbury, Ipswich, &c. Ward.But it was many centuries after the first use of the term, asapplied to the chief officer of the town or ward — whose dutyit was to superintend the execution of all the duties connectedwith the leet — that it obtained the modem applicationto an officer chosen by a corporation for life.So also the hypothesis that the mayor arose out of the Mayor,trading companies is inaccurate; as the documents whichhave been quoted abundantly establish.A more correct view of the history of Chester might becollected from a recollection of the circumstances alreadystated with respect to it — as the entry in Domesday. Thecharters and confirmation of Henry VI., King John, HenryIII., Edward I.,. Edward III., Henry V., none of themcharters of incorporation. The entries of freemen at thepromote court, in the time of Henry VI. Its separationfrom the shire of Chester, in the reign of Henry VII. Theregulation by statute of the shire days, in the reign ofHenry VIII. ; and the admissions of freemen in the samereign, with the first mention of it as a corporation, in thereign of Queen Elizabeth.*From these documents it will be seen, that the selectbody first began its usurpations in the reign of QueenElizabeth ; and the further progress of them may be collectedfrom its subsequent municipal and parliamentary history.The charters and privileges of Chester, were like thoseof many other places, seized in the reign of Charles II.,and restored by the proclamation of James II. After which,in the second of William and Mary, a report was made ie90.upon petitions against the return of the members to Parliament,in which it was said that the right of election was in• Vide Index, title Chester,1- the freemen,* the irregularities in making whom, were ppby the petitioners : — as that 125 urnre made free after theof the writ.Another witness proved he was present when thefreemen there made, and took notice of il to the petitionBod advised them to get some made Tor them ; but Irefused it, upon the cate of Dartmouth ; that several nI igtmiplained their apprentice were made free, contrary tknowledge.For the sitting members, it was said by a witness, thad known all the elections since 1660 ;t and that aa freeman might demand hut freedom at 16: and an appetitehas a right if he comes out of his time before be is Syears of age.Mr. Skelbani said, he was mayor at the time of tlelection ; and had also known the several elections «1660; and never knew any freeman of Chester, young <old, rich or poor, denied his vote ; that those who were nfree, claimed either by birth or servitude: that none vever put by who were capable of taking an oath.Upon the whole the committee resolved against the petitioners.The right having been thus agreed to be in the freemen,the system of outnumbering the resident citizens, by theforeign freemen, appears to have been acted upon; and theusurpations of the mayor and the select body, may also becollected from the following petition of Sir John Main-waring,and Mr. Chitchat, aldermen of Chester, on thebehalf of themselves and other aldermen and citizens, to theking—Humbly shevveth,"Tliat about the 15th of July last, your petitioners preferred• Thiscannolbe the light of election. unless "/r«inen" mean mhahiiaMi. forin Themthe suite of Henry Will. gives the riRl.l. And it is clearThat theuiiurpoll<pii in this boioUKh must have comnicneeil since 1543, Ihe daleof ttl.See Statute 25 Car. II., 1673, for Durham, which give theright li1 the freemen.■iii»worihyof remark, that almost all the usa?« which "ere reliedupon inthese parthe Re-Morality.CHESTER. 2177their humble petition to this most honourable board — setting ^^^^g*^"*forth the arbitrary and undue proceedings of Peter Bennett, 1690.late mayor of Chester, viz. : by waiving the fixed time, byorder of assembly, for the choosing of common councilmen.'' That, upon reading the petition, their excellencies, incouncil, were pleased to order the late mayor to attend theboard, in person, and to put in his answer in writing.That the late mayor of Chester put in his answer accordingly,and that the mayor and your petitioners are in town,and ready to have the cause heard.That their excellencies did, by their order, recommend tothe care and circumspection of Peter Bennett, the mayor andmagistrates of the city of Chester, the preventing, as muchas in them lay, all such tumultuous proceedings wherebythe peace of the city might any ways be disturbed.That, notwithstanding the order, the said P. Bennett hathsince caused five aldermen to be elected by an order ofassembly, contrary to the express words of the charter, anddid thereby exclude the freemen their votes, who ought tohave been the electors, and did greatly endanger the peaceof the city by such illegal election.That the common councilmen are to be chosen yearly ;and that P. Bennett suffered the year to elapse before hewent to the election of the common councilmen, by reasonwhereof 400 persons absented themselves, and would notattend to give their votes, lest they should seem to countenancea certain breach of their charter.That, by reason of the freemen absenting themselves, thesaid P. Bennett, and his accomplices, took the opportunityof turning out 32 of the old common councilmen, who all ofthem had subscribed the voluntary association, and werehearty and zealous to the government, — putting in theirstead men who refused to sign the association, and mayreasonably be suspected for their loyalty, two of them particularly,Will. Francis and Humpy. Page, standing convictionand indictment of high misdemeanour, for drinkingthe late King James's, and the pretended Prince of Wales',their healths, with swords drawn, and have been both fined6 z■*'" - for alio KiiiHP ; yet, are they both thought so meritorious bfBO. the said Peter Bennett, that they were chosencouiicilnien ; aod FmncU is thought fit, and presidesheriff.Tliat as the new common couucilmen are the creataiw itthe »aMl Peter Bennett, so have they gratefully expressthemselves to be such, having joined with some alilike principles ; and have, by order of their assetby a bond, scaled, with the common seal of the citythemselves and the city, to repay the said Petercharges lie shall be put to in the defence of his ille uxl.arbitrary proceedings.That by means of which security so given, 'lis conceitedthetreasureofthecityisingreat danger of being extravagantlyexpended ; your petitioners, and all the freemen, are highdiscouraged, if not, by your great wisdom, this evil, togrtbcrwith the rest. of the breaches of our charter complained i](are not speedily redressed.May it therefore please your most excellent majeslVrandthis most honourable board, that Peter Bennett may answerto the several complaints of this petition."The struggle for the right of the non-resident freemen ma47. afterwards continued ; and in the 21st year of Geog-ge II., apetition, complaining of an undue election, was heard. Thedispute was as to the right of election, which, by the petitioners,was stated to be only "in such citizens as wereinhabitants within the city, or the liberties, and admittedto their freedom by birth or servitude;" whereas by thesitting member the right was stated to be in the freemen inThe original charter gr.mtnl to the city l)v King HeiiiyVII., lull the cimfiruiatioii by tjueeii Elizabeth, were producedti prove, that the right of electing the mayor, andlino, several other officers, was vested in the citizens commorantwithin the city; and that mmmm-nnt citizens only wereeligible into thoi^c offices.A witness was examined in order to prove that, anciently,such citizens <nily had enjoyed the riiiht to vole in theCHESTER. 2179election of citizens to serve in Parliament for the city, as o«M«eiii.were entitled to their freedom by birth or servitude. Birth.Servitude.Another witness was examined in order to prove that theright was in such citizens only as were inhabitants within the inhawunucity or liberties, and admitted to their freedom by birth orservitude, &c.On the other hand, the sitting member showed, from theresolutions of the House, so far back as the second Wm. &Mary, that other freemen had voted at elections ; and havingproduced several polls taken at elections of members of Parliamentfor the city, he proposed to prove that many of thepersons who voted at each of the elections, were not com-movant in the city when they voted ; but the same wasadmitted by the petitioners. Then he proposed to prove,1st. That several honorary and non-resident freemen had Honorary*' freemen.been elected into the offices of mayor and sheriff. 2nd. Thathonorary freemen had exercised trades within the city. 3rd.The freemen who had purchased their freedoms, were exemptedfrom toll, as well as other freemen. But the wholewas admitted by the petitioners.The question was put and carried, " that the right was in Right.the mayor, aldermen, and common council, and in such of*' the freemen as should have been commorant within the said*' city, or the liberties, for the space of one whole year nextbefore the election."Upon motion for an information* in the nature of a quo 1733.warranto against some of the officers of the city, amongother things it appeared, that by a charter granted the 16thyear of Charles II., the right of election of corporation officerswas vested in the mayor, aldermen, and commonalty atlarge ; the defendants were elected by part of the corporation,exclusive of the commonalty, and a usage was set up tojustify such election.The court held clearly, that no usage could control the Usage,direction of a charter of so modem a date ; andLord Hardwick, Chief Justice, mentioned the case of thecorporation of Brecknock, where the charter was granted inThe King t>. Sir Robert Grosvenor and others, 7 Mod. 198.6z22iay LHtSTER.Orotniii. the reign of Philip and Mary ; and directed the corporatena. officers to be chosen de inkabttantibus ; and a usage had prevailedfrom the Isti of Queen Elizabeth, to elect them withoutany regard to inhabitancy to that time ; and upon a specialverdict, it wa held in this court, "that f^tcfi usage i*contradiction to the charter, teas void"* and that Judgment,upon a writ of nor, was affirmed in the House of Lords. Itwas also agreed in this case, that by a judgment upon aninformation in the nature of a quo warranto, the corporationitself cannot be dissolved, but only the particular abusedprivileges seised into the hands of the crowii.Upon a rule to show cause why an information shouldnot be granted against the mayor, aldermen and commoncouncil of the city of Che«ter,t to show by what authoritythey claimed to elect aldermen, exclusive of the freemen atiai^e ; and likewise upon four other rules to show cause whyan information should not be granted against the mayor,and three of the aldermen of Chester, for exercising Uiciroffices ; the nature of the case appeared to be, that by »charter made in the 16th Charles II., power was given to thefreemen at large, of joining with the aldermen and commoncouncil, in the elections of aldermen in this city. This charterwas acted under, till the 36th year of that king, and thenon a quo warranto brought against this corporation, judgmentwas given, that all their liberties should be seised, and thecorporation dissolved. The year following, a new charter wasgranted to them, vesting this right of election in the aldermenand common council, exclusive of the freemen at large, andthe king thereby reserved fo himself, a power of removing themat pleasure.The freemen, however, made some op|)c>sitinii to the acceptanceof this charter. In the beginning of King James Ii'stime, the judgment of seizure was pardoned, and they hadfull restitution of their liberties. In the fourth of James II.,there was another charter grunted to them, vesting the rightThe King c.Sii W, \V. WyiCHESTER. 2181of election in the aldermen and common council only, and in ^^'g*"^ -that charter y the king reserved to himself a power y not only of 1733.removing them at pleasure hut of appointing new ones in theirroom.*There was some opposition made by the freemen to thischarter likewise ; which continued to the year 1698, but fromthat time, they acquiesced under the election made by theothers.Upon this state of the case, Mr. Strange and others ofcounsel for the defendants, submitted, that the rule ought tobe discharged. They said they did agree, that neither thecharter of 37th Charles II., nor that of the fourth of James II.,could bind the freemen, unless the freemen accepted it ; butthey submitted, that a long acquiescence would be an evidenceof such acceptance. An acquiescence there was in the presentcase for 35 years last past ; and they apprehended thatthe court would not grant an information now, which wouldoverturn the whole state of the corporation.They cited the case of Taunton in which an informationwas moved for, against certain members of the corporationfor not having taken the solemn league and covenant, inpursuance of a clause in an act of Parliament. It wasargued by the defendant's counsel in that case, that if suchinformation should be granted on that account, it wouldaffect the election of most of the officers in England. Thatargument had a considerable influence with the court. Therule for showing cause was never made absolute, and whilstit was depending, the clause in the act of Parliament wasrepealed. For the like purpose they cited the case in Skin.574.Mr. Abney and others were of counsel on the side of therule. They conceived that the judgment of leisure in 36 Car.II., was entirely illegal. If the corporation had forfeited thecharter, the only method of taking advantage of the for-theproclamation of James II., in the fourth year of his reign, for restoring cor 1688.portions to their ancient charters, 6cc.> operates (when accepted) as a grant ofrevival to such of the old corporations as had surrendered their corporate franchise*to Charles II., (hut which surrenders were not enrolled,) and where new chartershad been obtained, overturn such new c/ia rifts.— Mewling v. Francis, 3T. R. 189.feature, was by scire facias to repeal it ; and no such judetaenl can be in quo warranto. For this purpose they itoned the case in 4 Mod. 5,'i.But if the judgment had been legal, the restitution iftJamb II. had entirely taken offthe force of it. Then wHregard to the powers reserved to the crown by the chartsof 37 Charles II. and 4 James II., they said they were of*wry extraordinary nature, and such as made the charter t*be void and not capable of being accepted. But they imitted, that in fact there was no acceptance ; on the contraryI there was an express opposition, and the submission to it (35 years last past, they conceived would not amount to iI acceptance. For this purpose, Mr. Collins mentioned a cainthat '2'i years would not.The Chief Justice declared his op'uiioc to be, that lljudgment of seizure was not according to law ; and witlfregard to the two last charters, he observed, that Me pouvrtreserved in them could kindly be warranted, and he never kneethese sort of charters in King Charles IFs and King JasutII's time mentioned by the judges but with ceifawre. By thecharter of 16 Charles II. the freemen at large had undoubtedlya right in joining ill these elections. And he did notthink that the acquiescence to the contrary by the freemen for35 years together, would make any difference. In the case ofBrecknock, there was a charter granted in the reign of Philipand Mary, which settled the election in one way ; from 15thElizabeth there had been an invariable usage in another.This matter was found by special verdict. Yet this eovtwas of opinion that the usage ought not to prevail ; and accordinglygave judgment in the quo warranto against thedefendants. On that judgment, a writ of error was broughtin the House of Lords, and it was affirmed. The leastthing that the court could do in this case, was to permitthis matter to be tried. The rest of the court were <rf thesame opinion ; accordingly the rule was made absolute.An act passed in this year, relative to the election of themayor and other officers of this city, and which, amongstother things, changed the day of election from the FridayCHESTER. 2183next after the day of St. Dennis, to the Friday next after the ^ ^'^ '" •20th of October.In the 24th year of George III. the important case of the 1784.King and Ameryy, relative to Chester, came before the Courtof King's Bench. The affidavits used on the occasion are toolong for insertion, and may be seen in the Chester case.*The rule for the information was made absolute, and thequestion subsequently tried.The contest between the corporation and the citizens ofChester, was in substance whether the old charter granted byHenry VII, , or the new one of Charles IL is to be the lawof that city. After two trials, and a very elaborate argumentof four days* continuance, in the Court of King's Bench, thepoints on which the merits of the cause rested, were brieflyas follows, viz.1 . Whether the judgment of seizure against the old corporationwent the length of dissolving that corporation.2. Whether the power reserved by the charter of CharlesII. warranted the amoval of all the officers acting under it.3. Whether the charter of restoration could operate to revivethe old constitution.The court, after twelve months' consideration, gave thefollowing judgment : —As to the first pointy if the old corporation were not dissolvedby the judgment of seizure, the new charter, creatinga distinct body, could not operate ; as two corporations, forsimilar purposes, cannot subsist in the same place at thesame time. But the contumacy of the old body in not appearingto the quo warranto, has been said to cause the judgmentof seizure to work an extinguishment of their franchises,and therefore the new charter was legally granted.As to the second it is said that the power reserved to thecrown in the charter of Charles II. did not warrant theamoval of all the officers, and therefore did not affect theexistence of that corporation.And lastly, it has been determined that the charter ofrestitution could not restore the dissolved body, after the• IT. R. 578; 2T. R.515.I; acceptance of a new charter, Hid ti Uierelbre null andvoid."Mr. Baron Eyre, in the course of thiscase,i-obfierved,>9lDthe charter of Charles II., tint tkr (forming it was a metuunof the times, and which, from the moment then it becameJieceatary to tread back those steps in the latter end of thereign of James II., seemed to have been entirely lull twiilft.Notwithstanding the case which in before cited, in w)udhtpKKtumable luuige- was not allowed to prevail, the Coatof King's Bench afterwards refused to grant a mandamus,for the purpose of bringing a usage which bad prevailedfor a great leitgtii of tir under discussion. But itwill be seen that the decision turned upon the tecfankalground that the Court will not interpose by the special prerogativewrit of mandamus, when any other species lemedjris open to the parties.The case was thus: J — A charter of incorporation ofUefuyVII. granted to the citizens and commonalty in these worth:Quod ipse et successors sui in perpetuum singular anoissuccessive 24 conceives civitatis in aldermannos, necnon 40alios cives ejusdem civitatis pro communi consilio civitatisillus elsmere, facere et create possint ;" and it appearedthat in the year 1693, and the two following years, successiveelections of the 40coninion-councilmen had been made,since which time the usage had been not to elect the aldermenor common councilmen annually. The court refused amandamus, which was applied for in order to raise the questionagainst the usE^e, whether the elections of those officersought to be annual; — there being another remedy open tothe parties making this application.Notwithstanding the dictum of Lord Mansfield, in the caseof the King v. Aniery, that Chester was a corporation byprescription, in the sixth of George IV., at the summer assizes,upon a quo warranto, an issue, whether it was a corpsSee Rep. of Trin. IVrni. 1788, Ihe King saint Amifry.CHESTER. 2185ration by prescription was found by the jury in the negative.* ^^^^'But the court afterwards granted a new trial. 1825.This closes the municipal and parliamentary history ofChester.CASES.— LEET.The following cases will establish the existence of the Leet.court leet at this period in the several places to which theyrefer. Thus in an actions for an amercement in the court leet, 1789.the declaration stated the court to have been holden beforethe steward of the manor ; and the evidence proved it tohave been holden before the deputy-steward ; it was heldto be a material variance.A custom to swear the jurors at one court leet, in the 1801.county of Cumberland, to inquire, and return their presentmentsat the next court, is bad in law.;]: 1802.Information in nature of quo warranto lies for the office of Gosport.bailiff of the court leet of Gosport, being a prescriptive office,and having power to summon and select the jury .§A plea to a quo warranto stated, that an immemorial 1819.court leet for the borough of Holt, was in part holden in themorning, and in part in the evening, and that the customhad been to elect the mayor at the morning court, whohad been accustomed to be sworn into the office at the eveningcourt, by the steward or his deputy. The replicationdenied the mode of election ; and there was also an issuenot duly sworn." At the trial, it appeared that in additionto the custom set out in the plea, it had been usualfor the leet jury to present, in writing, the candidate whohad most votes at the morning court ; but they had no controlover the poll. It was held, that this was a mere ministerialact, and that it was no essential part of the custom,and need not be stated on the record*And a similar verdict was given as to Staflfbrd->Summer assizes, 1825.t Wyvill, clerk v. Shepherd, 1 W. Black. 162.I Davidson v. Moscow, 2 East, 56.§ The King v. Bingham, clerk, 2 East, 308.II The King i . Rowland, 3 Barn. & Aid. 130.HUNTINGDON.4. Where a corporation were seised in fee of sands,* whichby the custom, were anouuily meted out under their controlby a lee jury, according to a certain stint, to such of theresident burgesses, who chose to stock the same, they payingI9«. id. to each of the other burgesses why did not stock;it was Held, that the burgesses who so stocked, were tenantsin commons the lands so occupied by them, and as suchoccupiers were liable to be rated for the same.And the court !feet minute book of that borough, is extantfrom 1764 to 1768. The following are specimens of theentries : —Borough of Huntingdon to wit. At the court leet holdenby adjournment, at the court hall, in and for the saidborough, on Monday, the 39th day of October, id this year,before William Smith, gentleman, mayor, of the saidborough. Leet jury; — 14 jurymen.At this court leet, Henry, son of William Dawes; George,son of (Odes and Henry Woodward ; Philip, son of Philipand Mary Stokes ; Richard, son of Th-iras Beale, andElizabeth his wife ; and William, son of James Garner, jun.,and Mary his wife, being all free-bon, were admitted andsworn burgesses, took the oaths, &c.This book also contains the admission of several bur-jail,geasea, in a similar way before the leet juries, ll freebornburgesses.But as a proof of the time and method of the usurpationof the common council, and the manner in which the courtLeet. leets have been gradually superseded in modem times, it isbut a very short period after the termination of the bookabove quoted, that the court leet became less frequent, andthe admission of burgesses began to take place at the meetingsof the common council ; though some were still admittedat the court leet, till 1790: from which time the meeting ta1810. generally called a Court of Pleas. I3ut in 1810, at the• ThtSec lo Rei u. Mayor, .HUNTINGDON. 2187court leet, the list of the inhabitants was regularly called o«>'8»mi.over, and those who did not answer to their names were 1810.fined. And the same list was continued till 1824.NOniNGHAM.The cases of this reign relative to England, may be isn.concluded with that which is by far the most importantin modem times, with respect to the subject of ourinquiry.The real nature and origin of the admission and swearingof freemen at the court leet — the connexion of the right bybirth and servitude, with the common law, unconnected withany reference to the doctrines or principles of corporations —have been already shown.It only remains to quote the case of the King and JBird,'^which, strange as it may appear, is the first judicialdecision, sanctioning the arbitrary power of corporations toadmit freemen.A prescriptive right in the eldest and youngest sons of everyburgess born in Nottingham ;* the latter having served a sevenyears* apprenticeship to any trade ; and in every person havingserved a seven years' apprenticeship in Nottingham, toany burgess to be admitted burgesses of the town, on attaining21, was holden not to exclude the incidental power arisingby implication of law to the corporation at large, to secure theirperpetual succession by voluntary elections of burgesses, ad libitum;t and this, though it was averred that N. had alwaysbeen, and yet is a populous town, containing numerous residentand trading burgesses ; and that by the prescriptivemodes of supply by birth and servitude, the succession of asufficient and large number of burgesses is fully secured. Fornon constat that these sources had at all times been sufficientduring the existence of the corporation, without occasionalsupplies of burgesses by election : or even that they wereso at the time of the defendants. And they could not haveoperated at all, for some years after the creation of the corporation; and therefore no presumption can be made fromThe King v. Bird, 13 East, 367. f See before, 1970.2lipi XOTTIXOUAII.^^'' thence, dial the croire meant to exclude tie imddaUalitJi. of the corporation U> make ToloDtanr el€Ctk<is of biuges<ehin aid of such prescriptive modes of supply.It was also directed, that whether the power of makingfetch voluntary elections be oxadeotal to the corporation atlarge, or exit in them by presumption, it is campttrml for themto dtU^aU it to a sect part of thttmselrts.But they cannot delcrg^te such power to any stranger.And the recorder of the town must be taken to be such, ifhe be not stated to be a burgess.Also as i»uch select body is the creature of the corporation,its constitution and mode of acting, may, it seems, bemodelled (with the exception before stated,) according tothe pleasure of its maker; and where the corporation(consisting primarily of the mayor and burgesses, who weredirected by charter to elect aldermen from among themselves,;transferred the right of electing burgesses to a Meteeibody consisting of the mayor and aldermen, of whom themajor part must attend ; 18 livery or nothing burgesses ofwhom nine were sufficient to attend, Whether with the recorder,if a burgess, and choosing to attend, and six of theburgesses at large, if they choose to attend ; but the selectbody riii^fht proceed without either the six burgesses or therecorder, if they did not attend : held that this was a reasonableand valid hye-l/ivc.For thi decision, there appears to have been no previousauthority, and none was attempted to be cited bv the learnedcounsel, who argued it, but one, which was the case of thecorporation of Launceston,* m the eighth of Charles I.: andwhich clearly did not apply to the subject in discussion. Forthat case only decided, that — if the kincr creates a corporationof a mayor and eight aldermen, providing: that upon the death,or amotion of anv alderman, it should be law ful for the mayorand aldermen within the next eight days, to elect another,though there should be no election w within the eight days, vetthey mii:lit elect an alderman at anytime afterwards: — forthey have a power to exert another, a> incident to a corpora1 Roll. .\;>f. Wo.NOTTINGHAM. 2189tion ; and anciently corporations had no such power given to oeorgeiii.them. And the affirmative power does not toll the implied 1811.power incident to the corporation.The principle upon which that case was decided is obvious.The king having directed that there should be perpetuallyeight aldermen ; and having provided for a reelectionupon vacancies; must be intended to have impliedlygranted the power of making elections to fill those vacancies:for otherwise his charter could not be carried into effect. Andthe direction that it should be done within eight days isnot inconsistent, though not fulfilled, with the generalpower to do it afterwards. But where there is no such necessity,that case does not apply. And it was properly urged bythe counsel opposed to this claim of right, that the corporationthereby took upon themselves to add a foreign body oftheir own election, in derogation of the influence and interestof the local inhabitants, whom the crown meant to favour.The noble lord who decided that case, justly stated at thecommencement of his judgment, that if the modes of supplyingburgesses appointed by the crown were in fairconstruction, competent to keep the body alive in the mannerintended, he should not be inclined voluntarily to adoptanother method to effectuate that purpose.The learned judge seems therefore to have felt in his mind,that this was in effect making a new charter for the borough;or at least adding to the one which already existed ; neitherof which could be done by any but the king.The court, however, justified it upon the plea of necessity.But such an act could not be justified even upon that groundHowever, if that principle were allowed, it would in thiscase be answered by showing that no such necessity existed.The charter of Henry VI. being in truth an incorporationof all the inhabitants of free condition, by birth or servitude;or otherwise, there could be no deficiency in the burgessesas long as there were any inhabitants in the place. And assoon as there ceased to be any inhabitants there, the franchisegranted should cease also ; as has been instanced in the casesof Gatton and Sarum.Ijl90 NOTTINfirrAM.0«oi»«m. Th' assunietl necessity, therefore, could hinder exist And1811. the practise of election was, as stated by the learned judge,n. usage of BO modem a date, as not to influence the demonof ii! court." It was 2O0 years.The learned judge also accurately stated, quoting fromRolie'a Abridgment, that " ancient charters had not any suchclause, giving; a power to elect ;" which is easily explainedby the general law having jirorided for the natural successionthe inhabitants through the presentments by the jury at thtcourt ti:rt.But the levied judge appears tohuveassuiued, as admittedin the argument, that which at least is not apparent upon theface of the report, that when uo mode waa provided forcontinuing the succession, a corporation had a right of necessityto make bui^csses by election. But for the reasongiven before, both the principle and the fact should be denied.It was also too readily assumed, that there was noprovision affording a supply of burgesses, because they wouldalways be found as long as the franchise ought to continue ;and the case was decided upon the technical grounds, thatthe replication did not state as a fact, that the sources ofbirth and servitude were competent to produce a sufficientsupply at all times.It was also assumed, contrary to the principles of thecommon law, that there was no mode of compelling personsto come in and be admitted. But the law was too wise andtoo strong to be so helpless, because, by the rule of the courtLee leet, every resiant of free condition, was, by law, compeUabUto be sworn, admitted, and enrolled: and the dissolution ofthe corporation, therefore, was not to be apprehended aslong as it could be kept alive for any useful purpose.But this suggested inconvenience of a want of power tocompel the parties to take upon themselves the new character,would apply to those who were voluntarily elected; andtherefore this new principle was a bad substitute for themore effectual rules of the ancient law.In fact, the decision proceeded altogether upon a disregardNOTTINGHAM. 2191of the real history of the municipal bodies ; and, therefore, Q^'8*'"-it is not surprising that a new position of a general incidental 1811.right of election, should have been inconsiderately adopted,and the case, from overlooking the simple principles of thecommon law, should have been involved in the intricacieswith which it is surrounded. Nor should the remarksupon this case be closed without observing, that the supposedrights, by birth and servitude, were attributed to prescription,which pre-supposes a charter to that effect. Butno charter, referring to such rights is any where to bediscovered. On the contrary, they can be referred to thecommon law, and be reconciled with it. It is, therefore,one of those instances in which the dark and uncertaindoctrine of prescription has been resorted to where there isa plainer and more direct ground upon which the rightscould be supported.IRELAND.— STATUTES.There are statutes in this reign in some degree affectingthe right of election in Ireland, which should be noted.Thus, in the 35th of George III. c. 29, many of the pro 1795.visions for the English elections are extended to Ireland :particularly in the 29th section, the substance of the provisionsand exceptions in the Durham Act, are embodied : —and a system is adopted, which, though varying in someparticulars from those of England, according to the particularcourse and practice in Ireland, is, generally speaking,similar to those in this country, at least as far as our presentsubject of inquiry is concerned — excepting that it shouldbe observed, that the system of a register was adopted inIreland before the general Reform Act was passed.At the Union, in the 40th of George III., the fourth 1800.article provided, that all questions touching the election ofmembers to Parliament, should be decided in the samemanner as questions touching such elections in Great Britainthen were.A long statute was also passed for regulating the trial of Cap. 106.controverted elections in Ireland, which directed that allIRELAND.George III, the regulations on that subject, prescribed by the British1795. acts, should extend to all petitions to the united ParliamentAnd a power was given to issue commissions, if necessary,for the examination of witnesses in Ireland ; and this statutewas further amended by the 47th George III. c. 14.Cap. 55. I^ should be observed, that the same error seems to havebeen adopted in Ireland, of confounding the counties ofcities and towns, with the counties at lai^e — at least as faras related to the freeholders voting.GEORGE IV.PARLIAMENTARY CASES.Petersfield. The burgesses of Petersfield were described in a resolutionof this date, in conformity with a resolution of 1727, asbeing " the freeholders of lands or ancient dwelling-housesor shambles built on ancient foundations."1821. In the succeeding year, upon a petition of appeal, they weredescribed in the following manner, which certainly does notincrease the intelligibility of the description : — " Freeholdersof lands and ancient dwelling-houses or shambles,"or dwelling-houses built upon ancient foundations, suchlands, dwelling-houses and shambles not being: restrictedto entire ancient tenements**1821. There was also a petition of appeal against the determines.mouth, tion, as to the borough of Portsmouth* which had given the• And in the King's Inch, it was held, that as the charter did not expresslyrequire the members o( the coi-portion to he resident, the court would not grant amandamus, commanding the corporation to meet and consider the propriety ofremoving from their offices non-resident corporators, unless their absence has been productiveof some serious inconvenience ; and it was said, that an alderman was notbound to reside within the borough unless it was necessary to the duties of his office,or required by the charter. Although in the Exeter case it was said to be incidentalto his office, &c. Kex i. Clyde.— i've King t. the Mayor and Aldermen of vueThorough of Portsmouth. 3 15. ^ C. 152.PORTSMOUTH. 2193right to the burgesses, including the non-residents, as well ^^*^'**'^'as the residents, notwithstanding the charter incorporated the 'There was a population of 60,000 : and theeffect of the decision was to limit the right to about 50persons, the greater portion of whom were non-residents.The committee, upon the appeal, confirmed that decision.Five years afterwards, notwithstanding the entry in Domes Dover,day, which describes the persons entitled to the privileges,and bound to perform the services incumbent upon thebarons of Dover, as " assidu^ manette in villa ;" and notwithstandingthe numerous documents we have quoted,which show that residence was necessary for the barons of Non-residence.that place, nevertheless it was decided that they might benon-residentsIn a previous reign we have referred to a decisionrespecting the burgesses of Cane, and have promised a Cane.recurrence to its history. It is too peculiar to be passedover : particularly as an extraordinary decision respecting theburgesses, again occurred in the present reign.It is one of the most ancient boroughs in the kingdom ;being mentioned as Terra Regis, in Domesday, together withits burgesses, and as having existed in the time of Edwardthe Confessor;! It is a curious fact, that the nearly equaldivision of the property at that time, between the lay andecclesiastical owners, continues to the present day.The peculiarity respecting its commons, has been alreadyobserved. §It returned members to Parliament from the earliestperiod, with some intermissions.It had also a court leet at which its steward presided. Leet.From ancient records belonging to the borough, in thereign of Queen Elizabeth, it appears that the inhabitantsclaimed the usual exemptions as tenants, in ancient demesne,which they asserted upon the authority of Domesday book,• See before, pp. 17, 410, 536. 1181. 1200, 1716.t Sao before, p. 2004. % See before, p. 156. $ See before, p. 1194.7 ARight.and their claim was allowed by the queen, and the allow-exemplified.One of the exemptions was from serving upon juries inthe county, which the burgesses have enjoyed till a vwjrecent period.It appears that between the reign of Queen Elizabeth,and that of Charles II., the burgesses had, in some wtyor other, assumed to be a corporation; and in the UUocre, a quo warranto was filed against them, to show hyswhat warrant they claimed to be a corporation, and toelect and admit as bui^osses at their will, as well saba*bitants within the borough, as non-inhabitants. Judgmentwas given and entered against them, and their francbteel^.real or pretended, seized.Upon which the king granted them a new charter, turningout the old burgesses, and bringing in new ones : — thecircumstances connected with which, as well as the severeconduct of Chief Justice Jefferies, has been already stated.Cain is also expressly mentioned in the proclamationJames 11., as one of the places against which judgmentbeen entered up. And there seems no reason for dnublithat from that time it ceased to be a corporation, for itdoes not appear to have acted upon the charter of James II.which was unknown to the burgesses until a very recentperiod.In the third of William and Mary, the burgess$ who hadthe right of election, were described in a resolution of anelection committee, aa " the burgesses, inhabitants withinthe borough ;" and consistently with that determination, apart of the inquiry at that time was, whether some of thevoters lived within the borough ; both the petitioners andsitting member assuming that residence was necessary forthe burgesses.In the 13th year of William III., the question as to theburgess, again came before a committee of the House (^Commons, and the right of election was most correctly declaredto be " in the ancient burgesses " — that term beingSm before, v- Iso.vere >noviCALNE. 2195probably applied in contradistinction to the burgesses, who owtfpfiv.had in former times assumed to act as a corporation ; andthe two stewards, called senior and junior, were declaredto be the returning officers.In 1710, this borough was again before a committee of 1710.the House of Commons, when the corporation was mentioned,but at the same time reference was made to the burgessesbeing sworn at " Ogbom Court," a village about 13 milesdistant, which it is impossible to attribute to any corporateright or obligation ; for Ogbom itself is not a corporateplace; and that the members of a corporation at Cane,should be sworn in at the manor court of Ogbom, is tooabsurd and anomalous to be for an instant supported.These matters, therefore, require some little explanation.As the swearing at Osborn was the only admission thatwas pretended to exist, it is obvious, coupled with theformer facts, that there could be no corporation. All, therefore,which is connected with that supposition, must beausurpation.The remaining question is, how the swearing at Ogbomcourt is to be accounted for ?In the reign of Henry VIII. an exchange being made ofsome of the lands belonging to the duchy of Cornwall,Cane was directed to be held of the manor of Wallingford,of which Ogbom is a part, and therefore it is clear, thatthe householders at Cane owed suit at the manor court ofOgbom, not as burgesses, but as tenants of that manor. Andtheir doing fealty there had, properly, no connexion eitherwith their burgess-ship, or any supposed corporate character.In the course of the inquiry respecting the burgesses,in the ninth of Queen Anne, the right insisted upon on n\o,the one side was in the inhabitants of the demesne houses,who, on the authority of Gateward's case,* and the otherswe have before quoted, had right of common, and owedsuit and service at Ogbom court, though the right wasimproperly placed upon the ground of previous election,which could not correctly be applied to the suitors at a court• S^ before, p. 1538.7 A 2rSl9S CALNE.i' "'■ baron ; and though it might be applied to corporate, th«jcould never be required to be sword at a distant court fltthat description.Nor could there be any question of the court at O^MMI.being, a* far as regarded the swearing of the inhabitantsCane, a court baron, for it could not be a court leet, iiu*-much as they, not being resigns within its jurisdiction, couldnot owe suit and service there. The use of the name ofcourt leet, therefore, must be accounted for in this instanceas in many others before cited, by the fact that the coiutleet and i-ourt baron were held together.Rigiif. The committee decided the right to be in " the inhabitantsof the borough, having a right of common, and soonat Ogbom court."1723. But in 1723, the same question coming again before &committee of the House, the right was again decided to binthe ancient hurgeanes of the borough only"*So that the only question which remained to be detemuDdd .was, who were the ancient burgesses of Caine ?IBM. In that state the question came sain before a comtnittM'in 1830, and statciiK-nts of the right being required, the petitvtaaaatn. towers delivered them, as being " in the ancient bargeeaesonly, such ancient burgesses being the inhabitant householders,resiant, duly sworn."Sitting The sitting members — " that the right waa in the ancient" burgesses only, meaning thereby the select body of thecorporation."Upon the statement delivered in by the counsel for thepetitioners, the committee determined — That the right ofelection, as set forth in that statement, was not the right.Upon the statement delivered in by the counsel for thesitting members, the committee determined that the right,as set forth, was not the right of election ; but that it was inthe ancient burgesses ; meaning by the term ancient burgesses,burgesses duly elected and sworn, according to theancient constitution of the borough." And thereupon thesitting members were confirmed in their seats.• See before, p. 2004.CALNE. 2197This determination is certainly extraordinary, inasmuch as ^^^'^^^'the sitting members had been returned by the burgessesclaiming to be members of the corporation whose right thecommittee negatived. But if they intended, that thoughthe burgesses were not entitled as corporators, yet havingbeen sworn at Ogbom court, they might be entitled as swornaccording to the ancient custom of the borough, in thatrespect also the decision was untenable : because Cane hadnot belonged to the manor of Ogbom, but at a period longafter it had first returned members to Parliament.CHARTERS.There were only three charters granted in this reign.1.— 1827 8 George IV.— Kidderminster.2.— —Stafford.3.— 1830 11 George IV.— Reading.KIDDERMINSTER.1. The following is a short abstract of the first.It commences by reciting, that Kidderminster was an 1827.ancient borough. And that the inhabitants had enjoyed diversfranchises by charter and custom, by the name of thebailiff and burgesses of the borough of Kidderminster ; andthat they had supplicated the king to grant them anothercharter.The king then proceeds to incorporate them by the nameof " the high bailiff and commonalty," giving them the usualcorporate powers, &c. And that they might have a highsteward — recorder — high bailiff— low bailiff — 12 aldermen —26 assistants, and town clerk, &c., for their municipal government.The charter concludes with a clause, confirming all theprivileges which the bailiff, high bailiff, capital burgesses,aldermen, common councilmen, assistants, the number of25, the burgesses and inhabitants, the bailiff and burgesses,or the bailiff, burgesses, and inhabitants had ever thithertoenjoyed.Stafford.2. TW mteami ««■ gn^FJ to Stars* m <of the tip oa i ioa Waa^dmnhmi, \tj the eotevj^ M^otad to Ul ap the racnd^ a tk^ ITV charter eoafitaad dl tim iAm ili iiwyiiiM firooi KnTHe oa jariee fcK the ooontT.EElCUtG.3. IV tfaad *M gnoterf to Jlm^Mf, tot tV pwrpoM rf Iwing la tV ammJha of tV mnkipBl n^istntes, in coo jHqaencc of tV gnalJj ncnawd position ; ujd to afford JTV ntigB «f George IV. produces ■winch nat not be paced orr.Truro.Truro, which has already been the subject of obsemtido, i*t;uiils protnm^nt also in this and the sgcx^edit^ reign.Its charters in the reign of Henry II. — its t wy e pisa m thereign of Edward I. — its bailiffs in the reign of Edward IL —it* poverty in the reign of Richard II. — its bnigenes andcommon in the reign of Henry IV. — its commtmaUy in thereign of Henry VI. — its charter in the reign of QneoiElizabeth ■.■f — the bretons to Parliament ; entries som theproceedings and presentments at the court leet; and thestrange decision as to the right of election, have beenalready mentioned.Truro appears to have been unfortunate in the legal determinationswhich have been made respecting it.:} In thefirst of George IV., the charter of Queen Elizabeth canebefore the Court of King's Bench, upon a question ariaii^upon that clause of the charter of Elizabeth, which directed,■ Itt before, p. 1493.t See before. pp.338, 5(26, 504, 7S2. 799, 911, 1006, 1348, 1335, 1744. 1875.1 The King r. Ihe Mayor of Tniro, 3 Barn. It Aid. So.TRURO. 2199that " when it should happen that any of the capital burgesses Q^Q^^'^-should die, dwell out of the borough, or for some cause be re- ^820.moved, it should be lawful for the remainder to elect others intothe places of those so happening to die or be removed."And it was held that these words were not so unambiguousas to warrant the court in granting a mandamus to admittwo persons, in the room of two non-resident capital burgesses; the corporation not having previously removed themfor this cause from their offices.What the ambiguity is, or what the want of distinctness,the reader must judge. The result of this determinationwas, that the non-residents in this borough, as well as manyin other boroughs, continued in undisturbed possession oftheir offices, contrary to the provisions and intention of thecharters.Again, in the second of William IV. a question arose as to 1832.the tolls of Truro, in an action brought by the select bodyof the corporation against the defendant, who was an inhabitantof the borough.* And upon the trial it was assumed,that the corporation (meaning the select body) were entitledby prescription to the tolls : with what propriety theformer documents will have shown. This assumption beingadopted, it was held that the prescription was riot destroyedby a charter of Elizabeth granting and confirming,among other things, all the ancient rights of the corporation,but exempting the inhabitants from toll in all places exceptLondon : and that this exemption applied only to the tollsof other places (except London), but not to the tolls ofTruro ; and therefore the defendant, who was an inhabitantof Truro, and as such one of the burgesses of the place, forwhose benefit the charter was granted, was decided to beliable to pay toll to the select body of the corporation, forgoods which he had imported into the place.The judgment of the court was chiefly founded upon theassumption that a prescriptive right to toll had been provedin the corporation. From the documents which have been• The Mayor and Burgesses of Truro r. Reynolds, 8 Bingham, 275. SameV. Bastian, ib. id.omq^iv. cited, and the passage relative lo the " pretence of incorpo- II 1832. ration " in the charter of Queen Elizabeth, it is obvious thatI the corporation could have had no prescriptive right, becauseU it had not exif'tcd from time ini memorial ; nor in truth had it^^^B any existence till the thirty-first or Elizabeth.^^^H But even if the corporation had immemorially existed, what^^^H proof is there of its having had a right to the tolls prior Ui the^^^H charter of Elizabeth ? and that charter eiietnpta the inhabittants from toll — an exemption which, it should be remem-^^^* bred, the charter of " Reginald" also gives to the diseasesH throughout all Cornwall, Theevidenceof aprescriptiverighlL to the tolls commenced from 1637, a period long subsequent to^^^H the charter of Queen Elizabeth. And the lease and auctions^^^H of the quay dues were in no respect contrary to the claim of^^^H exemption from the inhabitants; because it was clear, that^^^H subsequent to the charter of Elizabeth, such tolls would have^^^H been due from all strangers and persons not inhabitants of^^^B Truro.T Living witnesses proved the receipt of dues by the mayorL and capital burgesses ; four-fifths of which were paid by theinhabitants. But could this modem usage be relied uponagainst the inhabitants, when it appeared that during allthe time of the usage, although the charter of Elizabethexpressly appointed, for the benefit of the town, that theinhabitants should be incorporated as burgesses, yet themayor and 24 capital burgesses had suppressed altogetherthe body at large of the corporation, and had themselvesexcluded the burgesses and inhabitants from all participationin the privileges of the place; no individual in thatcharacter having ever enjoyed any privilege under the charter(with the exception only of exemption from juries); orhaving participated in any manner in any act of the corporation; and notwithstanding the express worde of thecharter, no body of burgesses had ever existed.There was also evidence, that the inhabitants had been actuallyexcused from anchorage for empty vessels ; being one ofthose things contained in the exemption given to them bythe charter.TRURO. 2201There were also variations in the amount of the tolls which ^^^'g*^^ -had been collected, a strong token in itself of usurpation ; — ^^32.but these variations were attributed to clerical mistakes inthe collector's accounts. An unsuccessful attempt was alsoshown to have been made in 1815, by the collector and townsteward, to raise the tariff of Truro, to that of Falmouth andPenzance ; but which was abandoned upon a remonstranceby the inhabitants.It was said that this attempt was made without the knowledgeof the corporation ; but it must be remembered, that itwas done by their own officers; and those officers whose actsand collections had been relied upon by the select body of thecorporation in support of their claim.At the trial, it was left to the jury to find whether theplaintiffs (that is, the select body of the corporation, the mayorand 24 capital burgesses) had shown a prescriptive right tothe tolls in question, viz. Toll to be taken by them from theburgesses and inhabitants at large. This direction was accompaniedwith strong observations in support of the prescriptiveproof. And upon the question, whether the charter of Eliza Charter,beth was incompatible with the presumption of such a prescription; it was stated that "that charter could not of itselfabrogate any former grant or prescription," — which positionis in its words accurate, because the king's charter cannot^* of itself," abrogate any former right; but the king's charter,if accepted by those to whom it is granted, can abrogateany former grant to the same persons, or any prescription enjoyedby them.This position therefore might mislead the jury, because althoughit is true in its literal words, yet in that sense, it wasinapplicable to the case ; because the charter of Elizabeth hadbeen accepted and acted upon ; and the plaintiffs had no right Acceptedsue, but under it. Instead therefore of the jury being toldthat the charter by itself could not abrogate former rights ;they should, with submission, have been told, that the chartergranted by the king, and accepted by the inhabitants of Truro,could abrogate their former rights ; and therefore they couldowt»i Iv have no rights, but those under the charter of Elizabeth :-12. and the proper construction of that charter was the only pointto be considered.It must also not be forgotten, that this was an actionbrought by the mayor and 24 capital bui^eGsea against some '*"■•• of the iulutbitanU, who were, as it appears by the charter,■*■■• the burgetaei ; and the action was in the name of the burgess,although no meeting of the burgesses or inhabitants hadbeen held for the purpose of their assenting to the action,nor had the mayor and 24 been in any manner authorized tobring it. Indeed it was notorious, that the inhabitants wereopposed to it. And thus did the select body, contrary tothe wishes of the body at large, use their name against someof their own corporation : but this was a point which Uiecourt did not entertain.The judgment given proceeded upon the assumption, thata prescriptive right to toll was proved by the usage.The only proof directly to the point, was the payment ofthe tolls by the inhabitants as well as strangers for 40 orUwi"' 50 years: but it was during that period, that the variationshad occurred in the amount received, and the attemptbad been made to raise the duties to those of Falmouth quidPenzance. And therefore a us^e so doubtful, and somarked with usurpation, ought not to have been treated asevidence of right : — the only usage which can by law havethat effect, being that which is uniform, clear, public, andundisputed.Prior evidence from 1637, of receipts for quayage andteases of the duties, were immaterial to the point of the hasability of the inhabitants, because they would equally haveexisted with respect to the tolls paid by strangers, if theinhabitants were not liable. It was said, that, " if the courtdid not give effect to that evidence, it would hold that thesecurity of rights was impaired, instead of beii^ confirmed,by long continued usage." However the usageagainst the inhabitants was only 40 years ; and if it was notheld to be of great weight, it would not have gone far toTRURO. 2203impair the security of ancient rights in general ;* but would <^«*^k^^^ -only in this case have left them to stand upon any better 1832.proof which the mayor and 24 burgesses could give of theantiquity of their right.The error noticed before, of confounding a borough byprescription with a corporation by prescription, occurs in thejudgment. Truro certainly was the former, and as certainlynot the latter.It was supposed, that though the natural impression uponfirst reading the charter was, that the sovereign intendedto grant the inhabitants an exemption from duties to whichthey were before liable, yet it was answered by a moreaccurate investigation of the words. Thus it was said, " thatpassage must mean, passing over the lands of others :" —but it should be recollected, that the lands of Truro hadbeen in the hands of the lords — and subsequently of thecrown — and passage might have been due for any personpassing over them. But as the lands were subsequentlygranted to the burgesses, the charter might reasonablyprovide for the passage ceasing ; or the crown might gratuitouslyremit it. As to " pontage," the statute of HenryVIII. had fixed the repair of bridges on the inhabitants inanother shape, and therefore pontage might be excused.As to ** murage," the necessity for walls had, at that time,ceased, and the probability is, that the inhabitants wereactually freed from that charge.Therefore the assumption, that these words cannot applyto exceptions in the town, seems to be doubtful.The clause as to fairs, it must be admitted, cannot bereasonably explained, if the general right is presumed toexist. But it is on the assumption of the right beingestablished (which it is contended it was not) that thesewords of the charters are to be disregarded, and answered bythe position, that " an existing right could not be taken away'* by mere words of addition." But the usual mode of construingthe charter, would be to give full effect to all theSee before cases as to the insufficiency of so short an usage, pp. 74, 1190, 1983,1P84, 2014, 2107, 2125, 2222, 2238, 2250, and Rex v. Holland, 2 £last, 70.2204 TRURO.^^^^^^^' words of it, which can easily be done, if the right is not1832. assumed to exist.It is clear that the inhabitants had actually been exempt^^ from one part of the " anchorage ;" but it was said that thegrantors might, by common consent, have relinquished thatdemand. The fact is, that the grantors were the burgesses:they had never consented to any such measure : they hadnever met ; — their existence had never even been recognizedby the mayor and 24 capital burgesses.Reliance was also placed upon the reasonableness of thecustom that the corporation, who were at the cost ofkeeping up the quay and adjoining streets, should raise tollto defray the necessary expence. But surely it is not veryreasonable that the mayor and 24 capital burgesses shouldraise upon those inhabitants of the place who traded, insteadof raising upon themselves, and the inhabitants generally,the expences of improving the town. It was admitted, thatthere was no evidence of any payment before the charter;nor till 1672, more than 90 years after the grant of it, whena document was proved in which the corporation themselves,called their own dues " ancient'* — the charter itself havingtreated 50 years as a prescription, that document thereforecould not be considered sufficient evidence to show that thetolls had existed before the charter. It was thought unreasonablethat the corporation of Truro should levy a dutyupon all the rest of the kingdom, for the support of theirquay. But, with all submission to the high authority fromwhom that argument came — it is not inconsistent withreason — the law — or general practice, that strangers comingto a place, should pay for the advantage they receivedthere. And that the inhabitants, who brought their merchandiseto it, should not pay a toll for it, because theycontributed to the support and repair of the town in otherways with the other inhabitants. To pay toll is the onlymode by which a stranger can be made to contribute. Ifany of the inhabitants pay it, they contribute twice.One of the learned judges observed, that " if the evidencewas not sufficient to warrant the inference of a legal originTRURO. 2206for the custom he did not know what title could stand the Q^'^^^ *test of legal inquiry :" — an observation which might be 1832.just, as to the right of the mayor and burgesses to toll ;but as to the liability of the inhabitants, there was no otherevidence than a varying usage for 40 or 60 years. And itis submitted, that there have been, and may be, many titleswhich can stand the test of legal inquiry upon much moresatisfactory evidence than this.*It was said that the variation did not apply to the chargethen in issue ; but the very essence of an ancient legal tollis, that it has been uniform. Now, if a toll is attempted tobe supported upon usage alone, and in the tariff by whichthat usage is proved, there have been variations in any ofthe tolls, can such usage be relied upon with satisfaction,whether the variation is in the particular article insisted uponor not? because the variation in either of the items affectsthe usage, as much whether it relates to the particular itemor another.It was also said, that ''if no corporation could maintainits tolls without producing a series of bills exempt frommistake, it is probable that no tolls could long exist."But generally speaking, tolls are not to be favoured bypresumptions ; and least of all, when in the hands of subjects.Mala tolneta were a subject of complaint from theearliest period of our history — so that if tolls did not long existthe evil would not be very great. However, the probabilityof tolls not continuing to exist, for want of proof, is notalarming : because there are very few corporations who resttheir right to them only upon 40 years' varying usage, andupon bills which have mistakes in them: on the contrary,they generally rely on express grants and charters, followedup by ancient unvarying perception, and uniform schedulesof the tolls.The result of this case, establishing the claim of themayor and 24 capital burgesses upon their fellow-burgesses,seems to be somewhat extraordinary, particularly when it• See before, the cases against the right of so short a usage, pp. 74, 1190, 1983,1984, 2014, 2107. 2125, 2222, 2238, 2250.'*- is accompanied with the other facts and documents relativeto Truro, which have been before stated. Aid in Bristol,Liverpool, Cork,* and CaTli&ie,-^- where the town dues havehen much diMruesed, the freemen were always held to beexempt from them.Another case is ulfto now depending, in which the selectbody of the mayor and capital burgesses claim of the tradingvessels, frequenting the port of Truro, a toll for peerage (^coals and other articles, although as far as relates to coals,the duties having been taken otf, no necessity any loiterexists for measuring Diem, and therefore the traders are calledupon to pay for that which they do not want, and the cost ofthe article would be so far needlessly enhanced to the public.This closes the extraordinary history of Truro.BATH.The history of Bath we have before given ; it is not Istethe neighbouring city of Bristol, a county of itself — nor isits separate criminal jurisdiction complete — in some degreeattributable to desuetude ; and partly to the omissions in itacharters.This gave birth to a decision upon the proviso in the65th George III., c. 51, s. If, which states, that that actshall not give any jurisdiction to the justices of the countyover any places situate within the limits of any liberties or(i-anchises, having a separate jurisdiction. And it was held,that the provision is confined to franchises having a separatejurisdiction, coextensive with that possessed by the countyjustices; and, therefore, as the justices of Bath had nojurisdiction by charter to try felons, the city was liable tothe county rate.But where there was a separate jurisdiction, a contrarydecision was given, and it was held that a rate, in the natureof a county rate, might be levied in Berwick-upoorTaxed^that being a place not subject to the commission of the• 3m before, pp. 2018, 2020. 1 3 Ludert. 527.t Tbe Kiagv. W. Choke, 5 Bun. & Aid. 6K.\ The King V. the Juattc«> of B«rwick-upoo-tweed, G Ban. & Cr. 317.BATH. 2207peace of any county in England, and never having contrive ^^^^^^^'bute to a rate made for any county; although it does not ^^^'he within the body of an English county, and although norate had ever been levied there before ; the corporation havingdefrayed out of their own funds, the charges to which thesums raised by a county rate are applicable.And in the same manner it was held,* that where a 1830.borough town was incorporated by charter, and certainmembers of the corporation were made justices, (but withoutpower to try felonies,) and the charter contained ageneral non-intermittent clause, wholly preventing the interferenceof the county justices within the town, a rate in thenature of a county rate, might be imposed by the justicesof the town, under the authority given by the 65th ofGeorge III., c. 51.BRISTOL.By an ancient Parliament roll, it appears that the Commons,by their petition, exhibited in Parliament, prayedKing Edward III., that the charter made to his liege subjects,burgesses of the town of Bristol, and the franchisesby him granted to his burgesses, should be ratified andconfirmed in the Parliament. The answer to the petitionwas, that it was assented and agreed in Parliament,that the franchises, whereof the petition made mention,should be ratified and confirmed under the king's greatseal. The charter was ratified by King Edward III. accordingly.It was heldyf that the crown was not prevented by 1826.this proceeding in Parliament, from granting a new charterto the burgesses of Bristol, varying the mode of electing amayor, from that provided for in the charter, recited in thepetition to the king in Parliament.Another case also arose with respect to Bristol to thefollowing effect : —A person carrying on trade in partnership with others, had• Mercer v. Davis, 10 Bam. & Cr. 617.t The King v. Hawthorne, 5Bani.& Cr. 410.t The King v. G. W. Hall, 1 Baro. & Cr. 123.i dwelling-house, and counting-house attached to it; thecotinttng-house being used by the different partners, whodaily resorted thither for the purposes of their trade; andthe dwelling-house being occupied by r clerk or servant ofthe firm, paid by them ; as were also the rate, taxes, &c. Itwas held, that each of the partners was a householder inBristol, within the 26 G. III., c. ^8, s. 8, although neitherhe nor they actually resided with their families in Bristol.So abo, where the dwelling-house was occupied by one ofthe partners, rent free, and the taxes, kc. were paid by thefirm. jHowever this case may be justified by the particular wordsof the statute, and the local circumstances as to Bristol, it iaobvious that if it were applied generally to all elections, and89 a general description of a householder, it might lead togreat frauds and uncertainty ; and the notoriety of who wasthe householder, for the information of the other candidatesand the electors, would be altogether defeated.iiuiutties JWE^MOimi.In a case* relative to IVc;//"""'^' ^m'l M<-!rmnhr Tfeg'tt, it .was held, where a charter directed that, out of certain penoosto be nominated in a particular mode, " the mayor, aldermen,bailiffs, principal burgesses, and other burgesses and irAo-bitanU ol" the borough for the time being, (they being forthat purpose congregated and assembled together,) or thegreater part of those who should be so congregated, might,by the greater part of the voices of them so assembled,choose one to be mayor:" that a majority of each denotebody must be present, in order to make a valid election.But we have before seest that where the mayor, aldermen,and capital burgesses, or other superior officers, votewith the burgesses at large, the former, though called bytheir names of dignity or office, yet vote as burgesses ; itfollows therefore that the whole vote as burgesses, and thereforethe election is, in fact, by the indefinite body : and, ifso, the attendance or non-attendance of the select body is■ The King v. R. Boner. 1 Rien. & Cr. 492. | S«e before, pp. 2123, 2124.BRISTOL. 2209immaterial because the majority of the indefinite body pre "'^ '^'^'sent might make the election.YARMOUTH.In an action* of assumpsit for money had and received it 1824.is stated to have been proved that Yarmouth had been a boroughfrom time immemorial. But it is clear that assertionis unfounded. It is also stated, that until the time of QueenAnne, the chief officers of the corporation were two bailiffs ;and various charters had confirmed to them all the fees beforereceived by them. By the stat. 1 Anne, st. 2, c. 7, all feespayable to the bailifl's were to become payable to the mayorwhen the style of the corporation should be changed ; whichwas done by a charter in the following year. The plaintiff,having applied to have his license renewed, which wasgranted, was required to pay, amongst other fees, the sum of4^. to the mayor, which was proved to have been regularlypaid for a period of sixty-five years. It v^ras held, first, thatthe defendant was not entitled to take any such fee ; for thepayment for sixty-five years did not raise a presumption thatit had been immemorially paid to the bailiff or mayor of Yarmouth; inasmuch as licenses were not granted until the reignof Edward VI., and the defendant, as justice of peace, wasnot entitled to any fee for granting the licensesMonmouth.The following case J occurred as to Monmouth, upon aninformation for usurping the office of burgess of the borough,in which it was pleaded, that it was an ancient borough ;and, as usual, that the burgesses were a corporation hy prescription,consisting of an indefinite number. That fromtime immemorial a court had been holden (amongst otherthings) for the election of burgesses, and notice of holdingthe court had been immemorially given by ringing• Morgan v. Palmer, 2 Bam. & Cr. 729.t See before, in Rex v. Bird, 13 East, per Ix)rd Ellenborougli, C. J., pp. 105,2126 2188X The King r. Ilill. 4 Barn. &c Cr. 426.7b1825.Court.'' a certain bell* within the tuwii <>r borough. Amithe bitrgeuft, or so many uf thei as choose, haveBuigeww. right to attend that court ; anti being present and ;tending there, have elected, and have a right to elficttheir discretion, such person to be burgesses as they thoiiglfit. That before the information, to wit, on, Ike. iiotiv'of holding illic court was given by ringing the bell ; that.the court was huldcn ; and the defendant was elected a burgess.The fiecoud plea set out & charter of Edward VI., andthat from the time of the charter the mode of electing largess*had been, for the mayor, bailiffs, and burgesses, beii^met and assembled for that purpose at a certain court, belonthe mayor and bailiffs, (notice having been given of holdingthe court by the ringing of a bell), bad elected burgesses ^^their discretion. That the mayor, bailiffs, and burgesses, beingin due manner met and assembled at the. court, elected thcTdefendant a burgess. The tliinl plea recited the charter, ati4averred that it contained no directions as to the election ofburgesses. That the mayor, bailitTii, and burgesses, on, &a,I met and assembled at a court holden before the mayor andbailiffs, for the election of burgesses (notice having beengiven by ringing a bell), elected the defendant a burgess.The fourth plea alleged, that the mayor, bailie, aod hm-guessesbeing met and assembled for that purpose at a meetingof the corporation at the guildhall, have from time immemorialelected burgesses ; and that notice of holding eachmeeting during all the time aforesaid had been given, andought to have been given by ringing a bell. The fifth andsixth pleas varied from the second and third only by substituting" met and assembled for that purpose at the guildhall,"for "at a certain court holden, kc." The seventh plea set oata custom to hold a court before the mayor and bailiff everyMonday, and that the burgesses " being met and assembledfor that purpose," at the court, had elected burgesses.See Dover cue, Glen. p. 64 : the public meeliBgi were celled together br Atblowing of a horn. See alio poet. Rei v. Sir George Chetwrnd. And Cheater,ente, 1 16a— Shrewsbury, ante, 2093— St. Saviour's, Soulhwuk, and Walliiigford—Une, 31.MONMOUTH. 2211That on, &c. the court was holden for the election pf Q^onyiv .burgesses, and that the burgesses then and there so as assembledtogether as aforesaid, elected the defendant. Theeighth plea set out a non-existent bye-law, providing forthe election of burgesses in the same manner as the customset out in the first plea. It was held, that all thepleas were bad. The first six and last, because the noticeby the ringing of the bell of holding the courts or meetingsin those pleas mentioned as there described, was not areasonable notice* of the courts or meetings, or of the puisposes for which they were holden, and was therefore insufficient; and the seventh plea because it did not state that theMonday's court was always holden for the purpose ofelection ; and notice of the intended election was not statedas a part of the custom, which was therefore unreasonable.Secondly because the defendant did not, in stating hiselection, bring himself within the custom.The replication to the seventh plea, being that the burgessesmet and assembled at the court, as in the seventh plea mentioned,were not in due manner met and assembled for theelection of burgesses — upon general demurrer seemed to thecourt to be good.Thus, by involving these questions in the intricacies ofcorporation law, instead of allowing them to be settled bythe general and simple rules of the court leet, this case wasembarrassed with technical difficulties of the greatest nicety.And had the principle been kept in mind, that every personwas bound to attend at the court leet, even without notice ;or if a special court was held, the inhabitants of the placeought to take notice of so public an act as ringing the bell,which was kept for the purpose — the decision could hardlyhave been arrived at, that the notice was not reasonable.And yet this has been the mode of giving notice of public meetings from a veryremote period ; and probably had a written or verbal notice been given of the meeting,instead of ringing the bell, it would have had a greater tendency to have misledthe burgesses.7b2NOTTINGHAM.The following case relative to Nottingham, is added iHC(|U(!l to those already detailed in the reign of James I., withreference to the right of common ; and also as connected withthe creation relative to the ancient messuages, which wudiscussed before the Steyniiig committee.The burgesses of Nottingham, and the occupiers of ancieiii*messuages there, had, as such, for a certain portion of theyear, a. right to tnm cattle into certain fields, and to excludeduring that period, the owner of the soil : it was held, thtthis was a mere right of common, and not rateable to therelief of the i>ot>r,+ iiViithing can be more essential to the due observance ofthe provisions of the king's charters, and the full executionof the public duties both of police and government, thanthat those who are intrusted with the auperintendaiiv« of 'these important maltese, should at all times be compelled loexecute, to the fullest extent, all that is necessary to be done,not only for the present immediate benefit of the public, butalso to prevent the possibility of future public inconvenience ;and, therefore, it might perhaps be excusable to regret thatthe court should have felt itself called upon to withhold itsaid in compelling public functionaries faithfully and effectuallyto discharge their duties — particularly if there werethe slightest ground for supposing that there were any privateor sinister views in the parties who were backward inpursuing the ordinary course of their institutions.The borough of Fowey, was by a charter constituted abody corporate Nine of the free burgesses were to bechosen aldermen — one of whom was to be called mayor —■ The King c. Churchill aad Booth, 4 BudMajor, Aldermen, and Burgesses of Sudbury, I BM to right of common, pp. 1S29, 1533. 1538-154*.t SeethedecisionoflhecoiniiiilleeiQlhe Steyaingcue, 1792, before, pp.3116.J The King v. the Mat', Recorder, ind Aldermen oF the borough of Fmrar,2 Born. & Ci. SH.FOWEY. 2213and the mayor and aldermen were to form the common ^^'^^^^council. The charter then authorized the mayor and re- ^^^5.corder, or their respective deputies, and the rest of thealdermen of the borough, for the time being, or the greaterpart of them, (of whom the mayor and recorder, or theirrespective deputies, were to be two,) from time to time,when to them it should seem fit and necessary, to nominate,choose, and prefer so many and such persons to be freeburgesses of the borough, as they pleased ; and to those free Burgesses.burgesses so to be chosen, to administer an oath for their infidelityto the borough ; and in case any one or more of thealdermen should die, or be removed from his office, themayor, recorder, justices of the peace, and the rest of thealdermen, or the greater part of them, were to elect oneother of the free burgesses, inhabitants of the borough, for in5>^*"<«an alderman, to supply the number of nine ; the aldermen sochosen taking the oaths before the mayor, recorder, or oneof the justices of the peace of the borough for the timebeing, or before two or more aldermen ; or for want of themayor, recorder, justices, and aldermen, before three ormore free burgesses, inhabitants of the borough, to executethe office : and the mayor, the ex-mayor, the recorder, andtheir deputies, and the senior alderman, and the senior freeburgess, were to be justices of the peace. It appeared byaffidavits, that the body corporate had for three years beenreduced to the number of six aldermen and four free burgesses,and that one of the aldermen was in a dangerousstate of health, being upwards of seventy years of age, andincapable of performing the duties of alderman and justiceof the peace ; that of the four burgesses two were upwardsof seventy years of age — and that another was not an inhabitantof the borough. The court refused to grant a mandamusto compel the mayor and aldermen to proceed to theelection of free burgesses, or to hold a meeting for thepurpose of considering the propriety of proceeding to suchan election, &c.2214 Colchester.COLCHESTER.16-2& A charter incorporated '' the men and free burgesses (tf theborough of Colchester'* And declared that for eyer thereafter,there should be within the borough, to be chosen oat ofthe free burgesses, 1 8 common councibnen ; and then nominated1 8 persons to be the first common councilmen* It visheld that this charter virtually made them also free hff"gesses.STAFFORD.1826. The following cases seem to afford apt specimens of thenice distinctions and technical points in which matters connectedwith the corporate doctrine, are involved. And it canscarcely be expected that one important object of aU law —that it should be intelligible to the public — can be attainedby such discussions as this case discloses.To an information for usurping the office of justice withinthe borough of Stafford the defendant pleaded that he waselected at a corporate meeting, where a majority of the aldersmen and corporate burgesses were present. The replicationalleged, that at the supposed election, five capital burgesses(described by their names,) and none others, were present,and that they were not the major part of the capital burgesses.The rejoinder alleged, that at the election, besides the fivecapital burgesses named in the replication, there were presentK. and T., being then capital burgesses, and that the fivecapital burgesses named in the replication, together with K.and T., were the major part of that body. The surrejoinderstated, that K. and T., before the election of the defendant,had been elected, admitted into, and exercised the office ofaldermen, and at the election of the defendant, were presentas aldennen ; and that before the defendant's election, twoother persons were elected, and admitted as capital burgessesin the room and stead of K. and T. The rebutter averred, thatat the election of K. and T., as aldermen of the borough, the• The King i. I)owne>, 5 Hard. c^ Cr. 18*2.t The King i. J. M. Ilubball, (i bain. is: Cr. 13'J.STAFFORD. 2215major part of the aldermen were not assembled , and that after the ocorgo iv.election of K. and T., and before the election of the defendant 1826.as justice, and whilst K. and T. exercised the office of aldermen,informations in quo warranto were filed against them,and judgment of ouster given, with a traverse that K. and T.ever were aldermen : upon demurrer, it was held that notwithstandingthe judgment of ouster, K. and T. could not beconsidered as having attended at the election of the defendantas capital burgesses, and that judgment must be for thecrown.Upon another information for usurping the office of burgess 1828.of Stafford, the plea alleged as usual, that the burgesses werecorporate by prescription* as well as charter, and that thecommon council, or the major part of them, duly assembled forsuch purpose, from time to time, as often as it seemed fit andconvenient to them, had elected so many persons to be bur Burgesses.gesses, as to them seemed fit.After setting out a charter by which the king granted thatthere should be a mayor, ten aldermen, and ten capital burgesses,and that they should be the common council for allthings touching the government the borough; the plastered,that from thenceforth there had been, and still were within theborough, a marjory ten aldermen, and ten capital burgesses, andan indefinite number of burgesses, and a common council; thaton, &c., the then mayor and divers, to wit, nine of the aldermenof the borough, being the major part of the aldermen,and nine of the capital burgesses, being the major part ofsuch ten capital burgesses, being the major part of the commoncouncil, duly assembled for the purpose of electinga burgess, it seemed fit to them to elect the defendant tobe a burgess. The replication alleged, that notice of thepurpose for which the supposed assembly of the commoncouncil was to be held was not, at any time before the assemblywas held, given to the aldermen or capital burgessesof the borough ; upon demurrer, it was held, that the replicationwas bad, because it assumed, as a general propositionof law, that there could not be any lawful assembly, for theThe King V. Sir G. Chetwynd, Bart., 7 Barn. & Cr.G95.3316 STAFFORD.Otwwiv, purpose of vlrciing a huTijess, without pret-ioiia notice of lieffl. purpose of the vttetiat) having been given Co rvivy member 9Jmch stUxl iiiuly of the common couitnl; whereas, if all themembers of such select body were predict at, and concnnwlin the election, such notice would have beeii unnecessary.*DEVIZES.il. By charter of the 10th James 1., reciting that the boroughiu(. of Devises was au ancient borough, and that the mtiyor nodbui^csses, time out of mind, had enjoyed divers frauchi«e»,-tthe king confined to the mayor and burgesses all privileges,Ice. ; and granted that the mayor, burgesses, and thsuccessors, and the mayor and town clerk, together with 36burgesses, being the common council, or the greater part o(them, should noraiiialconeof the number of twelve chief burgessescounsellors, to be mayor; and further, that the mayor,nu, town clerk, and thirty-six chief burgesses, should elect aflofficers, and also make all free burgesses. It then grantedto the mayor and chief bui^essea being counsellors, and thecommon council, a power of imposing fines; and that themayor and burgesses, and their succor-sors, should holdwithin the borough a court of record, before the mayor,town clerk, and chief burgesses, being counsellors ; andthat all manner of pleas should be determined before themayor, town clerk, and chief burgesses being counsellors;and that the mayor, town clerk, and one of the chief bagesses counsellors, (to be chosen by the mayor, town clei^and common council) should be justices of the peace withinthe borough. By a subsequent charter, reciting the former,King Charles I. confirmed the same, and granted, inter alit,that the mayor, recorder, and the chief burgesses, beingthe common council for the time being, (of which chiefburgesses some were known by the name of chief burgessescounsellors,) should have the power to elect one ofthe chief burgesses and counsellors, to be mayor ; and thatthe mayor, and recorder, and chief burgesses of the com-DEVIZES. 2217mon council of the borough , should have the power to 0*°^ '^-elect all officers; and also of taking thereafter all free 1827.largesses into the number of free burgesses : It was held, that S^'K^ases.by these charters (there being no evidence of usage prior to Usage,the granting of the charter of James I.) the 12 burgessescounsellors did not form an integral part of this corporationfor the purpose of electing free burgesses ; and the right ofelecting free burgesses was in the mayor, recorder, and the36 chief burgesses, or the major part of them ; and, consequently,that to make a good election of a free burgess, itwas sufficient if the mayor, recorder and a majority of the 36chief burgesses were present.DONCASTER.In the following case, the right of admission by servitude,was erroneously attributed, as we have before observed, tocustom, rather than the common law ; and such right seemsto have been assumed, contrary to the authorities we havebefore shown, to be referred to a connexion with trade, withwhich it had no direct affinity.In Doncaster, which is a corporate town, by custom, all 1328.persons having served an apprenticeship for seven years toa free burgess carrying on trade there, were entitled to beadmitted to the office of free burgess ;* It was held, that aperson who had served under articles to an attorney, a freeburgess of the borough, and residing within the same, wasnot entitled to be admitted to his freedom.Lord Tenterden said, that a person who served an attorneyunder articles of clerkship could hardly be said to be anapprentice within the popular meaning of the term, and theright in this case was confined to such persons as had servedan apprenticeship. An attorney carries on a profession, andnot a trade.But it would be difficult to say, that an articled clerk,who is bound by his articles for the purpose of learning hisprofession, was not an apprentice; and it will be remem-The King i>. Tic Mayor, Aldermen, and Capital Burgesses of the borough ofDoncaster, 7 Barn. & Cr. 630.221b Donc ASTER.IV.beredy that the earliest document which has beni quotedrelative to apprentices was one which referred to the professionof the law.* It has also been shown that the connexionbetween apprenticeship and burgess rights, was originallyfounded upon the common law, and not upon trade.LONDON, &c.1828. The following case is in some degree applicable to thelondon principle, that corporations require to be locally fixed inminster, some place — and also affects the question, as to what extentbye-laws can be made to bind strangers, or to impose apenalty for refusing to accept office, even in a companywhich has no municipal government : and likewise refers tothe question as to the expenditure of the common stock ofboroughs and companies.The king by charter incorporated the tobacco-pipe-makersin London and Westminster England and Wales ; and afternaming the first master, wardens, and assistantSy-f- providedfor the future election of officers, and the transaction of othercorporate business, at meetings to be holden in a hall inLondon, or within three miles thereof. And that the master,wardens, and assistants, should there yearly elect out of theassistants, four to be wardens of the society ; and it thenauthorized the master, wardens, and assistants, to make bylawsfor the government of the society, and every memberthereof, and every person using the art and mystery ofniakinj^ tobacco-pipes, in London and Westminster, and anotherparts or places in England or Wales. It was held,that although the charter might be inadequate to bind allthe tobacco-pipe-makers in the kingdom, it was competentto bind such of them as became members of the corporatecompany. J Secondly, that the charter, by fixing the placeof meetings to London or Westminster, or within three miles• See before, pp. 698, 722.t The Master, wardens, assistants, and fellowship of the company oftohacco-pipe-niakcrs. of the cities of London and Westminster, and kingdom of Kngland, anddominion of Wales, i . WocxJrofre, 7 harn. & Cr. 838.t There is a stronger obligation upon inhabitants in a borough to obey the bye-lawsmade by their municipal governors.LONDON, &c. 2219thereof, sufficiently established local limits for the corpora ^^^ ^^'tion. Thirdly, that a bye-law, which imposed a fine on *®^'every master, warden, or assistant, who should not attend allcourts to be holden, was a valid bye-law. Fourthly, that abye-law, that if any person chosen to be warden, shouldrefuse to accept the office of warden, he should forfeit to thecompany, 61. I3s. 4rf., was good ; the words " any person "applying to persons eligible by the terms of the charter tothe office of warden. Fifthly, that a bye-law, that everyfreeman, using or not using the art, mystery, or trade, shouldpay yearly to the company 8$., to be paid quarterly, andevery journeyman of the company 4l8. yearly, to be paidquarterly, and that every person refusing should forfeit twicethe sum, was bad; inasmuch as it did not appear that any Commonrightful expenditure of the company required such a contribution.SUNDERLAND.The next case involves an important consideration. Afterthe extensive and arbitrary manner in which informations ofquo warranto were used in the reigns of Charles II. andJames II., and the judgment in the London case being, inthe reign of William III., declared illegal by the Legislature,the law officers of the crown became extremely cautious inresorting to those proceedings : and probably to that feelingmay be attributed their disinclination to interfere on manyoccasions where the interests of the public would seem tohave required their interposition.From their abstinence there can be no doubt but thatmany abuses, both of omission and commission, were allowedto continue, which their timely interference would have preventedor corrected.The officers of the crown thus neglecting to proceedagainst the municipal abuses, and the perversions of theroyal charters, a more ready disposition in the courts to aidthe applications of individuals would seem to have beenexpedient.But technical rules restrain their proceedings, and on a 1829.ISUnOSKLANI).- recent occnsioii the Court of King's Bench, io a ease fnmSunderland, was compelled to decide, that an information 'mthe nature of a quo warranto, against pereonii for claimingto act as a corporation, uiuitt be filed by and in the aamecf-the attorney-general,*Such an information cannot be filed at the instance of anindividual, against persons for usurping a fnuichise of aprivate nature not connected with public government.The latter qualification of the rule in some degree lessensits general application; otherwise, by the non-interferenceof the law officers, and the inability of the court to interpose,the abuses and usurpations must grow up to anunrestrained extent. And under such circumstances it is impossiblethat uxfige can have any weight as evidence, whenif it is usurpation there is no mode of correcting it.LUDLOW.By a charlie of Qtmcn Elizabeth, it was provided, thatvacancies in the common council of the borough of Lvdhtw,ehoidd be filled up by election out of the " burgesses andinhabitants." The charter was accepted, but the corporationafterwards elected burgesses, not being inhabitants, tothe office of common councilmen, as they had done before.This charter, and al) other franchises, were surrendered inthe time of Charles II. And William and Mary, by a charterof restoration, granted that the corporation should enjoy allfranchises, elections, rights of election, &c., which they badpreviously enjoyed by virtue or pretence of any charter, orby any other lawful manner, right or title. It was held,that under the charter of Elizabeth, burgesses could not beelected to be common councilmen unless they were inAoii-tanis, and that a usage to elect burgesses not inhabitants,was repugnant to the charter, and could not be pleaded inexplanation of it. It wag also held, that the charter ofWilliam and Mary only restored such rights as had beenlawfully exercised under or by pretence of former charters ;and, therefore, did not enable the corporations to elect burnThe KJDg V. Ogden, aod foul olhcrs, 10 Bit, & Cr. 330.LUDLOW. 2221gesses, not being inhabitants to the office of common ^^^^^^'councilmen.* 1829.The above decision, sound, plain, and constitutional, protectsthe charters of the crown from being abused — repressesunauthorized usojgeSy — and gives a reasonable application tothe words in the subsequent charter.NORWICH.By several charters the sheriffs of Norwich were to be ^830.chosen by the citizens and commonalty " from themselves."i-A subsequent charter, confirming former privileges, andregulating the time and mode of electing sheriffs, omittedthe words " from themselves."The usage however, both before and since, had been toelect from among the freemen. Held that the last charterwas not meant to vary the qualification ; that the restrictionin the former charters could not be dispensed with ; and thatthe election of a person not free was irregular.The same observation may be made upon the clear andpractical principle contained in this determination, by whichthe former charters and the ancient usages are preserved intheir integrity, and a reasonable limit is put upon the effectof the new grant.LONDON.A person is not liable to serve the office of constable unless 1825.he be resiant in the parishes And therefore a person occupyinga house, and paying all parish rates in respect of it, and carryingon the trade of a printer, frequenting the house daily onall working days, and sometimes remaining there during thenight at work, but not sleeping in the house, is not liable toserve the office of constable in the parish where the house issituate.The above case is rather more involved in legal nicetiesthan the two preceding, and perhaps there is some difficulty• The King v. Solway, 9 Barn. & Cr. 424.t The King v. Grant, 1 Barn. & Adol. 104.t The King v, Adlanl, 4 Barn. & Cr.772.^ia distinguishing it in principle from that of the King «.Ponder,* which we have before quoted and commentedupon. The distinction founded upon sleeping or not sleepingin the house, is surely too minute for the dignity of the lawto stoop to consider ; and some instances might be suggested,where if sleeping were necessary, it might be establishedthat a person resided nowhere. The practical rule foundedupon commorancy, or in the language of the old law, beingconversant " in a place, either for business or pleasure, andhaving a domicile, is a more tangible and intelligible principle)and would have been easily determined by the law andpractice of the court leet.LEET.-rETERS FIELD.The two following cases are instances of the existence andcontinued exercise of the jurisdiction of the court heel, inPetersfield, West Looe and numerous other places.It was decided as to Petereficld, that a regular tuoye for20 years, unexplained and uncontradicted, is aulRcient to Iwarrant a jury in finding the existence of an immemorialcustom for the steward of a court leet to nominate certainpersons to the bailiff, to be summoned on the jury ; and it w ofood ctatom.fThis is one of the numerous cases which are often cited tosupport the doctrine of usage, and had not the law in thatrespect been carried further than it is by this decision, itwould have been impossible to complain of the rule. Forthis case only decided, that when an act for the public servicemust be done by somebody, and it had been executed withoutquestion for 20 years by a particular public officer ; andthere was no evidence of any other person having donethe act, this was held to be sufficient evidence of an immemorialcustom for the officer to do it ; the court at whichit was to be done being a prescriptive courts• SeeRexv.PaTn<]er,b«fore,pp.1514,16SS,33ai.t The King v. Jolifle, 2 Baro. ft Cr. 45.t Bui Lord Tenterdco in delivering his judgment, qualified it b; d«9cribin|[Uii(u a case, in which there dirt not appear to b* any tbiag in the utile contrary topublic poUc]' or expediency.itiiCHESTER. 2223George IV.CHESTER.But there are other cases, in which the doctrine has been Usage,carried to a much greater extent ; and in some instancesagainst the apparent meaning of the king's charter. Instancesof that kind have been remarked before. And in a case of53 George Iii,* where a charter of Henry VII. directed, thatcertain members of a corporation should be able, in everysucceeding year, to elect 24 citizens to be aldermen, &c.the court refused to grant a mandamus to proceed to suchan election — the only instances of usage being in 1693, andthe two following years in which two such elections weresaid to have taken place; and the express words of thecharter were pressed upon the court.But Lord Ellenborough said, " the words of the charterwere not compulsory, they were elsmere possint; that is,they had power, but were not compelled to elect ; and headded, it was an extremely unusual practice in corporations,'' as founded either upon usage or charter, to elect all thecorporate officers annually." And his lordship also referredto a case in the time of Lord Kenyon, in which the usage hadprevailed almost against the words of the charter. The courtnot being willing to interfere against the long continuedusage.His lordship also said, that the usage in the case before himhad been uniform, for upwards of a century, and was not inconsistentwith the words of the charter. He was thereforedisinclined to disturb it by granting the rule, especially whenanother remedy was open to the parties.With submission to the noble lord, it might be doubtedwhether the words " elsmere possint," used in a charter ofthe crown with reference to public officers, ought not clearlyto be considered as compulsory — either as regarded the rightor obligation of the parties concerned. If the offices to whichthe bailies were to be elected were honorary and desirable,it would seem that they should not be enjoyed to the exclusionof others in their proper course for more than 12 months;R. f. the Mayor and Citizens of Chester, 1 Maule & S. 101.[eon the coaUaiy, if the offices were bontensoiDe, then theielected ought not lo be bound to execute their functions ir )more than the; [>erio(l laentioocd in the charter ; nntl thcntfattit would appear on both these ^ruutidn, thut it would nothave been injurious — but on the county, constituent withthe probable intention of the crown if the words bad beaheld to be compulsory, and the elections had been anntiaLBut the noble lord seems to have relied in some degree uponihi^ lucien in other places, which is a dangerous ground toadopt, inasmuch as there are no means of ascertaining thefacts accurately ; nor, properly speaking, are they bctom thecourt. In many instances, such assuniptiocu) have \eA lounjustifiable results.Another remedy was also suggested, which, lowered, wuof Bo little avail, that the question has not since been brought |into discussion ; and the annual elections do not take place,notwithstanding the apparent intention of the crown.«Esr Love.The next case is one in which the contrary course seems Inhave been adopted.* Inthat instance there wasan undeviatingusage, from the earliest time the records existed, which wasas early as the reign of Henry VIII., that tht infm/iifinUreliant had been called over, presented, enrolled, and swordat the court Uet. And strong circumstances were laid beforethe court, showing the means by which the ancient systemhad been destroyed and a new system introduced. Uponwhich an application was made to the court for a mandamusto swear and enrol as a burgess, at that court, a person whowas an inhabitant householder within it.fThe first objection suggested by one of the learned judgeswas, that a free bui^ess was a corporate officer. But theprevious documents will have afforded a decisive answer tothat supposition.It was then suggested, that if they were not corporateofficers, the court could not interfere.• See the King v. Ihe Mayor, Sic. ol WeM Looe, pp. IG9S, 2234.t S«e alu poM. Iralanil, Sligo cite.WEST Love. 2225That point has also been answered ; and if the situation of f^^J^*a burgess is connected with the municipal government of the 1^22.borough, as undoubtedly it is, there can be no question butthat the high prerogative writ of mandamus should beapplied to enforce the due admission, whether they had thesuperinduced qualification of burgess or not.The learned Chief Justice most justly assumed that theremight be corporations which were not prescriptive. It hasbeen shown that there were no prescriptive corporations.Still the doctrine was held, that if it was not a corporateoflSce, the court could not interfere ; — an opinion founded,as it is humbly conceived, on the mistaken importance givento the word " corporation," and on the assumption that thecourt could not interfere, but to support a prescriptive right;whereas it is obvious, that the prerogative writ should issueto support rights under the general law, or particular grantsof the crown, or legislative enactments.It was truly observed by one of the learned judges, thatthe persons enrolled and sworn at the court leet, ceased tobe villains ; but the same high authority might also haveadmitted, that a person so enrolled and stood as an inka*- Leet.bitant householder within a borough ' became thereby aburgess.The Chief Justice, ingivinghis judgment, distinguished thecase from those which were cited, by the fact, that in thesecases there was a freehold interest in land. It has beenshown that burgess-ship did not depend upon tenure, but Tenure,the learned judge said, '^ if it had been so in this case itmight have appeared in a different light," With submission,it would have been in a worse light ; for it would havebeen connected with the usurpations attached to the supposedfreehold right of burgess-shipsThe same authority observed, that the object of the motionwas, to persuade the court, to order a party to be admittedto an office, which was to confer some benefit upon him, withoutshowing that he had any inchoate right by prescriptionto fill that oflSce, and receive the benefit. And that afree burgess was a corporate officer without a prescriptive7cISS36 "<^ Love.^''"''' right, and in favour of such a parly, a mandamus would inlie.But the application, it i!t submitted, was not to be a<)mitte<ito nn office, but to be sworn under the common law at tlwcourt Ui-l, as a free inhabitant households.And OB to the supposed benefit to be derived, it was colnetted with duties, as well as privileges, and whether it Mthe one ur the other, was immaterial to the court, who blonly to consider that right and Justice should be enforced btheir mandatory writ.No inclioate title by proscription was insisted upon ; Uthe right and duty to be nvorn to hia allegiance, and raniAdas a burgess according to the requisites of the common Sikh;And a free burgess was not a corporate officer, but a clauitfcondition in lite, which had existed long before the corporationin West Looe, or any municipal corporation in the country, Ithe documents quoted before have now abundantly proved.An application for a quo warranto against the mayor, cthe ground that he had not been duly elected by the bodyat large of the inhabitants, was also refused at the same tiupon the extraordinary ground — considering the opinions ansdicta which have been from time to time quoted — thftt theword " INHABITANTS," CLEARLY Meant THE Burgesses ; Sodtherefore, that the inhabitants, though expressly mentionedin the charter, had not a right to interfere in the election ofmayor; but that he was duly elected by the capricionri;f-chosen burgesses, many of whom, were non-resident.*Maidstone.Another case relative to a court Uet occurred with respectto Maidstone : a rule being obtained for a mandamus, directingthe proper officer at the next court Uet, to administer theoath of allegiance to a person who was an inhabitant freeholderwithin the boroughsThe Chief Justice observed, that a mandamus for such apurpose was perfectly new. But the peculiar characteristic■ see Ihccueal length, ■MAIDSTONE. 2227of the prerogative writ of mandamus, is to supply relief ^^'^'^'when no other specific remedy is provided ; and it presume 1^28.poses no precedent, because it is to be applied to newmischiefs.It was also stated hypothetically, " that if the applicantwas liable to any penalty for not having taken the oath ofallegiance, he would be exempt from such penalty byshowing that he had offered to take it." But there is nopossibility of doubting that the law peremptorily requiredevery male inhabitant householder of the proper age, withinthe jurisdiction of the court leet, to take the oath of allegiance; and if he did not do so, he was liable to amercement.And it is a novel proceeding for a court of law, ofsuch plenary jurisdiction as the Court of King's Bench, tofind an excuse for the omission of doing an act required bythe law, rather than to compel its being done.The taking of the oath was attributed by the court to thestatute of the 7th of James I., which was enacted with aparticular view ; instead of being referred, as the law prescribes,to the court leet, where, beyond all question, itought to be taken, notwithstanding it were also takenelsewhere.The reader, therefore, must consider these cases with referenceto the principles which have been elicited from theancient law, as traced from the early times — recognized inthe successive statutes from Magna Charta — and in truthconfirmed by the charters and the practice even to modemtimes : — though the oaths taken by freemen have mistakenly, oaths.and from a forgetfulness of the nature of our early institutions,been absurdly applied to the modem usages of corporations.There was also another case, in which it was doubted in theCourt of King's Bench, whether an inhabitant, to be withinthe purview of the law, must be a householder. Such a jj°ijj^'question, in the abstract, might seem to be involved in somedifficulty : but taken with reference to the records, and denc 2^238 WYCOUBE.Oftnyi^ - cideil cases which lithe been quoted in suceftssioa front (btearliest iime», it is too plain to require further abut-nation.WVIOMBE.J. The House of Lords* in its appellate, and the Court rfKini^'B Benches in its original jurisdiction, were also dutogthis reis, engaged in the consideration of the case of quowarranto against Thomas Westwood, for usurping the offiti(as it was called) of a bwgess of Combe.Besides a question, whether a charter could be partiallyaccepted — which in this case was a matter of subordinateconsideration — the more material point in dispute betweenthe litigant parties — that to which the case principally resolveditself^and which bears on the present inquiry — ww,whether a supposed bye-law, made by the burgesses at large,to restrain the right of electing burgesses, la the select bootof bailiffs and aldermen, (being the common council) mainUiw, and in this particular case, n valid bye-law. In theCourt of King's Bench, the Judges were divided on thepoint: two of that learned body giving their opinions insupport of the bye-law— one decidedly against it; and theChief Justice having considerable doiibt at which conclusionhe ought to arrive.Judgment was accordingly on this point given for thedefendant ; supporting his title to the office under the electionby the select body.Against this judgment a writ of error was brought in thsHouse of Lords; and the case was argued atmncb length,and with great ability at the bar, in the presence of thejudges ; who as the matter appeared to be of much importanceand difficulty, had been summoned to attend the argument ;after which a question was resolved to be submitted for theirconsideration; and the I6th of February was appointed forthe delivery of their opinions upon the points submitted tothem.The question was whether the bye-law was valid ?• See 7 Bins. 1. f S«« 4 Btm. & Cr. 78.WYCOMBE. 2229On the day appointed, the Chief Justice of the King's o^^^"^-Bench, appeared in his place in the House. The Chief 1829.Baron, three Judges of the Court of King's Bench, twoJudges of the Court of Common Pleas, and two Barons ofthe Exchequer, attended on the woolsack. The otherlearned judges were absent, as they had not been present atthe argument.The judges who were present delivered their opinions —three of them giving their judgments for the crown, andagainst the bye-law; the other five of them deciding againstthe crown, and in favour of the bye-law.The Chief Justice of the King's Bench postponed thedelivery of his judgment, and the House was adjourned.Under these circumstances, this case, in a legal point ofview, considering the difference of opinion which has existedrespecting it, assumes an interesting aspect ; and in aconstitutional point of view, it is impossible for a moreimportant question to have arisen.The direct struggle between the parties, was, whetherthe select body in the corporation, the bailiffs and aldermen,being the common council, should possess the entirepower in the borough; or whether the burgesses shouldenjoy that share in the management of the town, which thecharter apparently gives to them.If the light of making burgesses was vested in the selectbody alone, the whole corporation would in effect be intheir hands — the number of the burgesses would be kept, asthey had been, below the number of the common council ;and by that means the latter would secure a perpetual ascendancy.On the other hand, if the body at large had theright of making burgesses, they would at least have thepower at all times of correcting any undue influence or misconductof the select body, and of restraining their controlwithin proper limits.In many of these corporations, through the agency of theselect body,* the burgesses have been reduced to the smallestThis was the great evil in the parliamentary representation of corporations,produced in the manner here stated. In burgage tenure, another source ofWYCOMBB.'* possible numbers* — three, two, or one— nay, in some,already shown, that class of the corporate body has been Ialtogether suppressed ;+ Notwithstanding, the corporations Jwere, by the governing charters, to consist of a mayor, alder imen, assistants, and commonalty.There is also an "instance where a corporation han Ilost their charter, and judgment of seizure having been 'entered aj^aiust them, which remains unabated — though no ,siibsecpient charter has been granted — yet they still continue (to act as a corporation : and till the Reform Act passed, .returned their members to Parliament by burgesses elected |amongst themselves.Too often, it will be found, that the declared intention of \lithe crown, and the express words of the charters are de IAffected, by the usages and bye-laws of the grantees of theI crovm.Whether that were so in the present case, was the principal 'I I controversy between the parties.To ascertain which, the short account of the boroughs |^givcn before, with a few additional face, will suffice.This place is said to have been first incorporated in thereign of Edward IV. ; and the returns to Parliament weremade at that period, and subsequently, in the name of themayor and burgesses.1673. In 1673, there was a petition by the burgesses, freemen,1702. and inhabitants. And 1702, by Lord Shelboume; on theRight, hearing of which, the right was agreed to be in the mayor.abide, it was erected br the landed property being Acquired bj oThe two BlrikinK initsncea of this abirn hive been already mentioned — Old Samand Galton. But it i« a carious groined of objection to these nmrpaliaiH, Buleven Jamtt I., tenaciaiu >b be waa of the prerogative, Et opposed bimialf t»this glaring usurpation upon the constitution: anJ, accordingly, in his pnjclantt-tioD, on his accession, after having summoned bis Gist Pulianient, amongst otlMrthings he directed, that the tnemben ahootd be men of good behaviour and mfi-clench— taxed and paying subside ; and that the aheiifi should not End preceptsto any town so ruined, thai Inert tetrt not ttumgh rtaanti Id fleet «m1 ttittcttd. 5 Pail. His. p. 7.It is obvious how Consistent this direction is with the spirit of the law and constitution; and had i( been attended to, it would have corrected the anomalies* llOld Sarum. GattoD. and Aylesbury.■ See before, the Fowey case. i Sea Truro, Salisbury, &c.t See before, p. 1314.WYCOMBE. 2231bailiffs, aldermen, and burgesses — and the controversy was ^^''**^^'only upon the manner of making the latter. ^^^*For the petitioner it was insisted, that the burgesses oughtto be made with the consent of the major part of all the burgesses,duly summoned, and assembled in the common hall ;and it was proposed to take from the poll of the other candidateso many burgesses, on account of their not beingregularly made, as would give the petitioner a majority.Evidence was adduced, that 21 had been made at a public-house,in January, 1698, without notice or summons toseveral of the aldermen or capital burgesses ; and not at thetown-hall, where all such meetings ought] to be held; thealdermen protesting against, and complaining of this proceeding.Two individuals were admitted at an entertainmentof the mayor ; and another was made a burgess andalderman, on the same day, and in the like manner.On the other side, it was contended, that those three burgesseswere made by the mayor and seven others, who are amajority of the 15, in whom the sole power is vested ofmaking burgesses. That the election at the public-housewas only an adjournment, and a fresh election, after a previousone had been duly made in the hall : and the summoningof all the aldermen was proved, as well as the usualtolling of the bell.*The committee resolved, and it was agreed to by theHouse, that the sitting member, Mr. Dormer, was dulyelected.In 1725, a petition, amongst other things, stated, that the 1725.votes of two persons were expressly ordered to be enteredby the mayor, although they owned they had no otherauthority than an illegal charter of King James II. Otherirregularities were imputed to the mayor : and he wascommitted to the custody of the serjeant-alarms, for notpermitting an inspection of the public books, records, andpublic writings belonging to the borough.On the reading of several entries in the town books, itwas resolved, that it appears to this House, that in an entrySee before, Dover, Monmouth, and Shrewsbury cases.2232 WYCOMBE.^^^ '^' of burgesses made on the 20th of March, 1717, there hai17^- been an erasure* lately made and the name of Capta• Pilot inserted, without any legal authority.Tliat in an entry of burgesses made the 26th of September1723, another erasure had lately been made, whereby thename of David Shiloh, a burgess of the borough, wuerased.And also that two persons had voted, having no pretence tobe burgesses of the borough, but under a charter of Kii^James II., which was never accepted or enrolled ; and thatthey had no right to vote.The sitting member was unseated, and the petitioner declaredduly elected. The mayor was committed to Newgate,for his arbitrary, illegal, and partial proceedings, in violationof the freedom of election. And a person who had presumedto read the Riot Act before the election, was resolved to havebeen guilty of a high infringement of the freedom of election;and was ordered into the custody of the serjeant-alarms.Such is the short history of the borough of Combe.From which it appears, that it was not a borough till thereign of Henry ill. ; some time subsequent to the period oflegal memory. That it was not a corporation till a longtimeafterwards ; that it returned members to Parliamentby the burgesses, long before it was a corporation and asearly as the 28th of Edward I. ; and it is clear and indisputablelaw, that the same class of persons who were thenthe electors, as burgesses, must have continued so, unlessthey had been changed by act of Parliament. The right ofelections: members of Parliament havni": been once attachedto a particular class, could not be taken from them, ortransferred to others, by the king's charter — nor by anybye-law — nor any thing short of a legislative authority.If the king afterwards incorporated the place, and madea new class of burgesses, (for freemen there is no foundation,)still the same class of persons must have continued tovote for numbers of Parliament as before, notwithstanding:• See cases before, of Poole, Colchester, Quecnborough, Winchester. &c.WYCOMBE. 2233the incorporation.* And, therefore, it is impossible that ^^^'g^'^-in this case the right of election could be in the corporators ;there being no such class of persons when Combe firstreturned members to Parliament.This, whatever may be said or surmised to the contrary —or however willing any persons may be to shut their eyesto the truth — or to disguise the history of this place— or thelaw — fixes both the parliamentary and municipal rights inthe ancient ** burgesses ;" that is, the inhabitant householders Burgess.of the place ; free by condition, and therefore '' liberi homines"— sworn to their allegiance, and therefore " haleshomines" — who consequently performed all the importantpublic functions of the places in which they resided.However, let the ancient right of parliamentary electionbe what it may, it is now only necessary — after havingexhibited the arbitrary acts of those who had power inCombe — to ascertain, whether it is not clear that theparliamentary and municipal rights of that place were, evenunder the charter, vested in the '* burgesses ;" — made so—not by the select body, according to the usurpation whichwas insisted upon — but by the body of burgesses at large,according to the words of the charter.This leads to the consideration of the case of Rex v. Rex.Westwood, which has been so much armed and discussed. W«»*''<^1829.The defendant Thomas Westwood, in answer to theinformation filed against him, pleaded — a custom for themayor and common council, by themselves, and without theconcurrence or assistance of the rest of the burgesses, tonominate such persons to be burgesses, as to them shouldseem meet : — and he alleged his election according to thatcustom.And in another plea he alleged — that Combe had been lees,from time immemorial an ancient borough, and was, at thegranting the charter of Charles II., a body corporate. He Burgesses,also set out parts of the charter, particularly the power givento the mayoTy bailiffs and burgesses, to elect as burgessesSec before, p. 1769, the Newark case.2234 WYCOMBE.Owrt^iY. gQ many and such other men, inhabiting or not inhabiting*Rex V. within the borough, as to them should seem most expedientAtwood That the aldermen and bailiffs should be the common cil ; and that the mayor, aldermen and bailies should havepower to make '^ whatsoever bye-laws to them should seemto be good, wholesome, useful, honest, and necessary,according to their sound discretion, for the good rule and*^ government of the burgesses, artificers and inhabitants ; andfor declaring in what manner and order, the mayor, aldermen,bailiffs and burgesses, and the artificers inhabitants,'' and residents of the borough, should behave, conduct, and'* carry themselves in their offices, mysteries, and businesswithin the borough ; and otherwise for the further good and** public advantage and rule of the borough, and the victuallingof the same. And also for the better preservation, governsment, disposition, letting, devising of lands, &c., and other^' matters and causes whatsoever, touching, or in any wiseconcerning the borough, or the state, right, and interestof the borough." The plea set out other parts of thecharter; averred that it was accepted; and that in 1675,Bye-law. the major, bailiffs, and burgesses made a bye-law (not nowextant in uritingyjf for the better rule and government ofthe borough, touching and concerning the election of theburgesses, for the time then to come, in order to avoidpopular confusion and disorderly in such elections ; wherebyit was ordained, that from thenceforth, the mayor and commoncouncil, should at all times thereafter, by themselves, andwithout the concurrence or assistance of the rest of the burgesses.Burgesses, elect and choose such persons to be burgesses, as to themshould seem meet. Which bye-law, it was alleged, had eversince the making thereof, thitherto been constantly kept andThis passage in the cliarter clearly did not mean to give the power of makingand continuing as burgesses, persons not inhabiting, and altogether unconnectedwith the borough : for then they might have made all the people of Kngland, assuggested in the Ipswich case : — but only that they might make as burgesses, not onlythose persons who had before inhabited in the borough, but also all, who thoughnot inhabitant before, were desirous and willing to come and reside there.t This is a legal fiction, to raise the prescription of a bye-law, and is theinvention of the pleader.J These expressions are borrowed from the Corporation Case.WYCOMBE. 2236observed by the mayor, bailiffs and burgesses, and was still Q*^'^^^'in force. Rex v.The plea then stated the election of the defendants, accord ^,^°^'■ 1829.ing to the bye-law.The replications and rejoinder raised other questions inthis case :But a demurrer to this third plea brought under consideration,the important question before referred to ; and whichformed the subject of discussion in the House of Lords.In support of the demurrer to the third plea, it was arguedon the part of the crown,1^^, That the charter having given power to make bye-lawsto a select body, the burgesses at large had no powerto make a bye-law.2ndli/y That a bye-law altering the mode of election givenby the charter, and excluding an integral part of the corporationfrom voting at the election of burgesses, was bad.Against the demurrer, and in support of the plea, it wasargued for the defendant,Is, That it was a valid bye-law, because the power givento the select body was confined only to certain matters specifiedin the charter; and the regulation of elections was notone of those matters.2ndli/y The bye-law does not strike off an integral part ofthe electors : it only confines the election to a certain numberof burgesses. And the case of Corporations* was relied upon :as well as the Colchester caseinthose points the judges differed in the Court of King'sBench in the manner stated before. The argument in theHouse of Lords, as well as the different opinions of thejudges, were all referable to these same questions.It remains to be considered, lastly, what are the groundsupon which the affirmative or negative of these points canbe maintained.It should be first observed, with respect to the pleadings,that they are framed to support a usagCy which had crept Usage,into the borough, of electing the burgesses by the select• 4 Co. 77. t 3 Bulstrode, 71,3286 WVCOHBE.o*<«ftv. (joy of j[|e mayor and common council — whittier that usagen«» ■'. had a legal origin, or whether it was a mere usurpation, waaIgjg the real question to be decided between the parties.With respect to the usage, it was first asserted that it wasevidence of an immemorial custom. Now, from what hasbeen shown already of the history of this borough, it is clearthat no such custom could have existed ; for the borough itselfdid not exist before the time of legal memory.Nor does it seem possible that such a custody should haveexisted, because the baubles ure part of the common council,and they are not mentioned till the return in the sixth yewof Edward VI.; the retumof the first year of that king's reignbeing made by the mayor and burgesses, without any mentionof the bailiffs.1^^^^ Again, there is nothing in the charter to show that any^^^K mode of the election of burgesses contrary to that prescribed^^^H by it, namely, by the mayor, bailiffs, and burgesses, piously existed. The fair presumption would be, that therpower there given waa consistent with the prior usage; atU, least, till the contrary is shown.At all events, the charter was granted in 1663 ; and thebye-law limiting the election to the mayor and commoncouncil, was alleged to be made in 1675 — twelve years afterwards; BO that the election by the mayor, bailiffs, and burgesses,was in use for twelve years ; and during that timeboth the right and ust^e must have been intermitted forthat period, even if it existed before. As a confirmation ofthis assumption, it appears that in 1673, two years before thesupposed making of the bye-law, there was a petition bythe burghers, freemen, and inhabitants, complaining of theelection having been made contrary to the right and custom,and in infringement of the liberties of the borough.In 1702, thirty-nine years after granting the charter, andtwenty-seven after the supposed making of the bye-law, thematter was directly disputed between the litigant partiesbefore a committee of the House of Commons ; and thoi^fait was decided in favour of the sitting member, it does notappear upon what ground that decision was made. ThereWYCOMBE. 2237was no reference to any bye-law, as then existing ; and on ^^'^^-the part of the petitioners it was expressly insisted, that the Rex v.burgesses ought to be made by the burgesses at large ; which, jggg.in fact is the provision of the charter.On the proceedings in 1726, it appeared that the books ofthe corporation had been tampered with, by erasures and Erasures,interpolations; so that little reliance can be placed uponthem as evidence of usage.It appears also that persons claimed to be burgesses upona charter of James II. which was never accepted or enrolled ;upon which however it seems at least some persons hadclaimed to act. Upon reference to that charter, it wouldprobably be found that the usage of limiting the right ofelecting burgesses to the select body, had its foundation inthat grant; as occurred in many other boroughs, where theusages sanctioned by the arbitrary charters of those violenttimes have never been abandoned.This will afford a clue to the usage which prevailed incontravention of the charter of Charles II.But even supposing none of these observations should besufficient to answer this usage ; still the question remains,is it, or is it not, reasonable evidence of right, or ought itfairly to be attributed to usurpation ?The latter is not so unusual in corporations as to startleus at the proposition ; nor, as the select bodies have usuallythe power and influence of the corporation, will it be conceivedimprobable, that such a power should have led toabuses.Let it however be conceded, that, in the ordinary affairsof mankind, usage is fair presumptive evidence of right.This it undoubtedly is, between man and man, where theirpowers are equal — where the inducement by one to do anact is fairly met by the disposition and inducement of theother to resist it ; as where one exercise a right which producesa corresponding injury or inconvenience to another, tohis knowledge or under his eye. There the doing of the actis fair prima facie evidence of right to do it ; because theother would not submit to it, unless he were obliged to WYCOMBE.^^'^'^' knowledge the right of the person who did the act ; so thatHex V. the acquiescence is a practical, though tacit admission, ofWestwood . .1829 ^^ Justice of the claim.But is this so with respect to the governing and controllingpower of the corporation and the subordinate membersof it ? First, the parties are not equal : the corporation haspower and wealth to support its claim ; the latter probablyneither. The corporation has an interest to support theclaim ; the inferior body, little or none to resist it. Hence itis that we all practically know — and it has been shown inmany parts of this work — that such usurpations are constantlyexercised without resistance ; and the party acquiesces inthem, because they are unwilling or unable to incur the expenceof opposition.The enormous costs of legal proceedings on such occasionsis too well known to require minute statement. Itmay be only necessary to say, that the proceedings in thecelebrated Chester case, cost the prosecutor many thousandpounds, and at last ended in his ruin ; and the dispute inthis case, produced an expence truly appalling.How then can usurpation in these matters be resisted ?And, consequently, how can mere usage on such questionsbe evidence of ritiht ? ]particularly where that usajjje is indirectopposition to the express words of a charter so recentas the year 1()63.It is therefore contrary to the general feeling and practicalknowledge of mankind, to give such general elect tousage in cases of this description. If usage is allowed tohave only its fair weight in each individual case, accordingto the circumstances which accompany it ; and only a primafacie presumption is adopted in its favour; liable to berebutted by any fair presumption to the contrary, then it isimpossible to complain of the rule or its application. But ifit is extended further, or used as in any degree conclusive,then is usage misapplied, and the experience and commonsenseof mankind outraged. Nor can any thintr be moreinjurious, either to the science of law, or to the generaladministration of justice, than that any conclusion shouldWYCOMBE. 2239be adopted by the courts, against which the general feeling Qeorgeiv-of the public is justly directed; so that the conclusions iii„?^®*)^.courts of law should differ from those drawn by the public |829.out of court ; for by such means the law fails in much of itspractical good, and facts are seen in different points ofview by the courts and the public.Thus, in this particular case, the usage for the electionby the select body, enabled them to subject the wholecorporation to its control. The uninformed public wouldsay this could never have been intended — they would consultthe charter — it directs exactly the contrary — and theconclusion would be immediately drawn that the iLsage wasusurpation.On the contrary, the law says this usage is evidence ofright; but the charter is against it; then something tojustify this right must be assumed: in this instance a bye-law,said by the gratuitous fiction of the special pleader, tobe lost by time and accident must be presumed, in order thatthe usage may be upheld. The usage is to justify the presumptionof a bye-law contrary to the charter ; and the bye-law,when presumed, to support the usage. Thus, are thesepresumptions to move in a circle pursuing each other.The unlearned should be informed that this notion of a bye-law,lost by time and accident, only rests in the fancy of thespecial pleader; and no reasonable person will, for onemoment, suppose that such a thing really existed, withoutany trace of it being left.Having thus considered what is the real nature of thisquestion — how the usage ought to affect it — and why thisbye-law was imagined and alleged — it will be necessary toproceed to the abstract legal questions which arise out ofthe record.For it may be said, with truth, that these observationsturn, in a great degree, upon the fasts connected with thecase ; but the question raised on the record by the demurrer,admits all the facts, and raises only the question of law,whether the bye-law stated in the plea (assuming it to havebeen made) was valid.2240 WYCOMBE.Gcoryiv. j^ jjj^g jj^g,^ seen, that, by the charter, a power of makingRex V. bye-laws was given to the mayor, aldermen and bailiffs ; and1829. '^ ^^^^ clause gave them the sole power of making bye-laws,and impliedly excluded the body at large from exercisingsuch an authority, then it necessarily followed that thebye-law set out in the plea was bad.But it is incident to all corporations (as well as many otherbodies) to make bye-laws ; and prim facie, that power isto be exercised by the body at large. Nor, with submissionto the learned judges, who stated a contrary opinion, canthat power be taken from that body but by express words.There is no principle in corporation law more clear than thata select body can have no powers but such as are expresslygiven to it. Consequently, a power of making bye-laws,given to such a body, can only extend to such matters as arespecified in the clause giving the power ; and although thereshould be general words in such a clause, still those generalwords must, according to the rules of construction, bewith reference to the matters included in the special wordsof the clause. There can, therefore, be no sound groundfor supposing that general words introduced into such aspecial clause could have the effect of taking away, byconstruction, or implication, an incidental power whichexisted in the body at large, and which, as before observed,could not be annulled but by express words.It is a curious feature of this case, that although theprincipal point led to a decision in favour of the defendant,yet there were other points, which the law adjudged againsthim. And so intricate and involved were the questionsspringing out of this discussion, that truth and law appearedon many of the joints to alternate between the crown andthe defendant ; the worst position in which the law couldbe placed, and from which it could not be extricated but bysimplifying the question, and by deciding it on plain anddistinct principles, which might be intelligible to the publicat large.Assuming that this point could be surmounted by thedefendant ; and that the body at large had still left in themWYCOMBE. 2241a power to make bye-laws on some subjects — their general ^^^^^p^'^-incidental power not being exhausted by the special power K** v.given to the select body, it remains to be considered, ]329,whether the particular bye-law, supposed to be made by theburgesses at large, was good and valid in law, or otherwise.The bye-law is decidedly contrary to the charter ; and itis rather a strong decision to say, that when the kinghas by his charter created a corporation, with a particularconstitution, the body created should have the liberty ofaltering that constitution, provided for it by the powercreating it. The mere statement of the question seems tocarry its refutation along with it; and the simplest principlesof reason, would appear to make the point so clear,that it required much legal ingenuity to raise the doubtsrespecting it.Still less can the point be in any degree questionable,where the alteration is in so important a part of the constitutionof the borough, as the limiting the persons who are toregulate the admission into the corporation.This point has in fact, been expressly decided by theCourt of King's Bench ; in JR. v. Head where the charter ^* J 'granted that the mayor and commonalty, together with thealdermen, might elect as many burgesses, as to them shouldseem fit, but the defendants pleaded an election by themayor and aldermen, under the sanction of 100 years' usage. Usagefrom which it was contended, a bye-law, pleaded as lostby time and accident, might be presumed ; and that suchbye-law, " for the avoiding of popular confusion," restrainedthe right of electing burgesses to the mayor and aldermen.On the part of the crown it was insisted, that this supposedbye-law — inferred only from the proof of usage — contravenedthe fundamental principles of the constitution of the borough ;which it was argued they could not do, even by theirown consent, because the king and the public were interested; and it was said, they must use the charter as thecrown had given it, and they have accepted it; and thatthey could not make a law contrary to its intention. The• 4 Bur. 2521.7 D2242 WYCOMBE,Gcorsriv. assents the burgesses could not bind their successors Ac—Rex r. And though a verdict was found for the defendant, on allthe issues, the court set it aside ; and directed that judgmentof ouster should be given.The judgment of the court is not stated, with any particularityin Burrow's report of the case; but in a MS.collection of corporation cases, made by Mr. JusticeYates himself, who was a great corporation lawyer, hegives the general judgment of the court, as well as his owndecision, in these words — " Supposing the corporation had t'' power to exclude, (by any bye-law whatsoever) an immoral'' part of that community, from the right of electing, it*' could not possibly be done by the common council'' alone, thus specially constituted by the charter, whose'^ jurisdiction was only to administer the constitution, which** that charter established. In the case of corporations,'' the common council were created by the corporation'^ themselves, and were the representatives of the commodeally ; and the bye-law there made for restraining the'' number of electors, was made by the whole corporatebody. But the present bye-law can only be considered asan ordinance of the mayor and aldermen alone — '*It is alleged to be made by the mayor and aldermen,then being the common council of the borough ; andno further share in it is ascribed to the commonalty,than merely their assent to it, but assent alone is noact of legislation ; and (however it might affect the individualsassenting) cannot operate as a permanent law,upon their successors. To establish a laxcj all the integralparts of the legislative body, must positively join in*' enacting it, and not in assenting to it only. If those bywhom a bye-law is made, have not in themselves a com-plate authority to make it, the whole is a nullity; and noassent of others to an act that is void in itself can evermake it valid. The present case, therefore, falls withinthe determination of the King r. Spencer (from the boroughof Maidstone), and as that will alone be a sufficient groundfor giving judgment for the prosecutor, it is unnecessaryWYCOMBE. 2243to go into the general question, whether the whole corps o^rgeiv.tittitiuuitrate body together could, by any bye-law, exclude an interea v.rampart of the corporation from the franchise of electing.It was therefore determined, that judgment of ouster shouldbe entered against the defendants. But as the prosecutorhad joined issue upon the plea, instead of demurring in thefirst instance, the master of the crown-oflBce was directedto allow the prosecutor no costs for the trial, according tothe directions in the case of the King v. Spencer."Mr. J. Yates was very clearly of opinion, " that the bye-lawsuggested in the defendant's plea would have beenequally void, if the whole corporation had joined in making** it. For they have no authority to vary the constitutionestablished by the charter; as it is from thence alone thatthey have all their existence. And if ever they take upon*' themselves to change it, they commence usurpers, and are no*' longer a lawful society. That the crown, which originallyerected the corporation, could alone prescribe the mode of'^ continuing it. And any other method assumed by themeselves would be totally unauthorized and void. That by thecharter, the mayor and commonalty, together with thealdermen, were to elect all burgesses. The commonalty,*' therefore, were an integral part of that body to whom thepower of continuing the corporation was delegated by thecrown. But by this bye-law the commonalty were totallyexcluded;* and the mayor and aldermen assumed that powerto themselves, to whom no such authority was given. Soessential a variation from the charter was altogether aslawless as if they had set up a new corporation of their owncreating. And the burgesses elected by those two parts of'* the body, excluding the third, gained no more title by such*' an election than if they were chosen by strangers."Nor did this case pass sub silentio. The point was raised Rex v.again on demurrer in another case from the same borough ;and the Court of King's Bench decided again as they did inthe case of the King v. Head.The defendant, Hoblyn, carried the question up to the• See before the Truro and Salisbury cases.7 d2Hoblyn.2244 WYCOMBE.^^***''^'^- House of Lords by writ of error: where, on his part, relianceRex V. was placed on the usage for a century.Usage-^^^ ^" ^^^ other hand it was said, that the bye-law wisthe ground of that usage.On the part of the crown it was insisted, that the bye-lawsmade by corporations must be consistent with, and subordinateto, their constitution under their charter. If theycould make laws to alter their own constitution, the king'sprerogative would be taken away and transferred to thesubject. — That the power of electing burgesses and freemenof that borough, was, by the charter, expressly given tothe mayor and commonalty, together with the aldermen of theborough. And therefore the commonalty was a constituentpart of the body, by whom that power was to be exercised.Whereas the mayor and aldermen frankly declared it to betheir purpose in the bye-law, to take that power wholly tothemselves, in exclusion of the commonalty. — In this respectthe bye-law was repugnant to an essential part of the chartersand so substantially bad, that no usage or acquiescenceunder it could make it good.After which the judges, in answer to the question submittedto them, whether th(^ bye-law was o^ood or not, gave theirunanimous opinion in the negative. And the judgment ofthe King's Bench was accordingly affirmed.This therefore is a strong decision, after lon<x discussion andconsideration, and with the unanimous opinion of all thejudf]:es, that a hj/c-lair, rppufjnaiit to an essential part of thecharter, teas mid.It is true, it has been contended that this decision proceededon another ground, namely, that the bve-law wasnot made by the body at larije, because it was only allegedto be made by the mayor and aldermen, being the commoncouncil, with the assent of the commonalty ; and though theyassented, that did not make them parties to it, and theymight not have been summoned : but with submission it maybeasked, if this is not hypercritical ? It was suggested bythe counsel in the artz;unient of the King r. Head, and wasadopted by the court. But surely if the commonalty as-combe.2246seated which is what the allegation states, it must be taken ^]v^}^that they were present, and that they were parties to it, for Rex t>.how could the commonalty assent without being both presentand parties to the transaction ? if they assented, theymust have had the power of dissenting, and what is a partyto any transaction, but the person who has had the power ofassenting or dissenting, and has in point of fact done eitherthe one or the other ?A bye-law, therefore, made by the mayor and aldermen,ivith the assent of the commonalty, must surely be taken asmeaning in substance, that it was made by those bodies. Thecharter gave the power to the mayor and commonalty,together with the aldermen. Suppose the bye-law had beenalleged to have been made by the mayor and commonalty,with the assent of the aldermen, would not that have beensufficient, and are not the words " with the assent of," equivalentwith the words " together with ?" If so, where isthe difference, whether it is alleged to be a bye-law made bythe mayor and commonalty, with the assent of the aldermen,or by the mayor and aldermen, with the assent of the commonalty— if the one is to be considered as excluding anintegral part, the other must be equally so — and then thewhole resolves itself into this point, whether the words of acharter, requiring an act to be done by the mayor and commonalty,together with the aldermen, is not properly executedby the mayor and aldermen, with the assent of the commonalty.After all it must be remembered, that if this is a defectiveallegation of the concurrence of the commonalty, it is only theerror of the special pleader, who no doubt thought that he hadsufficiently alleged the concurrence of the conmionalty. For ifhe had not, he could as easily have alleged that it was madeby the mayor, aldermen, and commonalty. As the bye-lawis pleaded as lost by time and accident, it only remained inthe imagination of the pleader to allege it as he thought fit,to support the usage. For it must ever be remembered, thatthis formed no essential difference in the case, but was2246 WYCOMBE.Ge tory IV. purely a technical distinction, founded on the slip of tkRex f. pen of the pleader.It must likewise be observed, that the other ground dobjection, which is a more substantial one, was alsoupon, that the bye-law was contrary to the charter ; and tlnl,notwithstanding the Case of Corporations, from the 4 Co,was quoted.Indeed it seems clear that Mr. Justice Yates formed hisopinion on the broad ground that the bye-law loss contrary tothe charter, and could not be supported ; for there was noauthority to vary the constitution established by the charter.And in truth this seems to be the real ground of objection tothe bye-law in that case as well as in the present.But the Case of Corporations* was much relied upon in>&o;m1 Ilex V. Westwood.It must be remembered, that this case was cited in RexV. Head, and Rex r. Hoblyn, both in the Court of King'sBench and in the House of Lords ; and Mr. Justice Yatesexpressly referred to it— qualifying, however, its application,and finally giving his decided opinion against the bye-law.In the course of the argument of the Combe case, someof the learned judices observed, with respect to a dictum ofLord Mansfield, that it was extra-judicial — an allowed objectionto anv leixal doctrine — which has been made at alltimes, as well by the bar as from the bench, however learnedor talented the assertors of the opinion might be ; or howeverexalted the court in which it was uttered.Take of iVow, the first obvious objection to the Case of CorporationsCorpora . i rlions. is, that it is extra-judicial, as shown before :+ and althoughsuch a declaration of the law, if it had been founded on aconsideration of former cases, would, even as an opinion,have been entitled to much consideration ; still, in a legalpoint of view, and considering its binding effect, it is no moreto be relied upon than any other legal opinion ; that is, asfar as it is supported by the common or statute law, or prior• 4 Co. 'iH. f Sec hdorc, p. \44ky.WYCOMBE. 2247cases or established principles ; but the opinion itself, is no ^^'^ ^^'part of the law of England. Case ofT • 1 • CorporalIS to be observed also, that the reference to the judges, tions.was to know the law. Now, at that time, Glanville — Breton— Britton — Fleta — Fitzherbert — The Register — Fortescue,and the Year Books to the end of Henry VIII., were inexistence; besides the early statutes ; the most valuable partof our early enactments. And yet, when the Council requireto knot of the judges the law, no reference whatever is madeto a single authority, either of the common or statute law, tojustify the conclusion at which the judges arrived. Nor hasany earlier authority been since discovered or referred to —nor can any such be found ; but this extra-judicial opinion isleft to stand by itself upon its own merits.Again, it must be remembered, at what time this opinionwas broached. Henry VIII. had written, as we have seen,letters to some of the boroughs to return members whom henominated ; which in some cases the voters had refused todo.When the king, in order to satisfy his disappointed candidates,had them returned for places which were boroughs ; butwhich had not returned members for a long time. Hence,many have erroneously supposed that Henry VIII. had createdmany boroughs ; — the feet only being that he had requiredfrom the sheriffs a literal compliance with the parliamentarywrit, by returning members for all the boroughs — at least foras many as he was desirous of providing candidates.How Queen Elizabeth followed the course of her father,and the manner in which the House of Commons interfered,has been already shown, as well as the unsatisfactory mannerin which the matter was disposed of by a reference to thecharter — than which nothing could be more futile ; becauseat that time there were very few charters which at all relatedto the election of members of Parliament ; and none of thoseplaces, whose returns were disputed, in any degree affectedthe question.This was no sooner effected, than the queen began to bemost liberal in the grant of charters containing clauses, givingthe right of election of parliamentary representatives, though•■ ■ ■■»•:.jQ4g wrcoMBB.^ nut of the plMSM had c&joyad that right long iMfMtt;^::Cm the charter, which were more mmieioas thuiJn njreign in our history, (with the exception of tfasfc of-ifJohn,) began with long recitals of p r^mar ipUw e ligfat^eMHihave been previously enjoyed by themost cases, were altogether mifoonded in fret. Itthese proceedings had got to their right, that thethe judges now under consideration, was given.It has been seen, that the question propounded to lbjudges began with a recital, which correspond in m Mika%degree, with the recitals of the charters of theqnaen.The question admits that the charters up to that raiusually directed the elections to be made by the oommnii^at large ; which, no doubt, is the case with those diailnlwhich about that time specify the mode of election; hitwhich was not general in the earliest charters. .The question also speaks of the ardent and oaoal citationsby a selected number — but without saying by iriiombor when, or where, or how selected. The first is, that Aselection of all these officers being before that time hoofsrather troublesome than otherwise, the election naturallydevolved on those who had to transact at the time the usualbusiness of the town the appointment of constables, watchand ward, and election of the other officers. Hence the12 or 24, the grand or petty juries in the town, were oftenfound doing those acts, the others supinely absenting themselves; and in that manner in effect delegating their powerof election to those who attended ; but that implied delegationwas only temporary, and for the occasion — neither bindingthe individuals themselves for the future, nor their successors— all being able to resume their rights at any time.The question in effect therefore was, whether that usage wasgood against the charter? and the matters complained ofwere the popular elections contrary to these usages — showingplainly the feeling and temper of the time.The answer of the judges is somewhat singular: "thatsuch ancient and usual elections were good, and well warrantedby their charters." At least, it is strange, if it meansWYCOMBE. 2249that such elections were thereby limited for future times to Q^'y ^^'such select body ; and that seems to be the meaning of the cSJ^4-answer when it is compared with the sequel. If so, then the ^^^'answer is, that although the charters require the elections tobe made by the whole body, a usage to limit it compulsorilyto a select body, is warranted by the charter — ^which seemsalmost a contradiction in terms.If it meant, that the elections made by the small numberwere nevertheless good, it was perfectly correct; because,for that occasion the absent majority had, as suggestedabove, impliedly delegated the minority to vote for them —which is the real effect in all instances where a presentminority decide on any question — and this is the result ofthe St. Saviour's case.*The answer then goes on to say, that " in many of theircharters they have power given to them to make laws,"&c. It must be observed, that the judges had not anylegal mode of inquiring into the fact here asserted ; theywere either told so, not in a judicial course; or they assumedit ; be it either the one or the other, it is incorrectlystated as to the ancient charters; few of them have anysuch powers — and it could only be with respect to themthat the inquiry could be made with reference to the ancientusage. It is true that the charters of Queen Elizabethusually gave the power of making bye-laws — but thenthe question could not have been asked with reference tothose charters — because, suppose that the ancient mode ofelection in any place was by a select number of persons, andthe queen granted a charter giving the right of election tothe body at large, which charter was accepted — there canbe no doubt but that such charter and acceptance would putan end to the former mode of election by the select number,^rhe answer, therefore, could not apply to those charters :and as to the more ancient charters, it was untrue.The answer then suggests, as the ground for reasonablerestrictive bye-laws in this respect, the inconvenience of populardisorder and confusion.Southwark, Lane, 21.2260 WYCOMBE.Q*^'**^^- This is stated to be agreeable to law; but, as beforeGate of observed no authority is given for that position.tioDs. The origin of this doctrine, is, in all probability, to be foundin the preamble of the stat. 8 Hen. VI. ch. 7, as to theelections for counties, in which it is recited, that '' the eketions of knights of the shire have of late been made byexcessive number of people, whereby manslaughters, riot,'' batteries and divisions had arisen." But it must be remembered,that a principle upon which the legislative powermay think fit to act in framing a new law, is one thing; andthe assertion of a principle of the existing law is another;and there seems no ground for saying that this principlehad ever been adopted into the common law.It was not, therefore, agreeable to the law ; and that itwas not agreeable to their charters the question itself submittedto the judges admits on the face of it.It is then added, that although such ordinance cannot beshown, yet it shall be presumed in respect of such specialmanner of election ; so that, as observed before, the usage isto raise the presumption of the bye-law ; and the presumedbye-law is to support the usage.It is said parenthetically, " which special election could notbegin without common consent'* — why might it not havebcti;un by usurpation ? That is the whole question in dispute ;and it is a petitio principii to say that it began by consent,when the question is whether it did not begin by usurpation.But, it will be said, usurpation is not to be presumed : buteven were that to be conceded, was it not, at least, a sufficientprima facie proof of usurpation that it was against the charter.It is then added, " such reverend respect the law attributesto ancient and continual allowance and usage." And suchrespect will ever, on all proper occasions, be given to usage;because it tends to quiet men's possessions, and to putan end to disputes. But this is where there is nothingshown to the contrary. Usage then should prevail. But itis merely a presumption, and continues only donee probeturin contraries. And it can have no place where the darterof the crown, in whom the power of making the law for theWYCOMBE. 2261corporation is to the contrary, is vested : and where the ac ^^'^ ^^'acceptance of that charter conclusively binds the grantees. To Calc oflet in usage as a rule in such a case is to raise disputes tions.instead of allaying them — is to introduce uncertainty insteadof removing it — and makes the words of the king, and theacts of the parties, inoperative and useless.The conclusion that the usages have been so in Londonis not true ; for there the elections at that time were by thebody at large — the householders in the wardmotes, and thefreemen in the common halls.In conclusion, Lord Coke says, " all which the law hasprovided, as appears by this resolution" — which, undoubtedly,is a strange sum of the whole : because it is difficult tounderstand how the law could have well provided a thing,against which no single principle, case, authority, or dictum isquoted. Nor is it very obvious how the conclusion isarrived at, that it appears from the resolution that the lawhad ever provided it; because the experience of the past,could hardly be proved merely by the act done at the time.The resolution might prevent the assumed evil for the future,but would not prove that the law had done so before.It is true that there are some authorities for this decisionquoted in the margin. The first is Davies, 44, 6, where thecelebrated subsequent case of Ministry, in the second yearof King James's reign, is reported. But all there stated is,that '^ ancient grants have always a favourable interpretationaccording to usage and allowance ;" which is beyond allquestion. Whenever there is a doubtful expression used,usage must afford the interpretation of it.The next, which is the St. Saviour's Southwark case,*is not an authority on the point, but only establishes thata minority of persons shall bind a majority wilfully absent.The next, Jenkins' Centuries, 273, is only a repetition ofthis same resolution. And therefore adds nothing to the supposedauthority of it. Indeed, by the principles which arestated by the learned judge, at the close of that case, hedefines what is the proper effect of usage. He says, that Usage.• Lane, 21.case.2262 WYCOMBE.^^*o^^^^' « from length of time all things are presumed to be propertyCase of done : that usage countervails an unwritten law (whichCorporations.clearly cannot apply to a charter) if the usage be special ; andinterprets an unwritten law ; if the law is so general as tostand with the custom — that is if the custom and law arenot repugnant." And inasmuch as in the case under discussion,the charter and usage were repugnant — these principlesdid not apply, but on the contrary, excepted that case.Colchester fjjg Colchester case. inBulstrode, p. 71,* has also beenmuch relied upon, and, is like the Case of Corporations, deficientin one most material point affecting the present inquiry.It does not say distinctly that although confusion is bad,and they might, therefore, alter the mode of election, thatthey might do so for more than that occasion pro hac vice,so as to bind those only who assented to the alterationleaving in doubt the important point whether such analteration would bind their successors. It is clear that thepassage was to be qualified in some manner, because it closeswith the words, " and not otherwise ;*' and it does notexactly appear to what branch of the sentence these wordsapply ; so that its meaning is very doubtful. It must alsobe remembered, that in the case supposed it speaks only of apopular election, not saying; that it was required by thecharter; and therefore it might be only a popular election, asproved by former usage, which, upon the principles quoted byJenkins, might be countervailed by a later usage. Indeed,this seems to be the obvious meaning of the case, because itgoes on to make an exception, " if the charter requires theelection to be made by all ;" for it says, " But if bi their^^ charter they are to be elected by them, then this not to bealtered'' It is true it goes on to add, " but by and with the*' general assent of the whole town, and so by this means totake away confusion." But this is the same as was assertedjust before; and it makes no exception with reference tocharters ; but juts them on the same footing as the electionsmentioned before ; so the exception is stated to be the sameas the rule, which is absurd ; and consequently there nest• See before, p. 1517, 1518.WYCOMBE. 2253be some error or alteration, either by interpolation promise ^^^^^^^'sion, in the text, which makes this case, as well as that in 4 Colchester' ' case.Co. by no means safe authorities, on which to found a doctrineso contrary to reason and principle, as that the createdcan alter the law imposed upon it by the creator ; or, in otherwords, the grantees of the crown alter by bye-laws the constitutionwhich the king has prescribed for them. If thechance of popular confusion was to be taken into the accountbefore the charter was granted, the king had the opportunity,and must be presumed to have availed himself of it. If, onthe contrary, the popular confusion arose subsequently to thegranting the charter, then the rule which had been laid down *must be altered by the same power and means by which therule itself was made, namely, by the king's grant, accepted bythe burgesses, " and not otherwise*'The only remaining case cited in the margin, is that ofHobart 15, in which there is nothing bearing upon thispoint.It was, however, said that this Case of Corporations had cJJJora-long been acted upon. Admitting that to be true, still it has softenhappened, that authorities of even longer existence thanthis, have after more mature consideration been overruled,when they were found to be either of no authority, or againstprinciple. It has been attempted to be shown, that thiscase is defective in both those points.But the truth is that it has been very little acted upon; —has even been doubted as an authority ; and in the marginof the report itself, the point supposed to be decided by it,is stated with a query.The Case of Corporations therefore, not being a legal authority; and for the reasons suggested, not supported by principleor prior decisions ; it may be allowable, with all properrespect to the august tribunal before whom it was discussed,to question the propriety of that decision, which was inagreat degree founded upon it.It was justly observed by Lord Mansfield, as quotedbefore, that in matters connected with Corporation or municipallaw, certainty is of the greatest importance. And'* therefore wUcM tier was so obvious a ground of dtsupported by maott-ous authorities —-that the range wBihad prevailed io the borough of Combe, being contraryto the enter, could not be supported — it seem*extraordinary At ft plain course, which would have beintelligible to tiftrj capacity, should have been abandoned;and the intricate and unsatisfactory discussion of subttfpoints substituted in its stead.The only real stet in the case n-as, that there Ind htm auso^e for the salaet body to elect ; — but that usage was Cointray to the clMitar, and therefore void iu law.However it wai made the ground upon which a lost bye-ianwas to be fmomed. How with pi-oriel, could a poetbye-law be faded upon the evidence of a usage that was,upon the above principle, illegal ? But it was assumed tohave existed u Aet; and being so, it led to the strictlytechnical question, whether a power of making bye-laws,being given to ft helmet body, an inherent power still n-gained in tha body at large, to make bye-laws, which powercould be presumed to have been exercised, as the foundationof the usage which exist.How unintelligible these minute distinctions must be to thepublic, it is unnecessary to observe !The only practical remark necessary to be made, is, thatthese nice distinctions were unnecessarily resorted to ; and allthe difficulties of the case might have been avoided by adheringto the plain and intelligible rule, which would baresuperseded all the subsequent astute reasoning — that m>usage could prevail against the express words of the charter.That principle adhered to, there would have been no groundfor the presumption of the bye-law ; and the decision wouldhave then be) intelligible to the parties concerned, and thepublic.IRELAND.— Drogheda.The jury found by special verdict, that by charter endancient custom and us^e from time immemorial, hithertoused in the town of Drogheda,' the torn of freemen of the• 9 C. III. Mir. T. B. R. Ireland.Ireland-DUBLIN. 2265town, were by their birth, and other persons having served Qco^g* ^^'a legal and accustomed apprenticeship of seven years to any Birth,trade, to any freemen of the said town, were by their apparent ^^JJSp"ticeship, entitled to be admitted and sworn freemen of thetown, and to enjoy all the liberties, privileges, and franchisesto the place and office belonging.DUBLIN.The same appears also to have been the usage in Dublin,* 1826.though subject to some qualification; and it is to be fearedthat the reader will consider from the following extract, thatthe intricacies which had intruded themselves into the doctrineof corporations in England, had also extended themselvesto the sister kingdom.It has been lately pointed out, that in the Steyning case,the committee properly rejected the connexion of the guildswith the municipal body ; and it will be seen in this caserelative to Dublin, that the same untenable doctrines of corporationsby prescription were maintained in Ireland as inEngland. It was alleged that Dublin was a corporation byprescription — which can unquestionably be proved to beinaccurate.The following is the substance of the marginal note.A writ of mandamus, directed to the corporation of DmJ-lin, to admit Edward Adcock a freeman, stated a custom,that every person, being of the age of 21 years, and a son Son.of a person who was a freeman of the corporation, and afreeman or freebooter of one of the minor guilds, at thetime of the birth of such son, hath a right, in respectthereof, to be admitted and sworn a freeman of the corporationof Dublin." The return stated, " that it was a*' corporation by prescription ; that every person who wasthe son of a person who was a freeman of the corporation,and a freeman or freebooter of one of the minor guilds, atthe time of the birth of his son, must, before he can, inrespect thereof, be admitted and sworn a freeman of thecorporation, &c., have been approved of by the two• Adcock V, the Lord Mayor of Dublin, &c. Batty's Rep. 628.2266 iBSL4MD.-Dimnr.^^haneheB of the coqumtiop flit m io.waf^ the kmayor, for the tone beings eod eldennen, end these^liflb, for the time beings end the commoner fitting'different apartments el an aafemUy of thecalled a quarter aafemfaly, notwidielaiidiiig^ genoa, the son of a freeman, may be hand^orfteebrother ofooeof theminorgailds." It thi n illica cmtom, that the penon applying tx admiration ahoddpresent a petition to each bnmch of the corporation, who hadezerdied a discretionary right of complying with, or ntm^single pmyerof each petition, without assigning or bo^gfrequired to aaugn any reason; and that the opinion of Ha;sberiflBi and oomnume on such petition ahoald be takcnby^iaUai only ; and that without such appnyral no penon hmkbeen admitted a freeman ; and that a petition was pre a gn ladby Edward Adcock to the hid mayor and aldermen at .a^quarter assembly, which they rejected ; wherefore, the corporationcould not admit him a freeman. It was held (aatoimatter of form) — L That the retort was not aigomei^^tatiTe, and was to a certain intent in general, whisk wassufficient; and that as it did not native the right claimedin the writ, but admitted it, subject to a qualification, itwas unnecessary that it should traverse the right as stated ;and that for the same reason, the supposal in the writ wassufficiently answered, it not having been controverted, butmerely qualified.2. That it appeared with sufficient certainty in the return,that E. Aa's petition was rejected by virtue of the customtherein stated, and at the same quarter assembly at which itwas presented.3. That it was unnecessary that the return should negativethe right of E, A., as being 21 years of age.As to matter of substance. It was held, that the customthat either branch of the corporation might, withoutassigning any reason, reject a petition for admission to freedom,was not unreasonable and void upon the ground ofits involving a caprices right of rgectioriy or its being contraryto public policy, or its savouring of arbitrary power.Ireland-DUBLIN. 2267Secondly it was held, that the custom to reject or elect by Q^^g^^^-ballot was not unreasonable or void."The principal error in this case appears to be founded onthe assumption, that Dublin was a corporation by prescription,without which, the usages that are alleged could not besupported. And certainly it is a strong assumption topresume, that the election by ballot has existed so long, thatit could be attributed to immemorial custom.The discretionary power asserted in the mayor and burgesses,is undoubtedly founded in law, because they alwayswere intrusted from the earliest times, and ought to be sostill, with the power of saying whether each person whoclaims to be a burgess is fit and proper by condition, station,and character to be placed in that situation.In that form, and in that form only, can this power bereconciled with the law.SLIGO.Another case occurred in Ireland two years before the 1824.preceding, in which the same species of doctrine which hasbeen adopted in England with reference to the right of theinhabitants, was also extended to Ireland. And, it seems,with the same disregard of the ancient law and the principleswhich were applicable to municipal bodies. Nor can it beconsidered, that independently of t^^o^e, there is the slightestdifficulty in construing the words of the charter. The decisiontherefore, in truth, proceeds upon the usage ; the valueof which must depend upon the means or opportunity whichthe inhabitants had of enforcing their individual rights, andthe inducement they had to do so. Besides which it is to beconsidered, that, strictly speaking, the admission of some ofthe burgesses only, does not prove that the others were notentitled. In truth it is not affirmative usage, but negativenon-user which is relied upon; the whole substance beingthat no inhabitant who has not been admitted, has insistedupon his right. What evidence is there to show that hewished or desired it?* or that any person had been improveV. Atwood, 4 Barn. & Adol. 481, when it was laid, that the election7et*"- percy excluded ? because, from the very reason and naUre14. of the thing, as well a» from positive law, and the wbtJetenor of our institutions, it is clear that there was somediscretion iu the mayor and burgesses; and that they wennot bound to take every man, but only such as from condition,station, and character, were honestly and conscientiouslyfit to be admitted. The mage, therefore, is not ofthat great weight which seems to have been assented ;when opposed to the plain words of the charter, it appearincredible that a. doubt should have been entertained upMthe subject,The words are, that " all the inhabitants shall be a bocorporate" Who could accept that charter? Who were Ipersons to whom it was granted ? When they came fortito accept it, who could say to any inhabitant, except theexcluded by the law (as women, peers, ecclesiastics, minefelons, &c.); that they should not accept it? Who couldpresume, contrary to the words of the king's charter,make any election or exclusion '*.The real construction of the clause giving a discretion asadmission to tic jirovust and free burgesses is, that they ato exercise that discretion according to the law, with refhence to the condition, station, and character of the party, andnot arbitrarily or capriciously.The former construction is equally as consistent with thewords of the charter as the latter. And one is consistentwith law and reason ; the other opposed to both.Who will say that the latter was the intention of thecrown ? Who will say that the king's charter was intendedto support arbitrary and capricious selection — to generatedissatisfaction — to rouse jealousies — to create disunion? Ifthe rejection is to be founded upon cause, then all theobjections are removed, and the charter of the king is just,reasonable and wise. It appears impossible to doubt nptmthe construction.The claim as the ton of a freeman, being a branch of theancient common law, is equally applicable to Sligo, as toDJiht hic been mid in every iuftncc by ehoic*, udittuttSLIGO. 2269any other place ; but in fact, for the reasons given before, ^^^^ ^^-it is not at present properly applicable to any. 18^4.The following is an abstract of the case : —In the case of the King v. the Provost, Free Burgesses, and 1824.Commonalty of the Borough of Sligo.* It appeared thatJames I., in the eleventh year of his reign, incorporated the ^|f6[37'town of Sligo, and in the charter were the following clauses :Quod infra burgum praedictum sit unum corpus corporate** et political, consistent de uno preposition, duodecim liberia'^ burgensibus, et de communicate. Et quod omnes inhabittantes infra praedicta villa, et terres praedicta, de cetero^* in perpetuum sint, et grunt vigore praesenti unum corpuscorporate, &c. per nomen Preposition, LiberumBurgensium, et Communicates Burgh de Sligo,Ac omnes inhabitantes villa praedicta, et totidem tales** alios homines quos prsepositus et liberi burgesses ejusdemburgi, pro tempore existences, in liberate burgi'^ praedicti admiring, volumes, constituents, et ordinatesfore et esse de communicate burgi praedicti."The charter then provides for the election of the provostannually " de discretioribus liberia burgensibus," andfor the election of the free burgesses, " de meritorious et** magis probioribus inhabitantibus burgi praedicti."The plaintiff being desirous of being admitted to the freedomof the borough, presented a petition to the provost and Petition,two burgesses, claiming it upon two grounds :1^/, As being the son of a freeman.2ndlyy As an inhabitant of the borough.The application was refused by the provost, &c., who alsomade an affidavit that he had examined the corporation Affidavit,books, with a view of ascertaining "whether any right existed'* derived from any usage or custom of the borough, entitlingpersons, by virtue of residence or inhabitancy, to demandas of right their freedom within the borough ; and thatthere was not a single precedent which he had been able• 2 Fox and S. 96.7 e22260 SLIGO.o^rfBeiv. " to discover ill the books of any such admission, or even of1824. " any claim of such a right."The affidavit then states, that there was no usage or customentitling persons as of right to the freedom of the borough, aseldest son and heir at law of a freeman; and that the porousof Sligo was not a corporation by prescription, but derived allits franchises and privileges under the charter of James I., bjwhich it was incorporated.For ihc The counsel in support of the rule contended, that Sligo notbeing a borough by prescription, but by charter, no question ofusage could arise, but the case ought to be decided on theconstruction of the charter.That the plaintiff claimed to be admitted to the freedomas an inhabitant. The charter having expressly recited thatit was granted, on the petition of the inhabitants, and for thepurpose of encouraging settlers. But if nobody had a rightbut those capriciously chosen by the provost and the freeburgesses, the object would be defeated. That unless " omnesinhabitantes" mean '' some inhabitantes' his claim couldnot be defeated.That with respect to the clause, defining who the commonaltyshould be; it would be relied on that the antecedent toft'** quos" is " onincs," but that was neither a grammatical, noratrue construction, as the word " alF' would not have beenused, if selection had been intended ; and ** quos'' mustrefer to the last antecedent " alios ;" which would confinethe elective power of the provost and burgesses, to thosewho were not inhabitants. If the antecedent to " quos" beomnes'* the provost and burgesses would have beenappointed before an integral member of it was called intoexistence, for there would be no commonalty, until anelection took place.But if it be held that the commonalty consists of all theinhabitants, and that the power to be elected, is confined tothe alios homines, not inhabitants, the construction would begrammatical, and the object of the inhabitants attained.As to the annual election of the provost, the free burgessesSLIGO. 2261would naturally be elected from the commonalty ; and the ^°'^'^-provision of the charter can only be consistent with the con- 1824.destruction, that the ** commonalty" was to be composed ofall the inhabitants.The learned counsel then concluded his argument, byciting the English statute of the 43rd Elizabeth, c. 2, RexV. Nicholson,* to show that the meaning of the word " inhabitant*' did not extend to all dwelling in any shire, butto such only as be resident householders ; and that althoughusage might be of use in interpreting an ambiguous charter,it could not be relied on where the meaning was plain andclearsThe counsel in reply, urged the case of the King v. AgainstChester, J in which Lord Peterborough said, that " the courtwould not interfere against a long continued usizge, upon thewords of a charter which were in any degree doubtful."That the usage in this case had been uniform against theclaim to the freedom of the borough as an inhabitant ; andthe utmost that could be said of the Sligo charter was, thatits construction was doubtful.And that in the clause of the charter which describes whoshall be the commonalty "quos," may be referred both toomnes" and to *• totidem alios." Also words of restrictionwere not necessarily confined to the last antecedent connectedby the word " and."||The learned counsel further urged, that the usage hadbeen uniform, and not inconsistent with the words of thecharter. That in the case of the King v. Chester, the usagehad not been uniform, and yet the court would not interfere.If by this charter, an inhabitant is entitled, as such, to hisfreedom, he would not lose it, having ceased to inhabit ; andit never could have been the intention, that when a personhad inhabited, for perhaps a year, that at the end of 20 yearshe might claim the freedom of the borough.ITiat with respect to the argument, " if the first inhabit12 East, 342. 1 2 Inst. 703.I Hex t<. Grosvenor, Cases temp. Hard. by Midway, 41. $ 1 Maule & S. 103.II ThellusoD V. Woodward, 4 Ives. 330.2262 SLiGO.ocorgejv. tants of Sligo were not the commonalty this anomakNi18*24. consequence would have followed, that the corpoimtkiwould have existed without one of its internal parts*—which w as answered in Viner's Abr, tit. Corporation, & ly pL1 4. — where it is laid down, that ** a corporation may be witha heady or without a head, and the head and members may beappointed after the foundation, and the foundation may bebefore any material fabric is erected."The roll of charters has been examined, and correspondsgenerally with this ; and the usage has been the same iievery corporation in which the commonalty has been' createdby the same words.Biishe, Chief Justice. — ^^The plaintiffs claim rests upon Urhesitancy ; but there has been no instance of such a clarasucceeding : on the contrary, from the foundation of thecorporation by the charter of James I., the freemen hatebeen uniformly elected by the provost and burgesses.There are passages in the charter not free from obscurity,but none incapable of a construction consistent with theuniform and ancient usage ; and as other charters, some inthe same, and others in nearly the same words, have beenacted upon uniformly in the same manner — the court willnot encourage by its order the agitation of a question whichlias been so long settled by usage ; and by so doing, we adoptthe (decision of the Court of King's Bench, in England, inthe King v. the Mayor and Citizens of Chester.'* In support of the claim of inhabitancy, some passages inthe charter are relied upon.The first is, that in which it is declared that within theborough there is to be one body corporate and politic, consistingof one provost, 12 free burgesses and commonalty,and that all the inhabitants within the town and lands shallbe one body politic, &c.** Now this only means, that all the ' inhabitants' shall beincorporated by that name ; but it no more means that allthe inhabitants shall be the commonalty, than that all theinhabitants shall be the provost and free burgesses — whichwould be absurd, and yet equally warranted by a strict con-Sago. 2263structioii of the words ; that passage, in fruit, only designates ^^^^8*'^-the name by which the inhabitants when incorporated shall 1824.be known.The next passage is that in which, after appointing thefirst provost and first burgesses by name, the charter proceedsto describe who shall be the ' commonalty,' in these words :And all the inhabitants of the said town, and as many otheras the provost and free burgesses of the borough for thetime being, shall admit into the liberties of the borough,we will, constitute, and ordain, shall be of the commonaltyof the borough The argument of the prosecutor uponthis passage has turned upon a grammatical subtlety. Itwas said first, that the description of those who were to beadmitted (quos in the Latin), must be confined to the totidemalios, that is, the strangers who are there made admissible,because it would be a solecism to use the universal word,omnes,' and afterwards to qualify it by a word which meansnot all, but some. But this is a mistake ; and it is agreeableto the idiom, both of the Latin and English language, toreduce the meaning of a comprehensive term by a subsequentqualification. It was also said that the word * quos ' mustbe referred to the last antecedent; but it is an answer to thatto say, that a relative may be governed by two or more antecedents,and that no mode of speech is more common orcorrect. It is not necessary to carry the observations on thispassage further than to say, that it is capable of an interpretationconsistent with the usage.There is more difficulty," continued the Chief Justice,'' in dealing with another passage in the charter, which, afterproviding for the supplying vacancies in the office of provostout of the burgesses, provides for filling up vacancies amongthe burgesses out of the inhabitants ; which at first seems asif the eligible body must go beyond the commonalty, if allinhabitants are not the commonalty; but to this it is ananswer to say, that the eligible body is not necessarily to beconfined to the members of the corporation, but may beextern to them ; and that if it were so confined, it would beareasonable construction to say, that the meaning was toexclude sadi itnagerB as had beni admitted into the cob-molly,tnm bong burgesses, and to read the passage tintsflat tbeTicaacieB amongst the burgesses should befiUedifscam each of the commonalty as are inhabitanU, and oatBtraiigeiBt Tint Obstruction is not forced, uiid is soppoittdby th(! imifaim Omne."It is ladflM to comment upon the grammatical and writingargumeilU fbniided upon the precise words of the charter; battlepoeitiaD— titanic un inhabitant was entitled to his fiwdom, ho mold not lose it, having ceased to inhabit; and tealit could not hne been the iiitviitiou, that a person having ,inhabited fm ayaar, might ut the end of 20 yean, claiiathe fii I ilnm irtfiinii to have proceeded upon & forge Uiilneaiof the geoanl law upon this subject. The term " fretdamTseems to fan been used without considering at the moment,its real inquit. It relates, as all the documents have fibown,to fn^edoai ix fiw condition under the common law — thatonce obtained eoald certainly never be lost; but if a persoiijin consaqwDM of his being an inhabitant householder, wuentitled to be ooe of its hunjt&ies, upon quitting the placetha would low that title, and cease to be a burgess ; but if heshould return to the place, and become again an inhabitanthouseholder, then he would be enticed to be a burnetagain; whether his absence had been long or short; andwhat is there unreasonable in that state of things, or inconsistentwith the probable intention of the crown?TheChief Justice apparently relied upon the uniform electionof the provost and burgesses; but that is equally consistentwith either view of the charter. There is no doubt they wereto elect, the question does not turn upon that point — but uponwhether they were to elect arbitrarily and capriciously, andreject without causes-or whether they were to elect accedingto the condition, station and character of the applicant.With this case therefore, the observations upon Irelandmaybe concluded, as they were brun, with the assertion, thattheir municipal institutions were of the same origin, and badthe same objected effect as those in England; and all the Italprinciples and reasonings are equally applicable to both."LONDON. 2266OeoigelV.london.The following case was decided in England, upon the questionof the fitness of an individual to fill a municipal office,with reference to the acts connected with him, upon an inquiryby witnesses ; and not according to any arbitrary or capriciousgrounds.To a mandamus to the lord mayor and aldermen of Long ^^^'doTif^ to admit and swear an individual to the office ofalderman, they returned, that the court of mayor and aldermenhad from time immemorial the authority of examiningand determining whether or not any person returned tothem by the court of wardmote as an alderman was accordingto the discretion and sound consciences of the mayor andaldermen, a fit and proper person, and duly qualified in thatbehalf, whensoever the fitness and qualification of the personso returned had been brought into question by the petitionof any person interested therein ; and that it was a necessaryqualification of the person to be admitted to the office ofalderman, that he should be a fit and proper person tosupport the dignity, and discharge the duties of the office ;that the party in question having been returned to them bythe court of wardmote as duly elected, a petition by personsinterested in the election was presented to them, chargingcircumstances which rendered him an unfit person to beadmitted to the office of alderman — that they took the petitioninto consideration, and having heard witnesses, didadjudge according to their discretion and sound consciences,that he was not a person fit and proper to support thedignity and discharge the duties of the office.It was held, that the custom set out in the return, wasgood and valid in law : and that as the fitness of the personto be admitted was to be determined according to the discretionof the mayor and aldermen, it was sufficient for them tostate in the return that they had exercised their discretion,and adjudged the party unfit, without giving particularreasons.• 3 BarD. & Adol. 255. *The following; case eliuuld also be added,* as con'stabling how little justified Dr. Brady was in ftnutd!L ing his argument upon the assumption that burgesses »Pile Banbury charter meant capital burgesses. The deep*I . sign wf the King's Bench being directly to the contrary.By charter of Car. U. there was to be in the borough oft'Budbury a mayor, aldermen, and twenty-four capital bof*Largesses. On the death or removal of an alderman, the mayorI and aldermen, or the greater part of them, were to elect a ]I • capital burgess to supply his place: when a capital burnetL died, &c., the mayor, aldermen, and other capital burgessesr the greater part of them, were to elect a successor amongthe inhabitants and burgesses : and the mayor was to be annuallyelected on a certain day " by the burgesses of theborough, or the greater number of them," with the consentof twenty-four freeholders and inhabitants, to he chosen uI directed by the charter. In practice, the muyorhad alwaysf 4>een elected by the capital burgesses only. At the electionof mayor on the charter day in 1S32, there was not n majorityof the number of twenty-sur capital burgeoocQ pnuw t,and no other burgesses attended.It was held, " that this did not avoid the election, for traitthe word ' burgesses ' in the charter (where it treated of theelection of mayor) cove not be construed to mean only a^Utdburgesses ; that the right of election did not devolve uponthe body of capital blesses by the mere forbeaiwtoe <^4ksother burgesses to interfere ^ and that the capital duchesses,in electing the mayor, acted in the cafaoITT ofBUROESBSB HBRBLY."WILLIAM IV.Notwithstanding the parliamentary franchise forms no partof our inquiry, it is impossible to close this work without areference to one portion of it which is materially connectedwith the due formation of the lists of the burgesses, A modeof framing the list of the voters has been established by theact of the Legislature, and had experience proved the practicalutility of that system, it would be expedient to abideby it.But without any disposition needlessly to censure or complain,it is impossible not to say that a more imperfect planhas rarely been suggested ; and it is not immaterial to add,that it has been accompanied with no small portion of expence.There can be no doubt but the gentlemen who have beenappointed to superintend the formation of these lists, havedone all that knowledge, talent, and zeal could effect in theundertaking; and have by their intercourse with the conflictingparties tended in a great degree to lessen the virulenceof election disputes. But it was impossible to do more thanwas effected by the imperfect means placed in their hands.The real defect in the system is, that it was intendedmerely to form a list of voters ; which had never beforeexisted in this country — and, it is believed, in no other tilla very recent date.Before this experiment was tried, the conflicting motivesof privilege and burden operated upon the lists whichwere formed, from whence the voters were ascertained : — asthe land-tax assessments — the poor-rates — the entries offreemen — for which service had been performed, or someexpence for stamps or otherwise had been incurred. Anda variety of considerations induced those who made the liststo endeavour to form them as perfectly as possible. On theother hand, it was the immediate interest of the person, whoecharged, not to incur the expence if he could legalavoid it. But in the present mode it is not the interest ofany person to take care that the lists are correct — the timeat which they will be brought into action is uncertain — thosewho form them are totally indifferent to the subject, and hawneither inducement nor knowledge enough to malice themcomplete or systematic.On the other hand, in some particular places, when a temporaryexcitement happens to exist, an unusual effort iimade by partisans to crowd upon the register as many votesas can be placed there ; or to embarrass the inquiry with asmany objections as can be suggested — whilst in other places,the utmost indifference prevailing, the omissions are numerous,and otleu of thotte who would be raoat qualified toeve a disc rial ignatius vote.In truth, atlcr a short time, it is obvious that the lists willbe altogether under the control of active agents.To those who have had an opportunity of witnessing theoperation of this system, it must be known, that more imperfectlists of the voters have never been found than sinceit caria into action.But it is not our province to suggest alterations or come-tonsin this respect — it is sufficient to say, that it is not asystem which holds out any inducement to carry it further —but affords a strong reason, as fiu' as the municipal institutionsare concerned, to look for some better method ofascertaining the burgesses in the boroughs.The errors to be avoided are those of merely mskiog alist of burgesses, without the self-acting and correcting principleof opposing interests, resulting from the possession ofprivileges, and the imposition of burdens. And the other ofmaking lists for any temporary purpose, instead of framingthem with the intention of their being permanent and continual.Not only are these principles clear, but, fortunately,the mode of carrying them into execution is distinctly pointedout by the law ; and can be effected in a form and mannerparticularly acceptable to the people. For by the old law thelist of persons who were to enjoy the municipal privileges wasPRESCRIPTION. 2269made in the public court of the people ; in the presence of all W"**- ^V.the inhabitants ; under the sanction of a sworn judge: andregulated, and corrected by the decision of a jury. And thelist so formed remained as the permanent record of the burgessesof the place, entitled to all the privileges, but subjectto all the burdens ; and liable to be called upon at all times,as well for the exercise of franchises, as for the discharge ofduties.Such is the plain, simple, public, and inexpensive mode offorming the lists which the law prescribes — reason sanctionsand practice would easily execute. And it is no smallrecommendation of such a system, that it will not be underthe control of agents or others, but will in fact be executedby the people themselves, in their proper turn and rotation,which will be the surest guard against all mal-practices orimproper conduct.Another reform, probably as great as any effected in the Prescribelaw at any period of our history, has been workedduring this reign, by the passing of an act for shortening thetime of prescription in certain cases.It recites, that time immemorial was by the law of England,in many cases, considered to " include and denote the wholeperiod of time from the time of Richard L :" which seemsto be but an imperfect mode of describing that rule of lawwhich was created by statute ; viz. that although the lawgenerally required the production of written charters anddocuments as evidence of legal title, yet, in certain cases,rights which had been enjoyed in the reign of Henry ILshould be still enjoyed, without the production of anycharter to support them : which is the real foundation of thedoctrine of prescription.It is necessary to mention this statute, that so great areform may not appear to have been altogether overlooked;but it is not requisite to add any other observation respectingit, as it does not aiBTect the present inquiry.The only remaining public fact necessary to be noted, is ^X"^''■ the Commission which his majesty was advised to issue (or '- the puqxtee of obtaining information respecting the condition 'of the municipal corporations in the country. iSerious doubts were entertained by msuiy, best informedupon these subjects, as to the legality of the commission*I. That the king, by virtue of bis prerogative, is enabled, asapart of the executive functions uf the crown — and constitutionallyspeaking, is bound — to superintend the due exeat 'tiori of the law in the several municipal institutions of the 'country, cannot be doubted. And that for such purposes,an oath might perhaps be ordered to be administered, in orderto obtain the most correct information. But whether tbacrown can with propriety investigate the finances — or inquireinto the property of the corporations — who are its grantees — iis n question involved in great and serious difficulties. Thecases cited in the note, may supply the curious reader withthe means of investigating that point, if it should be thoughtnecessary.But comparatively speaking, it is now become of littleimportance. The commission has executed its functions:and the generality of the corporations, much to their credit,and consistently with their honour, have submitted to aninvestigation which has in most instances relieved them fromsuspicion and jealousy.The public wait the result of the inquiries of the learnedcommissioners.Whatever may have been the question respecting thereality of the commission, its fruits only now remain to bereceived.If the inquiry should have led to a full investigation of thehistory of all the municipal institutions, and tracing themfrom their earliest origin, should have pursued them throughtheir course of good and evil; and distinguishing their rightsfrom their usurpations, should afford the Legislature the means• IBl. Com-aW); IIdm.96 ti F. N.B., p. 362; F. N.B llld; F. N.BIMc; 4 Init.,cap.28,p. 162; Slat. Wrath. 2, cap, 39, 13 Edwanl I.; Sut.!4.Edwlrdlll.; 3Init.,p.60, 18 Edward III. ; SUt.2. cap. 1; 2 Iiut.479j'2 It.COMMISSION. 2271of supporting the former and correcting the latter, the public Will. IV.will owe a debt of gratitude to those who have effected soimportant a purpose.But if the indiscreet zeal of party feeling shall have obtrudedupon them only frivolous complaints of the presentstate of the corporations, or the past application of theirfinances, so as to have induced them to embody in theirreport, local prejudices and jealousies — such a course may gofar to counteract that conciliatory spirit so generally displayedby the corporations during the late inquiry : whichholds forth the strongest guarantee for their co-operation inthe reform of their abuses — an object so essential to thepermanent interests of the bodies themselves and the communityat large.That all may unite in so desirable an effort is ferventlyto be wished. The course to be pursued is plain andobvious. Every means should be adopted to uphold andmaintain, with general concurrence, the authority and governmentof the local jurisdictions of the boroughs : and to abate,with unsparing vigour and honest determination, every abuseand usurpation.The END.LISTSOPBOROUGHS, BURGESSES, AND CHARTERS.I. — A List of the Boroughs or Burgesses mentioned in Domesday, in theseveral Counties, in the order they are entered.Kent. — Dover, Canterbury, Rochester,Sandwich, Romney, Hythe, Seseltre,Norwich.Sussex. — Chichester, Lewes, HastingsSteyninf^r, Arundel, Pevensey.Hampshire. — Winchester, Christchurch(Thuinam), Stockbridge (Som-bone),Southampton (Hampton).Berkshire. — Wallingford, Reading.Wiltshire. — Malmsbury, Axminster,Wilton, Bradford, Cane, Sud-tone,Bedwin, Denies (Theodulve-side), Cricklade.Dorsetshire. — Dorchester, Bridport,Wareham, Shaftesbury.Somerset. — Militum Port, Rochester,Bath, Taunton, Langport, Ax-bridge.Devonshire. — Exeter, Barnstaple,(Jkehampton, Totness, Bedford.M 1 1) I) L E s ex. — London (burgesses once).Hertfordshire. — Hertford, St. Alban's.Buckinghamshire. — Buckingham.Oxfordshire. — Oxford.Gloucestershire. — Tewkesbury,Gloucester.Worcestershire. — Worcester, Wick(Droitwich).Herefordshire. — Hereford.Cambridgeshire. — Cambridge.Huntingdonshire. — Huntingdon.Bedfordshire. — Bedford.Leicestershire. — Leicester.Northamptonshire. — NorthamptonWarwickshire. — Warwick, Tarn-worth.Staffordshire. — Stafford.Shropshire. — Shrewsbury.Cheshire. — Chester.Nottinghamshire. — Nottingham.Derbyshire. — Derby.Yorkshire. — York.Lincolnshire. — Lincoln, Stamford.Essex. — Maldon, Colchester.Norfolk. — yarmouth, Norwich, Thetford.Suffolk. — Ipswich, Sudbury, Dun-with.Eye.7 FII. — ^A List of Borovobs moi mentioned in DomDAT, and ttwhen they first af^iear as BoBouoas.BSDrOBDSHIBS.Constable . . 1100. l Henry I.BSBKSHIKB.Abingdon . . 1551. iMsry.Windsor . . 1367. 12 Edward I.Newborn . . l301.30Edwird I.Buckinghamshire.1299. 38 Edwud I.1555. aFh.&M.llsik|!ir . ia99,38EdwirdI.Wflndofer Henry III.Wyeonibe . 1236, 21 Henry III.Cambridgeshire.Univnsitjf of CambridgeJBocbttmGUUngtonOuBdUDtdGnnqponndHMSftOHLsimeestonLiskeardLostwithielLooe, EastLooe, WestNewportPennedPenrynIonianSt. IvesSt. GermainsSt. MakesSt. Michael'sSaltashTregony .TruroWainfleet .CumCarlisleCockermouthEgmont .Wilton1003, iJamoil.Cornwall.Henry HI.Henry III.l583,27Eli»dMth.Henry UI.1340, 14 Edward III.Edwardlll.1300, 3 John.1190, 3 Richard I.Henry III.Edward I.1340, 14 Edwardlll.1340, 14 Edwardlll.1325, 19 Edward II.Henry III.1340, 14 Edwardlll.1558, 1 Elizabeth.1562, 5 Elizabeth.1562, 5 Elizabeth.1564. 7 Edward VI.Henry III.1200, 2 John.Henry II.1340, 14 Edwardlll.Ireland.Henry III.1292, 20 Edward I.1295, 23 Edward I.Henry III.DBToxaaiBB.Ashharton . log/T^MEfimmbBemlBtoiiBndnindiGallopDartmouthRiinouthrr TT f H 1 1 W WoHomtMiLid fowlModoQiyFlymoDQi .P lyiuyto n .South MotionXvnslodk .iiYeron1584.371319, 6134Q»1413SS, 6lSg0» BB Ed«Bt]1301, SB1300^14119fk llote.1301,30 M B Md I>1J1395,191615,13111301,30TonuBBtonDOBBBTBHIBB.Blanchard . . 1348,99Lyme . 1311, 5Pork . 119QI, 8Weymouth andMekombe . 1957, 49 BmjUtDurham County.Durham . 1189, 1 Richard I.Hartlepool 1200, 3 John.Wamemuth . 1246, 31 Henry III.Essex.Hannah . 1343, 17EdwaidIU.Gloucestershire.Camden . 1248, 33 Henry III.Cirencester 1399, 1 Henry IV.Hampshire.Beresford . . 1299, 28 Edward I.Alton . 1294, 23 Edward I.Andover . 1 307, 1 Edward II.Basingstoke 1227, 12 Henry III.Fareham . . 1305, 34 Edwardlll.Lymington . 1 535, 27 Elizabeth.Newport, Isle ofWight . 1294, 23 Edward I.Newton, Isle ofWight . . 1285, 13 Edward LOdium 1203, 5 John.BOROUGHS NOT IN DOMESDAY.Hampshire — continued.Overtop 1291, 20 Edward I.PetersfieldPortsmouthWhitGh\irchYarmouth, Isle ofWight .1103, 3 Henry I.1194, 6 Richard I.1199, 1 John.LedburyLeinsterRoseWeobleyStratfordFavershamGreenwichTunbridgeClitheroe .LancasterLiverpool .NewtonPrestonWiganBostonGrahamGrimsby .1294, 23 Edward LHerefordshire.Bromyard 1359, 33 Edward IH.1359, 33 Edward UL1297, 26 Edward L1359, 33 Edward HI.1297, 2C Edward I.Hertfordshire.Berkhamsted . 1340, 14 Edward HL1310, 4 Edward U.Kent.1381, 30 Edward I.1557, 4&5 Ph. & M.1294, 23 Edward LQueenborough . 1368, 42 Edward HLLancashire.1329, 3 Edward I.1193, 5 Richland.1200, 2 John1558, 1 Elizabeth1183, 30 Henry H.1399, 1 Henry IV.Lincolnshire.1352, 26 Edward III.1200, 2 John1200, 2 JohnMiddlesex.Westminster 1547, 1 Edward VI.Monmouthshire.Monmouth 1255, 40 Henry III.Norfolk.Lynn 1200, 2 JohnBromholm 1228, 13 Henry III.Castle Rising . 1558, 1 ElizabethNorthamptonshire.Bracelet . . 1547, 1 Edward VI.Higham Ferrers 1554, 1 Ph. & M.Peterborough . 1215, 1 Henry III.Northumberland.Flamborough . I260, 45 Henry HI.Northumberland — continued.Berwick-upon-lVeedCambridge 1200, 2 John^lorpeth . 1553, 1 Mary. . 1116, 17 Henry I.Tynemouth Henry HI.Nottingham.Newark . . 1674, 29 Charles II.Retford . 1275, 4 Edward I.OxfordshireBanbury . 1553, 1Chipping Norton 1299, 28Haddington 1300, 30University of Oxford. 1603, 1Whitney . . 1307, 1Woodstock . 1301, 30Hereford . 1305, 34MaryEdward I.Edward I.James I.Edward 11.Edward I.Edward I.Shropshire.Bishop's Castle 1572, 15 Elizabeth1220, 11 Henry III.^1399, 1 Henry IV.1300, 29 Edward I.1468, 8 Edward IV.Somersetshire.1313, 7 Edward II.1200, 2 John1164, 10 Henry IL1312, 6 Edward II.1360, 34 Edward III.1338, 12 Edward III.1359, 33 Edward III.1558, 1 Elizabeth1359, 33 Edward III.1360, 34 Edward III.1301, 30 Edward I.1200, 2 John1357, 31 Edward III.Staffordshire.Litchfield . 1310, 4 Edward 11.BedfordLudlowWedlock .Axbridge .BridgewaterBristolChardMunster .GlastonburyLangport .MineheadMontacuteStokegurseyWatchet .WellsWereLyneAldboroughBury7 F21215, 17 John.Suffolk.1570, 13 Elizabeth.1297, 26 Edward I.H II V ro L K — eoatiiuied,Ig™ 1203, 5 John.Cwb(3 , 139". 20 Edward I.SOBilBV.1197. 26 Edward I.1310, 4 Edward II.MSO. 29 Henrjr VI.1133, 1 Stephen.1564. i7 Elizabeth.pigg, I John.1397, 26 Edward I1297. 26 Edward I.BletchinglcyFarnhamaBtlmi .GuildfordHMlemeieKingstonRyegRteSouthwarkTrainerGriniitBadCoventryApplebyChippendaleDnivnUiDShaftesburyMigbn'urthBentonIjidgershallMarlboroughMereOld SanimSalisbury1297, 26 Edward I.1307, I Edward II.1299. 28 Edward I.1310, 4 Edward 11.1297, 26 Edward I.1267,62 Henry III,1199, 1 John,WiLTHHIBB.- Henry III.1297, 26 Edward I.H49, 28 Henry VI.1298, 26 Edward I.1224, 9 Henry 111.1313, 7 Edward 11.12(X), 2 John,1359, 33 Edward III.1200, 2 John.1226, 11 Henry 111.WlLTSHIHWeslbury . 1448, 27 Henry VLWotton Beset 1446, 25 Henry VI.WOBCBSTBBSHIBB.BewdleyDudley -EveshamKidderminsterSeashorey<AldlxirougbBeverleyBoroughbhdge .lancasterEldonHullJervttulxKnareaboroughMolinnNorth AllertonPickeringPontefractRavensRichmondScarboroughnckbill ,ThirstWhitby ,CinqWincbelseaRye1472. 12 BdwsrdlTL'1295, 23 Edwud 1.1295, 33 Edward 1.1295, 23 Edward 1.1295. 23 Edward I.1295, 23 Edward I.155S, 1 Elizabeth.Lai, 32 Heoi7l.1553, I Mary.1194, 6 Richard I.1200, 2 John.1303, 32 Edward I.1338. 12 Edward II.1 200, 2 John.1297, 26 Edward I.1297. 26 Edward I.1199. 1 John.1297. 26 Edward I.1328, a Edwanllll/1328, 2 Bdwardlll.1307, I Edward II.1199, 1 John1395,23 Edward 1,1205, 23 Edward I.1199, John.1190, 2 Richard 1.1190, 2 Richard I-1291, 20 Edward I.In the counties of Chester — Derby — Huntingdon — Leicester — and Rutland —there have been no new borough created.III.— Boroughs created after William I , and before Richard I.Bbdpobdbhirb . — Dunstable.Hampshire . — Peteraiield.Lancashire, — Preston.S URRB Y . — Guildford ,YoR KS H I BB. — Beverley.NoRTHUHBBBLAND . — Newcaatle.«n-Tyne,IV. — A List of the Places which were called upon as Boroughs, to sendBurgesses to Parliament in 1297, the 26th of Edward I., and at subsequentperiods.Bedfordshire. — Bedford.Cambridgeshire. — Cambridge.Cornwall. — Bodmin, Helston, Truro,Launceston.Derbyshire. — Derby.Devonshire. — Ashburton, Barnstaple,Dartmouth, Exeter, Plympton, Plymouth,Totness.Dorsetshire. — Bridport, Dorchester,Shaftesbury.Less EX. — Colchester.Hereford. — Leominster, Weobley.Hertford. — Hertford.Gloucestershire. — Gloucester.Hampshire. — Portsmouth, Southampton,Winchester.Huntingdon. — Huntingdon.Kent. — Canterbury, Rochester.Lancashire. — Lancaster, Preston.Lincolnshire. — Stamford, Grimsby.Middlesex. — London.Northampton. — Northampton.Northumberland. — Newcastl&^on-Tyne.Norfolk. — Lynn, Yarmouth, Norwich.Nottinghamshire. — Nottingham.Oxfordshire. — Oxford.Salop. — Bridgeport, Shrewsbury.Somerset. — Bristol, Bath, Bridgewater,Ilchester, Taunton, Wells.Suffolk. — Bury, Ipswich, Orford.Surrey. — Bletchingley, Guildford, RyeSouthwark.Sussex. — Chamber, Chichester, Lewes,Seaford, Shoreham.Warwickshire.— Coventry, Warwick.Westmoreland. — appleby .Wiltshire. — Chippenham, Devises,Denton, Malmsbury, New Sarum.Worcestershire. — Droitwich, Worcester.Yorkshire. — Malton, Beverley, NorthAllerton, Pontefract, Scarborough,York.28 Edward LAmersham, St. Alban's, Beresford,Cane, Chipping Norton, Hereford,Shaftesbury, Honiton, Fordham, Leicester,Marlborough, Marlow, MilbournPort, Champion, Stafford, Wendover,Combe, Wilton.29 Edward 1.Reading.30 Edward I.Andover, Arundel, Bedwin, ChippingThornton, Carlisle, Lynn, Newbury,South Molton, Wareham, Watchet,Woodstock.34 Edward LWallingford.35 Edward I.Litikeard.I1 Edward H.Andover, Instead, Ripon, Windsor,Whitney.2 Edward U.Christchurch.4 Edward H.Farnham, Kingston-upon-thames,Litchfield, Lostwithiel, Midhurst, Stratford(Bishop's).5 Edward H.Lyme.6 Edward U.Bradneysham (Bradninch), Chard.7 Edward II.Axbridge, Ludgershall.27 HsNKy VI.Hindoo, Weetbuiy.as Hbnkv VI.Heytesburjr.29 Hbnrt VI.Gatton.T Edward IV.Graham.31 EdwaiWare.33 EdwardBromyard, Langport, Ledbury, Mere,Montacute, Road.34 EdwaiHunter, Sudbury, Old Sanim, .la Edward IV-ludlow.ar Hrxry VIII.Anglesey, Beauvais, Brecknodi«Cardiff, Carmarthen. Carnarvon, Dea ~high, Aunt, Haverfordweat, Monmouth,Montgomery, Pembroke, Radnor.34 Henry VIII.Clear.3G Henry VIII.Buckingham, Berwick-oa-Tweed.Edward VI.Boney, BUckley, Camelford, Gnun-pound, Liverpool, Worketh, Newport,Peoryn, Peterborough, Petersfield, Preston,Saltash, Thetford, West Looe,Westminster.Abingdon, Aldborough, Aylerimrf,Banbury, Brecon, Boroughbridge, CaatlsRising, Higham Ferrara, Ktnreabo*rough, Worketh, St. Ives.I Elizabeth.Clitheroe, Sudbury.since 26th EDWARD I.=3 2 Elizabeth.27 Elizabeth.Maidstone.5 Elizabeth.Bere^tone, Callington, Bishop'sCastle, Haslemere, Lymington, White-church.St. Germain's, St. Makes,Stock-jamesI.r bridge, Tamworth.13 Elizabeth.Bewdley, Bury, Evesham, Ilchester,Minehead, oxford University, Tiverton,Tewkesbury.Aldborough, Cirencester, East Looe,Eye, Queenborough, Retford.26 Charles I.Cockermouth.14 Elizabeth.Charles II.Corse Castle, Fowey.Durham, Newark.CHARTERS GRANTED IN THE SEVERAL REIGNS.HENRY VI.Charters of Incorporation.Charters not qf IncorporationmProbProb18 Hen. VI. 1439, Hull . . .21 to 24 Hen. VIBridgeport .Plymouth . .1442 to 1445,Rochester . .a.22 — 1443, Southampton .Evesham . .24 — 1445, Coventry .Tenby . . .a.25 — 1446, Ipswich . .Shrewsbury .ib.Northampton .Northampton .ib.Woodstockib.London . . .ib.26 — 1447, Tenterden . .— 1448, Canterbury .Tyne . . .ib.Nottingham .25 to 26,1446 to 1447 .Bath27 to 39,Derby . . .ib.1448 to 1460Colchester . .ib.Poole . . .iNorwich . .ib.Winchesterib.Stratford . .ib.York . . .Cardiff . . .ib.Pu'lhely . .Dublin . . .iiAthboy . . .ib.2280 LIST up Chatter.^EDWARD IV.Ckarttrt qf Ittcorpwatim.CkoTtrrnol sis Incorporation.tutiBdw.IV. 1461, RomncyManh 9651 iidw. IV1461.Nunnch . . pCSRochester . . 966Bristol - - - 961Stamford -96sColchester . . 9»Ludlow .ib.LauncMlon , 9ilYork . 9Vr3 — 1463, Dartmouth3 —1463, London . . . 9»6 — U66. Windsor1-27S —i465,Dunwich - . 9W7 — U67. Doncaster .20 —1480, Bmy . . . . lOOSID — 1470, Bridgewater13 — Una, Bewdley .litanies . . loiS2 —1482. Evesham lOM-Cardiff 100RICHARD III.I Ride. ni. 1483, Huntingdon . 10331 Rich. II]I4S3. Sandwich - 1034Pontefract . ,1035Waterford . 10402 —\*<ii, Dublin 1041G«lw»y . , 1043- Waterford .a.HENRY Vir.I 1 Hen. VH. 146S, Landor . . 10493 — 1487, Bristol . . a.I 4 — 1488, Southward , 1053\ 9 — 1493, Athboy . . 108B15 — 1499, Cork . . &.■ 7 — 1501, CambridgeUniversity 1053i 22 — 1506, Ruthin . . 1085HENRY Vlll.7 Hen. VIII. 1515, Kildare7 — Alhye .1524, Lynn .1542, ib.1142 I1 Hen. Vin. 1509, LondonKilkenny ,DublinCork . .— 1510, BristolLIST OF CHARTERS.Charters of Incorporated.35 Hen. VIII. 1543, Seaford37 — 1545, BostonPAQBCharters not qf Incorporation,2 Hen. VIII. 1510, Limerick2 —4 —7 —9 —14IDPAQBib,ib.ib,Waterford .1512, Drogheda .1515, Dundalk .1517, York . .1522, Oxford UniversityandCity . . 11201527, Poole . . U251544, Galway . 1143EDWARD VI.1 Edw. VI. 1547, Merchant Adventurers,Newcas-tle-upon-Tyne 1160Litchfield . . 1152Aldborough . 1306Dublin . . 11742 — 1 548, Galway College 1 1753 — 1549, Stafford . . 1161Maidstone 11626 — 1552, Fiddlers . . 11757 — 1553, . . 1166St. Alban's . 14411 Edw. VI. 1547, LondonBristol2 — 1548, Cork .ResponsePHILIP & MARY.1 Ph. & M. 1553, Aylesbury . .11881 Ph. & M. 1553, Bristol .Chippenham . 1189Dover . . . 1200Buckingham . 1194Lyme . . . ib.Hertford . .1176. .1201Tyne . . . 1208Sudbury . . 13732&3 —1555, Waterford . .1&21554, Warrington . 13055&6 —1558, Chipping . .2&31555, Launceston . 1206Higham Ferrers, ib.3&41556, Axbridge . .1209Abingdon . . 1210 jIlchester . . 1291 j5&61558, Hindoo . .1211ELIZABETH.1 Eliz. 1558, Minehead . . . 122814 Liz.1561, Axbridge . . 14172 —- 1559, Reading . . . .14717 -1574, Limerick. . . . 14593 —• 1560, Tamworth . . .1232Hythe 1321LIST UP UHAHrKKS.Charter* '•/ Incorporation,Charter nol of Incorporation.4EIi». isti. Rjulnor , .3038l7Klizl574,TewkeBbucT - - - I5ft|lo — 13fir. Poole . . lai— 123918 —1S7S, Cork 1461-l-he Universities of19 -1576, Richmond . • . \3tiOxford and Camps—1579 Company of mer-bridge. .131Scharta of Newcastle 140115 — 1573, Buhop'a Cud136533 —1580, Drofthwla . . . 14MIS - 1573, Beverley . .1350Newcastle upon T}-ne 140S- WeatLooe ,134824 —1S81, Dublin 14(118 — 1575. Durhftin . .1403Kinsale . . . tt.36 — 1583, Singleton133525 —1583, Waterford . . . ib.87 — 15S4. Nelson . .138738 —1595, Haslemere . . I3g(89 — 1586, Liskeard , .- 1403East Looe134830 — 1587, Winchester ,31 — 1588, ■IViiro . , .13i5Newcastle upon I'yiiel404Wells . . .1413LeiceslCT - .34038 — 1599, Batli . . ,- 140539 - 1589, South Molto1-11739 — I59S, Totness , , ,140813B8Lover . .139444 — look, Plympton . .JAME8 1.1 JH 1. 1603. Evesham . .Ungport15923J».I1605, London . . , 147537 -Bristol isoCunbridgeUDive-Lyme . . . . ift.city . . .- 1579*- Oxford Invenity 15778 — I6(M, Harwich . ,1366Godmanchester14903 — 1605, Devices . . .Stafford . . .14914 — Bury1589Lymington . .6 — 1608, Loatwithiel . .6 — Cardiff . . .limerick , -7 - 1609, Tewkesbury .Athboy . . .1616 jKilkenny . -1617 '- Wexford . .1618 11610, Kinsale . . ,1619 11611, Ross1639 'LIST OF CJIARTBRS.Charters of Incorporation,9Ja8.I.l6ll, Salisbury10 — 1612, Dungannon11 — 1613, Belfast .Carlow .13 — 1615, TivertonRetford .17 — 1619, Hereford19 — 1621, CoventryIVegonyPagiib.1498 ^Charters not qf Incorporation.Now first created.rAOKCHARLES 1.2 Chaff.I. 1626, Wakefield16755 Chas. I. 1629, Bristol . .1661Southampton1662 114 — 1638, London1666 yWaterford .16743 —1627, Portsmouth .5 —1629, Rochester16646 —1630, Salisbury . .Huntingdon .ib.ib.7 —1631, Cambridge1666Cork . .16772 —1636, KidderminsterQueenborougbI 12095 —1639, Devisesib.CROMWELL.Cromwell, 1655, Swansea . . 1682CHARLES IL14 CHas. I[. 1662, Hilli<borough1663, Norwich .16971665, Ipswich1698Antrim18111667, Bridport .1699MuUingar18111671, Gloucester17031678, Granard .18111679, Wootton Basset 17051680, Sandwich .17071683, Wells . .17061684, Cambridge17081673, Newark1769^Lin OF CIIABTSHIi. ^^^^^|^^V WILLIAM & MARY. 4^^^F 3 W. & M- 1690. LoodoD . tSSB^^V 1697. Ere . 16.^^H Ruaury .^^B 11 - 1008. Deal . . . a.""-J^^H^^H 1 Ate 1703, WBrehun -^^H 9 — Ito, Bnaicil^^^HJINDEX.Aberystwith,leet, 2109Abingdon,not mentioned in Domesday, 110, 1392when a borough, 1 10burgesses of, the inhabitant householders, ib.charter — Philip and Mar)% 1210parliamentary history, 1210, 1211Adrian,bull of, 341Abbeys,corporate power, 322Aggregate Bodies,observations upon, 691can take in perpetual succession without being incorporated, 1098Agmondesham,not entered in Domesday, 201charter to the Earl of Essex of a fair and market in, 415right of election determined in 1680, to be in the inhabitants only, whopaid scot and lot, 1768Alban's, St.entry — Domesday, 175merchants of, not the burgesses, ib.charter by King John to the Abbey, 186members to Parliament for, returned in 1 300, ib.claim by the burgesses, as having returned members precious toEdward I. 187charter by the Abbot of, surrendered, ib.charter — Edward VI. 18Sobservations upon, ib.•«8() INDEX.Albans, St. — continued.charter— Charles I., 189observations upon, 1<K)charter — Charles l\. ib-observations upon, 190, 192bye-laws made by the mayor and aldermen, 192 — 194petition respecting the return of, members to Parliament in 1700, 195observations upon, 195, 196decision of committee, 196]petition to Parliament in 1701, from the householders and freemen ofagainst the mayor — for the admission of foreigners, ib.election petition in 1705, — decision of 1700 confirmed, ib.observations upon, 197» 198election petitions in 1714, 198decision of committee, ib.election petition in 1722, 199decision of the committee, ib.burgesses of, the inhabitant householders paying scot and lot, 199, 200villains of the Abbot of, contradistinguished from freemen, 685imprisonment of a burgess of, for non-payment of a penalty under abye-law, illegal, 1440, 1441albumen of, a right of voting, 1757Aldborouoh,not mentioned as a borough in Domesday, 1306parliamentary history of, 1 306, 1312illegal admission of freemen, 1 306villeinage having ceased, all inhabitant householders paying scot and lotin, are freemen, 1309House of Commons allowed the choice of a bailiff* for, 1055in 1 079, right of election, decided to he in the inhabitants ])ayin«y scotand lot, 1707petition from the inhabitants of, not being allowed to vote, 1885right in the select nuni}>er, and all the inhabitants paying scot andlot, 1894Alderman,fighting in the house of, punishable, 10shires, presiding in, 10, 17, 19king's officer, 17, 19original signification of, 18term, derivation of, ih.borough of, 1719gemote, presiding at, 20duties— 20, 53, 29Sorigin — 194nature of office, bound to he resident, 1741/^INDEX. 2287Alehouse,Saxon regulations respecting, 301derivation of the term, ib.Alfred,laws of, 21, et seq.provisions in, that a villain shall be free after seven years'service, 22right of lords to sell their native bondsmen recognized, ib.declaration of the principles adopted by the, 23provisions of mutual pledge, ib.enactments against vagrancy in, 24, 25breach of the peace, 26observations upon the Dom Boc, ib.colony of Danes permitted to reside in Derby, Nottingham, Lincoln, andStamford, 28Allegiance,freemen bound to take oath of, 55, 61, 67ordinances respecting the oath of, by Richard III., 1036, 1037provisions respecting the oath of, by Queen Elizabeth, 1237reasons for the exemption of peers from the oath of, ib.Alms,freemen allowed to vote at parliamentary elections notwithstanding receiptof, 108Amersham,case of, reported in Glanville, 1562Ancient Demesne,burgess-ship did not depend upon tenure of the king, but upon resiancy, 78inhabitants within, to have exemption from toll, 1434Andover,charter — Henry II., 338charter — John, 409observations upon, 410charter — Henry III., 438, 464charter— Edward III., 667men of, charged with arrears of their fee-farm, 747when members first returned (or, 1393nomination of members by the Earl of Leicester, ib.charter — Queen Elizabeth, 1394observations upon the municipal and parliamentary rights of the inhabitants,1394, 1395parliamentary history, 1395 — 1401right of election decided, 1688, to be in the select number in, 1867) 1868Anstruther Easter, 1466Anstruther Wester,charter, James VI., 1466charters, surrendered, 1814entry — Domesday, 98burgesses of, the inhabitants paying seat and lot, ifr.entry of, by Dr. Brady, iguASBBUBTON,parliamentary rights of the borough of, restored, 1639not entered in the Terra Regis, 1929leet, 2103Athboy,charters to 809, 940, 108SAthelstan,laws of, 32ayatem of mutual responsibility provided by, ib.origin of the trial by jury, 33regulations relative to the Remote, 34King's court defined, ib.Fol Mote, the place where justice waa administered, 3GAthyb,charter — Henry VIII., 1U2Axbbidob,entry — Domesday, 1 66charter — John, ticcharter — Philip and Mary, 1209INDEX. 2289A X B Ri D G E — continued.burgesses excused sending members to Parliament, 1209charter— Elizabeth, 1417charter — James I., 1501Aylesbury,entry — Domesday, 201charter by John, to the Earl of Essex, of the manor of, 415ancient history, 1187charter of incorporation — Mary, 1188parliamentary history, 1188, 1189dissolution of the corporation, 1 188not entered in the Terra Regis, 1929Ayr,charter — King David, 318Baas,charters — James VI., 14C6, 1467Bailiffs — (Scotland),election, 328duties, 332Bala,charter — Edward III., 704Banbury,respecting the elective franchise, 1 10charter of incorporation — Mary, 1201inaccuracies of Dr. Brady, 1202first return of members to Parliament, 1204decision of the House of Commons in 1691, ib.observations upon, 1204, 1205parliamentary and municipal history, 1897 — 1900unconstitutional decision of the House of Commons in 1690, canvassed1898, 1899burgess not descriptive of capital bigness, 2266Baron, Court — (Scotland),form of holding, 708suitors and outsiders of, mentioned, ib.distinction between, and the leet, 709Barons and Citizens,synonymous, 386Barons,term, defined, 299Barnstaple,entry — Domesday, 171charter — Henry I., 3057 cINDEX.Babnbtapi. b — continued.did not retuni merabere in Ihi- reign of .Athclnnn, 675extract as to, from Brady, 3(MBath,entry — Domesday, 163observations upon, IcicharWT^Richard I., 367charier— Henry 111., 463nuit to the Bishop of, by Edward I., 553chartef^Edward II., 595ebartei^-Henry VI 883obligation by the prior of, toGs, et aeq.charter— Elizabeth, U05. U06extract void Brady, 1913parliamentary and municipal history, 1965question upon 53 George III., c. 51, 8, 1, 2-206, 3207Bjlth, Earl orsurrender of charter to, 1368. 1794Battle,charter — William the Conqueror, JfK*confirmation of, ib.charter — Henry VIII., it.inhabitants exempted from sen-king on juries, 301otiservBtioiis upon, ib.action by Abbot of, upon penalty for non-payment of tithe, SOScharter— George III., 2160Beauvais,right select body, 2035Bedford,entry — Domesday, 21Sobservations upon, 219boruughof, 321, 339charters-Henry 111., 463charter — Edward I., S29householders treated as burgesses, 1S93distinction between a burgess and freeman, 2102parliamentary history, 2102, 2103quo warranto,' alderman, 2167credence, 2168argument of convenience answered, 2169Bbdwin,entry — Domesday, 157parliamentary history, 1733,1734Bill, Common,Chester, 1165INDEX. 2291Bell, Common — continued.Shrewsbury, 2099St. Saviour's, Southwark — Wallingford, 2210Monmouth, ib.Believe,observations upon, 773Belfast,charter — James I., 1620Berwick,charter — Edward I., 523observations upon, 523, 524charter — Edward II., 595bye-laws by the mayor and good men of, respecting the guild of merchants,563 — 567guild distinct from the borough, 564observations upon, 564 — 567regulations respecting the possession of, 708the fishing of, granted to the burgesses and men of, at farm, 950Berralston,when members were first returned to Parliament for, 1348not mentioned in Domesday, ib.nomination of members for, by the Marquis of Winchester and LordMountjoy, ib.parliamentary history, 1348 — 1350parliamentary decision, George I., 2003Beverley,charter — William the Conqueror, 290charter — Henry I., 304men and burgesses synonymous, 304, 305charters — Richard I. and John, 373burgesses not incorporated, 373, 374charters — John, 391charter — Henry III., 465charter — Edward I., 528observations upon, 528, 529charter — Edward II., 595charter— Richard II., 746, 747evils arising from discontinuance of the leet, 747charters — Elizabeth and James II., 1250parliamentary history, ib.Bradley,not entered in Domesday, 211charter — Edward IV., 1002charter — James I., 1574parliamentary history', 1580 — 15837 G 2charter— Richard Earl of Cornwall, 470grant to the prior and canonKof, 9)3charter— George Ul 1838, 2l6lBoroughs,derivation ol the Uoib, 7, 310actual existence of, in Ter. B., 7those T. R. E. distinct from the Bomao, (6.places named, by the Romans, ifr.preservation of peace provided for, 36government of, and their connexion with trade, 39gemote in, 32people of, what required from in case of homicide, 43have only one law, 45, 615, 780alldtiesare, 49, 1016all, not cities, 49castle distinct iron, 49, 113, 360, 336, 343, 727officers of, 59to be watched, 61jurisdiction of, S2causes of the establishment of, go, 264, 2S5, 359, 363i 43^ S73, 1046,division of, 91merchant guild, not the foundation of, 118, 330, 332, 340, 35g, 3S1, 390,392, 468, 469, 559, 599, 839, 842, 1048, 1049, 1147, 1916, 3136corporations not requisite to constitute, I6Sall, essentially the some, 309INDEX. 2293Bono UG Is — continued.merchant guilds distinct from, 320, 322, 340, 468, 469, 1048, 1049, 1147,fee-farms of, and cities substantially the same, 340decayed, loss of rights, 347demesnes of the king distinct from, 374, 1927, 1928grants of fairs and markets not the essential characteristic of, 381inaccuracies of Hume respecting, 423men of," term explained, 484, 485liberties of, 490, 491distinction between, and counties, 115, 131, 164, 217, 553distinction between enfranchised places, and those which are, 621 — 623not identical with market towns, 623, 855doctrine of prescription applicable to boroughs, 671doctrine of mortmain did not apply to, 727, 728when, ceased to exercise an exclusive jurisdiction, reverted to the sheriff,805, 806, 1277not always walled towns, 854leets parcel of, 930proposal for restoration of, 1009incorporations no essential characteristic of, 1013, 1226, 1227, 1228,1230, 1249, 1253, 1255, 1281, 1282, 1284, 1290, 1291, 1294, 1301,1304, 1305, 1307, 1346, 1347, 1348, 1354, 1355, 1365, 1367, 1372,1373, 1378, 1380, 1382, 1386, 1473restoration of, 1223 — 1225, 1635staple not the origin of, 1243records of, when destroyed, 1693prerogative of the king in granting charters to, 1774, 1775not all ancient demesnes of the king, 1927hist of decayed, 1927See also Burgesses, Freemen, Freedom, Citizens, Members to Parliament,Burgage Tenure.Boroughs (Ireland),same as in England, 343 — 345, 376, 1805, 2264creation of, by James I. for parliamentary objects, 1594, et seq.petition from the lords of the Pale as to the creation of, 1594, 1595petition from the temporal lords, burgesses. Sec, respecting the erectionof corporations by James I., 1597 et seq.Boroughs (Scotland),an act for the convention of, 1813directs all members of to be residences, 1814Boroughs (Wales),power given to the king to dissolve in Wales, 11 18Bourbon,ymi for taUiaging of, 5882288 IHDBX.AXTMII,Anna, Chris II., 1811Appleby,deter — Jot, 410tartar— Herr Iii, 471ktbr of the CoontoM of Pmfanke sfcuiut the■■ for, Boo-'■*Appbimtich,n o^ in LsicMter, 335a of tern, 098, 783 .origin, history, md Statutes of, 733 et Mq, 763 et b«).Inr md cutonu rapecliiig, 733 " 'iAfpn^em hmi mat tJub- arigm in my cordon te priaopk^ Wt;Hbcommon Inr, 737. 76( ' *1I^nm nrdiiwacci expecting, 763 J{obfemtioo* upon. 709 — 766ngnlatioiw nqwcting, by dw initiate of the eth of Hay ^lOMMlOOArpEBimcH ( tnl m i} ,ori|pa to li of freedom, 313dhntv, 1467AsniTDBL,■itrr^Domeedijr, 98big ew ei of, the inhabitants paying scot and lot, ib.entry of, by Dr. Brady, 1914AlHBORTON,parliamentary rights of the Ixirough of, restored, 1639not entered in the Terra Regis, 1 929Atpab,)feet. 3109Athboy,charters to 809, 940, lOBSAthelstan,laws of, 32system of mutual responsibility provided by, rt,origin of the trial by jury, 33regulations relative lo the GenKing's court refined. ib.Fol Mote, the place where justice wAthyb,charter — Henry VIII., ii42Axbkidob,entry — Domesday, Ifificharter — John, 411}charter — Philip and Mary, IMINDEX. 2295B R I STO L — continued.inhabitants to be the burgesses, 337not incorporated, ib.charter — Henry II., of the city of Dublin, 343obser\'ations upon, ib.charter — John earl of Moreton, 356burgesses of, the inhabitants, 357observations upon, 357 — 359charters — John, 415charters — Henry HI., 458. . 460inhabitants the burgesses, 459, 460observations upon, ib.charter — Edward I., 552observations upon, ib.proceedings against mayor, &c. of, for taking to their own use the customsujKjn wool, 587mandamus to the mayor, &c., to restore ]persons whom they had disfranchised,ib.six men of, answer for a contempt to the governor of the castle, ib.restoration of liberties by Edward II., ib.charter — Edward II., iA.petition from. the mayor and burgesses, to Edward III., 639observations upon the privileges of, ib.charters— Edward HI., 640 — 643observations upon the non-existence of a prescriptive or select body,643—645common council not a prescriptive body, 645inhabitants can destroy the, 646no regulation for the admission of burgesses, 647burgesses — the inhabitant householders, 648conusance demanded by the bailiff, 677charter— Edward III., 693, 694charters — Richard II., 737, 738claim of cognizance by the burgesses, 788no mention of being a body corporate, ib.charter of Henry V. to found a fraternity, 824grant of corporate powers, ib.obser\'ations upon, 825entry of the election of sheriff, from the red book, 826observations upon, 827, 828charter — Henry VI., 849burgesses pray that, should be a county of itself, 849, 850obser\'ations upon, 850 — 852election of municipal officers, 852charters— Edward IV., 961— 963charter — Henry VII., 1049privileges granted inconsistent with the parliamentary confirmation, 1050—1052Little,charier — William the Conqueror, 290confirmation of, ib.charier — Henry VIII., ib,inhabitants exempted from serving on juries, 291observations upon, ib.action by Abbot of, upon penalty for non-payment o[ tithca, 808charter— George III., 2160BZAUMARIS,right select body, 2035entry — Domesday, 218observations upon, 219borough of, 321, 339charter — Henry III., 463charter— Edward I., 529householders treated as burgesses, 1993distinction between a burgess and freeman, 2102parliamentary history, 2102,2103quo warranto; alderman, 2167residence, 3168argument of convenience answered, 2169Bbdwin,entry — Domesday, 157parliamentary history, 1733, 1734Qrll, Common,Chester, 1l6sINDEX. 2297Buckingham — continued.right in the bailiff and 12 burgesses, 1896Brady's opinion disputed, 1909.Burgage Tenure,all boroughs held by, 167, 324, 413, 627, 830, 831referred to in Magna Charta, 480definition of, 589, 830, 831Bletchingley first instance of, being recognized by the House of Commons,1550right of, decided to be in Berealston, which had been recently sununon-ed, 1349,evils of, 1352, 1353, 1372, 1380, et seq. 1386, 1551, 1569, 1644, 1646, etseq. 1652, et seq. 1767, 1865, et seq. 2129, et seq.Vide Boroughs, Burgesses, Members to ParUament, Corporations,Freedom.Burgage Tenure (Scotland),boroughs held as in England, 323Burgesses,the same class of persons at the prest day, as at the close of the Saxondynasty, 10trade had no connexion with, 22, 349, 687, 1920the inhabitant, 56, 59householders, 79, 81, 82, 95, 98, 160, 168, 170, 174, 175, 207, 217,220, 254, 259, 260, 273, 275, 277, 279, 281, 282term when first occurs, 63the inhabitant householders paying scot and lot, 72, 73, 79, 81, 82, 84,86, 87, 88, 93, 95, 96, 97, 98, 103, 105, 107, 108, 110, 124, 126, 127,131, 136, 150, 153, 154, 157, 158, 159, 160, l6l, 167, 170, 171, 173,174, 175, 177, 178, 179, 181, 186, 200, 217, 874, 875, 1309, 1333,1348, 1405, 1562, 1563, 1576, 1591, 1635, 1636, 1638, 1639, 1645,1734, 1737, 1746, 1747, 1749, 1751, 1754, 1757, 1763, 1766, 1768,1728, 1776, 1851, 1873, 1894, 1896, 2033, 2034, 2035, 2094, 2096,2099, 2104, 2108, 2115, 2116, 2118, 2138not created by tenure, but by resiancy, 78, 83, 84, 86, 114, 154, 159,160, 164, 166, 175, 202, 203, 205, 207, 209, 214, 221, 239, 254,256, 274, 278,281, 289, 481, 484, 521, 526, 527, 930, 933, 1077exemptions from being, 80all householders not, 98, 109, HI, 112, 114, 155, 156, 159, 205,207no regulations in the early charters, for the creation of, 382inaccuracies of Hume, respecting provisions of Merton explained, 434the hberi homines of the common law, 495commons and, the same class, 525men and, synonymous terms, 662making of, 874, 875unconstitutional creation of, for corrupt purposes, 985, 990, 1297, 1306,1352, 1358, 1371, 1376, 1379, 1380, 1384, 1387, 1568, 1570, 1713,1754, 1763, 1767, 1848, 1854, 1855, 1865, 1869, 1879, 1886, 1887,1946, 1956, I960, 1961, 1964, 2007ieiivaiioa o£ she ten, 7> 310•ctnal existence of, in T. R. E., 7those T. R. E. distinct from the Roman, ib.plea named, by the Romani, ib.preservation of peace provided for, 26government of, and their connexion with tide, 39gemote in, 32people of, what required from in case of homicide, 42have only one law, 45, 615, 7B0all dtjes are, 19, 1016all, not cities, 49castle distinct from, 49, 1 13, 260, 336, 342, 727officers of, 59to be watched, 61jurisdiction of, 82causes of the establishment of, 90, 254, 256, 359, 3fi3a 432, 873, 1046,division of, 91merchant guild, not the foundation of, IIB, 320, 333, 340, 359, 381, 390,392, 468, 469, 559, 599, B39, B42, 1048, 1049, 1147, 1916, 3136corporations not requisite to constitute, 165an, essentially the same, 309INDEX. 2299Carlton,charter — Edward III., 7o6charter— Edward IV., 1028Calais,petition from the burgesses, as to the inheritance and residence ofstrangers, 671Callington,when members for, were first returned, 1347right of election, 1348Cane,entry — Domesday, 156observations upon, ib.aid of, 339charter — Henry III., 471no parliamentary return in the reign of Edward I., 494right of common in, 1 1 94quo warranto against the borough, 1880tyrannical conduct of C. J. Jefferies, ib.right ** in the ancient burgesses," 2004municipal and parliamentary history, 2193 — 2197leet, 2193exemptions from county juries, 2194swearing at Ogbom Court, 2195Cambridge University,charters — Henry III., 456, — 458, 464observations upon, 457, 458charter — Edward II., 587return of the talliage of the scholars, 588charter— Edward III., 588, 648, 649observations upon, 649charter— Richard II., 736, 737charters — Henry IV., 787king's grant to, void, t^.from the spiritual character of, considered to be incorporated, ib.enactments against the Irish, 834, 835charter — Henry VI., giving the chancellor of, power to inquire whatnuisances existed, &c., by the good men of the town and county ofCambridge, 849arrangement of disputes between the scholars of and burgesses, relativeto cognizance, 1052, 1053not incorporated by Henry VIII., 1124ordinances respecting strangers and servants, ib.incorporation of, 1318disputes with the townsmen, 1319, 1320power of sending members to Parliament, 1579Cambridge Town,entry — Domesday, 2152t2y-2 Index.\B ■ w D L E V — conrtnufti.burgesses under the charter of the 3d of JavaM V.KriglUoCr-^charter— Anne, 183Scharles— declared void, 195a.aBishop's Gabtlk,mincorporated by Elizabeth, 1365when summoned to return membera to Parliamentn(.ii^B LETCH INC LBV,first instance of burgage tenure right being reCommon B, 1550coguiaed by the Hinseofnsvet incorporated, 1551not mentioned as a borough in Domesday, ii.BOCLAMD,^HsBJe of, prohibited, 26distinction between, end Foreland, 30^JBodmin,■charter— Richaid Earl of Conway. 470^^1grant to Ihe prior and canon of, 913■f BoBoroHs,-jM■actual existence of, in T. R. E., 7thou T. R. E. distinct flora the Roman, A.places named, by the Romana, ib.preservation of peace provided for, 26government of, and their connexion with trade, 29gemote in, 32people of, what required from in caw of homicide, 42have only one law, 45, 615, 7B0alldtiesare, 49, 1016all, not cities, 49castle distinct from, 49, 113, 260, 336, 343, 737officers of, 59to be watched, 61jurisdiction of, 82extinction of, 89causes of the establishment of, 90, 254, 255, 2fi9t 363| 43^ 873, 1046,division of, 91merchant guild, not the foundation of, US, 330, 393, 340, 359, 3S1, 300,392, 468, 469, 559, 599, 839, 842, 1048, 1049, 1147, 1916, 2136corporations not requisite to constitute, 16Sall, essentially the same, 309INDEX. 2301Canterbury — continued.charter — Queen Eleanor, 369observations upon, ib.charter — john, 409charter — Henry III., 465complaint of the men of the Abbey of St. Augustin of, 526charter — Edward I., 545aldermen of the aldermanries^ 546charter — Edward II., 595charter — Edward III., 666commission issued respecting the complaint of the Archbishop, ib.charters — Richard I., 745, 746bailiffs and citizens' power to tax all houses of foreigners, denizens, andmen of the holy church within the city, 746charter — Henry IV., 789citizens to hold in burgage, 791charter of incorporation to, by Henry VI., 884 — 887the recital false, 887second charter to, by Henry VI., 887, 888charter— Edward IV., 963 — 965liberties confirmed to the mayor and aldermen, 117provisions for the improvement of the river at, 1132controversy between the Prior of St. Gregory's, and the mayor and commonaltyof, ib.agreement between, 11 34charters, surrendered, 1822James II. appoints the municipal officers, ib.right of corporators and exclusive bodies destroyed, as contended for byBrady, 1910—1912Canon Law,same policy pervaded the, as the common law, respecting residence, 624Centres,country divided into, 569Canute,laws of, 43freemen bound to place themselves in decenna, 44resiants bound to attend the leet, ib.provisions against infamous characters, 45provisions for friendless men, ib.ecclesiastics exempt from the leet, 46title to lands to be settled before the whole borough, ib.Cardiff,grant of burgages, 419charter — Edward II., 601charter— Edward III., 704—706burgages, mentioned, 705inquest to be taken by the iolffien'atione upon, ib.charter — IUchar<1 11., 778charter— Henry V., 833charter— Cotmlesa of Vlareettm„-9tlcharter— Earl of Warwick, 949, 048charter— Edward IV., I02Schartei^IUchtird. Duke of OkmcMlar, tl.exemplification of Quebarter — James I., 1624charter— Jamea II,, 1842an ordinal] ce that all honorHfMd flOt-baqpa|iri\-ilcges of the borough. Mint IuAIb to Urn town dnq^ lf)t-Cardigan,charter — John, 419charter — Henry III., 475-"^charter — Richard II., 777 '•chartei^-Jame« I., 1577leet,preieDtinent«, 3106, 3liWCabhabthsn,charter — John, 419 jcharter— Henry III., 475charter— Edward II., fillmandatnua, mayor. 20G1charter— George III., 2l60bye-law transferring right of election held ill^;a], 2163residence, office, 2173Ca UNA 8 VON,charter— Edward I., 567, 568Carrickpekous,charter — Eliiabeth, ordering them to return the secretary to the lorddeputy, as one of the burgesses, 1 463Carlyle,aid of, 321charter— Henry III., 470charter— Edward II., 5^, 595chartci^Ricbard II., 749mandamus against the mayor, to restore a capital hurgen, 301 1parliamentary and municipal history, 213Snot mentioned in Domesday, Hi.mushroom freemen, 2133, 2134enfranchisement for non-residence, 2132interpolation in records, 2134quo warranto, 2135no connexion between the guilds and municipal constitution, 2 1 36INDEX. 2303Carlow,charter, James I., 1621CARTiB AxTIQUiB, 378Cashbll,inquisition in the reign of Elizabeth, finding the lands, as held in freeburgage, 1482Castles,distinct from boroughs and cities, 49> 327, 342, I66l, 1828to be watched, 61, 113Castles (Scotland),distinct from boroughs, 327Cecil Papers, 1171 to 1173respecting Poole, 1119 to 1220v>ERNE,abbot of, claims a payment from his men inhabiting within the decennaof Welcome, 526Charters,all, essentially the same, 45restoration of (Ireland), 1809Charles I.,reign of, 1627 to 1680obser\'ations upon the commencement of, 1627 — 1632disputes between, and the commons, as to tonnage and poundage, 1686illegal practices of, 1636, 1637restoration of eight boroughs sanctioned by, 1644, 1645 .unconstitutional proceeding of the commons, 1655 — 1668the constitution suspended, 1658Charles II.,reign of, 1689—1817period when the greatest irregularities were introduced in the granting ofcharters, 1704, 1705removal of municipal officers, 1716court leet in practice, 1723citizens of London the same as in the reign of James I., 1731, 1732power of the crown in the granting of charters, 1774, 1775opinion of Chief Justice Pratt as to the charters granted by, 2012observations upon the close of the reign, 1776 et seq.quo warranto against the city of London, 1778 — 1794observations upon, ib.against Bristol, 1795, et seq.Ipswich, 1799Chester— Romney—Petersfield, 18003304 INDEX.Crawley ll.—contim-r'i.restoration ofchftrtrrs. 1S1)9concluding ofnen-atinii.i upon the relg^ of, IBIS, IstiVide B/mmyla, Bvryasea, Frfrnai, Freedom, Members of ParlintnJ.Burgage Tmurr,Crabtbhs.r«KuUtioits for the preservation, (KM)iKe kia)t'», not sufficient to entitle a town to send members to Pojliamnil.C*>4, 13ii6orations upon the doctrine of usage respecting, 774list of. granted by Philip and Mary, 1181perversion of, 11H4, IIS5, 121t, 1319doctrine respecting the, of the crown, 1203surrender of, when vote, I3G4, 12(i5period when th* greatest irregularities were committed, I "(H, I "OSpower of the crown in the granting of. lT7i — 1776surrender caused by C. J. JetTerics. 1794(;do wnrnuuo agaJABt Tendon, 176d — 1776Bristol, 1 795lp«wieh, 1799Chester, Iron- Romney, ib.- PcterafieU. I'fi.subserviency of the common to James II. from the eeiiurc of, 18171 8-3U IdebRMa upon, xix wen gratified, altering the Ancient number oT section,1S33unconstitutional] powers obtained by James II. by the leisure tA, 1834,proclamation for the restoration of, 1836, 1S37Cbbpyno Triton,exonerated from sending members to Parliament, 669Chxbteb,entry— Domesday, 261observations upon, 263charter— Henry I., 305observationa upon, tb.complaint of commons, 525observations upon, 5S5, 536charter by Edward, Prince of Wale, 663men of Uie count of, completed by the commons of 1 1 conti fortheir depredators, and escaping punishment by realm of theirfranchise, 773charter, Henry V., 824entry of freemen at the portable court 903observations upon the admission of freemen for, goi, goinhabitants of, claim exemption from studies, 005, 906INDEX. 2305Ch B 8TE R — continued.county palatine of, not subject to the general laws of the realm, 1082a county palatine by prescription, 1083charter — Henry VII., ib. et seq.regulations as to the shire days for the county palatine, 1111petition of the inhabitants for burgesses to Parliament, 111 6, 1117ancient forms for admission of burgesses, 1139» 1140admission to the freedom, being for the purpose of permanent residence,1139statute of the first of Ed\i'ard VI., relative to the county palatine, 1146great bill of, 1165letters respecting the non-inhabitancy of the municipal officers, 131 2 — 1314usurpations in the corporation, 1324, 1325interference of James I. in the corporation, 1509admission into the trading companies, distinct from burgess-ship, 1510—1512letters among the Harl. MSS. respecting the restitution of Birchley tohis freedom, ib.charters surrendered, 1800restored, 1825improper admission of freemen, 1886right agreed in the freemen, 1897corporation by prescription. 2173usurpations, 2174companies, aldermen, 2175non-residents, 2178honorary freemen, 2179usage, ib.rights of municipal election, ib.charters — Charles II. and James II., 2180, 2181charters — Charles II., 2182charter — Henry VII., 2183mandamus — usage, 2184meaning of the king's charter altered, 2222Lord Kenyon's opinion canvassed as to usage, 2223Chichester,entry — Domesday, 92burgesses, 93confirmation of merchant guild, ib.burgesses, the inhabitant householders paying scot and lot, 93, 94charter — Stephen, 320guild merchant treated as distinct from the borough, ib.charter to the bishop of, by Edward I., 525parliamentary decision respecting, in 1690, 1734Chippenham,charter, Henry III., 470charter of incorporation — Mary, 11847HDover not nwntioncd, 7SRandivirh, ditto, b6Romney, ditto, 1*7n Bracton, 4H1charter— Edward I., 529, 530barons of, claim not to be placed upon ma of foreignobservations, 531, 532cuatumab of cmbodjr the chief topics of the Saxon and early Commonlaw, S33observations upon, 533, 540copies the cuBtumals ordered by the constable of the castle of Poorer, 533provisions for the election of mayor, 534, 535for strangers, 537, 538for freemen, 538, 539exemption of the barons from serving upon inquisition. Sec, 557exemptions claimed for the, 562charter— Edward II., 595privileges pleaded, 607not incorporated, ib.complaint against the men of, by the men of the county of Sussex, 670entry of the barons upon the Nome Rolls, 673carter— Edward IV., 998 to 999right of the inhabitants to be impleaded within, 16S7charter— Charles H, 1701, 1702INDEX. 2307Cirencester,grant of the priory, 913parliamentary and municipal history, 1281 — 1282, 1564right agreed to be in the inhabitants, 1895not entered in the Terra Regis, 1929Brady's assertion that, was no borough, 1935Cities,all, boroughs, 49> 259, 1016boroughs not always cities, 49» 113castle of, distinct from, 49, 260, 327, 342, 727, 1661, 1828to be watched, 61derivation of, 81demesnes of the king distinct from, 374, 1927, 1928distinction between, and counties, 553doctrine of mortmain did not apply to, 727, 728incorporation no essential connexion with, 825, 828, 1013See Boroughs, Burgage Tenure, Burgesses, Corporations, Freedom,Freemen Members of Parliament.Citizens,term described, 379, 380of London and other places judicially defined, 634, 699, 1480men and, synonymous, 1157Vide Freemen, Inhabitants.Civil Law,few traces of in the Saxon periods of our history, 5Lucius petitions Eleutherius for their establishment in Britain, ib.introduction of, 6vagrancy, provisions against, 8Civil and Ecclesiastical Government,union of, 37See Oxford and Cambridge Universities,Clarendon, Constitutions op, 342observations, ib.renewal of, 344observations, ib.Clergy,freedom from taxes, 37distinction between, and laity in Magna Charta, 37exemptions from all temporal jurisdictions, 426Clitheroe,charter — Edward L, 545observations, ib.when members first returned, 1355no mention of, in Domesday, ib.never incorporated, ib.7 H 2'\charter— richard I., 3G5rolls of, 558n the rei(tn of Richim! 11., 74"wilful inlerlinfatioiis, ~ASob«pn-Htifin«, ih.early rclurnn of member to parliament, 749inhabitants of. the burKMses, ib.B nf, the reign of Henry' IV,, 705wilful interpolations, ib.rum of members to Parliament for, " liy the men, different withhoroii(th, (swelling and residing," 7S6charter— Henry VI., 8S3nr<linanceB~in the reign of Henry VI,, 899 — 902burgesses defined, S;)!)dirtier, 900qualification n, 900, !Weiobsen-alioDB, 901return to Parliament (A.D. 1454), 902charter — Henry V I. , ib.firant U> the prioris 913charter — Edward IV., 968letter to the biirgesMS by Henrys VIII., 1093Queen Elizabeth's interference in the elections, 1346constitution of, in the reiftn of Elizabeth, 1346, 1347mandamus to restore " Northen" to his burgess-ship, J517burgess ship an office, 1518common council endeavouring to exclude the commonalty, 1519usurpations of the select body, 1634charter— William III., 1838, 1844right agreed to be in the freemen, 1 896INDEX. 2309Colchester — continued.parliamentary and municipal history, 1955 — 1964charter — Charles I., 1956charter — Charles II., ib.surrender of the charter, ib.charter— William III., 1757usurpations by foreigners, 1956 — 1964making of freemen after teste of writ, I960charter— George III., 1963, 2160making of freemen for election purposes, 1964common councilmen free burgesses, 2214COLERAINE,mayor refuses to call a council at the request of the aldermen, 1980COMBURGENSES,the inhabitant householders paying scot and lot, 107Commonalty,definition of the term, and generality of expression, 371, 440—442, 562,563, 597, 628, 629when introduced, 440, 451action does not lie against, 698recognized by law, though not incorporated, 892monies paid to the, added to the conunon stock, for the benefit of thetown, 1101Common Council. — See London.first mention of, 53of the kingdom, 61, 293term explained, 303, 387, 551, 590only a delegated authority, 293, 590, 645, 981, 1490, 1519, 2023originally juries at the leet, 194, 1738and community decided to be synonymous, 1834Common Law,difficulties accompanying a departure from the, 94, 97, 114, 123, 181,182, 184, 195, 199, 240, 250, 906, 1393, 1443, et seq,, 1504, 1510,1512, 1519, et seq., 1535, et seq., 1549, 1551, 1560, 1568, et seq.,1601, et seq., 1613, 1647, et seq., 1686, 1687, 1746, 1750, 1753,1759, 1763, 1767, 1848, 1852, e^ seq., 1870, 1955, et seq., 1993,2008, 2019, 2035, 2041, 2045, 2059, 2069, 2089, 2094, 2101, 2113,2118, e^ seq., 2186, et seq.Common Seal,purposes of, 443not characteristic of a corporation, 443, 495, 1370ecclesiastical bodies acting under, 555Com M UN am,grant of, to London, 370observations, ib,, 371Gateward's case, 1538 — 1544observation passim, from 1529 to 1554, that inhabitants cfor right of common, and the accuracy of the judgquestioned, — See Introduction, xzvCommonwealth,constitution suspended during the, l6tflordinances enacted, 1684when the ordinances were made by the *' Lords and Conunoiiwhen the ordinances were made by the " Commons," ib,declared to be high treason " to assert that the Commons inhad not the supreme authority," ib.titles granted to Oliver Cromwell, 1689ordinance relating to the pacification of Scotland, 1685Commons AND CANTRKDf(,Wales divided into, 1106, 1143Companies,under the Roman government, 8dissolution of, 9Singleton,charter — Henry de Lacey, 1333injunction issued on the complaint of the mayor and commecharter — Elizabeth, 1335privileges enjoyed by inhabitants, under the name of bmgeicomplaints of encroachments upon the inhabitants, 1338 — 13examples of the abuses introduced, 1340 — 1344Corps Castle,charter — Henry III., 470when first returned members to Parliament, 1350Index. 2311Cork — continued.charter — Henry III., 474charter— Edward II., 603charter — Edward III., 707charter — Henry V., 832charter— Henry VII., 1088charter — Henry VIII., 1140charter— Edward VI., 1176charter — Elizabeth, 1460early admissions to the freedom, 1622questions to the judges as to the corrupt election of the mayor of, 1623answer of the judges thereupon, 1623charter— Charles I., 1677—1679bye-laws, 2017 — 2020charter — George II., 2020admissions to freedom, ih. 202 1.cornwall,no boroughs nor burgesses entered in Domesday, 1 72no aid from any borough in, upon the pipe-rolls, 322first charter to any borough in, 368observations upon, ib.regulations respecting, 434parliamentary return for, in the reign of Edward I., 494observations upon, 555, 556charters by the duke of, to the boroughs in, 556made a duchy, 665, 666petition from the commonalty, 666petition from the onions of the shire, 893system of tythings and decennie in full force, 893, 894Vide — Apprentices, BonmgKi, Burgesses, Freemen, Freedom, Inhabitants,Leets, London, Members to Parliament, et Index decorum passim,Corporations,principles of, 7, 1115freedom, no reference to, 22, 177, 349, 2046no trace of, 55, 781inaccuracies of Dr. Brady, 96, 111, 115, 118, 120, 164, 256, 381, 1900—1938, 2162not requisite to constitute a borough, 90, 165, 254, 255, 259> 263, 422,873, 1046holding at fee-farm not essential, 214, 354select bodies, 231, 1448, 1731apprentices had not their origin in any principle belonging to, 235, 698,722, etseq. 762, etseq. 1099, 1100no, by prescription, 486, 713, 722doctrine of, not understood, 107, 608, 621, 825, 1039common council only a delegated authority, 243, 590, 645, 981, 1490,1519, 2023Composition 8 — coaiinutd.of. G89, (i9<i. 603, 8li7interpolation of the word, upon the printfir petition W have the privilc^n of, MOimproper use of the word in the Year Bo919. 9a.'isint motion of tartrate doctrine u tfsint modern durlrine aa to. 1013 iearly usurpations o(, 1047, 1731ill-trine firnl aspired of, by prescriptionbye-laws, power of making not continueunconstitutional creation of frei^uien liy.1397, 1306, 13S3, 1358, 1371. 13i1570, 1713, 175*. 1763. 1767, WishtSSG, 1B87, 1046, 1056. 1960,101hmita defined. M43— 1453restive to, James I., 1533, !£arises from the [lower c)f making, 1443;case of, 1448—1453mi)H-hiefii of, 1448, 1816illegality andabaurdily of, U50— 14SII e^ definition of, 1520obserAraiioiu upon, ib. et sq.hill of, 1883 — 1885conduct of Chief Justice Jefferiincorporation distinct from municipal aljudgment of the Court of Kiract for regulating, 1883delicate, 1883. 18S4observations, 1884, 1385II George I., fur regulating of, 1081, 1!improper constructionimproper application of the ICorporation Commission.prerogative of the king, 32GoCoRPOSAT tot's (Ireland,Ireland, 1463letter from the Earl of Orrery to Lordmerchant into, 1808letUr from the Part of Clarendon to Lo:into, without tendering the oath ofCouncil,of prelate, barons, Jkc. in the reign ofCounties,distinction recognised between, and •350, 263, 553INDEX. 2313County.divisions of, 26, 27, 54, 209, 221, 262County Courts,inaccuracies of Hume respecting, 424provisions respecting, 432, 1147members returned in, explained, 828, 829Courts (Scotland'sanalogous to the courts leet, 326Coventry,entry — Domesday, 255charter — Henry U., 338charter — Henry HI., 469confirmation to the prior and convent of the church of, ib.observations, 469> 470charter — Edward I., 529charter— Edward HI., 650charter to the merchants by Edward U., ib.writ, containing the complaint of the men as to their taxation, 651charter — Richard H., 749mayor and bailiffs claim cognizance of a plea of debt, 794charter — Henry VI., 881, 882, 883Henry VHI., 888prescription by usage recognized, 1018charter — Edward VI., 1159exempted out of the hundred of Offley, 1433charter — James I., 1498case of the disfranchisement of Warren, one of the common councilmen,1528return of members disputed, 1632argument of Sir Edward Coke, as to the return of a non-reliant, notwithstandingthe statute of Henry V., 1633election of 1660 declared void, 1750Cnihtkn Gild,charter to, 307observations upon, ib.Cox Manuscripts, 1820Cricklade,entry — Domesday, 157charter — Henry III., 471first return to Parliament, 600right of election agreed to be in the freeholders, copyholders, and leaseholders,for three years, 1833entry of, by Brady, 1809act for the prevention of bribery, 2090parliamentary history, 1776, 2114, 2115cane of the county of, reported in GUnviUe, 1565CvsTDMB Ancient,eontmuancc of, 60, 72, SI, 101, lU, 16i, 193, 20S, 209, 233,268, 294, 317, 310, 334, 325, 339, 346, 353, 420, 421, 443491, 531, 572, 573, 574, 57S, 584, 586, 615, 618. 667, 663702, 718, 765, 769, 800, 803, 804, 818, 899, 905, 920, 11106, 1110, 1117, 113GSacrum,loud always heldirithin the hundred of, 936colony of, settled in Derby, Nottingham, Leicester, Uneoln,ford, 28Dartmouth,charter— Henry III., 471bailiffs chain cogoinuce, 700history, 972—997first returned members to Parliament in-298, 1973return of on inqiuaitioa ad quod damnum, 974all persons retidimf in, free bvrgeuei, ib.charters — Edward III., 974, 975charter— Richard l\.,ib.roerabers for, returned in the county court, ib.charter— Edward IV., lA.observations, 976, 977indenture between Henry VII. and the mayor and bui^eascs, 9!charter— Henry Viii," 378transactions at the " curia salis," 978penona made free burgesses, 979charters — Edward VI. and Mary, ib.constitutions of, ib.observations upon the power of making freemen, t6.Index. 2315D A RTM o Ruth — continued.person re-admitted to his freedom, 981common council of, only a committee of representatives, ib,interference of the Earl of Northampton in the election of members toParliament, 982'* freemen of the corporation," a term totally known, ib.change in the entries, as to the admission of freemen, Ut.parliamentary decision in, 658, 983inhabitants of the borough had not voices together with the freemen ofthe borough, 983constitution of, prohibiting any person being made free without the consentof seven magistrates, 984burgesses of, called the " populace," ib.petitions to Parliament, against the return for, in 1672 — 1685, ib.petition in 1689, 985mode of making freemen in, decided to be illegal, 985, 986mayor of, ordered into custody, 986observations upon, 986, 987disfranchisement of a freeman by the whole commonalty, 987petition to Parliament in 1698, ib.usurped usages, 988liberties claimed by the burgesses of, 988, 989decision of the Court of King's Bench, 989mandamus issued to admit apprentices as freemen, ib.petition to Parliament in 1701, 990abuses of the present system of admitting freemen exemplified, 991mayor, aldermen, and magistrates usurped the right of making freemen, ib.alderman," first mention in, 992petition to Parliament in 1793, ib., et seq.observations, ib., et seq.petition of the inhabitants, respecting the preservation of the havens inthe west, 1097Coventry,prior and convent of, pray for a grant of frankpledge, 597Deal,Charter— William III., 1844Decent,all persons bound to be in, 49regulations of, 53, 476, 482, 483, 554, 571, 572Derby,entry — Domesday, 264burgesses minutes," explanation of, 265observations, 266aid of, 339fee-farm of, ib.charter, John, 410charter— Charles I., 1667darter — James II., 1821puUamentaiy history during the year 1666, I860not a corporation by prescription, ib.right agreed " in the free burgesses," 1827D'EwBi' Journal, 1223—1236members ordered to confer with the attorney and solicitor general aboutthe returns of nine boroughs, 1253DiBPRANIcase of Bags, relative to, and obiWarren's case, 1&28DoH Boc (Alpkbd),contents, 26country, how divided, 2?DoMBBDAY, 66object and period of compilation, 70 — 72obaeri'Btiona, 283freeman defined, 263Doncaster,charter^Richard I,, 373INDEX. 2317Doncaster — continued,charter — Richard II., 750charter— Edward IV., 997, 998mandamus — alderman — anon-residence, 2059admission by servitude, 2217DONBKETON,writ for palliating, 588Dorchester,entry — Domesday, 158observations, 159, 160money pardoned to burgesses of, upon account of poverty, 321charter — Edward II., 594suitors of, hanged, 614charter — Edward III., 65442 persons of, named as being taxed in the None Rolls, 673charter — Henry VI., 854inhabitants required to pay the church rate, 2004history, 2095, 2097right in the inhabitants paying to church and poor, 2096Dorset County,parliamentary returns in the reign of Edward I., 494parliamentary returns in the reign of Edward II., 495Dover,entry' — Domesday, 71burgesses — their venice, ib.customs, previous to the coming of the Conqueror, 71inhabitants, 72reeve, ib.mansions in, ib.ROC and sac, i^.guildhall defined, 72, 73ancient institutions, ib.Commons, House of, decisions respecting, 73burdens borne by inhabitants, ib.head of the Cinque Ports, 75aid of, 321charter — John, 410custumal of, 533provisions for the election of mayor, 534, 535provisions for the admission of strangers, 537, 538admission of freemen, 538 — 540parliamentary history, 1555, 1556watch and ward in temp. Charles II., 1716parliamentary decision in 1826, 2193Dublin.charter to men of Bristol to inhabit, 343charter by the Earl of Moreton, 3^6charter — John, 417, 418iH proriiled for by the great charter to Ireland), 437agreement between the archbishop and the citizens, 472charter— Henry 111., 473charter— Edward I„ 569charters— Edward II., 601—603charters— Edward III., 706, 707 -obsenitionB, 707, "09charter— Richard H 775charter— Henry IV., 809charter — Henry V., 832charter Henry VI., 869—940hye-law respecting the court ofThoUy, 1027charter— richard HI., 1041observationa, 1041, 1042freemen required to be inhabitant and resident, longchartei^Henry Vlll., 1140charter of incorporation — Edward VI., 1174conformity of privileges granted to, with the English town, II74, 1175charter — Mary, 1218charter— Elizabeth, 1461charters of, annulled, 1839letters from the recorder of, recommending a lord mayor for the city,1938—1940INDEX. 2319Dublin — continued.letter from the mayor to Sir Robert Southwell, 1940letter from Archbishop King to Dean Swift, 1 975 — 1 977letter to Lord Dartmouth, 1978letter from the lords justices to Mr. Secretary Southwell, ib.memorial of 19 aldermen to the lord mayor, 1979oaths of the citizens of, and Bristol, 2066, 2067Adcock V. lord mayor of, 2255unconstitutional doctrines maintained, 2256, 2257not a corporation by prescription, 2256usage opposed to the charter, 2257, et vide etiam ante, 2252king's charter will not support arbitrary and capricious election, 2258Dundee,charter — King John, 417DUNDALK,charter — Edward I., 569charter — Richard II., 776charter— Henry VIII., 1141DUNOANNON,charter — John, 419Dunstable,charter to church of, by Henry I., 306, 913daim of a market by the prior of, &c., 728privileges of the burgesses, 928case of, temp. James I., 1609judgment in, unsupported by principle, and unfounded in fact, 1614Dunwich,entry — domesday, 281observations, 282charter — John, 402 — 404observations, 402, 403charters — Henry III., 464liberties of, seized, 464good and lawful men of, what class described by, 465charter — Edward I., 524liberties of, seized, 524charter — Edward III., 667charter — Henry IV., 792charter — Henry V., 824charter—Edward IV., 977erroneously stated upon the Parliament Rolls to be incorporated, 1060charter— William III., 1838, 1844parliamentary history, 1851 — 1859improper admission of freemen, 1854, 1855artifices to obtain the acceptance of the charter from William III., 1857honorary freemen of, outnumber the inhabitants and freemen, 1858Brady's entry of, canvassed, 1902, 1903W^i^ •• 'East Instead,not mentioned in Domesday, 1766in 1679, right of election decided to be in the inhabitants as ^burgage-holders, 1766, 1767parliamentary history, 1863, 1866Ecclesiastics,government of indians and, 37exempted from the leet, 46incorporated from the earliest times, 85charter to, 289exempted from the sheriff's toum, 435provisions respecting, as to the purchasing of ends, 489men and tenants of, free from geld, 559> 560exempted from the view of horses and armour, 563perpetual succession, 573, 611distinction between, and laity, 673prior described as perpetual, 702lands of, spoken of as being in mortmain, 702privileges enjoyed by, but not by municipal bodies, 703, 107 1» 1exempt from expences for knights of the shire, but not for lay fcexempt from murage, 770Ecclesiastics (Scotland'sonly persons recognized as holding by succession, 333Edgar, A.D., 959, 975laws of, 38supplement, 40canons of, 41Edmund, A.D. 940—946laws of, 37TNDRX. 23211)urh shire, 30hoc land'' " fol land." ib.with, ib.guest of bad repute, 31ATigrancy, ib.occasional residence, vb.toum or borough gemote, 32Edward the Confessor, A,D. 1042— 1060laws of, 46 — 56Saxon laws neglected, 46, 47outlaws, 47Danegild, 4Swill responsible for murder, ib.castles distinct from boroughs, 49decenna, 49, 53soc, sac, infangthef, &c.y 50guest, ib.law-worthy, 51jurisdiction of sheriff, t^.Jews, 52reeves, aldermen, 53mot bell, ib.common council, ib.freemen, 54watch and ward, ib.division of counties, ib.society, 65shire gemote, borough gemote, ib.origin of trial by jury, ib.oath of allegiance, ib.burgh\vara, 86Edward L, A. D. 1272—1307reign of, from 488 to 577parliamentary writs issued by, 493no prescriptive right of electing members for cities and boroughs, 494observations, 492—496observations upon the charters, 496villainage preserved, 542, 553, 571decenna in practice, 654charters and boroughs in Scotland, Wales, and Ireland, similar to thoseof England, 563, 567, 569Saxon laws in force, 571, 572no change during the reign of, in the class, of persons who formed thebody of citizens and burgesses in the Saxon sra, 676Edward II., A.D., 1307—1327reign of, 577—6187iIndex.eanlinufd,e of t-UIainagc. 578. &97, 610, 512, 613gracra] law and municipal institutions continued to be street; irto what had existed during the Saxon Dynasty, €13w> dash of freemen existed but the " liberi homines" of the canada law, i.pri^ileiites of the boroughs in Scotland, Ireland, and WsJea, .imtW ■those of BngUnd, 617Edward III, A,D. 1337—1377reign of, 618—713a)] cities and boroughs to enjoy their custom as ardently', 6I8continuance of villainage in, 6H, 62b, 668, 669, 677. 680, 685. 6$8boroughs and cities in Wales, Scotland, and Ireland, cootioucd aijnilar isthose of England, 704, 707, 709no municipal corporations, 713Edward IV., A.D. U61— 1483reign of, B44 — i033the sheriff's toum in fill practice, 947, 1011. 1013, iivillainage in force, 1016,1019rising importance of the House of Cannons, I030Edward V A.D. H83reign of, 1032Edward VI., A.D. IS47— 1533reign of, 1145—1177comments upon, 1145, lUG, 1176, 1177continuance of the leet and toum, 1 149burgesses the inhabitant householders paying act and lo 1 1 77EoBRTON MSS., 1335, 1454, 1457, 1C19, 1630, 1810, 1811charter — James VI., 1467Elizabeth, A.D. 15SS— 1603rdgnof, 1218— 1469observationa, 1218, Isisobject of the charters, 1238charters, laws, and local recorda, all refer to residence and inbalul-any, 1237, 1238observations upon boroughs summoned by, to PitriiRiiMnt, 1316, 1317,1386, 13S7influences the elections, 1346, 1463interferes in the admission of freemen, 1346villainage, continuance of, 1443church lands exempt from taxes, 16.ancient municipal system not destroyed 1441, 1468, I469observations upon her reign and policy, 1467, 1469lOTS IINDEX. 2323ELIZABETH->COn/tllt(^.courts leet in full practice, 1221inaccuracies in the recital of the charters of, ib.Ely,plea respecting tenements which were belonging to the franchise of, 607bishop of, claims return of writs, &c., 679Elections op Municipal Officers. — mandate from the king,Leicester, 229 — 232Northampton, ib.Pontefract, 1567Exeter, 1739Elections, Parliamentary,no charter or bye-law can control, 1546, 1549, 1556ESCUAGE,directions respecting, 432EtH ELBERT, A. D., 564laws of, 1 1people described as freemen, ib.Ethelred, a. D., 979King's town, 1 1probe homines, 11, 12laws of, 41persons of bad repute, ib.pledges, freemen, people of the borough, alderman, gemote, revere, 42, 43Evesham,entry — Domesday, 211observations, ib.charter to abbey of, 289sac and soc granted, ib.observations, 289» 290burgages of, 526charter — Edward III., 651observations, 652charter— Henry IV., 791 ,observations, ib,charter to the abbey, 880losses sustained by the bailiff, 1004observations, 1005record relative to the court leet of the borough, during the reigns ofHenry VIII., and Elizabeth, 1420, 1428observations, 1427, 1428charters of incorporation — james I., 1 952when first returned members to Parliament, ib.charter— Charles II., 1825constitutions of, 1829 — 18317 I2IEvidenceexclusion of hearsay, 218EwELlfE,license to found an hospital at, 913ExKTBByentry — Domesday, 168observations, 169> 170lestage, 321how governed during the Saxon dynasty, 343charter — Henry II., ib.charter — Henry III., 470record — tautologous expressions — ancient demesne, 528bailiff stated to have the return of writs, 562grant to Here Gravestone of the fee-farm, 574petition from the mayor, bailiffs, and conmionalty, 896-— 898recital, false, 898franchise of the citizens not to be sworn with foreigners, recusurpations of the select body, 1623court leet, temp. Charles II. — 1724parliamentary and municipal history, 1737 — 1744*common council originally the juries at the court leet, 1738mandate of Henry VII., appointing a common council, 1 739charter— Henry VIII., 1740charter — mary, ib.right to freedom by marriage, ib,surrender of charter to Charles II., t6.municipal officers removed by order of James L, ib.proclamation of James II., 1741generality of municipal officers non-residents, ib,an alderman of, must be advise and inhabitant, 1741, 1742usurpations of the select body, 1742iKDBx. 2325Eyk,entry — Domesday, 281observations, 282charter— William III., 1314bye-laws of, illegal, 1314, 1315charter— William III., 1844Brady's opinion confuted, 1907£lyre (Scotland),precept for, 332Fairs and Markets,not the essential characteristic of a borough, 381Warringtonfee-farm of, 339Farnham.quo warranto against the town, 1722Fbb-Farm,not the peculiar characteristic of a borough, 214, 354Form,regulations respecting, 620observations, ib.Feudal System,existed previous to the coming of the Conqueror, 69Fiddlers,charter— Edward VI., 1175inquisition in the reign of Elizabeth finding, an old borough and anancient corporation, 1462Fines,origin of, 107for the admission of freemen accounted for, 1289 — 1296Fire,early anxiety of the laws for the prevention, 259Fitzherbert's Abridgment,observations upon, 692Fleta,extracts from, 570 — 575all men, either free or bondmen, 571right and obligation of inhabitants to be sworn and enrolled in the decennaand free burgh, 572no allusion to municipal incorporated succession, but to ecclesiasticalbodies the reverse, 575Flint,right, inhabitants renting lands or tenements, for which the landlordsonly paid scot and lot, 2036unconstitutional decision, ib.It mentioned in Domesday, 1576le of elective franchise in, ib.charter — George III., Hi.mandamus against the corporation in 1834,judgment of ouBtcr ogaiiut the corporation,county magistrates now exercise jurisdictioncompromise of the interest in, for parliamentparliamentary history, 1277 — I3S1court leet, 1379charter— William III., 184-1compulsion to observe the king's charter, 2'.inconveniences arising from the modem cor]FkAMPTON.writ of ad quod damnum, 599, 600Francbkville,charter — Edward I,, 529B of eleven counties petition chichestercommit depredations, and echof their franchise, 773index. 2327Frankpledge. — See Deceit.the articles of, 578complaints of the bailiffs, 60Freehold,freemen not requisite to have a, 103Freedom,claim by primogeniture, 7attainable by other means than tenure, 15, 43, 103, 106after seven years' service, 22, 235, 313, 722, 727, 762—765, 1099,1100, 1698no reference to corporations or trade, but to birth, 22, 349, 687, 1920modes of attainment by villains, 22member of a trading guild, proof of, 29modem system of abuses in granting, exemplified, 152, 181 — 185, 196,245, 985, 986, 990, 991, 1285, 1297, 1306, 1346, 1348, 1350, 1358,1368, 1371, 1375, 1379, 1380, 1384, 1387, 1568, 1570, 1713, 1754,1763, 1767, 1848, 1854, 1855, 1865, 1869, 1879, 1886, 1887, 1946,1956, I960, 1964, 2007observations, Bracton, 480connexion of trade with, 584freedom never lost by prescription of time," explained, 613, 688granted for the purpose of trading, 1 179observations upon the right of, in Retford, 1283 — 1296condition of the person, not residence, dependent upon, 1359principles of villainage and, applied to Sudbury, 1375See Apprentices, Burgesses, Burgage Teiwre, Boroughs, Citizens,Corporations, Freedom, Freemen, Members to Parliament, Leets,Inhabitants.Frbbmbn,residence of, by the Roman law, 9privileges and class of, under the Saxons, 11fine for imprisonment, 12pledges and duties of, in the fol mote, 12, 44, 62, 63, 66compurgation of, 12under control of their lords, 16working on a Sunday, punishment for, 28enrolment of, 29, 45, 62, 1429to give pledges, 42spoken of without reference to their lands, 43, 62, 63, 66qualification of, 45, 1970slaves and, the only two classes, 55, 56, 106, 348, 571, 847to hold their lands and possessions, 61villains, state of, 67freeholds, not requisite to make, 103 — 106admission of, under the ancient system, 105, 480, 2186Pk BK H KN — con Instil.ftnM, origin of, for adiDisHiun, 107defined from the entries in Domesday, S83extinction between, wit villains, 348, 430, 847■mo-ivmUmicc of, incompatible with the object of the early clayton,distinction between, and i-iUaint, in Maffiu Chula, 420enacInieDla respecting, in Magna Charta, 428provisions in the cuHtuinaLi of the CiiM|ue Ports. 538 et reg.bondmen born in the county of Kent always free, 020otMen-ationi upon the power of making, 340, 979adniisiiioD of, for the jmrposeiof trade, 1179right* and halriUiies of, in Retford, &c., atoning the progress of unation, 1283 — 12gGcorrupt odnuMion of, in Retford, 1297light of, how engrafted upon the constitution of the borough of Queens1209admission for poetical purchases, in Aldboroogh, 1306admission for pcditicsJ jniriHwes in Corse Castle, 1353corrupt practices against the admission of, in CUtheroe, 1358principles of freedom and villainage applied to Sudbury, 1376election of, in Helston, 1387, i3iiSfreeman of London, "one who 'u a citizen cormorant, and an iolubitan^]and Subject to pay scot and lol," 1480requisite to be, defined. 1483election of, in Hylhe, in the reign of James I., conformably with (1ancient usage, 1502, rt le.all the free inhabitant householders of the Cinque Ports the, of, it.,tlieq.power of corporations in the making of, 2046freemen introduced by fraud, 2103doctrines respecting— George 11., 2163. — See Btrgetget piutim.Freshen (.Scolltmit),provisions respecting, 312right to be made free, derived, aa in England, from the common law, ib,not confined to freeholders, 316freemen mentioned in Domesday, 373Froboroh,defined, 483FlJBNBSB,abbot of, petition for a view of frankpledge and return of writs, 597Gatbbubad,grant by the Bishop of Durham to the burgesses, 34 1inhabitant treated as synonymous with burgess, 341, 342chartei^Richard III., 1042charter— Henry Vlll., ii43INDEX. 2329G A L w A Y — continued.charter— Edward VI., 1175provisions against the influence of the Pope, 1175act of Parliament for regulating the town, 2016Gatton,a prescription, that the freeholders dwelling out of the town had theright of voting, decided to be good, against common right, 1647Roger Copley, in his own person, both the returning officer and theelector, ib,not a borough by prescription, ib.parliamentary history, ib.letters from the Lord Treasurer Burghley, ordering the election of members,1648all the freeholders dwelling out of the town, 1649return of members for, signed casually at Ryegate, ib^freeholders' right to vote disputed, 1650, 1651return of members, who elected themselves, 1651when, ceased to be a borough, 1651, 1652Gold,description of, 14persons liable, 100Remote,laws made at, 14shire and borough, held over the kingdom, 32absence from, 34criminal law administered, ib,protection going to, and coming from, 46George I., A. D., 1714—1727reign of, 1981 — 2021first legislative act affecting the nature of boroughs and corporations,1981, et seq.errors and inaccuracies of, 1983erroneous construction of courts of law, ib.provisions for courts leet, 1984how the evils complained of might have been prevented, ib,liveries of London, distinct from the municipal government, 1985no prescriptive rights, 1986usurpations, 1993illegal claims of non-residents, 2011, et seq.court leet, 2016George II., A.D., 1727—1760reign of, 2021 — 2082act for rendering the last decision in Parliament, final, 2021injustice of, ib.common council of Norwich delegated body, 2023(ill. D ABLE,Distinction between, anie franchise. C21, 304, 1045. 1046county at Urge. described under the general name of, gaoGlanville,doubted aa to its bang an authorised legal treatise, 345objects of, ib.pleas of the crown anaJogoiu to Saxon laws, 346when Old Sanun ceased to be a borough, ib.attendance — mourn, 347strangers, ib.villainage— emancipation, 34S — 352millions and freemen contradiHtinguished, 348freedom independent of corporate rights, 349. 6S7, I920Glastonbury,abbot of, brings an action alone, 8O6doctrine of corporations, as to ecclesiastical bodies, not understood, 807franchises and lands granted by codicils not sealed, but under atgna, 8(Gloucester,entry — Domesday, 206observations, 207, 308aid of the borough, 321, 339INDEX. 2331Gloucester — continued.charter— Henry II., 343charter — Richard I., 374charter — John, 389merchant guild, 390observations, ib.charter — Henry III., 470charter — Edward II., 696charter — Richard II., 750grammar school of, trespass concerning, 807first mention of the word " corporate," 807charter — Henry V., 807, 824bailiffs demand cognizance, 917no mention of a corporation, 918charter — Charles I., 1699charter — Charles II., 1763quo warranto, 2046power of corporation to make honorary freemen, ib,Gloucester County,case of, in Glanville, 1564GODMANCHBBTBR,bailiffs and commonalty claim to be a corporation by prescription, 1066charter — James I., 1491GOSPORT,court leet, temp. George III., 2185Guthrie,league of, 28Grampound,charter — Richard II., 752petition for the restoration of charters, 1262presentments at court leet, 2063Granard,charter — Charles II., 1811Graham,charter— Edward IV., 970, 971charter— Richard III., 1034, 1035no notice taken of the previous incorporation by Edward IV., 1035members to Parliament returned from the influence of the crown, 1172,wages for members paid by the inhabitants, 1344parliamentary decisions respecting the freemen in 1345, l7ll» 1730Grimsby,charter — John, 408charter — Henry III., 47165 persons of, entered as being taxed upon the Nome Rolls, 673charter — Henry VI., 864parliamentary decision, 1793, 2115QUKBTBAD,sint return of memben to Parliament, 6c)0ri^iht of parliamentary Elecliim deddcil lo be in iba inhabitants, 1636right of parliamentary delation decided to be in the burgage holders, ib.OUEBT.liability of host for, 13,51coinpurgBtion of a, 14harbouring, of bad repute, 31, 35entry — Domesday, 99not a borough, ib.history of, peculiar, 100charters to (he good men, Henry III , lOO, 468object of, 101balnlity of the men, 1*6.membera to Parliament, first return, 103pleas relating to, before barons of the Exchequer, ib.burgesses described as men commorant and resident, ii.election report in 1689, ib.freehold not requisite to make a freeman, 103freemen, allowed to wrote, receiving alms, lOSfreemen, the inhabitant householders, ih.aid of the borough, 339GriLDH (Scotland),distinct from the boroughs, 336, 362derivation of term, 563Gold,persons when to be ransomed, 24descriptive of all common payments, 204, 353, 599, 600Hadlkioh,charter — Anne, 1838petition for the ex ten ion of privileges towards, 071observations, Ii72cntrj' — Domesday, 109agreement between, and the citizens of London, 350observations, 561,562INDEX. 2333Hargrave MSS., 445, 953, 1491Arabian MSS. 376, 497, 663, 753, 903—906, 1002, 1034, 1036, 1037, 1039,1190, 1312, 1333—1335, 1338—1341, 1429, 1510, 1511, 1516,1517, 1537, 1538, 1605, 1647, 1648, 1696, 1759Harwich,not described as a borough in Domesday, 274complaint against the inhabitants of, for returning members, 1365not mentioned in Domesday, 1366incorporated by James I. and Charles II., 1366parliamentary history, 1365 — 1367Haslbmbrb,when first returned members, 1380not mentioned as a borough in Domesday, ib.parliamentary history, 1380, 1385improper conduct of the bailiffs, 1380action by Denzil Onslow, 1381 — 1383unconstitutional doctrine of the C. J., 1381illegal custom of voters, 1384, 1385right of election for, in 1661 — decided to be in '' the inhabitanthouseholders," 1751Hastings,entry — Domesday, 97aid of, 321charter — John, 415custumal, 533payment of scot and lot in, a consequence of being within the liberties,596, 597custom of, that if a man lived a year and a day out of the town he had novote, 1831interference of William III. in the elections, 1887non-resident freemen, 2057, 2058Havbrfordwbst,case in Glanville, 1564ordinances for the admission of persons as burgesses, 1762improper conduct of burgesses, 1763parliamentary history, 1761 — 1763charter — Edward I., 568charter— Richard III., 1039Hbdon,charter — John, 412observations, 413charter — Edward V., 552, 553observations, ib,right — inhabitants being housekeepers and parishioners, 2026right — freemen by descent, or by apprenticeship to resident freemen, or byan honorary gift, 2036Hilton,charter — John, 408, 40gchutei^-Bliubeth, 1387observation upon the admission of freemen, ib.House of Common and committee degree as to lite rifin, 1747question under the Durham Act, 2101evils from non-user of the leet, 3102charter— George III., 21C0Hinlrv-upon-Thamm,charter — George I., 2003Hbnkt 1., A.D. 1100—1135reign of, 293 — 319kws of, 394—301church U) be free, 394heirs, heiresses, widows, moneybags, ib.laws — King Edward, confirmed, ib.charter to London, ib. et leq.London not incorporated, 296 et itq.inaccuracy of Hume, 396charter granted to the inhabitant!, 297hundreds, decennas, pledges, tfr.viUfuna, aldermen, ragrauta, 398plea of the crown, forfeitures, reliefs, guild, 299reerea of hundreds, boroughs, Villains, bamna, ib.peasants, frankpledge, common stock, 300Saxon origin, 302observations, tfr.Hbnbv H., A.D. 1154—1189reign of, 335 — 364laws of Henry I. confirmed, 335boroughs distinct fitim |i;uilds, 340, 341INDEX. 2335Henry II. — continued.guilds not connected with municipal government, 354men, inhabitants of the place, ib.society divided into two classes, bond and free, 363villainage and freedom dependent upon birth, ib.no traces of municipal corporations, Uf.guilds apparently incorporated, 364charters to burgesses and their heirs, ib.fee-farms of all cities and boroughs substantially the same, 340, 344, 345observations upon the charters, &c., 353, 354, 363, 364Henry III., A.D. 1216—1233reign of, 425-— 488statutes of Magna Charta and Marlberge confirmed, 427, 437causes of the toiun having fallen into desuetude, 436charters, 437 et seq.commonalty, word of general import, 440 et seq.common seal no characteristic of a corporation, 443London not a corporation by prescription, 444universities not incorporated, 448, 449Britton, decenna, 475 et seqBracton, villainage, freedom, universitas, frankpledge, inhabitants, 479et seq.uniformity of the privileges of boroughs in Ireland with those of England,474, 475Saxon institutions, preserved, 483boroughs and burgesses continued the same as in the Saxon era, 485burgesses the inhabitants paying scot and lot, 486no corporations by prescription, ib.House of Commons in the reign of, 486, 487Henry IV., A.D. 1399—1413reign of, 779—819continuance of villainage 800, 804, 805, 807leet in full force, 804inhabitants of Plymouth petition to be " incorporated," 801, 803first mention of the word " corporate" in the text of any document, 807Henry V., A.D. 1413—1422reign of, 819 — 834guilds incorporated, 824corporate doctrine borrowed from the ecclesiastical bodies, 825return of members to Parliament in the county court explained, 828, 829The word " incorporate" used in its primitive sense, 822leets in full force, 828, 944continuance of villainage, 831early interference by great men in the elections, 91 1 et seq.principles of Saxon and common law in full effect, 944f Vni,. A.D. 1500—1547reign of, 1091 — Aimscomines upon the reign of, 1091 — 1093. 1U3. 1145comte left inboroughs in England, Scotland, and Wales, eiuientianjr tb cBtrnlily of Parliament, !I44Saxon anil cuouQon law prinin[iteii unchanged, 1 143villeinage in force, ib.Hbrkpord,entry — Domesday, 212observations, 214aid of, 339charters-Richard I., 347 ,charter — Henry III., 470parliamentary return, in the reign of Edward I., 494bailie committed to the Fleet, for a sum due from the dtuau, SS2, 5charter— Edward 11., 59586 persons named as being taxed upon the Nonce Rolls, 673charter— James I., 1495charter— William 111., 1496intended for the inhabitant householders, 1497observations, ib.case of, in Glanville, 1563charter— William III., 1844improper admission of freemen, IB79Herotocks,election of. In the fol mote, 54iNDBX. 2337Hertford,entry — Domesday, 174burgesses in T. R. E., 175members to Parliament from the earliest times, 176borough held in capite, ib,municipal officers, election, ib.no borough in Hertfordshire from whence burgesses could be elected forParliament, ib.charter — Mary, ib.observations, 177charter — James I., 178existence doubted, 180members to Parliament ordered to be returned in 1624, 178 — 180three burgesses allowed to be non-residents, 181petition to Parliament, from the freeholders and freemen of the countyand borough, in 1640, ib.inhabitants petition against the illegal proceedings of the mayor, onmaking freemen, 1681, 181 — 184observations, 185non-residents admitted to vote, 184inhabitants petition Parliament in 1705 and 1723, 185decision in favour of the resiants, 186aid of the borough, 321, 339released on account of poverty, 321extract of Brady considered, 1908HlOHAM FbRRBBS,charter — Mary, 1206parliamentary decisions respecting the right of elective franchise, 1206,Hillsborough,charter — Charles H., 1810Hindoo,charter— Henry HI., 438charter — Richard H., 750charter — Philip and Mary, 1211not -a borough by prescription, 1212parliamentary history, 1212 — 1214Holt,information against mayor, for the admission of burgesses, 1289leet, temp. George ni.» 2185HoM Ins. — vide Men, Burgesses, Freemen, reputationsshowing its original application, 1327HONITON,elective franchise restored, 1639parliamentary history, 2009—20117Kto be watched, 61doctrine of, recognized, 67SHuntingdon,entry — Domesday, 206observations, 31?charter — Henry I., 305observations, 306weavers, 321aid of the borough, 339charter — John, 414observations, ib.chartei^Heiuy III., 470charter— Edward III., 660tenants and residents defined, 661, 662men and burgesses synonymous, 663135 persons of, entered upon the Node Bcharter — John, pleaded, 6B9charter— richard II., 743— 74Sobservations, 744, 745charier — Henry IV., 794charter— Richard III., 1033INDEX. 2339Huntingdon — continued.observations upon the burgesses, 1033, 1034prior of, against the men, 1068doctrine of corporations by prescription first asserted, ib,charter — Elizabeth, 1220charter — Charles I., 1664admissions in the court leet, during the reign of Charles I., 1665constitutions in temp. Charles I., 1714 — 1716no man to be made a burgess, unless sworn at a court leet, 1714charter — James II., 1826extract from Brady, 1912, 1913petition from the conmionalty, 1925not enters in the Terra Re^^ 1929leet, 2186in full practice in temp. George III., t^.presentments, ib.Huntingdonshire,talliages assessed upon the boroughs and demesnes in, 588HUTBSIUM,meaning of, 482Hythe,entry — Domesday, 88burgesses, inhabitant householders, ib.parliamentary decisions, 89charter — Henry II., 336charter — John, 415charter — Henry III., 468custumal, 533charter— edward II., 595admissions of freemen, 768, 796, 908, 910, 1007> 1008, 1507, 1509charter— Henry IV., 796, 797observations, 797, 798jurats of, the jury or sworn men, 910, 911barons of, the resiants, ib.burgesses described as resiants or indwellers, 1037, 1038, 1136, 1137indenture between the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the inhabitants,devising the bailiwick, &c., ib.precept from Henry VIII., to the constable of Dover castle, to administeroaths, &c. to the inhabitants, 1137charter— Elizabeth, 1321ordinances, ib.inhabitants, compellable to serve all offices, 1509ordinances temp., Charles I., as to disfranchisement and freedom, l67lquestion of disfranchisement for non-residence, 1831admission of burgesses, 1970, 19717 K 2IkCIUKB'rKB,rnlry, Du]iienla<r, KilaliMrvaliona, 164cb«rwr— John, illch«rMr— Henry V , IJIIIthartei^Quefn Mary. ib.court iMI. ib.parliain«nury lu«lory, Ii9\. 1^9!coqioratoni not thp burftnwen. |()HIa. A.D. 688— 73iitaw<iof. li— 21by whom guide, 15tendency to incruw frBmiMi, ibalderman, 16^21■hirenuui. IGriot. 16, i;pledges. 16incrchant8^vUlun», IG, 17were gild. 17mldemun, shire, ibimprisonment, ib.slaves, state of, ibborough, lyIncorporation,doctrine of, in its infancy, 575obMmtioni upon the introduction of the word, 807, 841ob»en-atioas upon its properest in the reign of Henry' \'I, 857 — B92introduction of the word ujxin the inde lo the patent rota, &c,, 860terms of incorporation when applied to ecclesiastical and eleemosynarybodies, ginoconnexion between, and cities and boroughs. 1013, 1501, 18g4early notions of, were, that the inhabitants had been almiya incorporated,lOU ; Intro. xxv,by inference or implication. 1021, 1022doctrine of, in ibe reign of William and Mary, I-2Idreal nature, defined, 1380'S against, 31. 35, 3P. 41. 43, 46, 4i|, 51, 63origin of notice lo become, IsjTionjTnoiifl lo burgess. 56Index. 2341Inhabitants — continued.the burghwara, 13, 57origin of notice to become, 14, 15early provisions for mutual responsibility and permanent residence, 24,25, 28, 31, 32, 35, 46, 55, 56, 62, 63—66, 306synonymous to citizen, burgess, freemen, and men, 56, 59> 64^ 72, 86,93, 96, 97, 98, 103, 108, 123, 125 et seq,, 151, 167, 181, 193, 244et seq,, 249—272, 281, 297, 341, 354, 357, 360—362, 374, 380,399, 413, 459 et seq., 484, 493, 521, 522, 526, 527, 534, 590, 593,648, 663, 673, 680, 738, 747, 760, 796, 800, 820, 896, 948, 967,973 et seq,, 1000 et seq,, 1018, 1025, 1064, 1209, 1210, 1214,1218, 1229, 1231, 1281, 1710, 1726, 1746, 2003, 2106ecclesiastics, 46, 102, 378, 435, 489villains, 45, 378. — See Villains,poor, 378strangers not admitted sworn and enrolled, 378, 537persons of incompetent mind, 378females, 102, 378, 613, 756minors, 378Saxon charters granted to the burghwara, 56 et seq, 285all burdens and discharges in cities, boroughs and counties related to, 72,73, 103, 274, 380, 553, 561, 590, 593, 597, 598, 613, 665, 748,795, 796, 820, 899, 1001, 1008, 1040, 1061, 1092, 1097, 1112,1170, 1207, 1214, 1228, 1234, 1281, 1483, 1602, 1572, 1720,1733, 1740, 1790, 2003, 2012, 2098, 2224term, only occurs once in Domesday, 214bound to be admitted, sworn, and enrolled in the court leet, 44, 45, 78,80, 82, 153, 177, 399, 486, 521, 522, 534, 680, 700, 706, 759,760, 766, 768, 796, 802, 908 et seq,, 929, 953, 1006, 1007, 1037,1061, 1064, 1187, 1218, 1236, 1281, 1346, 1403, 1447, 1557,1723, 1831members of Parliament elected by, 821, 828, 905. — See Members qfParliament,distinction between, and foreigners, 855incorporation of, assigned, 1010introduction of the term, 1215rights of, encroached upon, 1270, 1617, 1520 et seq., 1633, 1634dictum of Lord Hardwick as to the incorporation of, 1302Lord Coke, "that inhabitants could take by continued suecession," Intro. xxv,enrolment of, practised from the earliest periods 1310, 1429can make bye-laws, 1444, 1474held not to take in succession, 1520, 1521Gateward's case as to right of common by, 1538 et seq.observations, 1539 et seq.Sec Burgesses, Freemen, Corporations, Leets, Freedom, Citizens,Men.Indistinct,charter — John, 418Ipswich,entry — Domesday, 380obwrvatiMis, 381, 263aid of the borough, 331, 339charter — Richland I., 3"*charter — John, 391, 393burge!i»m, inhabitants, 393merchant guild, ib.ordinances, 393 — *01observations, 399—401charter— Henry III., 467ordinance in the reign of Edward 1. — Mission of burgesses, 5?3domboc, filS, 510contents, 520—522ward same aa leet, 519men defined, ib.foreign burgesses — gmlda,town of, held bj burgage Uno corporation, 533bailiff pleads he could not Bummon IS of the foreign handled, 563charter— Edward II., 589common count, 590observation, jfr.men of, chained with a tine, ii.ordinance, it.burgesaes, to pay scot and lot, ib.bailiffs not to make burgeaaea of themselves, 593observations, 593charter — Edward III., 667not mentioned as being incorporated, 702charter— Echard II., 742, 743hnrgesBea of, released from all arrears of fee-fame, &c., 794charter — Henry VI., 870first charter of incorporation, by Henry VI., 875, 877observations, 878INDEX. 2343Ipswich — continued.trespass against the bailiffs and commonalty, 933charter — Edward IV., 971villains, freedom by residence, 972bye-laws made by the commonalty of tailors, 1524charter — Charles II., 1698charters surrendered, 1799charters of incorporation by Charles II., ib.charter — James II., 1824Brady's extract explained, 1907parliamentary and municipal history, 1946 — 1949case of foreigners, 2049, 2050quo warranto, 2061evils of non-residence, 2062Irish,provisions against repairing to Oxford or Cambridge, 834, 835James I., A.D. 1603—1625.reign of from 1469 to 1626,difficulty of managing the House of Commons, 1470discretionary power of the chancellor in supplying vacancies in the Houseof Commons, abandoned, ib.seat in the House of Commons no longer considered a burden, ib.continuance of the leets, 147 1* et seq.every man must be within a leet, 1474interference of, in corporations, 1500incorporation not materially affecting the class of burgesses, 1501borough and parliamentary rights, ib.courts of law subservient to the views of the crown, 1609> 1626concluding observations, 1626Jambs I. (Ireland),the wise policy adopted by, at the commencement of his reign, 1593,unconstitutional and violent conduct of James I. in the corrupt erectionof boroughs and corporations, with remonstrances upon his conduct,1596 et seq.,speech at Whitehall, 1601boroughs erected for parliamentary objects, 1603James II., A.D. 1685—1689surrender of charters to the Earl of Bath, 1267object of, ib.arts to manage the elections, ib.election of members taken from the inhabitants, 1 268reception of the king in the western counties, ib.proclamation for the restoration of charters, 126oproclamation of William III., i^.removal of aldermen in East Looe, 1270S344 tNuu.AMKfl 11. — enticed.pFtition~Eui Loot. 1:171nilwemeiii^ of the House of Common, 1817cauwi, 18ia~IS30conduct of C.J. Jefferiea, IHlflunconstitutional conduct of, 1834, li93&proclamation for the restoration of charter, 1836 — 1838 'concluding observation. 1842, 1S43usurpation and tbxxse progressive and uninterrupted, 1B43 "JtrFEHlBS, C. J;tyrannic and ilkgil conduct of, 1793. 1818, 1880, 1883, 18S6Jbkhtnb's, St.rostonttioii of numbers to Parliament. 121)3JswB.((UudH i>f, brluD)! lu the kilt. 52John. A.D. 1199—1216reign of, 377^25charters, 377observations, 377, 't nq.to whom granted, 379. 443none of incorporation, 380guilds distinct from boroughs end InirgwMw, 381furs and market distinct from Itnroughi. &c i6.none providing fur thp election of burgesses, sano municipal {'iiq>oraCionf. :i^7. 422couuuou L-uuucil nut It Bclccl L-orpunM bod', surinaccuracies of Hume, 423, 434Jurisdiction,secular and ecclesiastical division of, 14sheriffs excluded, 52lords, excluded, •£.quotation of, land required for bang, 820not U> be justices of assise in thar own counties, 1 1 13r. Grand and Petit,origin of, 40 — 55liability to serve upon, 495Justices OP The Pbacr,required to be peasants, recent and dwelling in the shin, 830JusTiTiA General — (Scofiond), 701Keiwpsq,grant of burgages, 4 1 9men and tenants released from toll, 601index. 2345Kbnpkg — coii/ifiiiec/.charters-Edward III., 706charter— Edward IV., 1028Kent,people of, 13first county mentioned in Domesday, 71customs, 75customs respecting bondmen, 920Kidderminster,charter— Charles I., 1668charter — George IV., 2196Kino,when only to be appealed to, 38—43cannot of right change that liberty which he had granted, 481grant of, when void, 683extent of the prerogative, 914exemptions — confined to those cases only, in which the discharge ofpublic duties are substituted for a more general obligation, 1024boroughs can be created by, but the voters must be the class prescribedby common law, 664, 1256, 1774KiNOSBOROUOH MSS., 1231, 1463Kinoston-upon-Thambs,charter — John, 408charter— Henry III., 463, 470charter— Henry VI., 869charter— Edward IV., 1005inaccuracy respecting a charter said to be granted, 1130, 1131charter— Elizabeth, 1434, 1435custom for the disfranchisement of freemen, discussed, 1685, 1686observations, 1685, 1687KlNGSTON-UPON-HULL,charter — Edward I., 546charter— Edward II., 595first return to Parliament, 600charter — Edward III., 664charter, pleaded, 677no mention of a corporation, ib.complaint against the mayor and commonalty, by the Archbishop ofYork, 690observations upon the previous charters granted to, 857, 858first charter of incorporation, 860 — 869observations, 868 — 869exactions by the mayor, 1115charter— James I., I619n the Earl of Oirerjr Ksate members for bird, 1801letter from the Earl of Orrery, to Sir Robert Soiitbwell, 18(i|. 1 8112letter from William Blathwa)-te to Sir Rolwrt Soulhwrll, 1 8*0Soutliwell Manuscripts, as to the improper niiiking of freemen, wtclcorrespondence od parliamentary airaiigeiDents, aoSg, 3074Knarksbohouoh,charter of the manor — Henry HI., 46Sgrant of the castle and manor, 594parliamentary history, 1861^1863burgage tenure defined, 1862Lancaster,charter^Earl of Moreton, 370charter — John, 410charter— Henry HI., 471parliamentary returns, in the reign of Edward 1., 494charter— Edward HI., 666inhabitants discharged from pang toll, 1832charter— George HI., 2161poBBemion of, before whom settled, 46early instance of the necessity of having, attached as a qualification forany office, 619, 620Lkbds,petition from the inhabitants, against being made a corpotstioti, ISISLandbdownb MSS., 1171, 1172, 1223, 1330, 1331. 1410, 1411INDEX. 2347Landward,definition, 333Lampadar,charter— Edward I., 667essentially similar to the English grants, 567leet, 2109charter — George III., 2161Lanark,regulations respecting the possession of, 708Lanoport,entry — Domesday, 166incorporated, James I.observations upon the tenure, 167leet, port reeve, inhabitants, non-residence, ib.common law principles acted upon, ib.Launceston,charter — Richard I„ 368charter— Edward III., 666charter — Edward VI., 971charter — Mary, 1205parliamentary history, 2004 — 2008sent members to Parliament before their charter, 2005improper admission of freemen, 2007borough of, an instance of the introduction of non-resident freemen, afterthe interference of James II., 2008Laws and Customs,summons of 12 persons from every county by William the Conqueror toascertain the, 47restoration of ancient, by John, 422William III., 1845, 1846Law-worthy,freeman to place himself in the hundred to become, 44when considered to be, 49advantages of, 63term explained, 19, 286, 287, 347, 428, 1919Laws of England,introduction of into Ireland, 569 570,Lbbtb. — See Freemen, Boroughs, Burgesses, Inhabitants, Charters passim.origin, 34, 52, 1075, 1080, 1728anxiety of our ancestors that the laws should be administered locally, 38,43, 609, 614, 895, 1238pledges, 32, 46, 55, 56, 62, 63, 66, 316Manchester ordinances, 541, e^ seq., 687functions of, 38, 39, 52, 194, 261, 919, 949, 107l> 1076, 1096, 1471Idogs, 3103. alio, 3113(J01presentment of freemen and the public business transacted in Ipswich,393, et teq.inde. portmen, commoner, guild merchant, defined, 309, rt le[IIenby in.)frankpledge, view of, provided for in Magna Charta, 433(Bbittok,)provisions for the view of frankpledge, 476. 477(Bracton.)Saxon system of, defined, si — 484(Edward 1.,)addition of burgesaes, &c., in Ipswich, 511, el teq.warden, leet, foreign burgesses. defined, 519. rt teg.juries, chief pledges, jurats presented, scot and lot, boats, S31 S39mutual aa to the, of Romney, 535inhabitants, burgesses, freemen, residence, scot and lot, fine, straiten,635—539(Flxta,)view of frankpledge to be held according to Magna Charta, 573, 573(Edward Ii,)articles of frankpledge, 578, 579admissions of burgesses tR ipswich, 593, 593courts held at Poole, 599petition for, 597complaint of false presentments at, ib.(Mirror,)frankpledge, 609,610what cannot be presented at, to be done at the sheriff's toum, 610,611(Edward III.)statutes relative, cismDEx. 2349Lbktb — continued.held at Lynn, 653all public functions discharged, •&.men of Gostelyng complain of misuse, 670(MSS. Year Book,)resiants boimd to be suitors, 680(Fourth Year Book,)frankpledge, leet, dozens, pledges, 687resiant prosecuted for non-attendance, 689(Richard Ii,)inhabitants of Portswood to attend the court, 751burgesses of Stafford to be sworn at, ib,(Yarmouth Rolls,)inhabitants presented and sworn, 754capital pledges, 755form of presentments, 756fines, apprentices, inmates, 757duties of the juries, 759common law. in full exercise, ib.presentments at Lynn, 760servitude, residence, pledges, jury, election, apprentices, 761, et teq,freedom by birth, 764presentments at Wells, 766 — 768admissions to freedom in Hythe, 768(Hbnrt IV.)presentments, Hythe, 769Yarmouth, 798suitors — Plymouth, 802(Sixth Year Book,)if things incurable at, neglected, sheriff to interpose, 805(Henry V.)presentments at Yarmouth, 828Huntingdon, 828(Henry Vi,)Oxford and Cambridge, universities, 835chief pledges, 843municipal officers for Shaftesbury elected, 963admission to freedom at Chester, 903, et seq,,admission to freedom from birth, marriage, &c. in Hythe, 908, et seq.(Seventh Year Book,)bailiff fined for not impannelling a jury, 919antiquity— jurisdiction, 927inhabitants of Windsor bound to attend, 929(Eighth Year Book,)trespass — free profits of, 938, et seq.(Eleventh Year Book.)origin of, 1075, et teq.duties, 107c, 1077bye-laws, 1078distinction between the hundred and, 1078CKbilwsv'b Reports, 1079)origin of, Iindictment*, 16.steward, portreei-e, &c in Pevemey, 1081(HexrvVIII.,)powers to Steward, lOEMarticle inequitable, 1096liberties confirmed, II06University of Oxford, powers to do all acta i(Edward Vi,)liberties of, confirmed, 1149commencement of unupatioiu, II61presentments — Stockbridge, 1167regulations — Sandwich, 1169(Edward Vi,)admission to freedom in Wells, 1169, II7D(Philip and Mary,)steward u> preside at, iElizabeth,offences to be prosecuted at the leet, 1220courts, in full practice, 1221, 1252, 1258grant of, to Poole, 1241admissions of burgesses in Poole, 1246admissions to freedom in Wells, 1251pensions at the, in East Looe, 1258a Buckingham, 1199INDEX. 2351LbBTS — COfl/tlltl«(/.presentments, 1261court, Cirencester, 1281confusion between the court, and baron, 1286court, Queenborough, 1299admissions to freedom in Hythe, 1322regulations for, Singleton, 1340, et seq.ordinances — Colchester, 1346court, Callington, 1348Corse Castle, 1362Clitheroe, 1355attempts to destroy, 1362Lymington, mayor of, sworn, 1366jurisdiction administered at Sudbury, 1373all municipal officers elected at the courts, 1380Richmond court, 1386Portsmouth, 1388admissions, 1390admissions to freedom in Wells, 1414record relative to, in Evesham, 1420an act for Westminster regulating, 1429, et seq.an avowry for a fee, 1441(Jambs I.,)jurisdiction of, 1471assumed as becoming obsolete, 1472chief pledges fined, 1473all inhabitants bound to appear as amenable, 1474every man must be within a leet, ib.can make bye-laws, ib.admission to freedom in Cinque Ports, 1503, et seq.ordinances and admissions in Chester, 1509» st seq.admissions — Poole, 1513admission to freedom in cities, 1622(Charles I.)gradual usurpations upon, 1654, 1655court baron substituted, 1654prescription, 1659usurpations, ib.requisites, 1660admissions — Huntingdon, 1664, 1665Sandwich, 1669Hythe, 1671(Commonwealth,)bye-laws made at a leet affirmed, 1687, 1688(Charles II.)omissions of courts, 1695Lt KT* — conJ MW [f .power of nta(i^titrmlM, ib.iilminiuan of burgcMcs, pic, luicum. Punsinoiiih, iTSn. 1731prenanlmiMiM II, 1713ortftiu of lecu, I73Hcloini of. Tavistock. 17^6D otivtenM, and alndltdwra. 1776{Jaues H.)ordinances — Romney, IH3I[irogrcM of usurpation, oil iibu««« uiWlLLIAK 111.)t. Truro, 1 67bpresentments, 1876, 1^77right of select bodies. 194a(Anno.)Plfmplon, Admission to freedom, 1945 el Madmission, Hythe, I970(G«<usurpations, 3015 1(Gkorob II.)London and Westminster under the controlmoment, sons, aosGamercement, 2064jurisdiction, ib. et $eg. 747evils from the departure of, 2074 rt seq. Soi(Gborob III.)benefits of restoring, 2101, 210a, et vide Intrancient sj-stem of Cricklade. 2114courts held in Cumberland, Gosport, Holt, iadmission of burgesses — Huntingdon, 21B6(Gborgk IV.)continuance of, in Petersfield, 2222West Looe, 2224Maidstone, 2226Lbetb and Law Days {Walti),established institutions in Wales, 1106, 2109Lkqalkb Homines. — See Freemen, Burgasft, Lotthe free inhabitants of cities and boroughs, &Lbicientry — Domesday, 321described as a citjr, ib.observations, ib.charter— Earl of, 222INDEX. 2353Lricrstkr — continued.observations, 223charters — john, ib.observations, ib.first entry of aldermen, 224duties and origin, ib.charter of the Earl of Leicester, in 1239 — 225observations, ib.charter — Henry III., ib.members to Parliament, 226first return, ib.charters of John of Gaunt, Richard II., and two of Edward IV., 226—228 ,members to Parliament, by whom chosen, ib.observations, ib.ordinances, 228, 229elections parliamentary, mandates respecting, 229 — 232observations, 231 — 233charter — Henry VII., 233commission from Henry VII., iLobservations, ib.charter — Edward VI., 234observations, ib,ordinances, 234, 236 — 239observations, 235 — 239charter— Elizabeth, 240observations, 240, 241petition — Elizabeth, 241poor oppressed, ib.observations, ib.ordinances, ib.watch and ward, continuance of, ib.second charter — Elizabeth, 242observations, 243charter — James I., 243, 244charter — Charles II., 248House of Commons, petition to, in 1705, 249decision of, ib.mandamus respecting an alderman, for non-residence, 250, et seq,distinction between non-residence and absence explained, 250, 251inhabitants paying scot and lot entitled to the privileges of, 252, 353tom ancient demesne, 1433inhabitants discharged from toll, ibLeinster,32 persons of, named as being taxed upon the None Rolls, 673charter — Anne, 19507 Lf33S4Index.Lbwkii,winy — Domesday, 9Snmirpaiions, ib.burgess the inhabitant householder |W]inaccuracy of Brads. id.election of member agreed to be in the inlLiBIRl HoiiisBS, — See Preetnen. Burnt,hav-voTlhy. Lett, Borou^ka,cbaner of Liberties-127recognised by Brittle, t76LtBBBTT,loss of, recognised tka a punishment, in theLiDroRD,entry — Domesday, 172observations upon, Brady's extract, 1§(Lack Mantlejury of the borough. 370 JLlMKRICK, Jdarter — John, 419 ^burgages, &6gcharter — Henry VIII., llcharter — Elizabeth, I45{lLincoln,entry— Domesday, 268described as a city, 269aid of, 339fee-farm, ib.charier — Richard L, 3G8charter — John, 386, 387common council, meaning of, 387parliamentary returns in the reign of Edcomplaint of the citizens. 525charter — Edward IL, 595558 persons of, entered, as being taxed upmayor and commonalty bring n wait oand bailie of Derby, 694observations. G[I5. 69()action by two citizens, against the bailiff*charter— Henry IV., 793not one of incorporation, ib.INDEX. 2355Lincoln — continued.mayor and burgesses, suit by, respecting cognizance of pleas, 803the principle recognized, " that no one can be judge in his own cause," ib.a fine imposed for a person not accepting Uie office of mayor, 804bishop claims a person as his villain, 805statute relative to false verdicts given in the city of, 822made an incorporate county of itself, ib,observations, ib.charter, upon petition of the commonalty, 894not previously incorporated, ib.indentures of return temp. Charles II., 1732Linlithgow,regulations respecting the possession of, 708mentioned as one of the four boroughs, 709burgesses pay scot and lot, 1974LiSKEARD,charter — Richard, King of the Romans, 464charter — Edward the Black Prince, 666charter — Richard II., 752petition for the restoration of charters, 1262, 1839charter^Elizabeth, 1403, 1404leet, 2138, 2140parliamentary and municipal history, 2138, 2141constitutions, 2138, 2139quo warranto, 2140charter — James II., ib.Litchfield,right of voting, 258charter— Edward VI., 1152ancient history, 1155not a prescriptive borough, 1156observations upon the charters, 1156—1159charters granted to the inhabitants and resiants, 1 1 58charter — Philip and Mary, 1182parliamentary history, 1183, e^ seq.admission of burgesses, 1184, 1185election petition in 1710, 1186observations upon freeholders, burgage tenants, and freemen, 1186, 1187election petition in 1772, 1187freemen required to be enrolled, 2004LiVEBY AND Liverymen. — (See London.)statute of the 10th Richard II., cap. 4, 728commons pray that no livery be granted under colour of any guilds 773adoption of liveries by guilds, a usurpation, ib,7 l2Livery and Livbhvmhn — continued.guilds. fraternities, and men at trade, ma]guilds spoken of as in connexion with trainstatutes against the taking or giving, !)49,statute of, not to extend to any, gireacorporate, 1016ordinance— Richaid lit., 1D36, 1037usurpations of the London, 1985 — 3003have no municipal rights a« " lirerfmeiiLlVBRPOOL,charter — John, 413burgage tenure, ib. \charter— Henry III 464 '•rfiarter— Edward 1I„ 595charter— Richard II., 738merchant guild distinct from the muuicipicharter — Henry IV,, 794burgesses petition for privilege, 829burgage tenure, observations upon, as IJHcharter— Charles II., 1704officers of the corporation removed by Chicommon council order a levy upon the inlyordinances respecting the addition of forcharter — Geoi^ II,, 2044quo H'arninta against the baptista, 2045parliamentary and municipal history, roscommoncouncil, 2154, 2157, 215Scharter — Charles 1., 2153charter— Charles II., 2154charter — James II., 2155charter— William III 3157mandamus, residence, aldermen, 3172La:charter — Richard, 103!)Local Administration op Laws,anxiety of our ancestors for, 38, 43, ILothair AND Eric, A.D. 675 — 685lat-s of, 13inhabitants of Kent, 12compurgation of freemen. 12, 13host liable for his guest, ib.ive, iA.«H»4INDEX. 2357LOWCSTOPPB,town of, ancient demesne, 1435Look, East,early history, 1253, 1254return of members, 1254charter of incorporation— Elizabeth, 1254, 1255suit in the exchequer respecting the market, burgesses, &c., 1255charters of the crown have no power to control the election of membersto parliament, 1256observations upon the terms "inhabitants" and" burgesses," 1256, 1257bye-laws, 1257, 1258demise of lands by the mayor and principal burgesses, 1258, 1259charter — James I., 1259, 1260only one member to parliament for, and West Looe during the protectorate,1260early books destroyed, 1260, 1261election of mayor by the " commons', 1261presentments at the court leet, 1261surrender of charters to Lord Bath, 1262petition for the restoration of charters, ib.illegality of the charter granted by James II., 1263 — 1265admission of freemen, 1266election of burgesses, ib.officers of the corporation removable at the king's pleasure, 1266, 1267members to parliament, nominees of the court, 1268proclamation for the restoration of charters, 1269order for the removal of the mayor and aldermen, 1270bye-laws, 1271petition of the inhabitants to William III., ib.return of members to Parliament in 1689» 1273presentment of strangers, ib.freeman's oath of the borough, 1274quo warranto against the inhabitants, ib.election petition, 1806 — 1275decision of a committee of the House of Commons, in 1824, ib.charters previous to the proclamation established, 1839Looe, West,court leet, 2224mandamus to enrol an inhabitant, ib.villains, 2225burgesses not dependent upon tenure, ib.inhabitants clearly mean burgesses, 2226oath, ib.Lords — vide Bracton, Bracton, Gamble — Mirror, Year Both.jurisdiction, 51treating villain as free. Siresponsibility for villains, 32villain's absence from their, 350inclusive a||;auiitt, 350, 360. 490(le)>«Dd«nce of villains upon their, 613villain* rnft^ be seized b^, notwithstanding the writs of liberate pIhuiHb were purchased, 615. 028, GG8prnviiitonB reading the exception of village. 669, 669n to inquire respecting the misbehaviour of tenuit and )»Acquits to their. 7 1 4provision* against villain living to enfranchised places fran their, 71Svillain could not be enfranchised without consent, 771charter— Henry III., 470charter — George 11., 1838raoDdaiuue against the major lo restore a person to his freedom, I9fiabsence, ground for disfranchiticment, 196S, 196gfreeman," referable to the common law, 1970charter— George II., 2037LrooKRfliiALinot relumed an a borough ill Domesday, I73&no charter ever granted, ii.parliamentary hi«tDt7, I736j 173?bui^iage in, 527all boroughs held by burgage tenure, ti.observations, ib.charter to Jordan, of Bedford, 674assise of frank tenement respecting, 701an ancient borough, ib.upland towns not boroughs, ib.tenements in a town always desirable, iA.observations, ib,charter— Edward IV., 968payment of members' wages, assessed upon the inhabitants, 1431right of election in the common burgesses resiant. 1758distinction between the burgesses and freemen. 1759ordinance for the election of a burgess, 1760charter— William III., 1838, 1844legal decision respecting, 232surrender of charters, 1 886charter — James II., 16.illegal election of mayor, 1887irregularities in. from the surrender and grant of charter, 1894INDEX. 2359Lufton,inhabitants and residents, excepted from an ordinance respecting cloth,Lymington,when first summoned to return members, 1368not entered in Domesday, ib.charter — James I., questioned, Uf.common seal, rarely used in the returns to Parliament, 1370evils of non-residents, 1371parliamentary history, 1368 — 1372Lyme,charter — Edward II., 59530 ]persons, named as taxed on the Nones Rolls, 673inhabitants released from all arrears of fee-farms, &c., 794charter — Henry V., 823a burgage mentioned as granted to the burgesses, 1561charter — Henry VIII., 1137, 1138charter — Philip and Mary, 1200charter — James I., 1501order for the payment of the members' wages during Uie reign ofCharles I., 1672parliamentary history, 1689 — 1874, 1875decision, 1 780—2 113,2114right — freeholders and freemen resident, 2120, 2121resiant roll, 2123Lynn Regis,charter — john, 411charter — Henry III., 470charter — Edward II., 595bishop of Norwich avows that he is lord of the town, 606commonalty, mentioned as an aggregate body, ib.no allusion to a corporation, 606, 607regulations for the municipal and parliamentary government, 653observations, 653, 654not mentioned as a corporation, 693burgesses described as the men of the town, 760early levying of poor rates, ib.pledges given in, conformable to the law of the leet, 761members elected for Parliament by the leet jury, ib.coroner elected by the leet jury, ib.regulations respecting apprentices, 762observations, 762, 763apprenticeship no connexion with corporations, 765apprenticeship, principles of, direct connexion with the common law, ib.regulations for the worsted weavers and their apprentices, 1094, 1100charter— Henry VIII., 1180letters from Sir Robert Hitch, and Sir Henry Spelman, to the burgessesof, desiring to be elected members, 1513xfTtt City, 6■nhabilMrt* Ot, ibe bor^iwan, 13, ilikacribcd u a " hic," 13not mfnooncJ in Doomsday, 13, 173, ihbfncdocn in, after Keen jean' ■emce, 32jndkia nvhatii, 36caDcd " Brig," iA.dnnibcd u head of the kinfplom and lava, Mbnmt bj the Dana, ib.dnnibcd in the lave of Edward th Coofmor, 'hastings, court, ib.■urrmdeT of the city to William the Conqueror, 16.caDcd a city, ib.charter ad^twed to the " inhabitants," ib.Uw-woTtfay," explanation of, 286obHTTBtioiu, 386, 387portreere, (be king*! officer, 387data boc, ib.Mcond charter of William 1., 388, 289i charter— Henry I., 3p4I not incorporated, 3D6, 297charter— Stephen, 319cbaiter—Henry 11., 335guilds, adulterine 341charter— Richard I„ 370, 371not one of incorporation, ill — 37iINDEX. 2361LoN DON — continued.commonalty defined, 440—443not a corporation by prescription, 444liberties seized by Henry III., 487no writ directed to, for attendance upon the king's councils, ib.mayor and bailiffs vouching foreigners to warranty, 488, 489charters — Edward I., 546—548barons of, defined, 546profits of the markets, 547citizens, no prescriptive title, ib.petition of the citizens for a restoration of their ancient privileges, ib.citizens, the inhabitants, ib.citizens and aliens, distinction between, ib.wardmotes, 549juries of, and duties, ib.power, 549, 626freemen, 549presentment and election, 550distinction between, 651common council, defined, 551, 552officers of the Exchange not to contribute for any talliage in, 558agreement between citizens of, and the hanse merchants, 560 — 562the statute of Gavalette, 578charters — Edward II., 579, 580, 586the articles agreed upon by the citizens of, 580 — 583court of hustings explained, 581admission to the freedom, 582usages similar to those of Ipswich, Manchester, and the Cinque Ports, 583villains, laws expounded, 584connexion of trade with freedom, 584, 585Saxon laws, continuance of, 586admissions into the liberty, ib.expulsions from the liberty, ib.default of good governance, by the mayor, sheriffs and aldermen, andprovisions regarding, 625,626charter— Edward III., 629 — 632, 635observations upon the bequests in mortmain, 631made to ecclesiastical, and not civic bodies, ib.no municipal corporations, ib.jurisdiction of, confined within its limits, ib.when the title of " lord*' was prefixed to that of mayor, 632writ inquiring whether two persons were in scot and lot, &c., ib.held in free burgage, 633citizens of, those who are bomand heritable in the same city by descent ofinheritance, and who are resiants, and taxable to scot and lot, 634aldermen of, removable by the commonalty, 635merchant strangers, regulations respecting, 636adulterine guild, 636—638commonalty perpetual, 628LoM DON — rontin unl.mayor complains of liberties being infringequalification of a dtiieu, described in the Liobservation, 7*iOLuiU'iw, biirifeasee of, can devise their landhoar in, la abolaio from forestalling, 717Vintners and victuallers under goi,-enianBO-17. 71S{«]oni9 escaping punishment by going into Scharters— Richard U., 729. 733no strange to buy or sell of another strait(ifaat they should only obey the mandate ofcitizens only to inquire of their cuatonui, 73charters should be favourably interpreted, icitizen of, crim to enjoy any franchise thaorboroughin England, ib.couKtahle of England, complain of the mayexemptions from haying tenths and fifteenthaldermen, their election, 731mayor. sheriffs, &c., nut to incur puuieluq731, 732two aldermen appointed for the covenantWithout, "33vicinage reco^iicd, 733tenure of, 733, 734deputies h'oni the wardnioteH, 734, 735illegal provisions of the citizens, ib.observations, ib.punishment of the mayor, 780all burgesses upon the same footing, ib.charter— Henry VI., 783complaints respecting misgovernment, 783,petition of the weavers, 7B4no merchant strangers to traffic, 785prisage of wine not lo be enjoyed but by iwithin the city, 785, 786illegality of non-resident seing citizens, JSguildhall, ib.Iiver)-ni en, origin, 800, 801charles — Henry V., 823charter to the mercers, Richard II., 840charter to the grocers, Henry VI., ib.charter lo the fishmongers, Henry VI., ib.charter to the vintners by Henry VI., 841charter to the brewers by Henry VI., ib.grant to the grocers, 845obsen-aljons, ib.statute to the city confirming the taking of (freemen distinguished from villains, S47, BlINDEX. 2363London — continued.charter — Henry VI., 848hanse merchants pray to have an alderman assigned them, 848customs of, respecting the writs de native habendo, 919not in ancient demesne, 91 9> 920wards in, analogous to hundreds in the county, 920case respecting the priory of St. Bartholomew, 928customs of, respecting villains, 937enactments against sales by strangers, 948charter— Edward IV., 950—952, 954, 955disputes between the city and the abbot of Westminster, 953recognizance upon the admission of freemen, 953relinquishment of the rights of a citizen refused, 953, 954being an admitted freeman both a right and a duty, 954residence of freemen, ib.citizens no fixed corporate name, 955charter of incorporation to the mystery of cooks, ib.tower of, pleaded as being, 1012observations upon its inaccuracy, ib.inhabitants, a prescriptive right to the common road to the church yardof the Charter House, 1018statute 1, Richard III., relative to hosts and strangers, 1032trade of the citizens, 1044description of persons subject to be summoned as jurors, 1045, 1046first legislative recognition of the freedom to trade, 1047charter — Henry VII., 1049stranger artificer inhabiting in, to contribute with the citizens of, 1 108charters — Henry VIII., 1119city of, held in free burgage, 1119, 1120citizen of, disfranchised, 1120no stranger artificer to work within the liberties, 1148freemen of, treated as dwelling in, ib.charters— Edward VI., 1149, 1150villainage and courts leet in existence, ib.Archbishop of Canterbury owner of the borough of South war, 1151jurisdiction, civil and criminal, over the borough of Southwark, 1152assise of fresh force in the hustings, 1173enforcement of residence of freemen within the city, &c., 1238, 1239distinction in Moore's Reports, between a citizen and freeman, 1325freemen of, made by redemption, 1418restrictions respecting the making, 1419, 1420disfranchisement of a freeman held illegal, 1443action of debt by the chamberlain, for breach of a bye-law, 1443 — 1447statute of the 14th of James I., for the freemen of, to recover their debts,charters — James I., in the 3rd, 6th, and 12th years of his reign, 1475,not a corporation by prescription, 1477entries, relative to the admission of freemen, &c., 1477> 1478Sw IKDBX.Lo M OOH.—^omtiitard.ewe of Wallis anJ Hanger, l-tTS^UBtcitizen of " b a citizen commorant ami I'llhe swells eUcif here he i« nut free, 141city of. last, U84— USStiber homo of, may be nude three wajrst Jdemplion, 0486observations, 14S6 — 14B8compendium of buff hers' case, aa U> their p«tenements, case conceding, in the 12tb o(charter* — Charles 1., 1666charter— Charles II., Ifi^einterference in the affairs of the tale, 1779,quo warranto against the city, 1^78 — I'JHobservations, pwwim, ib.I improper conduct of the common council, II abvervBtiofu upon the 'ind William and Mldarter— William III., 1S4*|Kivile|(eB of, restored, IsisInhabitants lo cleanse the elreete, &c., 1SS9distinction between a corporation and a fnttciting in the reign of Charles II., aamadof JaiDCsl-. 1741Brady's history of, refuted, 1916 tl leg.freemen of, 1917mode of becoming so, ib.Xwrtreeve defined, 1918buriihw&ra." the inhabitants of, 16.freed men independent of merchant guilds, 1communis not granted to a select number, 1barons. 192'iliverymen, l!)22. 1923commonalty, the whole body of citizens. 19:all boroughs not ancient demesne of the crowBrady two questions answered, I<)30 — 193observations upon the llth of George I., 19principles of freedom explained, 1985 — 19s;Verie of, applied to the trees rather than Iusurpations of the Liveries, roscommoncouncil, 1989tirerymett, hart no rigkl to interfere in lie imiordinance as to the liveries in 1651, 1990, 1!illegal claims of the liverymen to interpose instatute of llth of George I., cap. 18, 1993. '.list of companies and liverymen, 1 995change in Ihe oath of a freeman, 1998usage against the rights of the present liveryn-ardmen to be householder, paying scot ancindex. 2365LoN DON — continued,Regulations for the government of, 2001 — 2003charter — George II., 2040citizens to enjoy privileges, must be resident, and in scot and lot, 2171corporations require to be locally fixed, 2218bye-laws — strangers, ib,expenditure of common stock, ib,constable must be resiant, 2221Magna Chart a,provisions of, 420, 421Maidenhead,charter — James II., 1822Maidstone,entry — Domesday, 86charter — Edward VI., 1 162, et seq.burgesses, the free resiants paying scot and lot, 1 164admission of freemen, 1164, 1165return of members in 1553, 1165restoration of members by Elizabeth, 1316charter — George II., 2040making freemen, 2041letter from the Earl of Winchelsea, ih.quo warranto, 2041, et seq,Malton,petition from the townsmen, requesting to be made a corporation, 1516early history, 1639when first returned members to Parliament, 1639, 1644held by burgage tenure, 1639customs, 1639 — 1643usurpations, 1644Malton, South,charter — elizabeth, 1417Malton,entry — Domesday, 273observations, 274honorary freemen, outnumber, the inhabitants and freemen, 1886charter— George III., 2161Malmsbury,entry — Domesday, 164householders, burgesses by resiancy, 155reeve renders an account of the town to the sheriff, 321case of, in Glanville, 1564charter— William III., 1844^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^1mI^^V 2366 INDEX.■^^LChester,ordinances, fi-ll- 5*6burgesses. 541pledges, ii.ii-iUaiua(re, 543reeve shire, 543. 544j^H Makdefinition of, 433J^HKKT Towns,not idenliea] with boroughs. 622, 5554|^H Marlborough.^^M charter— Hear)' III., 470^^^^^^^ 563^^^^^^H charier— Bdwanl II., 595^^^^^^ charter— Elizabeth, 1220^^V parliamentary history'. 1866— 1S67494^H Marinot mentioned in Domesday, 201^^^1 Marlow— con/inufi/.^^^M writ for the repair of the bridge in, directed tothe bailiffs and good macase of, reported in Glanville, 1563in 1687, right " in the inhabitants only' who paid scot and lot," 1768right in the inhabitants and householders paying scot and lot, 1896Mawbs,restoration members to Parliament, 1223non-christened of a corporation, 1227right of parliamentary election, 1227, 1228Maxiuh,Every man's house his castle" explained, 237That no person can be a judge in his own cause," published by anentry in the Year Books, 803Maynooth,charter to the college, 1142Bath,charter— Edward III., 706charter— Edward IV., 1028Mblcombb,charter,— Edward II., 895when first returned to Parliament, 60032 persons of, charged as being taxed on the None Rolls, 673mayor and commonalty, petition for the same privileges as those ofSouthampton, 76$INDEX. 2367Members to Parliament,return of, not a corporate right, 658, 1191) 1230charters of the crown cannot control the election of, 664, 1256elected by whom, 821, 838return of, in the county courts, 828, 829wages of, 842, 843, 1117, 1225treated as an office, 843interference by noblemen, &c., for the counties of Norfolk, Suffolk, Pastoncetera passim 911, 1008, 1009interference by the Earl of Northampton (Dartmouth), 982interference by the lord president (Dartmouth), ib.interference of the Duke of Northumberland (Wells), 1170, 1171Cecil Papers, 1171—1173interference by Elizabeth, 1592, 1219, 1648Colchester, 1346Wells, 1415Gatton, 1648restoration of, discontinued boroughs, 1223members appointed to confer respecting the return of, for nine boroughs,interference of William III. in the election of, for Retford, 1285nomination of, by the Marquis of Winchester and Lord Mountjoy (Bere-aston),1348interference of Sir Edward Coke(Corfe Castle), 1350one elector only for the return of (Newtown), 1368creation of voters in Lymington, 1371Sudbury, 1376—1379Haslemere, 1380 — 1382, 1384interference in the election of Andover by the Earl of Leicester, 1390borough of Steyning,, as to the election of, by the Earlof Arundel, 1513of Lady Howard (Bletchingley), 1551improper admission of burgesses in Pomfret, to control the return, i568deeds and other artifices made at Pomfret to influence the return, 1569argument of Sir Edward Coke, that the act of the first of Henry V., c. 14,relative to, though in the negative, yet if a non-reliant were elected itwas good, 1633return of, for Gatton, made by one person as the returning officer andelector, 1647interference of the Lord Treasurer Burghley, in the return of, for Gatton,return of, for Gatton, casually signed at Ryegate, 1649Sir Nicholas Throckmorton and John Throckmorton elected themselves as,for Gatton, 1651Marquis of Winchester and Lord Mountjoye electing, for St. Ives, 1653wages of, paid in the reign of Charles I., 1672a peer of England elected as, for Lynn, 1682right of returning, a franchise that can never be lost, 1635S IITDEX.[BBRH OP Parliament— ron/inun/. *House of L'omniutu make relation!! lu Lu tht mlirfcritnco of f^mt notIn the returns, 16.^3, 1654improper admission of freemen in Rorhentrr. 1 71 Jret(»1atioiiB respecting jierBoiiH volant iii RocIiMt«r, ib.fraudulent admission of persons in DowiUon, 1754cliuiil«9tiDe admission of persons to vote for, in Hnrerfonlirext, 17fi3 'niiilti[il)ioK of vote in East Urinalcad to rote for, 1767■biiHea in Poole in making freemen, I84H500 freemen made in Munich to vote. 1854. IS55cnmiption in the burgage tenure right of voting for, in Most Ringtail. Itt^-otera for. sworn after lets of writ for Truro, 1 869secret admission of freemen in Hereford to vote, 1879petition som the inhabitants of Bridport against allowing pennons to vtHfor, not being inhabitants, usespetition from the inhabitants of Aldborough against non-resents vnUi^I made to vote, after be of the writ in York atcomplaint of freeCheater, Isoillf^ proceedings in ludlow, 1867art to declare the right of freedom in the elections of, ib. (major of PljrmjKon declared he will make freemen for the purpose g|voting, 1946introduction of foreigners into Colchester, and making of freemen to rttin,1950, 19GO, 1964persons admitted as freemen in Launceston who would vole as the corporationdesired, 3007improper adnuBsion of freemen in Carlisle, 2132illegal proceedings in Combe, 2232Parliament (IrtUmdj,to be elected by the inhabitants of the counties, cities, and towns, 1140Queen Elizabeth orders the burgess* of Carrickfergus to return hernominee as one of the membra to Parliament, 1463improper influence by the Earl at Oner to secure return of, Kinsale,Ibi, 1802corrupt election of freemen, in Kinsale, 20Gg, 2074Members to Parliament (WahiJ,regulations respecting the return of, 1118, 1143term in constant use for inhabitants, 63, 519, 628of the borough," observations upon, 484, 485, 1156aud burgesses, sjrnonjroous, 662and citizens, synonymous, 1157grants to 85, 86, 99, 100, 118, 122, 124, 137, 139, 144, 174, 187. 191,217, 250, 300, 304, 306, 307, 319, 328, 335—^38, 346. 353 — 355,359. 359. 372, 378, 380, 382,391, 404, 409, 414, 41S, 430, 438, 454,INDEX. 2369McN — continued,465, 467, 468 — 170, 473, 481, 484, 506, 508, 616, 516, 518, 519,521, 526, 529, 545, 546, 567, 580, 590, 593, 598, 617, 628, 630,640, 641, 645, 650, 651, 662, 664, 665, 667, 673, 699, 747, 750,753, 760, 775, 778, 789, 791, 796, 799, 800, 833, 853, 854, 858,883, 886, 896, 919, 941, 946, 963, 967, 974, 998, 1000, 1003, 1005,1006, 1013, 1036, 1075, 1085, 1113, 1119, 1130, 1131, 1151, 1198,1327, 1335, 1392, 1393, 1435, 1436, 1490, 1553, 1557, 1558, 1590,1615, 1618, 1662, 1665, 1668, 1708, 1740, 1876Vide Burgess$, Freemen Citizens, Inhabitants.Merchants,sale by, only before witnesses, 16, 40, 61, 66men that they bring with them to attend at the fol-mote, 24not the burgesses, 175, 264protection of in Magna Charta and subsequent statutes, 420, 431, 619,provisions respecting, 714, 718, 784, 1043Merchant Towns — (See Merchant Guild— Merchants.)distinct from cities and boroughs, 579Merchant Guild,members of, distinct from burgess-ship, 81, 117, 264no, the foundation of a borough, 118treated as distinct from a borough, 320, 322, 340, 381, 390, 392, 468,469, 559, 599, 839, 842, 1048, 1039, 1146, 1147incorporation of, 824, 825, 894, 895statute restraining the unlawful orders of masters of, 838, 839observations, 839, et seq.abuses by Uie masters of, 894See Boroughs, Cities, Burgesses, Freemen, Inhabitants.Morton,tenants and men of the prior not gildable, 559MiCHBLL,burgesses the inhabitants, 1638not mentioned in Domesday, 1749no corporation, ib.when members first returned, ib.parliamentary history, 1749, 1750Milkburn,Brady's notions discussed, 1 1 13Middlesex,entry — Domesday, 173observations, ib.case of, reported in Glanville, 15647 M^HPm■^ ^^70^^^^^H MlLBORNB^^^H^^^^^H cntrT^Domesdar. 162^^^^B^^^^^M^^^^^P Charter— Henry 111 1^^^^B^^^^^P olTx-tra supported al court let. 2093'^^^1^V MlNRIIBA .fl^^B mtorntiun of memben to Parliament, 1-223■^^1 rhRilerof incorporation— Eliiabeth, 1228^^^B^H parliamentary hi«u.ry, lang, ia3«i^^^1^^P Mint,^^H^^B■ MtsmoR.'^^H^^^H^^ ^ fwry'^nWT'h'diccntinerorlmndrecJor, 60e, «09 ^'^^^^^^^ toum, frankpledge, 6()<l, Glo. 612, 613■^^^^^H inciitH^ty of villain*, 610— fil^^^^^H when a borough ceawd to have jurisdiction, Oho611 ^d^^^^H 6 1 1^^^^^^H MclMiailical corporations, tA.^^^^1^^^^^P fteeilnm, 613^^^^H^^^^^^^ Sailors of norrliexter hanged, 6U^^^H^M MlKNOMnRfl,^^^H^chartei^Henry Vlll., 470provisions respecting the inhabitants of the county, 1 105caiie reported in Glanville, 1565in 1694, right of election recited to be in the burgesses and inhabitants,1768), 2210corporation by prescriptionwhen summoned, 2211evils exemplified from not having the leetMonsoon KRY,bailiffs complain that the men of,wpractice, 2312impleaded for foreign matter, 567charter— William 1., 362It good, which approximates that to ofl many, 1442!, which might be profit-provisionsrespecting, in Magna Charts, 433INDEX. 2371Morte A ly^-ctmiinued.origin of the statutes, 608lands of ecclesiastics spoken of as being in, 702doctrine of, did not apply to cities or boroughs, &c., 727, 728evasion of the statute of, by religious houses, 772, 773Mortmain scotland),alienation of land in, provided against, 563Mot Bell — See BeU.origin of, 53MULLINOAR,charter — Charles II., 1811Municipal Oppicrrs,mandate from the king, ordering the election of, in Leicester, 232Northampton, ib,Exeter, 1739observations, 220Murder,responsibility of will, 48Naval,inquisition respecting the burgesses, 1461Nripty,writ of, prayed, 597, 607regulations respecting, 668, 669Newark,not mentioned as a borough in Domesday, 266, 1768parliamentary history, 1768 — 1776charter— Charles II., 1769right of election decided to be in the inhabitants paying scot and lot, 1774power of the king defined as to the granting of charters, 1774, 1775Nrwcastlr-undrr-Lyne,parliamentary decisions, 257, 258charter — Henry III., 470parliamentary and municipal history, 1557, 1561decision, 1792, 2115charter — Henry I., 302term "common council" explained, 303observations, ib.Newcastle-upon-Tyne,charters — John, 406, 407observations, 407, 408talliage raised upon, 437observations, 438quo warranto against the bailifis, 5247 M 2complaint by a bui^ess nf, against the mayor, 693writ to the mayor and bailiffs for wages to the members,commonalty inhaUtBiit householder*, tA.charter-Rkhard II., 738, 739castle of, to be cooudered aa in the county of Northombecharter— Henry IV., 789men of, released from all escapes of felons, &c. ib.charters — Henry VI., SS2grant to the burgesses of, and ther " hws," ib.observation 8, id.inquisition, H53not mentioned as a corporation, *&.observations upon the return of burgess to Parliament,an order by Parliament to levy 30J. upon the inhabitants,chaitei^Henry VI., 880, BBlmayor, burgesses, and commonalty, 1094articles for the government of the drapers, 1 1 35observations upon the apprentices, 1 136free inhabitants, the burgesses, 1 137grant of burgages, 1 138charter — merchant adventurers, 1 160Gateshead, annexed, 1161chartei^PhiUp and Mary, 1308apprentices, bye-law respecting, ib.fellowship of cooks, 1333opinion of C. J. Holt, 1333charter— Elisabeth, 1408second charter— Elisabeth, 1404observations, 1405charters— James 1., 148B, 1489burgesses, distinct class from the hostmen, 1469common council, only acted by delegation, 1490Sir John Morley disabled from beiiuc mayor and aldermanINDEX. 2373Newport,charter— Edward 111., 706charter — Edward IV., 1028Nbw Ross,charter— Earl of Norfolk, 472N«WTON-IN-THlS-WlLLOW8,when members were first returned for, 1 354not mentioned as a borough in Domesday, ib.parliamentary history, 1354, 1355Newton, aisle qf Wight),right to return members contested, 1367not mentioned in Domesday, ib,charter — Edward I., ib,parliamentary history, 1367, 1368a single elector only at one time residing in, 1 368burgage tenure right established, 2035Newton, (Ireland),doctrine, as to residence, 2074 — 2082judgment of the House of Lords canvassed, 2082NoNJi Rolls, 672 — 674provisions respecting the collection of the ninth part of goods and chattelsin cities and boroughs, 672observations as to the distinction between boroughs and counties atlarge, ib.distinction between clergy and laity, 673NON-RBSI DENTS,origin of the abuse of, 6X3, 688, 1134, 1135observations upon, in London, 786have legally no municipal rights, 1307, 1969for one year and a day in Hythe to be disfranchised, 1831first introduction of, in Rye, 1871capital burgesses in Lostwithiel cannot be, 1968introduction of, after the interference of James II., 2008illegal claims of, 2011, 2012evils of, in Wells, 2035, et vide index decorum passim.Vide Leet, Burgesses, Citizens, Freemen, Freedom, Corporations,Inhabitants.Normans,provisions introduced by, 69Northallerton,the right of returning members to Parliament restored to the burgesses,Northampton,entry — Domesday, 219NokTHAUPTON — nntfiMtnfbur)[»Miii hoiu«liolil»n. j'Jtiobservation, ib.chaiUt — John, 3'J3ulwervatiuiu, 22*clMTUir — Henry III., tb.fnembfni to pKrlMiDent, 9Siisint return of, ii.rectal liy mayor and iMuUff, with thHiatus r»p«ctuig the cUctiua uf. 233•.)lMr^vati^>lu, 333HivKT — James I., 244nbBcn-ationt, '245decUiunii of the Hoiu« irf Domains in l66o, ib.the mnyoT committed, ib.tloTMionii in IG63, 346inliHbilnnta, the bll^esaea, ib.charter — Charles II., ib.Brathwtutc'a ca««, ib.charter — 35 Charles il.,ii.eonMdetvd out binding, 347admission of freemen, ib.abspn'Btions, ib.quo warranto, ib.creation of Freemen, 348aid of, 321fee-farm, 339charter — Henry Ti., 467ohartcr^llenry VI., ShUparliamentary decision in 1560, 1746extract of Dr. Brady consicltrcd, 1908charter — George 111., aifti»iH«ni oT tk bA ';:n of the CIy released from all subsidies, &i'., ThoNorfolk,interference of noblemen in tcounty of, 912corinth case of, in Glanville,N0K<entry — Uoinesiby, 27iobservations-278, 379charter— Henry I., 30Bamici of the l.orousli. 321, 339ffiztirc aiiii colorado of Belle;iliartiT— Iticliiirii I Jotchiirluf— John. 3>nINDEX. 2375Norwich — continued.charter — Henry III., 437liberties seized, ib.charters — Edward I., 527, 528petition from the citizens, ib.traders to contribute with the citizens in talliages, 557charter — Edward II., 595citizens petition Edward III. for the jurisdiction belonging to the fee ofthe castle, 659writ of ad quod annum, 659> 660citizens petition for a confirmation of the custom, that no stranger of theirfranchise should sell or buy any merchandize within it, 769citizens petition that there should be four bailiffs and 24 citizens electedevery year by the commonalty of the town, 769charter — Henry IV., 792not incorporated, 792, 793observations, ib.charter — Henry V., 1824charter — Henry V., founding a guild of St. George, 825observations, 825, 826charter — Henry VI., 888trespass against the mayor, bailiffs, and commonalty, 920, 921charter — Edward IV., 960not incorporated, 961action by the abbot of St. Bennet against the mayor and commonalty,101 9> et seq.statute of Henry VII. respecting worsted shearers in, 1040statute of Henry VIII. respecting regulation for the governance of theworsted weavers, 1100freedom of, granted for the purposes of trade, 1 180observations, 1179charter— Charles II., 1697, 1698mandamus to enfranchise the son of a freeman, 1723Dr. Brass observations relative to, controverted, 1903act for the regulation of elections in, 2022act 9 George II., c. 9, 2023act 20 George II., c. 28, 2024election of sheriffs, 2221Nottingham,entry — Domesday, 263observations, 264aid of, 339fee-farm, ib.charter— John, 404, 405observations, 406charter — Henry III., 465parliamentary return in the reign of Edward I., 494action against the men, 1017court! will not lake judicial notice of granta uoleea ipeciicharter— William HI., 1844ket, 31S7presentments and admiration, ib.election! of bui^esws, 21B8, 2189evil of the modem notions of prescription, 3191right of common not rateable to the relief of the poor, 3313Oaxinohah,dictum of Lord Hardwickthat all the inhabitants af,wareiiKOOakham,grant to an hospital at, 913Oakham Eton,entry — Domesday, 171first return to Parliament, 600Ou Sarah,when it ceased to be a borough, 37S, 610, 16S3early history, 1G53not mentioned in Domesday, ib.charter — Hstiry III., ib.parliamentary history, 16S3, lS53Ordeal,number to be present, 35doctrine as to residence, 3051 — 20MOutlawry,origin of, 33INDEX. 2377Oasis, St. Mary,action brought by the dean and chapter of Stoke against the master of,939, 940corporations only in their infancy, 940Oxford, Town,Danes arrival at, 57entry — Domesday, 203customs of the county, 205observations, ib.burgesses entered upon the Pipe Rolls, 320weavers, guild of, distinct from the body of the inhabitants, ib.charter — Henry II., 340charter — John, 386charter— Henry III., 447—467mayor and commonalty amerced, 471, 497disputes between the burgesses of, and scholars, ib.controversies between the burgesses, and the university arranged, 498 —observations, 502 — 504charter — Edward II. to the cordwainers, 505charters— Edward III. 505, 506observations, 505 — 511weavers of, remission of their rent to the king, 559observations, ib.charter — Edward II., 595charter — Richard II., 736charter— Henry VI., 848, 849mayor and bailiffs assert their right to cognizance of pleas, 849mayor and bailiffs demand cognizance of a plea, 917no mention of a corporation, 917, 919charter of Edward pleaded, 918, 919mayor, bailiffs, and the whole community, return members to Parliament,communitas" and " burgesses," descriptive of the same class, 958, 959action by the mayor and bailiffs, 1072misnomer pleaded against, ib.privileges reserved by 1 Philip & Mary, 1178immunities granted to the inhabitants, 1180charter — James I., 1579freemen admitted upon the court day, 1722petition from, at foreigners being unduly admitted to offices in, 1885Oxford University,charter— Henry III., 447—449, 451observations, 447university, term from whence borrowed, 448chancellor, his authority, ib.when incorporated, 449obwrvMionH, 503—504charter confirmed by Henry II., 505charters— Edward III., 505—511observations, ib.derka of, their privileges, 686charter— lUchud 11., 736to tiw Aivbbiahop of Cmtnbiuy, ud not the kin(, belongsof, 736charter— Henry IV., 787king's grant void, ib.from the ecclesiastical character of, considered la be incorpostatutes against the scholars and clerks of, 832provisions against Iriik relating to, 834observations, 835chancellor of, claims to be guardian of the peace by prcacriicharter — Henry IV., validity of, questioned, 934, 935charter— Edward IV., 956—958charter— Heniy VIII., 1130—1123observations, ib.right of returning members granted, IS77parliamentary history, 1577 — IS79charter confirmed by Parliament, 1G79case of Dwell r. the, ib.law case, illustrative of the jurisdiction of the chancellor ■cellar, 1738address from, to James II., 1S30sentence required to enjoy privileges, 3165, 3166Pabisk,first mention, 360, 355no allusion, 348added to the common apparitions of the country, 1103, t :INDEX. 2379Parliament Rolls — continued.Richard II., 768—773Henry IV., 800—803Henry v., 829—831Henry VI., 870—876, 892—899Edward IV., 1025—1027Parliament, (Ireland),Queen Elizabeth expresses her disinclination to call a, in Ireland, 1464Parliament (Scotland),lesser barons exempted from personal attendance upon, 940chancellor declared perpetual president of, ib.Paston Letters,observations, 911Earl of Oxford to Mr. Paston, 912informing him the Duke of York had named as knights for the countyof Norfolk, ib.Richard Call to John Paston, ib.relative to disturbances for the election of knights for Norwich, ib.William Price to John Paston, respecting the election of knights of theShire for Norfolk, 912, 913from Mr. J. Paston to his brother. Sir John Paston, acquainting him thatthe Duke of Norfolk and the Earl of Suffolk, had arranged themembers for the county of Norfolk, 1008two burgesses returned for Yarmouth, ib.that the bailiff of Maldon had been written to, in order to have Sir Johnmade a burgess, 1009» suggestions made that " there are towns in England, which choose noburgess, and ought to do it," ib.Sir John to his brother, acquainting him Mrs. Jane Assert and himselfhad laboured both for knights of the Shire of Norfolk, and theknights of the Shire of Suffolk, ib.Paul's, St.canons of, grant of lands in Mortmain, 840grant, 913Pembroke,charter — John, 419Penned,charter — Henry III., 470Penryn,charter — Henry III., 470petition for the restoration of the charters, 1262Perthbley,charter — Richard II., 778charter — Henry VI., 941retina made by the commonalty, 443charter— Henry til., 470orders to the chief magistrate to make smular returns as besleges were seized by Charles II., 1800parliamentary demons in 1820, 1B31, p.SlQScourt leet, usage, 2333Pktvt MSS., 383, 387, 403, 413, 431, 433, 447, 454, 456, 41466, 469, 523, 539, 594, 648, 649, 651, 653, 665, 6i752, 792, 839, 854, 898, 961, 971, 1003, 1003, 1194Fbvbnbby,entry — Domesday, 92, 98burgesses in, 93charter — John, 415in lot and scot with Hastings, 596, 597leet of, 1081habitants incorporated, 1083entry of, by Brady, Igi4Philip and Mary,reign— 1177— 1218observationa upon, 1177> 1178, I31Sthe inhabitant householders pang act and lot, the bm;gM)PaiLiPSTOWN ANn MABysoKouoB,letters from Queen Elizabeth to the Lord Deputy of Irelandincorporation, 1462, 1464, 1465Physicians,incorporate of, 1094exempted from watch and ward, 1109, 1110Pipe Rolls,of King Stephen and Henry II 330, 339INDEX. 2381Pledges — continued.mutual, 23, 24, 33, 36, 40, 49, 55system of, 40, 42, 62, 63, 66ransom for the breach of, 46sale with, 61individual fined because he dwelt in a place without pledge, 339township fined for permitting him to reside without pledges, U>.legislative provisions respecting, 488chief, continuance of in the reign of Henry VI., 842Pledges scotland),provisions respecting, 317observations, ib.Plymouth,inhabitants and resiants petition for corporate privileges, 801, 802observations, 803, 804charter of incorporation — Henry VI., 870 — 873essential character of boroughs, 873burgesses of, the inhabitant householders, ib.making of burgesses in, 874, 875petition of the inhabitants, respecting the preservation of havens, 1097observations, ib.charter— Queen Elizabeth, 1401, 1402Bragg's case relative to his disfranchisement, 1525chartei^William III., 1838disposition of the House of Commons to exclude the voices of the burgessesat large, 1880Plympton,charter — Baldwin de Recovers, 466observations, ib.charter — Edward I., 529charter — Baldwin de Recovers, 657an assise of novel disseisin by the prior of the house of lepers, 703charter — Richard II., 750charter — Henry IV., 794charter — Henry V., when Earl of Chester, 824charter — Henry VI., 898petition for the restoration of charters, 1262charter— Queen Elizabeth, 1402, 1403bye-laws of, 1514 — 1516charter— William III., 1838, 1844charters surrendered, 1893charter — James II., ib.inhabitants complain of foreigners having usurped their rights, ib.non-residence of the mayor, 1844parliamentary history', 1 944 — 1 946observations, 668charter, Thomas de MoaUcutccharter— Henry VI., 854a borough, but not a walled town, ib.a market ^d not constitute a borough, 855fee-form granted to the Bishop of Winchester, 356charter— Edward IV., 9*9, 990case of trcGpaM by the dean and chapter of, 1071observations upon ecclesiastical bodies, ib.fee-farm of granted to the Duke of Richmond, 1 1 34charter — Viscount Wesley, 1 Misscharter— Elizabeth, 1230letter among the Cell papers to the inhabitants, 1231charr— Elizabeth, 1239—1343the staple not the origin of boroughs, 1343ohMrvationB — inhabitants, non-residents, 1343, 1347observations upon the word "prescription," 1347, 1349inaccuracy of " Clarencieui, &c," respecting the incorporateinterpolations in the books of, 1512, 1513agreement by the burgesses that no person should enjoy tbexcept during his resiancy, 1673charter— Charles II., 1702quo warranto issued against the corporation, ib.wilful erasures and interlineations in the books, 1709right of election, decided to be with the in and out-bargecharter of restoration, 1834inhabitants and commonalty of, synonymous permit, A.parliamentary history from 1681 to 1695, 1S48 — 1858introduction of the word " incorporated," into the retunu tparliamentary history. 1775 j 3105, 2106I, 2106INDEX. 2383Poor Laws— <?ofi/mtt«/.regulations by Elizabeth, 1237act for their amendment, 1889> 1890Pom FRET,charter — Henry IV., 793charter — Richard III., 1035not mentioned in Domesday, 1566not incorporated by Henry IV., 1567burgesses of common right in, the inhabitants householders residents,improper admission of burgesses for electioneering objects in, ib.interpolations in records, 1570abuses of the burgage tenure right of voting in 1569parliamentary history, 1567 — 1576Portsmouth,charters — Richard I., John, and Henry III., 372burgesses, the householders, 372, 373observations, 373charter — Henry III., 467merchant guild, distinct from the borough, 468charter — edward II., 595charter— Edward III., 667court leet, 1388charter— Elizabeth, 1388, 1390—1392admission to freedom, 1389> 1390incorporation of the inhabitants, 1391charter — Charles I., 1663municipal history, in temp. Charles II., 1716charter — Charles II., void, 1718object of Charles II., to exclude the inhabitants, 1720neglect of the mayor to summon a council for the filling of vacancies,1971, 1972burgess minor, 2170parliamentary rights, 1821, 2192Portreeve. — See Reeve, PreposUus.name of, to whom applied, and for what purpose, 31, 49> 54PORTSWOOD,agreement by the inhabitants of, with the commonalty of Southampton,POTWALLERS,right to vote unauthorized, 165, 1226, 1639, 2009 — 2011, 2097Prepositions,definition, 358, 658duties, 359PwmnttPTtoN,orifpn of, 364, 431. 4pl, 493otiMmtionii. 431, 433, 774iloctrmi' of, 671by ui>ag* iec<>|{iui«il, IQIBfijrat introduction of the doctrine of corporation bf, Addsnrly iiutancm nf the use of the word, 1347, 124Snriincuui ileciirioftii of routta of law respecting coqMUUKioa bjr, 1733, intactretrulHltii^. 3368nullification of, ii.Pbb»tcdiner — Heiiry II 356cutters — John, 389ob«en*ationB, 16.charter— Henry III., 470a native of the king's of the manor ol,all the inhabitants of, right uf voting. 1754inconsistency of the deterininBtidU, 1 7^borough hy prescription. ib.pArliamentary history, I'M— 1757pBIMOn«NITVBB.origin of, 7rule* of, perverted, 107PnOTBCTOllATlf. — See Cotmntatiendth.only one charter granted during, IG93, |08^PvBViivoHa.interference of, regulations respecting, &2ienactments against, S34charter^Eclward III., failing theroyal charter not sufficient to send innot a borough by prescription. I25Sincorporation — Charles I., \i9dobservations upon the freemen, ib.parliamentary history 1299—1301court left, 1300n, 6G3, 664hers to Parliamentinhabitants of, the burgee:burgesses uf the fire mil lionmjih'charter — george II., Jo;Hquo H-iirranlo-2(148rcsiili'my of capital burgess. iliiiiiLkina uf burgesses. ■iOti:iINDEX. 2385Reading,entry — Domesday, 136not in ancient demesne, ib.charter to the Abbey by King Henry I., 137Henry II., Richard I., John, ib.scutage, abbots exempted from, 138charters to the burgesses by Henry III., 138, 470merchant guild granted, 138observations, ib.disputes between the guild of, and burgesses, with the abbot, 139concord between, 140observations, 141members to Parliament returned from the earliest times, ib.burgesses to be toll ft*ee, 142returns to Parliament — Edward II. and Edward III., ib.charter — Edward III., ib.Richard II., 143leet, ib.members to Parliament, returns of, ib.charters — Henry V. and Henry VI. ib.liberties, seized into the king's hands, 144charters— Henry VIII., 144, 145burgesses claim to be a body corporate, 144abbey destroyed, abbot executed, 145charter— Edward VI., 146members to Parliament, by whom elected, ib,inhabitants subject to burdens, ibcharter— Elizabeth, 147observations, 148usurpations of the high stewards, ib .nominating burgesses to Parliament, 149charter — Charles I., ib.freemen, admission of, refused, 150election petitions, 1685, 1700, 1708, 1715, 1716—150freedom, ill effects of present system, 152history of, ib.burgesses, inhabitant householders paying scot and lot, 153liberty of the abbot of, seized into the king's hands, 563error sued against the bailiffs, 1019poor of, not a corporation, 1447parliamentary decision — George I., 2003charter — George IV., 2197Records,Saxon, the earliest, 1 1Interpolations in Colchester, 748Winchester, 907, 9087n^H^^^^^^ ?Sfifisnobs.^pMix — reiHtiauediC»t 1».>P. lino, \if,\SdltoHh. 3137CuUile. 'Ji:)*Combe. 3231Poole, 1512, 1709iilranhofUreUnd), USSiRsBvmole of. when to be hcW. 33theMuii-tent officers, iiborough and sbiic alliidrd In. 717a. flRsroRH Bill.lists of burgesses, asM rf uq.imperfections, i6. tl trq.Roiwhen compiled. 310rtjTuologj- of the word borough,.eft.liMliffs of boroughs and ritieB. 3iir(ni>iion.= rehifive tu freedom an1 Villifreedom of a villain after Even years* «laws of the guilds, 314, 315as to residence, 316early instance of passing and removingtrial by peers, 318earliest charter, ii.burgesses, the permanent inhabitants, :attendance at the leet, 45enforcement of the law meeting, 109;See InhabUatUt, FVrtmtn, ButyetmiRbbidkncb,tenure and, not necessarily connected, 1of freemen, inhabitants, burgesses, showgear-ship, voting for members tocbial settlement, 349always an important consideration withobservations respecting, upon the stat.analogy to the Season laws, 718, 720 — 7all privileges the object of, Iiimportance and enforcement of, 1531INDEX. 2387Residence — continued.modern doctrines, 2051 etseq. 21/1See Pledges, Leet, Burgesses, Inhabitants, Statutes.Rksidbncb (Ireland),doctrines as to, 2074 — ^2082Residence (Scotland),provisions respecting, 316, 329» 710Rumford,entry — Domesday, 266charter — Henry III., 468charter — Edward II., 595first return to parliament, 600early municipal history, 1282charter — James I., 1283election petition in 1700, 1283—1286observations respecting non-resident freemen, 1283, et seq.interference of William III. in the election of members to parliament,admission of apprentices, and eldest sons to the freedom of, 1286making of freemen, ib.admission of younger sons, 1286, 1287entries of freemen in the old books of, 1287erroneous decision of election committee, respecting the rights of theyounger sons, 1287right of making freemen in, considered, 1288fines for the admission of freemen in, accounted for, 1289» 1290decision of election committee in 1685, 1290decision of election committee in 1705, 1291order of the 6th of James I., respecting admission of freemen, 1291 —election petition in 1708, 1294in 1710, 1295disfranchisement of burgesses, ib.honorary freemen, ib.origin of making foreigners freemen, 1296election petition in 1741, 1297illegal admission of freemen, 1297f 1298case of, reported in Glanville, 1565indentures of returns for, in temp. Charles II., 1733Richard I., A. D. 1189—1199reign, from 364 — 376origin of prescription, 364no charters of incorporation granted, 376the burgesses, the inhabitants, presented, sworn, and enrolled at thecourt leet, paying scot and lot, ib.Richard II., A. D. 1377—1399reign of, from 714 — 779interpolation of the word " corporation," in the statutes, 715 — 7177 N 2Richmond,writ directed to the bailiff, 676the abbot of Notre Dame of York — return of wno corporation, ib.parliamentary history, 1385, 1386burgage tenure rif(ht established, 2036RiNGWOOD,writ for the palliating of, 588in ancient demesne, 589early provisions against, 16Roche MSS., 1633Rochester,entry, Domesday, S3entered an a city, 84burgesses of, the householders, tA.charter to St. Andrew's, 3g2described as a city, ib.charter to church, 306aid of, 339charter— Henry III, 468charter— Edward III., 667community in the reign of Richard II., for the nbridge, 840charter— Henry VI., 8S6, 859charter of incorporation — Edward IV., 869, 966charter— Charles I., 1664bye-laws, iTU, 1713provisions respecting the election of municipal officia of, 'regulations as to the admianon of strangers and foreignerINDEX. 2389Romans,institutions of, in substance and name, lost, 4, 5, 8few traces of, in the Saxon aera, 5Romney Marsh,charter— Edward IV., 965ROMNEY,entry — Domesday, 86burgesses, 86, 87not described as Cinque Port, 87custumal, 532admission of strangers, 537, 538freemen, 538 — 540provisions for the election of mayor, 534, 535charter of surrender, 1800ordinances to compel inhabitants of, to be made free, 1831extract from Brady, 1912Response,charter— Edward VI., 1176charter — James I., 1619Roth SAY,charter — James VI., 1466ROUOUBUROH,the inhabitants and residents excepted from an ordinance respecting clothsRoxburgh,regulations respecting the possession, 708RUTHEROLEN,charter — David, 318Ruthin,charter— Henry VII., 1085observations upon the election of burgesses, 1086petition against the making of foreign burgesses, 1942Rutlandshire,entry — Domesday, 266parliamentary returns in the reign of Edward I., 494Rules, New (Ireland),declaration respecting, 1804, 1805letter from Archbishop King to Dean Swift, 1976, 1977letter to Lord Dartmouth, 1977Rye,lestage of, 321charter — Richard I., 369charter — Henry III., 470custumal, 533provisions for the election of mayor, 534, 535provisions for the animation of strangefreemenhoBtx in, ordered U) abstain from forestcoiifiDilon Hs to the delation of munich:parliamentary pillory, 1S70 — IS73usurpation* in, 1S73inconveniences arising from the modegrot and lot in, caned, ib.gTcUit and delhiHt. CilLBtl'lNTHB Flnos, M, Sh. 290,4court leet of, 30O4, inca 1St. Ives,Imrgessu to Parlitraenl for, elected 1^1CS3parliamentary history, \TtT, 17*9not mentioned in Domesday, 174* 'when lire returned members to PoriJMbarter — James 11,, 16.right of election in the freemen inhalessurrender of the charters, held void. MSalisbury,charter — John, 409charters — Henry III., 461not 3 corporation by prescription, 462observations, 463, 465burgage in, 589defined to be nothing but a messuagewrit by the bishop against the commonthe king's city, ib.convicting claims of the bishop of, andwrit to the bishop concerning the bailieassise of novel disseisin, 700, 701grant lo the proctor and vicars of the ccustom of mayor sending for any per*as too general, 1441charter — James I., 1404charter— Charles 1., 1664returns to Parliament iiparliamentary history iicharter — Anne, 1 95 1inhabitants the citizens, 1052charter— Charles II., ib.writ for the appearance of the mayor a:INDEX. 2391Saltash,charter — Richard II., 750charter — George III., 1838municipal and parliamentary history, 2126, 2132leet, 2127, 2131constitutions, 2127mutilation of records, ib.charter— Elizabeth, 2129charter— Charles II., 2131, 2180proclamation — James II., 2180making burgesses, 2131charter — George III., 2160Saltbode,entry — Domesday, 89Sanctuary,provisions for, 23, 24Sandwich,entry — Domesday, 85services of, same as Dover, ib.not mentioned as a cinque port, 86hundred court in, ib.burgesses of, inhabitant householders, ib.charter — Henry III., 470custumal, 532provisions for the selection of mayor, 534, 535admission of strangers, 537, 538freemen, 538, 539mayor of, claims exemption from the jurisdiction of the exchequer, 562charters— Edward III., 658, 659writ respecting, not being properly fortified, &c., 750charter— Richard II., 761charter— Henry IV., 794charter— Richard III., 1034ordinance of, providing that all elections should be by the barons,indwellers, and householders, 1 109separate jurisdiction of, from the county of Kent, 1438freeholders unconstitutionally allowed to vote, 1509right of select body in 1620, negatived, 1577regulations respecting the admission of freemen and foreigners, 1660^ordinances defining the rights of freedom, 1670charter— Charles II., 1706—1708right agreed in the freemen inhabitants, 1895Tanquam,charter , 1467It'liberi]' iivrrailMl all iniftitiitKitw of. irRoman nialoniM i>bliUTBl«l, ih.the biiTgcucM during the, unolU-rcd lubwi. IG. %6divinity of tiodft]', 11, J5loTftl dhi«onof the county, 36, 37, 2O0. 231,302personal and lucid distinction. 14, 35ngTsnry, ruidniM, oaths, i>lt!dgM, 34, 33, 3fi, 40, 49. 3^bou<teholil«rs, Tn)|N>niiiUUty, 15,34,31frc«dnm of attic nibjert, 50not depending upon lenwre, 33. 43ofGcen of vires nnd lK>rniugh», juriadutum, l6, 1 *. I9i 36alderman, shire rervp, [Hirtrccve, la, 30, 31, 54, 59folrmotf, vliire)[enioti\ burf^uiute, 13, 3H, 43, ai, M, :oiijiin of iriid by Jury, 33, 335ftvem(.>n. Un-worthy, l4no trace of a mitniciiia] coriK>rBtion, in the law*. chroDKrlcB, (n dieiIntro. xiUwH of, Dq;l(rt«d, 41)charier — John, 391duster — Henry III., 470chartCT^Edward 11., 53ienvy of lOS perscmB of, upon the Noise Rolls, 674hoeti in, ordered to obtain from forestalling, 717charter — Henry V., 824ciirponition crealrii in, '■ ti 1>e raastera or keeper of the key of,"right, select body. 2035IScot ano Lot,Saxon regulations riSee Burgage.<[>ecling, 13, 63Fi-men. Gallants, Cilia.boroughs, antiquity of, 3IUderitiLtiDn of, ib.resemblance to those of England. SSSdistinct from the guilds. 3Gl, .i6-2charter of uicor[M) ratioparlianirnlar)' rights r<rigjlit, inh.iliilaiits lll>ll^INDEX. 2393Sklbct Bodies,unconstitutional support of, 231, 1448, 1731, 1732Sblkct Bodies ilrekmd),continued exertions to maintain the, 1806Senator,inapplicable to the rank of ealdorman, 18Serjeants at Law,case respecting exemptions of, 1015no pretence for asserting that they were incorporated, 1014, 1015Sbsbltrb,entry — Domesday, 89Shaftesbury,entry — Domesday, 160observations, 161inhabitants paying scot and lot the voters, &c., ib.charters — Henry III., 466, 467court of the abbess of, 595members to parliament not returned by the corporation, 65891 persons charged as being taxed, 673petition of the abbot, 749municipal documents, 902, 903municipal officers appointed at the leet, 903Sbbbiffs. — See Tom.origin of, 16, 1727, et seq,toum of, origin, duties, &c., 38, 526, 1075, 1076, 1725, 1731jurisdiction of, 51, 587 — 611, 781exclusion of, 52extortions, 343, 488provisions in Magna Charta, 420—429causes of the toum of, falling into disuse, 436statute, 577liberties of a borough ceasing, or not capable of continuing local jurisdictions,reverted to the jurisdiction of, 587 — 611, 781complaints and enactments, 627residence required, 781qualification requisite to be impannelled upon the toum of, 1032toum of, in practice, Edward IV., 1034Richard III., 1038king cannot abridge the office, 1432grant of gaols must be to, 1432, 1433duties, 1931Sheriff iScotlarul),when to hold his court, 361observations uiK)n, ib.diviHuait of the oouaXtj mpnMcd hf tha 1|csuMi to be deUnnincd in, S3«xid«naiiun oftlie tina. 307«x«n|ilion from niiu, 539, 55Texpence of knights, 737 ',unique election of kni^chu, 783 Iknijxhu to President. Hit. HUOdistinction between cilia and IxtrotigUH, III, uakiwhrii lu be lirld, 33, SQSUBBWBBUBV.entry — Dompstky. 25!)drscritwil u a city. ii.inhabitants tli« burgMiieii, ib.castle distinct from the borough, 360charUrr—Henty II., 342no pensoti U> buy within the buruu^, tcharter— King John, 338charter—Henry III., 403charles— Edn-ard II., 698charter— Henry VI 880scire facias, by the Abbot of Weilbtiry Bgdstatute confirming the privilege!. 947charter to the drsjKra, by Edward IV 96by Elizabeth, 1250,Statute of the Hi of Elizabeth, 1321mamiumuH — residence — aldermen, 31).'j4parliamentary history, 2O08, 2101SuRorsriiKR,fiherifr of, return the hundreds in hie bcities, boroughs, and towns in each bucue of the King r. Provost, free burgeuee, ichanter — 1 1 James I., it.no usage to right of (reeiloin, 2259commonalty defined, 22G0English law cases quoted, 2361, 2262judgment of C. J. Lush, 3362no instance of a claim of inhabitancy for cotArguments founded upon usage, 2263, 2364judgment questioned, 3264ilelinitiun of, 5referred to in Domesday', 480INDEX. 2395Society,vision of, 14, 25, 41, 55, 571Societies Voluntary,regulations, 300Sessions,jurisdiction of, and tours, subject of dispute, 101 1Somerset,parliamentary returns in the reign of Edward I., 494Southampton,entry — Domesday, 110fee-farm, 389reeve, 340charter — John, 410charter — Henry III., 470freedom from toll, 607petition from the onions and tenants, 670mayor, bailiffs — claim a right to the toll of the town of Lymington, 676no mention of a corporation, ib.agreement by the commonalty with the inhabitants of Portswood, 751charter of incorporation by Henry VI., 87S, 879mayor impleaded, 879observations, 880charter — Henry VI , 888charter— Edward IV., 968law-day or court leet, 1661charter — Charles I., 1662inaccuracy of the recital, 1663right of election vested in the non-residents, 1881, 1882entry of, by Dr. Brady, 1914South Molton,charter — Charles II., 17O8SOUTHWARK,aid of the borough, 329, 339Archbishop of Canterbury treated as the owner, 1152civil and criminal jurisdiction, 1150—1152parliamentary history from the reign of James I., 1547Southward,ancient history, 1053charters — Henry VII., ib. et seq.confirmation of liberties by Henry VIII., Edward VI., Elizabeth,James I., and Charles I., 1056unconstitutional charter — James II., 1056, 1057observations upon the municipal privileges ib.Southwell, MSS.1806, 1812, 1819, 1940, 1978, 1980, 2069, 2070—2074, 2079entry — Domesday, 25Sparliamentary and muiiiripiil right*, in whcsid of, 339cluTter — Join, 408cheer— Heni>- HI 471rfuirter — Edward 11., Soft(irdumDce by ibf burgesses, 751ordinance for the regulation of the town, :the inhabitant householder, lA.charters of incorporation, by Edward VI,record between the twenty-fivety, and thisborough by prescription, Hi.not anciently incorporated, ib.charter— Jam I., 1491, 1493case of, reported in Glanville. 15SUcharter— George IV., 2197usurping the office of justice, 3314oflnirgesR, 2315 <not a corporation by prescription, ib.Aeftct of notice in municipal election, S)STATrONOBHIItK,sheriff' returns the hundreds in his |cities, boroughs, and Uiwna in «td£STAiiFOiiD,entry — Domesday, 270members to Parliament for, returned from:charter— Henry in,, 271members to Parliament in 1473, ib.charter — Brflward IV., ib.election petition in IGGi, ib.decision reapecUng, ib.inhabitants the burgesses. 273ud of the borough, 321charter— Edward IV., 96Hright in the inhabitants paying siStannary Laws,observations. 556charter — Edward I., for the establishmentStantk^fs,privileges of the town, 037Statim,observations iijion the abridgment, t>66, 6'Statistics Hiher.ma,observations, 437INDEX. 2397Stephen, A. D. 1136—1154.reign of, 319 — 326confirmation of ancient laws and customs, 319castles adulterine proscribed, 320pipe rolls, ib.documents prove the rights and obligations of social government to individuals,in the places which they inhabited, 334Steynino,entry — Domesday, 97burgesses, ib,inhabitant householders paying scot and lot, ib.letter from the Earl of Arundel to the burgesses, nominating membersfor, 1613parliamentary decision, 1791> 2116leet, presentment, 2137> 2138Stourbridge,entry — Domesday, 109rolls, 1167presentment of strangers, apprentices, 1167, 1168burgesses, the inhabitant householders, 1169restoration of members to Parliament, 1223parliamentary history, 1235, 1236no charter of incorporation ever granted, 1235case— Glanville, 1663, 1564Strangers. — See Burgesses, Inhabits, Freemen.enactments against, 14, 106, 34 7» 1167definition, 358provisions in the custumals of the Cinque Port, 537Stranger — scotland,merchants, 325man, 326, 327, 709Stratford-upon-Avon,charter — Henry VI., 888charter— Edward VI., 1166Successors,word adopted respecting ecclesiastical property and persons, 422application of term, explained, 439» 628, 629term, when first used, 646, 662in conjunction with heirs, 439* 461, 462, 522, 529Sudbury,entry — Domesday, 281charters — Mary, Elizabeth, and Charles II., 1373parliamentary history, 1373 — 1379admission of non-residents, 1377> 1378improper conduct of the magistrates, 1379v^mI^V 2Sd8il^^Htir— ™i(inu«/.IIHright of election ■■> loll, In the nvlen bodIHliur«eiie not ileBcriiitive of ciipiul burgaaIWOle.vjrof chief pledges It 1Sl'nBland.quo Warranto, Chorea II., 21lgJuiiginent. London cute, ib.inconveniences of tecliniol rulcN. Ira,quo warranto cannot Iw tiled for harping■i'i20St; 110Sons AND BaRBKRH.charters explained, 1111Si'TTONV HOBl-lTAL CaSK.SrsHtommonaHy complain m to the harboursmen of. cr)m|>Uin of the men of the CinqiiSwA•C!IRA,charter— John. 410Taimodes of collection in coiintiee and porousassessed upon the boroughs nnd demesnesanil Huntingdonshire, ashmode of lei-jin^, upon tenants in ancient <TaM WORTH,entry, Domesday, 253, 254observations, 256elective franchise exercised liy the iniia1)ilnaid of the borough, 331, 33(|excited from poverty, 321charter — Edward III., 654restoration of members to Parliament, 123.early history, 1230, 1231parliamentary history 1231 — 1235entry of, by Brady, 1915enirj' — Domesday, 163members to Parliament, IC:right of election, ib.INDEX. 2399T A u Into N — continued.corporation, not requisite to constitute a borough, 165leet, 166mentioned as a borough, 594complaint made to the House of Commons of the improper conduct ofthe steward of the leet, 1655pot waller" defined, 2097Tavistock,claim by the abbot of view of frankpledge, 522first return to Parliament, 600charter — Edward III., 667parliamentary history, 1735, 1736Tavistokb,inhabitants and residents in the hundreds, 1025Teignmouth,charter — Henry HI., 470Tenant,definition of, 927, 1077an inhabitant householder paying scot and lot, 1077Tenterdbn,charter — Henry VI., 892privileges of persons residing in, 2012, 2013improper application of the word " corporation," 2013Tenure,freedom not dependent upon, 15, 78, 83, 84, 86, 114, 154, 481, 484, 521,526, 527, 930, 933, 1077residence and, not connected, 159, 160, 164, 166, 175, 202, 203, 205,207, 209, 214, 221, 239, 254, 256, 274, 278, 281, 289Newbury,extract from Brady, 256, 1913Tenby,charters — william de Valencia and the countess Johanna, his wife. Ado-marde Valencia, Lawrence de Hastings, Edward III., richard II.,Henry IV., Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, Henry VI., Edward V.,and Richard III., 817, 818, 878, 880charter of incorporation — Elizabeth, 818observations, ib.charter — Richard III., 1039petition against the making of foreign burgesses, 1942Tewkesbury,entry, Domesday, 206petition from the burgesses and commonalty, 892, 893recognized by law, though not incorporated, 892early history, 1583charter — James I., 1583, 1584charter — Elizabeth, 1584T«WKtaaii>v-'«iMitMiffJ.parliunniUry and municipal wintery, I&H4 — I&S7. 14UchNTttr — WiUiain III IH3S, 1B«[Mrliuui-iitary division in 17<>7, 2I1GTnitrr,provisions a)(aiiui, ll— 4Uplcd^ for him ai-cuiied uf, 31division of property of tboM guilty of. 3dTiiitu.definition. 50TBrrromi.entry — Domesday, 277, 278sid. 331commonalty and common council decided In ho iiyTiotiyiiitiiu l«nni,mcoriKiratea in the loth of Eliiabeth. ib.pu-elementary history, ib.modvK schooled to to obtain a surrender of the charter, I:right, agreed lo be in the " select body," 189*burgesses of, the housekeepers, 1903Brady's statement relative to. contn»-ened, it.TiNTAJOII.,charter — Henry III., "0TlTHINO,regulations, 27, 49. 53TirBKTON,charter — Jamea I., 1587iliaaolution of the corporation, ih.charter— George I., 1587—1589—2003TOCKBTKR,cufUim In, that no person should exercise the tide of a baker withoutconsent of the lord of the manor, held illegal, 1443Haddington,license to found an hospital, 913Toll,definition, 50freedom from, 380, 392TORKESOY,41 persons of, entered as being taxed upon the None Rolls, 673ToHKiNOTON, Devon,men and commonalty of, exempted from sending members to Parliament,charter— Mary, 1205INDEX. 2401ToTNBB0yentry — Domesday, 171, 17*2borough distinct from the guild, 340claim of view of frankpledge, 52Qsurrender of charters, 1268charter of James II. void, 1263parliamentary history, 1695 — 1284, 1286charter — Elizabeth, 1408bye-laws, 1408, 1409Tour. — See Sheriff.the origin, nature, and duties, 38, 526, 1075, 1076, 1725, 1731attendance required, 347causes of falling into desuetude, 436provisions, 429» 435, 436liberties of, a borough ceasing, or not capable of continuing local jurisdictions,reverted to the, SS7, 610, 611, 781sheriffs complained of for taking indictments of manslaughter, 769amercement when leviable, 804extortions, 838proceedings in, when void, 939doubts relative to the jurisdiction of, and sessions, 1011, 1012distinction between the, and leet, 1013in practice — Edward IV., 1034Richard III., 1038Trading,proof of free condition, 18no reference to corporations, 22first legislative recognition of freedom, 1047Trading Towns,mentioned as distinct from cities and boroughs, 488Transportation,origin, 14Tregony,restoration of elective franchise, 1223when first returned members to ParUament, 1226parliamentary history, ib.petition for restoration of charters, 1262charter — James I., 1500Trevbnny,writ moved to swear a person into the office of mayor, 1 685Truro,charter — Henry II., 333confirmed — Edward I., 526burgages, 526, 527inquisition, 5947 ono mayor, &94buriceiuitii, the householder, ib.Bubaidita remitted to the bun^Bset, 75'huTgeeaea. the inhabitants, 7^3, ^00. ICburgess and commons petition for a rto Parliament— Hfmry VI., 911borough in the poit»es«ion of Edward 1return in 17*7 " by tic mayor and coicommonalty'' 1006petition for the restoration of charters,return of member to Parliament in tbachsn«r — Elisabeth, ib.return of members in 1610, 1744Surrender of charters to the Earl of B*burgesses elected by all the " people'scharter— Jamea II., 1S33presentments at the leet, 1&76parliamentary history in 16H8 and 1$89tolls, 2199. 3306corporation — prescription, 319ainhabitants — usurpation-2300. 2301charter— Elizabeth. 2201UNiVBRstTiiiB— See Oxford and Cambridge.what the term imports, 481obiwrvalioDS upon the doctrine of, 74,2125, 2222, S233, 2I3S, 9950charter— Edward III., 7D6charter— Edward IV., 1028provisions agunst, 8, M, 15, 35, 31, 63:Vagrants scotland),provisions! respecting. 317.710observations upon, 'i\7Vbhitlamium,inhabitants, privileges of Roman citizensVillains — See Tel, Burgesses, Apprentice.fugitive, reception of, ISreclaiming, 17INDEX. 2403Villain s — continued.not bound to do seme at the leet, 1 7state of, under the Saxons, ib.freedom after seven years' service, 22selling of, recognized, ib.freedom, modes of attainment by, 22, 42could not be members of a trading guild, 29responsibility of lords for, 32oath at the leet, 45disabilities of, 64provisions respecting enfranchisement, 65, 67, 770 — 772law respecting, 104denoted by birth, 106, 349, 688freedom, 178provisions in Glanville, 349, et seq.regulations against, and provisions for, in Bracton, 479, 480, 484, 624,manumission without free land, 484claims, 553, 554all men either, or freemen, 571, 584, 586enactments against, and provision for, in the " Mirror" 609 — 615incapacity, 610, 688claiming to be free, 668, 669provisions against going to enfranchised places against their lords, 718,771, 772cannot be enfranchised without consent of their lords, 771complaint against, flying to enfranchised towns, 800freemen distinguished from, 847children born in the county of Kent were always free, 920law respecting, in force in the reign of Elizabeth, 1251doctrine of villainage in practice in temp. Elizabeth, 1442doctrine of — James I., 1544virtually ceased — Henry VIII., 1545Villains scotland'sprovisions, 312freedom after seven years' residence, 313after one year and a day in a borough, ib.observations, 313 — 316Villains wales),provisions respecting the king's, 843Vil,responsibility of, for murder, 48definition of, 49doctrine of, recognized according to the common law, 6787 o 2petition to he levied ujntn the whole Fluidity, Sit 18"^calc of liability, SiKjobgrrvnlinna. 1 istiorations upon ihecharlerB, 410, 56Hstatute of Henry Vlll., traversing council*, 1099*lathe of the arili of Henry VIH., iQcorpamting, with England, iUHI mes 1 Iiientry — Domesday, 1 1 1borough, T. R. E., and engird More the caitlr, UJ■qiarale jurisdiction, 113, Tilancient hisiorj-. Iiicharter — Henry H., I IdmerchoDl guild, ib.object of explained, 1 1 T{Mrtmote court, A,inquisition, I ISlauda seized into the hiuidi of the king, ik.membera to Parliament, 119by whom elected, ib.rttnm by the jury. ib.selection of io Mis — H<35 by the inhabitants. I'ioreturn in 1553, 131charter— t'harlfs It,, 122parliamentary history, 133, 331, 1851charter — Henry IH., 470the inaccuracies of Brady fxempUjied, 1905Wapbntakb,and hundred anonymous, 13how held, 53where held, 54to be watched, 61exemption omni attendance, 669, 670Warrhah,entry — Domesday, 160inhabitants and freeholders right of voting, Giview of frankpledge certified, 533parliamentary history, 1751, 2036right in the inhabitants pang scot and lot. and the freeholders, 1897charter — Anne, 1950Wakuinstbr,entry — Domesday, IsmWatch (Scotland ,provisions respecting, 338WATBKrOBD,charters — Henry 111., 471liberties, renders, ii.charter— Edward I., 569charter— Edward II., 605charter— Edward III., 707charter— Richard III., 1040, 1042charters — Henry Vll., 1087charter— Henry VIH., UHcharter— Edward VI 1176charter— Mary. 1218charter— EiUabelh, 1459, 1460charter— James I., 1674—1676entry — Domesday, 253charter — Henry III., 470right in the commonalty, 1636charter— WiUiain 111., 1844Brady's entry of. Confuted, agisinhabitants to pay the church-rale, 2004parliamentary decision, 1793, 2116Watch and Ward,to be duly kept, 59, 241, 391, 782continuance of during the reign of Elizabeth, 1439, 1440Wbi,i,s,charter — John, 414charter— Henry III., 471charter— Philippa, 663charter disputed, 680—683entries at the leet, 766, 76srh arte r— Henry V., 824charter— Henry VI., 866inhabitants described hy the name of "men," 1006entry, ailinisHioii. and expansion of burgesses, 1006, 1007articles by the bishop against the city, 1064absence in, not arnountinii; to non-residence, 1134origin of non-rcsiilenls, \Z4 1135duties connected with the character of a biggest, 1 135]»trtiiun disfranchised. 1169regulations respecting residence, 1 170entrance of strangers, ib.admission of sons of burgess, ib.of freemen in temp. Eliiabtih, 1251, 1352continuance of the law of villajnajje, 1252Elizabeth orders member" to he elected, ib.letters from the Inshop relative to the granting a corporation, MOg, 1412I nchair— EUiabetli, lira, 1413haec cis Knight r. Cur|Hinitiiin, 1413uiliuiMuma of pwnonn lo the rrccdum,ilisfraiirhiHenient of freemen, it.bitrgeaitet, the buiwehulilerB, H.QomiiutiuD of memben by Elizabtilli,^biiriceBsee anal inhabitants, elected mencheer— C^xrlra II., 1706charter— Jomea II 1B37admission of Imrgesees, 3027 — 3039parliamentary hislorj'- 2039 — 303Snilmitwion of freemen. 3033 — 303& 4evils of DOQ-reindeat freemen, 3035 \imposed timon ley Henry IV,against, in the reign of Hmentry — DomeiHlay, 301 jfee-fsriD, 339 4charter— Henry III., ijl iraati of. reported iu (ilnni-ille, 15li.1 'charter of incorpocsluiu— Edward tVJhistory, ib,charter— Charles I., 1002petition against n»n.residenlH, ii.Wei1 7 jierHons charged ait being taxed uponright, inhabitants of ancient houses, 30■ Gii.i>. 17. ejBctirm by the abbot of. against the comeparliamentary decision. George i., 3003Wkbtuinstbh,abbot brings a writ of tresiiaKs for the (1described as being within the franchise cabbot, dispute with the city of London,trespass against the abbot for imprisonprivilege of sanctuary allowed, 1011city of, a diiilinct fnuichiM, 1080statute authorizing the king to make anstatute of the seth of Elizabeth, respect!borough. 1439—1431igdi George II., c. as, 3035obiwrvBtionB upon the present e:INDEX. 2407Westminster — continued.right, " inhabitant householders paying scot and lot," 2094parliamentary decision, 1785 — 2116Westmoreland,parliamentary returns in the reign of Edward I., 494Restore,writ for palliating, 588Wexford,charter — Edward II., 603observations, ib.charter— James I., 1618Weymouth,charter — Henry III., 471first return to parliament, 600charter — George II., 2040charter — George III., 2l6la majority of each definite body to make a valid election, 2208Whitby,charter — John, 388observations, 388, 389Whitechurch,when first returned members to Parliament, 1372not in Domesday, ib.parliamentary history, 1372, 1373quo warranto, as to whether municipal officers could be non-resident, 2015borough court — the court leet, 2015, 2016Whitboate,vicar incorporated, 1115Loan,charter — Henry III., 471Wigtown,chief magistrates resiants, 2104William the Conqueror, A.D. 1066 — 1087,laws of, 60, 292council summoned, 447did not change the constitution of the country, 60, 69, 73, 114allegiance, 61freemen, 61, 62common council, 61cities, boroughs, ib.pledges, 61, 62scot and lot, 62were gild, 63WU.I.UM TUB t'a»<tt-KKoa—tMr-W(Vtbr. 63Boat trait, bntgrn t , ii.riOmn^ )otd«, 64. 67 IloiietiCT of die Conqueror, 60. 65 ipnmscai* far filing. 66William 11, A.D. its;— iiountgBof. 992BO diancn fnatcd. ib. tBDitanatioo mtbe 1mw«bb<1 uutinukn^jWilliam axd Mary, A.D. IG19— 1701.nigh of, from le-is — 1W3 'narration* upon the commefieemnit ochItt afefaanen granted by, 16-14 1AriwikiooL IB4G. 1S«6 I«fc rf i» w to be made BcconUng to the mtimfmper Conduct in grammar a dura 19tint RMiIution of the Condition Parishbodies. I860interference of the Icing in the election of 1hutorx of Dr. Brady connected timon, IIconcluding observations. 19*3William IV— a. D. ism, \min">f. J'267-327i<lch:\.~ .,f ;■;,. iUf.iriD Ad, ■'■2(i-, J263presumption act, 2269corporation commission, ib., el teq.WlTAN,provisions against a breach of the peace, 3WiTBBD, A.D. 691—725,made by the assent of aU the people, ib.rights of the church to be prepared, ib.freedom, 16.compurgation for a guest, ib.workmen, freemen, ib.foreign-coming man, ib.vagrancy, residence, 15Wilton,entry — Domesday, 155charter— Henry III., 471pleaded, 699a corporation, ib.Winchester— Richard I.,Index. 2409WiNCHELSSA — continued.custumal, 532provisions for the election of mayor, 534, 535admission of strangers, 537» 538admission of freemen, 538, 539parliamentary and municipal history from the reign of James I., 1548 —Winchester,standard for coin, 39Danes' arrival, 58entry — Domesday, 109burgesses, ib.dom hoc, 304fee-firm, 339charter — Henry II., 356charter — Richard I., ib.merchant guild, 366charter— Henry III., 471not mentioned as a corporation, 692, 699hosts of, ordered to abstain from forestalling, 717charter — Henry VI., 888MS. book respecting the customs, &c., 907> 908charter— Elizabeth, 1407, 1408charter — George III 2160Windsor,entry — Domesday, 124not a borough until 1267, ib.charter — fifth Edward I., ib.non-intermittent clause omitted, 124members to Parliament in 1301, 125charters— Henry VI., 125, 126, 859parliamentary returns, 126 — 128, 131, 135charter— Edward IV., 127, 1644burgesses, tenants of the king, 129inhabitants incorporated, 130parliamentary decisions, 131 — 136charters — Charles II., 133James II., ib.inhabitants paying scot and lot, the burgesses, 136ud, 321fee-farm, 339grant to the College of St. George, by Henry VI., 840trespass by the dean and canons, 928 — 930charter of incorporation to the dean and canons of the chapel of St.George, 1026right in 1661, decided to be in the freemen paying scot and lot, 1754parliamentary conduct of Mr. Powle, 1873right in the inhabitants, 1895Woodstock,charter of itic<irporniiod — Henry VI., Siftnot mi-ntiuDL'd lu a borough in DainM^petition lu LoTil Burghley from the iaUparliauMiUry hi<iUiry, 13i>4Worcester, 1entry— Domesday, aOS, 309 'merrliaDtH, the aldermen. 331charter— Henry HI , elis, *rileisure. into the king's hand. &6lcharter — Edward III,. 654charter— Echard II., 7*7indentures of members to Firmament bq[parliamentary decision, 1755, 3036WOTTON Basset.charter — Charles* II 1705right of election in. exercised by Uie intoWOBTHB,no parliamentary return in the fnoelWaiTs, Return ar.burgesses, return of. 437. *67, 490, 523,esiEeinptioDB and amercement*, 341, 447, •bailiffs neglecting write tent them by thegrant of. by Edward I., 555commonalty of Bristol pray for a restoreLord Uale'B opinion, 17'i4WWT DB NaTIVO Rll-LEGIANUO,origin, 17Wycoubk,entry — Domesday. 201manor of, granted. 415agreement between the burgesses and Alin the possession of the crown, 522, 533charter — Philip and Mary, 1314parliamentary history, 1314, 1215not entered in the Terra legis, 1939case of Westwood, 2227, 2254writ of error, 222Swhether a hye-law restraining a right to :Judges divided, ib.evils of select body. 3328, et trr/.records erased, 3331, 3337improper admission of freemen, 3231Index. 2411Combe — continued.ancient parliamentary right of election, 2232pleadings, framed to support a usage, 2234, 2235charter — James II., 2236charter — Charles II., ib.usage, 2237, 2238parties not equal, 2237bye-laws, modem notions canvassed, 2239, 2240power of electing burgesses, 2243dictum of Lord Mansfield discussed, 2245ancient elections held valid, 2247> 2248no usage can prevail against the words of the charter, 2254Yarmouth,entry — Domesday, 277observations, 278, 279aid, 339charter— John, 411, 412early returns by " conmiunitas," 442charter — Henry III., 467provisions in Bracton, 481parliamentary return — Edward I., 494charter — Edward I., 546charter— Edward III., 652hosts to abstain from forestalling, 717leets held in four divisions of the town, 754origin of the aldermen, capital burgesses and common councilmen, 755permanent inhabitants the burgesses, ib.presentments, 755, 756freemen, apprentices, 758inmates not bound to attend the leet, ib.the advantages of the ancient system over the present unconstitutionalpractice, 759leet entries, correspond with the principles in Bracton, Britton, Fleta,Mirror, and Year Books, ib.Henry IV., 798presentment, 798, 799charter — Henry V., 824leets, 828trespass against the commonalty, 932exertions of Sir John Paston to be returned as member, 1008nomination of leet jury, 1062, 1063admission of burgesses, 1063presentments, 1063, 1064regulations for the worsted weavers and their apprentices, 1094, 1 100continuance of the leets, 1 135persons presented as strangers and foreigners, 1136members elected by the burgesses and inhabitants, 1688, 16892*12ittnEX.i>iYamiuiith — coHliniitd|iarli«m«iitai7 drrloion rMpcrbng, b 1660, ITMhiiiiOT7 of. nr^tivM Ui« o|iiniaD fxprtwtd by Or. Bml)', 1901, IQOtlInirKcasH, Ir radiant inhnbiUnt honMhoUen, 1903cliarter — Anne, 193not ■ borough from Istage of 05 yi«ni will nutimmeniorul presumption, aimrtAantkin of members for, liy Kluslwth, 366YvAii AND A Day.limitation of n. adopted for theBab Book — Vide Index tororHm. &c.Edward 1 557— S63Kdnvd II., 605 — 60SEdward 111 676—703Ritual It., 773Henry IV., 803 — boo[lorry V 831 — 833Henry VI,, 913—9*0Edward IV., 1010—1034Henry VII,, io67— 1079Doric fCwwiyJ.claim of pemuuH l(of ligne ngbtt, A3tts iOs. freeholders, and being reliant l6U'.JIK rCUyJ. ^townsmen, 50entry — Domesday, 267described as a city, ib.shire, tenn explained, ib.aid, 339charter— Henry II., 355not a corporation by prescription, ih.charter — Richard I,, 374not incorporated. 383chartei^John, 390, 391charter — Henry III., 466charter— FMward II,, 595archbishop of, complaint against the map-or and commonalty of Hull, noviaction against the mayor and commonalty, 697foreigners" used in contradistinction to inhabitant' of a city, ihthe .\bl>ot of St. Oswald, stated to be free of giiitds, 7li3license lo the mayor and citizens, to purchase lands, «;r , to lit lioldtn cjfthe king in burgage, "39, 740, 74|, 74*>charter— Henry iV 792charter — college, vicars, Sec Henry V,, Kailreliance lo the mercers— Henry VI s.k.INDEX. 2413York (City),statute repealing letters patent, which exempted some citizens fromserving municipal or parliamentary duties, 843, 844charter — Henry VI., 888instance of a hundred being take from a county, and annexed to theexclusive jurisdiction of a city,citizens not to be sworn with foreigners, 927charter — Edward IV., 997no corporate powers, ib,regulations as to making coverlets, 1115freemen made after the teste of the writ, 1886charter— 1128election of common council, 1128 — 1130custom in, respecting merchant strangers, 1138error of " Bundle," relative to the incorporation of, 1138, 1139inaccuracy of the case in Dyer (279)» respecting the incorporation, 1249charter— Charles II., 1700, 1701elections, transferred from the people to the magistrates, 1835entry of, destroys the theory of Brady, 1908, 1910YOUGHAL,charter of incorporation, Richard III., 1040, 1041charter — Elizabeth, 1459Stevens AND PARDON, Printers,BKLI. YARD, TBMPLV BAR.