THEHISTORY OF BOROUGHSANDMUNICIPAL CORPORATIONS./tf** The Court leet and Court barons are still in being in the country ; retaining thesame name and nature they had before the Conquest.Surely, that old way ofjtutiee at hornet and the exact division of it, caused greatease and safety to the people ; and though there be difference at this day in thesecourts, from what they were anciently, yet they may (without so gross an error assome would reckon it) be yet styled the same." — 2 Whitdocke, 420 & 421.r/ : • .THEHISTORYOF THBBOROUGHSANDMUNICIPAL CORPORATIONSOFTHE UNITED KINGDOM,FROM THE EARLIEST TO THE PRESENT TIME:WITH ANEXAMINATION OP RECORDS, CHARTERS, AND OTHER DOCUMENTS,ILLUSTRATIVE OF THEIR CONSTITUTION AND POWERS,BYHENRY Walworth MEREWETHER,serjeant AT LawsSOLICITOR GENERAL TO THB QUEEN ;ANDARCHIBALD JOHN STEPHENS, Mea. F.R.S.BARRISTER AT LAW.IN THREE VOLUMES.— VOL. I LLONDON:STEVENS AND SONS, BELL YARD ; S. SWEET, CHANCERY LANE ;AND A. MAXWELL, BELL YARD, LINCOLN'S INN ;ICILLIKKN AND SON, DUBLIN; AND T. CLARK, EDINBURGH.MDCCCXXXV.SnySNS AND PARDON, Printers,Bell Tied, TKMPLS BAR.CONTENTS OF VOL. II.Edward II 577Statutes 477First Year Book 605Mirror 608Edward III 618Statutes 618Charters 629Parliament Rolls 667None Rolls 672Second Year Book 676Manuscript Year Book, Third and FourthYear Book, Liber Assisarum 678Richard II. . 714Statutes . 714Parliament Rolls 729l^HARTRRS / liiiHenry IV 779Statutes . 780Charters, Sec. . 783Sixth Year Book 803Henry V 819Statutes 819Charters, &c. 822Parliament Rolls . 829Sixth Year Book 831Henry VI. . 834Statutes . 834CONTENTS.Charters, &c. . 847Corporations 857Parliament Rolls 892Seventh Year Book 913Eighth Year Book 933Edward IV 945Statutes 945Charters, &c 950Ninth Year Book 1010Parliament Rolls 1025Edward V .1032Richard III 1032Statutes 1032Charters, &c 1033Henry VII 1042Statutes 1043Charters, 8cc 1049Eleventh Year Book 1067Henry VIII 1091Statutes 1093Charters, &c 1119Edward VI 1145Statutes 1146Charters, &c 1149Mary 1177Statutes 1178Charters, Sec, . 1180Elizabeth 1218D'EwEs' Journal 1223Statutes 1236Charters, &c 1239Cases, &c. . 1432Case of Corporations 1448HISTORYOFCORPORATIONS.EDWARD II.The weak reign of Edward II. is less productive of mate 1907rials than the former, and less important in its results. 132?.We shall however proceed with the same division, andinvestigate successively the statutes — charters — and otherpublic and local documents.STATUTES.The statutes at the commencement of this reign are fewand unimportant.The articuli clerk contain many provisions ; but none ma Aniculitrial to our present researches.The statute of sheriffs exemplifies the jealousies at that Sheriffs,time entertained respecting their conduct, and the complaintsmade of their oppressions; establishing the importance ofthose exemptions which the boroughs enjoyed from the inter-vol,II. V p578 STATUTES.— Frankpledge-THE ARTICLES.Edw. 11. fereiice of the sheriffs ; and which they from time to timeprocured from the bounty of the crown.1316. In the 10th of Edward II., the statute of Gavalette is speciallygranted to the citizens oi London; — i\\e freemen of thecity are mentioned ; and the hustings — with the presentmentsthere.The legal periods of time, to which we have before alludedin our extracts from the Saxon laws, of the 40 days, — theyear and a day, — occur frequently in these statutes. In the1318. statute of York, 12th Edward II., chapter five, the bailiffs offranchises having the return of writs — and their returns tothe sheriffs — are mentioned. The succeeding chapter speaksalso of the officers in cities or boroughs having the assise ofwine and victuals,1324. I^ she statute as to the mode of doing homage and fealty,statute . ^jjg difference between freemen and villains is distinctlymarked, and the oaths of each of them given ; — the latterstating that "he will be justified by his lord, in body andgoods."1325. The importance of the view of frankpledge, is marked bySwTge ^^® statute relating to it; which passed in this year, andcontains the articles of the frankpledge — as follow: —The Artis First, you shall say unto us by the oath that you havemade, if all the jurors that owe suit to this court be come ;and which not.And if all the chief pledges or their dozeins be come, as theyought ; and which not.And if all the dozeins be in the assise of our lord the king ;and which not ; and who received them.And if there be any of the king's villains, fugitive, dwellingotherwise than in the king's demesnes ; and of such as bewithin the king's demesnes, and have not abide a year anda day,And if there be any of the lords' villains in frankpledge,otherwise than in this court."Amongst these articles, are also contained those againstcommon thieves, and their receivers: — the hue and cry re-680 LONDON.^"^^^^ ^^' them on that behalf, granted that such aids should not beprejudicial to the mayor and *good mere' — their heirs andsuccessors ; nor should be drawn into precedent for time tocome. A precaution not unusual in those times, to guardagainst the consequences resulting from precedent, of whichthere is a similar instance relative to the Prior and convent ofCanterbury.1312. In the following year, the mayor and aldermen claimedtheir privileges, as granted by the charter of Edward* I., andextending over the suburbs.1316. The aldermen and citizens of London present their mayorto the treasurer and barons of the Exchequer.*1317. In this year there was also a charter of confirmation toLondoner1318. Simon de Swanesland, the king's merchant, of London,obtained a grants exempting him from talliage, and frombeing mayor, sheriff,, coroner, alderman, or other minister ofthe king ; from which we see clearly the character of thoseseveral oflScers, all in fact coming under one general descriptionof officers under the crown.This brings us to the important period in the history ofLondon, in which certain articles were agreed upon by thecitizens, for the better internal government of the city, andcommon benefit of " those who dwell therein,**^ They weresubmitted to the king for his confirmation — when he waspleased, amongst others, to ratify the following : —1. — that the mayor and sheriffs should be elected by thecitizens.2. — that the mayor should remain only one year in office.6. — that the aldermen should serve but for one year.6. — that the talliages, afler being assessed in the severalwards be not afterwards increased at the discretion of themayor and commonalty.It seems obvious, that these talliages could have been• Mad. Fir. Bur. 53.t See Yr. Bk., Trin. T. 46 Edw. III., fol. 26, B. ; et Lib. Ass. B. 8 Edw. HI.,pi. 18.X Mad. Each. 750.Strypc^s Stow, book v. p. 363.LONDON-hustings. J1 in the wards only, upon the inhabitant householders, ^"■who were the proper suitors at the ward-motes.7. — that no stranger was to be admitted into the freedomof the city but at the hustings' court; nor any inhabitant,especially an English merchant, of mystery, or trade, unlessby surety of six honest and sufficient men of the mystery heshould be of, who were to undertake to indemnify the cityin that behalf. That strangers who were members of anytrade, upon being admitted at the hustings, should give thesame security — if they were members of no trade, then theyshould be admitted by the full assent of the commonalty.And all acting to the contrary, should lose their freedom.This article was declared not to affect the admission of apprentices,who were to be admitted according to the ancient form.Iliis article requires some explanation, as its having beenmisunderstood, has led to much error. The court of hustings ^o"" <was the general court of the city, and there strangers wereto be admitted. For, not having houses within any of thewards, they could hot be admitted as suitors at the ward-motes,within the precincts of which they could not, like theinhabitant householders of the ward, be known; and thereforethe general court was to decide, whether they were fitand proper persons for admission.There were certain mysteries, or trades, to which merchantsbelonged ; and as the city might be rendered liable for thedebts of the citizens, and that liability would be much increasedby their being engaged in trade, it was provided,that inhabitants being merchants, should find six sureties oftheir trade, instead of two only, as the common law required ;and strangers who traded, were to do the same. Otherstrangers were only required to find two sureties or pledges,in the common form. But as they were not of any trade,and therefore were without that proof of their being free, fornone but freemen could trade, they could not be admittedwithout the consent of the commonalty, because it did notappear but that they might be the villains of some lord, orfugitives, for the taking of whom, the commonalty mightincur liability ; and therefore it was but just, that they should582 LONDON.^^' ^^' have the power of giving or withholding their assent, beforethey incurred the chance of such a liability.The exception as to apprentices, is to be explained uponthe grounds to which we have before adverted, viz., thathaving served and resided more than a year and a daywith their masters, who were not their lords, it was clear,they were not villains, and therefore were qualified absolutely,and to the knowledge of the commonalty, to be admitted asfreemen.8. — ^^The eighth article provides against ^^The colouring ofthe goods of strangers by freemen.9. — ^^The ninth provides, like ^^The custumals of ^^The CinquePorts, that every one being in the liberty of the city, i. e.residing in it, who would enjoy the liberties of the same,must be in lot and scot and partake of all burdens formaintaining the city ; and whosoever would not, should losehis freedom.10. — ^^The 10th provides, that every one, being of ^^The freedomof the city, and that by themselves or their servants,exercise their merchandises there, should be in scot and lot,with the commoners of the city, for their merchandise, or bemoved from their freedom.We should observe the difference of expression in thesetwo articles : — in the former, the phrase is, '^ being in theliberty," that is, " residing within the liberty ;" the latter is,being of the freedom of the city," that is, one who, havingbeen admitted and enrolled in the city as a freeman, continuesto be a freeman, notwithstanding he goes to reside elsewhere ;but he ceases to be one of the commoners, because he is nolonger a householder in the liberty: still he would not bedealt with altogether as a stranger, if he came to trade in theplace, because his name would have been entered on therolls of the city, as a freeman ; and instead of paying tollsand customs for his goods, he would, upon paying scot andlot, be exempt from those charges ; but if he refused to paythem, then he would reasonably be treated altogether as astranger, and as having renounced his connections with thecity.LONDON. 68311. — ^^The 11th article relates to-^e keeping of ^^The com- *idw. 11.mon seal ; but as we have before made observations respectingthe seals, it is not necessary to repeat them here.Provisions follow, respecting the weights and scales, thecollection of toll, and the direction of the sheriffs.14. — ^^The 14th article, following up ^^The 10th, provides, thatmerchants who are not of the city, are not to sell wines orwares within the city or suburbs.16. — ^^The common harbourers in ^^The city and suburbs,although they were not of the freedom, were to be partakersof the burdens of the city, as other like dwellers, on accountof their dwellings ; from which it is again evident, that thecommons were householders in the city.Provisions are also made, as to the brokers — the repairsof the bridge — and the conduct and duties of the Serjeants, asto fees.20. — ^^The 20th article provides, that ^^The goods of ^^The aldermen,in aids, talliages, and other contributions, should betaxed by the men of the wards, in which those aldermen abide,as the goods of the other citizens by the said wards. Fromwhich it is evident, that the aldermen, undoubtedly, residedin their respective wards.All these articles were ratified by the king to the citizens,their heirs, and successors, for the conmion profit of the city,and those that inhabit therein, and resort thereto. In theconclusion, the body of the citizens are described as the commonaltyof the commons.It is impossible not to remark the conformity of these articles,with the usages of Ipswich, Manchester, and the cussof the Cinque Ports, and as we shall see hereafter, inamuch later period, with the customs of the burgage tenureborough of Maldon.Mr. Norton, in his excellent commentaries upon the constitutionof London, seems in this part of his investigation tohave been misled by the reference to trade, which occurs inthese articles, as well as in many of the charters grantedto other places, and he states, that they contain the firstauthentic mention of what he terms "the mercantile conesLONDON.^^'^^' situation of the city." He seems to have considered that agreat change was effected in the constitution of London, bythe introduction of a trading character into the qualificationfor citizenship, which he conceives to have been introducedby a great revolution in the quality of civic freedoms, whichbeginning in London, gradually overspread most of thecorporations in England : the revolution consisting, as he supposes,in the destruction of the functions of the leet, and thesubstitution of the principle, and practice of the guilds.But this assumption seems to be without proof, for there isnothing to establish by evidence this great revolution, — it isnot apparent upon any of the documents or charters, relativeto London, or any other place, many of which we havecarefully investigated from the earliest periods. Indeedthese articles seem to import that they were founded uponthe ancient usages of the city, rather than that they wereintroductory of any new system.And so far from the leets or ward-motes being in any degreesuperseded, they have continued in uninterrupted exerciseof their functions down to the present day : — the truth is,that Mr. Norton overlooked the connection which existedfrom the earliest periods of our history, between trade, andthe laws connected with free condition.In the Saxon laws, we find the origin of the principle, thatthe person and property of a villain, belonged to his lord, andthat doctrine continued uninterrupted as long as villainageexisted. For it is expressly laid down, " that whatsoever avillain possessed, is his lord's,* for which reason, the lordcould not sue his villain ; \ nor could a villain have even anappeal of mayhem against his lord, for if he recovered damages,his lord would retain them. "J Therefore if a persontraded, it was prima facie evidence of his being free, and if hecontinued to do so for a year and a day, or was in any tradingguild, fraternity, or mystery, for the same period, he wasabsolutely free, subject only as we have seen in Scotland, tohis being reclaimed within seven years. Hence arose the• Lib. Am. 22 Edw. 111. pi. 37., and 3 Hen. IV. 15. See Finch, 159.t Jenk.236. % Lib. Ass. 27 fcidw. III. pi. 49.586 London-UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE.Edw. II, which a large bell was set up, and when any one was to beoutlawed for felony, all the folk-mote, that is all the citizens,came thither together, and he was proclaimed outlawed.Here we have the folk-mote called together, and outlawryaccording to the Saxon laws, acted upon at this time.1323. In the same year, as well as in the 17th Edward II., letterspatent issued respecting the repairs of London Bridge, whichare not otherwise material to our investigation, than that theywere granted to the mayor and conmionalty, for the commongood of the city.1321. In this year, there was a grant to the aldermen and citizens,that they might nominate a citizen to be mayor ;* and the earliestrecords now extant of the admissions of freedom, byservice and otherwise, are in this reign; and the form is** missus fuit in libertatem, civitatis et juratis/'fTwo aldermen were appointed to receive and determinethe fines of foreigners residing and merchandising in theci^Yft ^^^ ^^^ ^ ^ admitted to enjoy the franchise if theywere of sufficient ability ; § but it was expressly provided** that none were to be admitted into the liberty but by the** assent of the commonalty in full hustings*' which is repeatedagain in the 6th year of Edward II.||In the 13th of Edward II. the consent of the commonaltyseems to mean the consent of 12 men, or the jury from eachwardsAn individual was put out of the liberties of the city, ** and** he and all his were declared to he foreigners and never to** be admitted without the consent of the mayor, aldermen andcommonalty** This closes our extracts from the documentsrelative to the city of London. .Hac *™*^ All the liberties and privileges of the town of Cambridgebridge, were confirmed, but providing that neither the masters norscholars of the university, nor any of their liberties, shouldbe prejudiced thereby.Rot. Pat. 4 Edw. 11. m. 3.t D. 8 to 36 D. p. 8. These Records are in the possession of the Corporation.t D. 176. § Niger, 20 B. 203 B. ( Niger, 35.218.If E. 103. ♦• E. 154.588 COLCHESTER.^^' ^^' We find also at this period some rolls relative to Colchester,Colchester, in the first of which it appears, that Colchester was an*^*^* hundred of itself, and that hundred courts regularly satthere, under the name of " Lagwe Hundred Courts," whichwere held before the bailiffs and coroner, and were attendedby the whole commonalty.It appears, from the entries in the books, that the meetingsare described to be " in plena congregation burdens;" and that these law hundred courts were the courtleet : because " the officers of the court are described as theofficers of the leet," and the jury are sworn in the mannerusual in that court. The charge also is given of all thematters inquirable in the leet, and amongst others, ofstrangers coming to reside in the borough. But this courtseems, afler the introduction of the quarter sessions, andprobably after the statute of the 1st of Edward IV,, whichtook away the power of trying indictments at the leet, tohave been merged in the general quarter sessions of theborough.1313. In this year, a talliage was assessed upon the boroughs anddemesnes of the king in Cambridgeshire and Huntingdonshire.*That upon Cambridge is assessed according to thewards, of which there are seven named. There is a returnof the talliage of the scholars of the university. Also ofecclesiastics (religiosorum), priors, prioresses, matrons ofhospitals, abbots and abbesses, almoners, monks, brothersof societies. And the jury, 17 in number, return their own.Cheltenham, also, and its juries, make a return.Salam and its taxors.fAlso Wytterham manor, which is the demesne of the king.And the return for Huntingdonshire is of the same description.13-25. A special tvrit seems to have issued for palliating Ring-wood,Christchurch, Restore, Bourbon, and Doneketon,which then appear to have been held of the Queen ConsortIsabella,! reciting, that they were not ancient demesne, norfoniierly assessed with the king's demesne lands — yet theyhad been lately so assessed and fined. It then proceeds to• Mad. Fir. Bur. 59. t Mad. Fir. Bur. 60. ♦ Mad. Fir. Bur. 61.690 IPSWICH.Edw.ll. cessors, from murage, pickage, &c. ; and prohibits forestalling&c.Common We have before commented on the above expression —Council.*^ of the common councils — and have shown, that it relatesnot to a body having that name, but to the act being doneby the common assent, or council, of the town — ^whieh mthe sense in which the word is used in this document. As afurther proof of it, we have an instance in the reign of HenryIII., in which, in a return of members to Parliament by thebailiffs and commonalty, they use the terms themselves, thattheir burgesses are to consent to such matters as shall bedetermined upon by the common council of the realm — whereit is impossible there can be any doubt as to the meaningof those words ; and in the succeeding ordinances it will beseen, that the expression repeatedly used was '^ by commonconsent."1319. The men of Ipswich are also charged with a fine due fromthem.1321. At this period we find further ordinances of the burgessesof Ipswich, to this effect :The aldermen, bailiffs, and commonalty, recite, that theyhold the town at fee-farm ; and that, by their charters, allwares and merchandises should be freely and openly sold inthe town, without any forestalling. That, of common right,every burgess of the town, who should pay scot and lot to allthe aids of the town, should be equally entitled with anyother person to buy such wares and merchandises; thatthey and their ancestors have been bound to maintain thefranchises ; nevertheless, divers of them acting contrary tothe franchise, being hosts of the merchants, have sold themerchandise in secret places, of which the greatest part ofthe commonalty could not have knowledge — such hostsclaiming a fourth part of such merchandise by reason ofhostellage.It then directs, that all goods should be freely and publiclysold, in the common place assigned for them — so that nohost, forestaller, or other of the commonalty, should intermeddlewith them, or take hostellage ; that every scot and lot592 IPSWICH.Edw. II. of the most sufficient should be yearly elected by commonconsent J to keep the four keys of the common chest in whichthe common seal and treasure should be deposited — so thaton the election-day of the bailiffs, the keepers of the keysshould surrender them to the commonalty ^ to be re-deliveredto them, or to others, at their pleasure : and that nothingshould pass under the common seal without the common consentand received in full toll-house.Clerk of That On the bailiffs' election-day, one of the most good, loyal,and sufficient of the town, should be elected, by common consent,to the office of clerk of the court and commonalty of the town.Sub Sub-bailiffs and a gaoler are to be similarly elected, bybailiffs.Gaoler, common assent.All chattels found upon thieves arrested, should remain inthe custody of the chamberlains, until such persons should beconvicted or acquitted of their felonies ; and if convicted, toremain with the chamberlains, in the name of the commonalty,to the use of the king, when he should be calledto answer for the same.And inasmuch as heretofore the bailiffs of the town have,at their pleasure, without the common assent, made thosethey thought fit to nominate, (being of their comport,)Burgefwe*. burgesses of the town ; and the moneys that such burgesseshave paid for their freedom, which of right and reason oughtto have been applied to the common profit, the bailiffs have,of their own accord, divided between themselves and others,contrary to right and reason. We will and ordain, for usand our heirs, that no burgess shall hereafter be made in thesaid town, except four times in the year — ^that is to say, atthe next great court of the said town, holden after the Feastof St, Michael — and the next great court after Christmasat the next great court after Easter — and at the nextgreat court after the Nativity of St. John. That such burgessesshall be admitted and made by common assent — sothat at the day all the commonalty may come at their pleasure ;that the moneys arising from those fines, shall be confined tothe dominion profit, and be tallied by the chamberlains,and accounted for by them.594 POOLE.-UORCHESrER.-TRURO.-EXKTKR.^'^w^^n. In an inquisition on the death of William, Earl of Lin-poore.coin, lord of the manor of Canford, it was returned that1311.the burgesses of Poole held a free borough, paying a fee-farmrent.Dorchester This king also granted at this time to the burgesses ofDorchester,* that they might have their town at fee-farm.Snares And the custody of the castle and honour of Knaresbo-1319. roughly was granted for life at fee-farm to John de K. —Truro. From an inquisition after the death of Thomas de Prides,of this date, it appears that the bailiffs of Truro were theofficers who paid the rent due from that borough at the Exchequer; and the same inquisition speaks of the rents ofassise of the free burgesses, and the perquisites of the courtsthere.So that it is clear at that time there was no mayor ofTruro, — ^that the burgesses paid rents of assise, — and thereforemay be assumed to be householders there, — that thecourts of the borough were there held, including no doubtthe court leet, and view of frank-pledge, to which we havebefore adverted.Carlisle. This king made some additions to the buildings of Carlisle,and in the ninth year of his reigns; committed the custody ofthe dty to the citizens, granting them the city and millsbelonging thereto, and royalty of Eden Water, at 80/. perannum ; the liberty of building on the waste, freedom fromtoll ; with markets, and a fair ; likewise a guild-merchant,with assise of bread and beer, and trial of felons, &c.Taunton. We have seen that Taunton is mentioned in Domesday asaborough, and had then 64 burgesses.1317. It is also mentioned as a borough in the pipe rolls of themanor of Taunton Deane of this date, preserved in WolvesHouse, at Winchester.Xieter. We also find that during this reign, Pierre Gravestone had,by the king's gift, a patent, for the fee-farm rents of this city,payable by the citizens,• Rot. Fin. m. 12. 2 Pet. MS. 168.t Rot. Fin. m. 9. 2 Pet. MS. 47.X Rot. Cart. 9 Edw. H . n. 6.SHAFTESBURY. 595As to Shaftesbury f it appears, that the abbess held a Edw. ii.court every three weeks, on Wednesday, styled Curia Shaftesburyd'AbbatisscBy as appears by several court rolls in this reign,as well as in those of Henry VI. and Edward IV. ; and it issaid in the composes of the abbess's bailiff, to be held infraporta abbathias. The perquisites of it belonged whollyto the abbess. She also held another court, styled CuriaLycia Fcedorum JSaronuB, within the j urisdiction of which,the bailiffs of the manor of Tissebury, Harleigh, Kingston,Compton, West Orchard, &c, are said to be, and whichseems to have been held every three weeks, for pleasof debt, &c. as appears by several court rolls in the reignof Henry VI. The perquisites of this belonged also whollyto the abbess. This court was probably peculiar to themanor and tenants of the abbey without the town.There is also a roll in existence of the court leet held in 1353.this year.Numerous charters of confirmation, which are to be foundupon the Charter and Patent Rolls, at the Tower of London,were also granted during this reign, as to Lyme — Norwich —Beverley — Bath — Berwick-upon-tweed — Cambridge — Canterbury— Carlisle — Christchurch — Gloucester — the CinquePorts — Hythe — Sandwich — Winchester — Hereford — — Lincoln — Liverpool— Lynn — MarlboroughMelcombe — Nottingham, 2 — Oxford — Oxford and theuniversity — Portsmouth — York — Retford — Scarborough —Shrewsbury, 2 — Stafford and liberties — to the burgesses ofBerwick.And to afford the reader a short view of the state of a particularcounty at this period, and of the boroughs and hundredswithin it, we shall add the following document withrespect to Staffordshire.In this year the king, by writ of his great seal, com- ^316.landed the sheriff of Shropshire and Staffordshire to certifyinto the Exchequer what and how many hundreds there werein his bailiwick, whose they were, and how many cities,boroughs and towns in each hundred, and who were lords ofthem.QQ2596 Tamworth-PARLIAMENT ROLLS.Edw. II. Upon this writ the sherifl'made his return for Staffordshire,thus : —In the county of Stafford there are five hundreds : the kingis lord of each hundred.There is one burgh, to wit, the borough of Stafford, ofwhich the king is also lord.The towns of Auc'eley and Berkeley. Nicholas de Audleyis lord of them. (And so for other towns, in all 40.)The Bishop of Chester, lord of Ecclesiae and Hey wood.John de Hasting, lord of Cheese ; William de Stafford,lord of Soudan ; Earl of Lancaster, lord of Newcastle.Tamworth. By this rectum the sheriff of Staffordshire states, that therewas only one borough in his bailiwick, namely, Stafford. Itwould therefore appear, that Tamworth was not then aborough.This inference is strongly confirmed by a roll in the18th of Edward II., by which it appears, that the men andtenants of the king, of Tamworth render an account of 1 16^.,for the farm of half of their town; — of which the primi facieimport is, that it was not then a borough : — the men, tenants,and town, being expressly spoken of; and the former notbeing called burgesses, or the latter a borough. And if itwas not then a borough, this document also shows, thatholding at fee-farm was not confined to boroughs alone, butextended to all the towns held of the king.And it appears not to have been treated as a borough inthe succeeding reign, as there was of that date a chartergranted to the meus and not the burgesses of Tamworth, of amarket and fair.^*RoiS.*"* There are also on the Parliament Rolls of this reign a fewentries, which it may be material to notice.1320. Thus as to Hastings and Pevensey, it appears, that themen of the former tom state,* that the town of Pevenese,with La Lowe, was always a member of the town of Hastings,and in the same liberty, and in lot and scot with the town ofHastings ; and they now claim to be independent.Here we find a distinct instance of the payment of scot and• Pet.Parl. n.60, p.377.PARLIAMENT ROLLS. 597lot, as an assumed consequence of being within the liberties, ^^' l^«or rather used as evidence of belonging to the place, itbeing apparently considered as the ordinary course, thatthose who paid scot and lot, belonged to the port, and thattheir doing so was proof of their appurtenances.Also the prior and convent of Daventry * pray a grant Daventry.of view o{ frank-pledge for them and their successors, inthe town of Westhadden in Northamptonshire j of theirown tenants and of others who come to the market ofthat town. An inquest, and a writ of ad quod damnumordered.Daventry, although not a parliamentary borough, is nowa corporation, and continues the jurisdiction given above.William Le Rous prays redress having purchased a tenet Villeinage.ment, and ousted out of it by a writ ofneifty (or villainage) ;from which it appears, that the doctrine of villainage was atthis time commonly acted upon.The commonalty of the county of Sussex complain, that commonalty.outlaws are harboured within the liberties of the CinquePorts within their county.Here we have the term commonalty (and the same occursafterwards as to Suffolk) applied to the body of the inhabitantsof the county, and that with reference to the receptionof outlaws contrary to the Saxon and common law.The abbot of Fumessj% in consequence of the lives of many 1325.persons having been sacrificed crossing the sands to Lancaster,prays to have a view of frank-pledge, and coroners of hisown ; also return of writs within the lands of Fumes.Here we have a petition for those privileges, which wehave so frequently had occasion to observe, were the foundationof exclusive jurisdictions.The commonalty of Suffolk complain, " that the chief 1314.pledges at leets and tourns of the sheriff*, present men falsely, asbeing guilty of articles of leets and tourns of the sheriff*, whenthey are not guilty ; and token the leets are held in the town of• Pet. Pari. n. 66, p. 378. t Pet. Pari. n. 27. p. 374.J P»*t. Pari. n. 73, p. 379. i Pet. Pari. n. 24, p. 436.II Pet. Pari. n. 24, p. 293.598 PARLIAMENT ROLLS.Edw. H. xohich the sub-bailiffs are, they procure themselves to be chiefpledges in the leets, to make advantage of their mysteries,and the more to damage them who have grieved them' &c.In this instance both the leets and toums are mentioned asin full use.1326. As illustrative of the law and practice with respect to thelevying of talliages upon the tenants in ancient demesne, andthe mode of collecting the revenue from the other places inthe county, not privileged or exempt from the sheriff's jurisdiction,the following document may be interesting.*The men and tenants of the towns of Sevenhampton^Stratton, and Heyworthj in Wiltshire, complained toKing Edward II.,+ that although they were not of theancient demesne of the crown, and were not wont to betalliaged in times past, or then lately, when the men andtenants of the king's ancient demesnes were talliaged, buthad constantly hitherto contributed with the men of thecommunity of the said county y to the common charges laidupon them ; nevertheless, the assessors of the talliage imposedin the 32nd year of the reign of King Edward I., andalso the assessors of the talliage imposed in the sixth year ofKing Edward II., did assess talliages upon the men andtenants of the said towns, just as if they had been of theancient demesne of the crown, whereas they were not ; andthat the sheriff oi the said county did now, by virtue of theSummons of the Exchequer, intend to levy the said talliagesupon the said men and tenants. Hereupon the king com-*>mandate the treasurer and barons of his Exchequer, to searchthe rolls and memoranda of the Exchequer relating to thesaid talliages, and if upon search, it appeared that the saidtowns were not of ancient demesne, and that the men of thesaid towns were not wont to be talliaged with the men of theking's ancient demesne then to acquit them of the said tallies.— The treasurer and barons caused search to be made,and in Domesday Book, the said towns were hoi found setdown under the title of Terra Regis. But the town of Seven-hamptonis there set down by the name of Sevamentone^• 19 Edward II. Rot. 38 b. f Mad. Fir. Burn p. 6.GUILDS. 599under the rubrick or title of Terra Wilhelm de Ow : and the l^^- H-town of Stratton, under the rubrick of Terra Nigelli Medici.But nothing was found in the said book touching the saidtown of Heyworth. Other rolls and records were alsosearched. And forasmuch as the court could get no information,that the said towns ought to be charged with the saidtaUiageSj it is adjudged that the said men be dischargedthereof.GUILDS.That guilds were distinct from the municipal government 1308.of boroughs, and the brethren of the guilds separate fromthe general body of the burgesses, has been already urgedfrom the clear language of the charters of King John.* Itappears also from many other collateral facts, occasionallyoccurring in the history of the several burghs.Thus in this year, it appears in a suit in the Exchequer, Niwca»ue-that William Sadler with ten others for the rest of the poor Tone.burgesses of their town, recovered 50/. damages of Nicholasde Carlisle and other burgesses of the ^uiZtf-merchant of Newcastleupon Tyne.tAnd in a document in this years one Robert Margrave is 1329.described as am^rcAan^ancf burgess of Newcastle-upon-Tyne.That the term "guild" meant only originally the commonpayment made by the inhabitants of the several districts intowhich the country was divided, whether of counties, hundreds,cities, or boroughs, without reference to any idea of incorporation,is clear from this, that generally speaking, the partof the county not included in any privileged district, wascalled " the reliable." And we have seen the constant useof the term " geldavit " in Domesday, as applied to all theseveral classes of districts.In this year also, we have a very distinct instance of the issueof the word in this sense. — thus the king being about togrant that Hampton in Gloucestershire should be a free Hampton.borough, directs by writ of ad quod damnum, that it should• xMad. Fir. Bur. 95. f Vide Mad. Fir. Bur. 05, 96.t 4 Ryui. Feed. 382.600 SCOTLAND.^^'^- ^^' be inquired to what the aforesaid town is " gildable " tothe king, and what it renders with certainty.Before we altogether quit the documents of this periodrelative to England it may be expedient to observe, thatthere were during this reign, several boroughs added to thenumber of those which returned before ; as Instead — Melcombe— Hull — Weymouth — Retford — ^Tavistock — CrickladeNorthampton — and some others.1321. And we should add, that this king also took some painsfor the digesting, arranging, and preserving the public rolls,*and other writings in the great public depositories of theExchequer, and the Tower of London ; directing the treasurerand barons of the Exchequer to employ proper persons forthat purpose, and suggesting that they were not at thattime disposed in such a manner as they ought to have been,for his and the public service.1323. And in the 16th year of his reign, made a similar order forall charters and other muniments touching his state andliberties in England — Ireland — Wales — and Scotland. Twopersons being appointed to examine and methodise them.SCOTLAND.Notwithstanding the directions given by the king for thepreservation, amongst others, of the records of Scotland, wefind no charters to illustrate our subject in this reign. Scotland,the scene of frequent wars, and its prince engaged incontending for his crown, afforded little opportunity for advancingthe arts of peace, or regarding the municipal government.This is however the period in which, in imitation of whathad before taken place in England, Robert Bruce first admittedburgesses into the Scotch Parliaments]:1326. And in the same year, a statute was made concerning recentdeforcement in boroughs, (analogous to our writs ofnovel disseisin,) which is to be found in the 135th chapterof the Leges Burgoruin.• Aylf.lnt.Cal. Cart. Ant. xxvi. t lb. 26. 1 1 Abcrc. 635.602 Ireland-DUBLIN. *Edw. 11. concerned the king, or his heirs, or the commonalty of the city ;that the mayor and citizens, and their heirs or successors uponany appeals, &c., within the city, be not committed by foreigners,but only by their fellow citizens ; unless the matterconcerned the king, or his heirs, or the commonalty of the city.That they be not accused in any plea of listening. Thatthey be not made sheriffs, coroners, controllers, or other bailiffs,or ministers of the king, or receivers of his moneys withoutthe city, contrary to their will, while they reside withinthe city; and no justices, bailiffs, or ministers, should takeaught of their goods or merchandises, against the will of theowners of such goods and merchandises, unless in the king'spresence, for his use; or for the fortifying of the castlesin the aforesaid parts, when, from any causes, it shouldbecome necessary to fortify them. That they might havethe assise of bread and beer; the custody and assay ofmeasures and weights, and of all other matters whatsoeverappertaining to the affair of a market in the city, for ever; sothat the clerk of the market, or any other minister might notenter the city, except only to oversee, approve, and examinethe standard of the city ; and to correct defects, found in thestandard. That all advantages arising from this kind ofassise and assay in the said city (the standard excepted)might belong to the mayor and citizens, their heirs and successors,in aid of their rents of the city ; saving nevertheless,that if any person should make complaint that the mayor andbailiffs were negligent in performing the premises ; then theking's justice in the land, for the time being, by himself, orby any other person, whom he should depute for that purpose,might, at the suit of such complainant, look into the matteron which such complaint be made : and if he lawfully findthe mayor and bailiffs negligent in the matter, that he thencause it to be redressed, as is meet, and duly punish themayor and bailiffs, reserving the fines and amerciaments ofthe mayor and bailiffs on this occasion ; and the penalty ofthat, which by the said justice, or his deputy, should happento be laid as aforesaid to the king. And also granted thatthe mayor and citizens, their heirs and successors, might forIRELAND.-WEXFORD.-CORK. 603ever be free from mirage pavage, pontage, ^c, and from all *^w- smothersuch like customs.Prom this charter it is evident, that the same privilegeswere granted to the city of Dublin, as we have before seen inthe numerous charters to the English boroughs ; and that theenjoyment of the privileges depended, by the express wordsof the charter, upon residence in the city; and that the substantialfoundation of the city rights, was the local jurisdictionexcluding the sheriff, and the other officers and ministers ofthe crown.A second charter was granted to Dublin in the tenth year J316.of this king's reign, giving to the citizens a confirmation andexemplification of King John's charter ; but to which it is notnecessary for us further to refer, the charter above sufficientlyestablishing the only point material fpr consideration.In this same year, Adomari de Valence, Earl of Pembroke, wexford.and lord of Wexford, granted to his burgesses of Wexford,that they should not be bound to answer for any plea, whichshould happen within the bounds of the borough, in thecastle, or elsewhere, except in the hundred of the same town.That they should be quit of toll, and all customs. That theyshould not be amerced, except by consent of the hundred,with the other usual clauses as to listening, distrainingfor debts, and the selling of cloth and wine by retail, exceptwith the consent of the superior and commonalty.This charter, it will be perceived, distinctly shows, thatthe castle of Wexford was, as we have observed before withrespect to the English boroughs, distinct from the borough ;and the exclusive jurisdiction is also established.Cork received an important charter at this period, which ^?'^*commences by reciting, that the citizens had, in times past,elected every year one of themselves to be mayor, who tookhis oath of office to the one who next preceded him, beforethe commonalty of the city, &c. But that the citizens hadbeen molested in the king's courts, by the assertion, thatsuch an oath ought to be made not elsewhere than in Dublin.That, in consequence of the distance of the city of Cork fromDublin, the violent insurrection and riot of the Irish people.604 Ireland-CORK.Edw. 11. there had never been free access from Cork to Dublin norwould there be for the future.The king therefore granted, that the mayor should infuture take his oath as had been accustomed. That thecitizens, their heirs and successors, citizens of the city ofCork, might for ever have the return of all writs, as well bysummons as attachments, of all and every the things arisingwithin the city, and the suburbs thereof. So that the king'sministers of Ireland should not meddle with the summonsor attachments, or the executions of any things arisingwithin the city, or the suburbs thereof, except for want ofa mayor and bailiffs, and for four pleas — viz. of rape,house-burning, forestalling, and treasuretrove, if in the city,or the suburbs thereof, they should happen. And of anythingsarising within the city, and the suburbs thereof,that were not by foreigners, except only such as agreethereto, unless the thing might touch the king, his ministers,or the commons of the city.That they should be free from murage, passage, carriage, andquayage; that they should not be put in assises, juries, or recognitions,to be taken on account of their lands and tenementslying without the city, or the suburbs thereof — so long as theyresided within the city, or the suburbs thereof, — that theymight the more quietly attend to their affairs and merchandises.That recognizances might, in the Court of Chanceryof Ireland, be executed of the lands, tenements, and rentswithin the city ; and that their recognizances have such forceas such recognizances made of lands, tenements, and rents,in the city of London, have had ; that the mayor and bailiffsof the city might have the assise of bread and beer, and theassay of weights and measures, in the city and suburbsaforesaid — so that none of the king's ministers of Irelandshould intermeddle therewith, except it be in the presence ofthe justices of Ireland, or lieutenants of the same land, beingwithin « the city, who, on complaint being made of the wantof keeping the assise and assay, might, on supervising andexamining the same, punish all transgressors that they found,in such manner as should befitting — excepting that the officersWaterford-YEAR B00KS.-SALI9BURY. goeof the markets in the land, if they were willing, once every ^<i^. u.year, might enter into the city, and the suburbs thereof, andmight do and execute, as requisite, all such things as therebelong to the office of the market.And there was also a charter granted to the citizens of isis.Waterford . "■"■"•"'This closes all that is necessary for us to add in this reignas to Ireland, It only remains for us to make some fewextracts from the important law treatises which are attributedto this period.YEAR BOOKS.A few extracts, relative to the subject of our researches,should here be added, as an introduction to the treatise ofthe Mirror, from which we shall hereafter make quotations ;as also for the purpose of establishing, that, although manyof the cities and boroughs, with their usages and customs,are mentioned in these records, there are no indications oftheir being corporations, which is strongly contrasted withthe appearance of corporate principles, with respect to theecclesiastical establishments.On the roll of this year, there appears to be an exception i309.of villainage, Fol.ai,And a plea for forestalling in the city of London upon the Fol, 55.statute, at the suit of the commonalty — the defendant having i-"™""-bought goods for a certain sum, and sold them for twice asmuch; and it was adjudged, that nothing should be takenby the plea, and the commonalty were in mercy.It is entered, that the Bishop of Salisbury brought his whit 1310.of nuisance against the commonalty of the will ; because gjjjjb^vthey had wrongfully set up a fair, to the injury of his fee-firmin the town.It was answered, that to have a fair vns a realty; andthat the bishop, being a religious person, could not claim bypurchase.' And it was also pleaded, that Salisbury was theking's city.■ RoLCart.SEdward n.n.3.606 YEAR Books-SALISBURY.— LYNN.^^« ^l' The commonalty set forth a charter, granting them a fairfrom which it is clear, that the conflicting interests andjurisdictions of the bishop and city, were even at this earlyperiod, brought into opposition — which appears again, in areplevin brought by the burgesses, in Michaelmas Term, the8th of Edward II., where they claim common appendant totheir *' burgages,^' which are alleged to be nothing more thanahouse in the town of a borough. And the same questionarises again, in Trinity Term, the 7th of Edward IL, whereSalisbury is described as the borough of the king. Andalthough these records of Salisbury are numerous and long,there is no mention of its being a corporation.1310. In four replevins, brought by four persons separately, theBishop of Norwich avoided, upon a custom, that he waslord of the town of Lenne, in which there was a custom,Lynn, that the commonalty of Lenne ought to come to the courtof the bishop, on the Monday after St. Michael, there toelect one of themselves, by whom they would answer to theprovost of the bishop, to levy his rents and spleen of hismanor. That the bishop had seized the cattle of two individuals,as tenants of the conmionalty of Lenne.Common It was urged, that this was not, like a custom, regardingeach person separately ; but it is to a commonalty as onebody — in which case, they can only proceed by distress.Here we have a direct reference to a commonalty as anaggregate body ; but it is not mentioned as a corporation —which could hardly have been avoided, if there had been anypretence for so treating it at that time. This, therefore,seems a strong proof and confirmation of what we havebefore adduced, to show that there were no corporations atthis period: for this is a long record, and states fully everythingrespecting Lynn, — as, that a predecessor of thebishop's had granted to the town of Lynn, the franchisesand customs which the citizens of Norwich had ; — and that,in the time of King Henry, the commonalty were dischargedof the custom and election — so that the provost was to beelected on the part of the bishop.The absence of all reference to any corporate character ofYEAR BOOKS.->CINQU£ PORTS.— SOUTHAMPTON. 607the commonalty y or allusion to their successors is the more ^^' II*striking — because the predecessors of the bishop are repeatedlymentioned.In a long record respecting the Abbot of Battle, the bailiffs 1311.of the Cinque Ports are mentioned ; and that a place calledDigmar was a member of the manor of Romney, which isone of the Cinque Ports. That all who were in the precinct pom.*of the five ports, ought not to plead but at Shepway. Therecord then alleges, that the two persons who are mentioned,were resident in Digmar, and demanded the franchise, whichhad been granted by King Edward, that they should pleadat Shepway, and not elsewhere. ,Here again there is no mention of the Cinque Ports asincorporated, nor of their successors, although the predecessorof the abbot is spoken of; and the claim of theprivileges here demanded is expressly upon the ground ofreliance.One avows, as bailiff of Southampton, which is stated to ^i?^^*be held in fee-farm of the king, to pay at the Exchequer, South -4/. and 40 marks per annum ; and that all those who came tothe town to sell or buy, ought to pay toll, if they were not enfranchised.The complainant was said to be a man of thebishop's, all of whose men ought to be quit of toll, of whatthings they purchased. But if they purchased nothing, butsold, they ought to pay toll, as other people.Another instance of the freedom from toll, claimed by themen of the bishop, as belonging to the church.In the 12th of Edward II., we find an instance of a writ 1318.of Neifty being brought ; and another in folio 358. ^^^' ^^'Certain tenements were demanded in different towns, i-^^^*some of which were the franchise of Ely ; and the bailiff of ° '. "the franchise came and demanded the franchise.In the 15th of Edward II., the master of an hospital 1321.brings a writ, claiming certain tenements — and alleges, that ° *the defendant had no title but through his predecessor, whohad leased to him without the consent of the brothers, &c. ;but it appeared that they had no common seal — and it washeld that the assent was not necessary. So that, although608 I've MIRROR.^^' ^^' the religious bodies certainly at that time had many of theappearances of corporations yet, from this record, it seemsclear, that the doctrine of corporation was not then generallyknown, nor its results much practised. And here the consentof the whole, even of a religious body, was held not tobe requisite.1323. The common seal of a prior is subsequently mentioned,as well as his predecessors, and with the consent of theconvent he grants the tithes; and it is added, that whatthe prior demanded was in perpetuity. So that this doctrineof perpetual succession, with respect to religious houses,was then entertained, and doubtless gave birth to the statutesof mortmain, as applicable to those bodies ; but it does notappear that the same doctrines were applied to the municipalcorporations.THE MIRROR.In the reign of Heniy II. we have extracted and commentedupon the early compilation of our common law,which passes under the name of the " Justiciary Glanville."In the reign of Henry III. the compilations of " Bracton "and " Bretton."In the reign of Edward I. we find a treatise called Flea,and to the present reign is attributed — whether justly or notmay be questioned — the " Mirror of Justices," purportingto have been originally written in the old French, before theConquest, but edited by Home, the chamberlain of London,as it is said, in this reign. It is, however, evident, that aconsiderable portion of the work is of great antiquity,although it is equally clear, that many passages in it are ofmodem introduction.The parts material to our inquiry are probably of veryearly origin, and may with safety be ascribed either to this oranearlier period ; for instance, in the 2d section of the 1st chap-cap.l. ter, the division of the country into centuries or hundreds,and that to every century there was a center or hundred,is stated ; and this unquestionably belonged to the earliestperiods of our history.THE MIRROR. 609In order to illustrate the positions we have before urged, ^^' ^^^it is here material to note, that every center or hundredhad assigned to him his part by metes and bounds, which hewas to keep and defend. Clearly establishing the principleof local jurisdiction, to which we hate so frequently referred ;and which is so important a clue to unravel the intricaciesof our modem corporation law.The chapter proceeds to state, that these divisions insome places are called hundreds, according to the originalnumber of the persons contained in them : — in other places,tithing according to the English phrase : — and in others,wapentakeSy the Saxon term for the taking of arms. And it isadded, that ^^ by these divisions, peace, which consisted incharity and true love, was kept and maintained."In the 3d section of the same chapter, it is stated, that the Sec. 3.toums of sheriffs, or views of free-pledges, were ordained ;which explains the passage we have seen in many of thecharters. It was likewise directed, that none of the age of14 years or above, was to remain in the realm above 40 days(a period frequently mentioned in this compilation), if theywere not first sworn to the king, by an oath of fealty, andreceived into a decennary.In the 9th section of the same chapter, the different cuss Sec. 9.toties in which persons might be placed are enumerated,and amongst them men of religion in the custody of theabbots — villains in the custody of their lords — which explainsthe reason why they were not respectively liable todosuit at the court leet, because they were in the custodyormanupast of the abbots and lords.In the 10th section, the holding of the sherifTs tourn, and Sec. 10.views of frank-pledge, once in the year, is mentioned.In the 13th section, the coroners are directed to inquire Sec. 13.in what pledges criminals were, or of what decennary, or ofwhom maintained, and in whose ward. The pannels ofjurors for coroners are directed to be of defenders ; forcoroners at these inquests, sheriffs at their tourns, bailiffs attheir views of frank-pledges, escheators, and the king'sofficers of his forests, have power, by authority of theirR R610 THE MIRROR.Kdw. II. office, to send for the people, which none others havewithout the king's writ, and that is for the keeping of thepeace, for the right of the king, and for the commonpeople.Sec. 17. The 17th section applies solely to views of frank-pledge,and the articles of inquiry at these courts. They are to beheldonce in the year; and (which is decisive against theexclusive right claimed by freeholders in some boroughs),they are to be not only of the freeholders, but of all personswithin the hundred: — Strangers (that is, those who have notbeen there for a year and a day), denizens of the age of12 years and upwards; except archbishops, bishops, abbots,priors, religious persons, and all clerks, earls, barons, knights,femes coverts, deaf, dumb, sick, idiots, infected persons,and those who were not in any dozein. And the inquiry isto be not by villains or women, but by the afferent offreemen at the least.ViilaiaH. ^g illustrative of the incapacity of villains, and of thosewho were not law-worthy, it is stated, that a villain cannotindict a freeman, nor any other who is not receivable to dosuit in inferior courts, and therefore it was anciently ordained,that none should remain in the realm if he were notin some decennary and pledge of freemen ; and it belongedto the hundred once a year to show the frank-pledges, andthe pledgers, and therefore are the views called the view offrank-pledges.Amongst the articles, it is provided, that they should declarewhether all who ought to appear do so, or not — and if allthe freemen of the hundred and the fees be present — ^if all thefrank-pledges have their dozeins entire, and all those whomthey have in pledge — if all those of the hundred, or of thefees of the age of 12 years and above, have sworn fealty tothe king, and of receivers of others wittingly, as of outlaws,&c.y ^^^ In confirmation of what we have before urged with respect tobanim. . .places not capable of continuing their local] jurisdictions, as OldSarum, &c., it is stated, that what cannot be redressed at theview of frank-pledge by these presentments, is presentable at theTHE MIRROR. 611sheriff's first tourn; so that the instant any place having a Edw.ll.court leet, ceased to present that which was inquirable atthe leet, the jurisdiction of it immediately revelled to thesheriff and his tourn ; by which simple expedient, the dueinquiry into these matters was certainly preserved, and at thesame time, the local jurisdiction of the district adjusted itselfby the ordinary course of proceeding, to the varying changesof population.Amongst the outlaws, are classed those who were not inallegiance under the king ; and they and their goods were tobe seized. And it is added — if any one proffer himself toswear fealty to the king, he is first to be pledged in somefrank-pledge, and put in decennary, and afterwards swornto the king; and then enjoined obedience to his chiefpledge.In the second section of the second chapter, relative to S^^'o^'judges, it is stated, that women are forbidden to be judges ;and thence it is, that femes coverts are excused from doingservice in inferior courts.On the other part, a villain cannot be a judge, by reasonof the two estates, which are repugnant; and thus the chaptercontinues with respect to other incapacities.In the fourth section, the liability to do suit in another fee, ^^^' ^'by reason of residence or dwelling, is expressly mentioned —a strong confirmation of the local duties which result fromresidence.In the 24th section, we have, as in Fleta, some trace of ^^- ^^*the doctrine of corporations ; but it is confined here, as itwas also in that treatise, to ecclesiastical bodies. It is said,of goods which are in common, no several action lieth ; andtherefore of goods which belong to men of religion, the actionbelongeth to the sovereign of the house, in his name,for him and his convent," &c.In the 25th section, the term " corporation " occurs, but it Sec 25.does not appear distinctly in that passage, to what it relates ;but considering it with reference to our former extract, it wouldseem to be also applicable to ecclesiastical corporationshaving franchises, of many of which they were possessed.R r2(j]2 THE MIRROR.Kdw. 11. We have also a confirmation of that law to which we haveVillains, before alluded — making the villains entirely dependent upontheir lords ; — for " it is forbidden to villains to bring an actionof novel disseisin, or redisseisin, without their lord ; forasmuchas they are in the custody of their lords." And inthe 28th section it is said, they can purchase nothing but tothe lords' use.Sec. 28. The 28th section relates entirely to villainage and neifty,to the same effect as the same heads in Glanville, Bracton,Britton, and Fleta.The writ de nativo habendo is referred to, as well as themode of villains acquiring freedom by grants from theirlords, of any free state of inheritance, to descend to theirheirs — with several other modes of effecting the same purpose,particularly that one which, in some degree, bears uponour present inquiry, of a villain being put as a juror amongstfreemen, without the lord's claim; and other instances offreedom, acquired by the neglect or default of the lord, particularlyas in Glanville, by the villain remaining within acity, or upon the king's demesne, for one whole year ; or if avillain is a suitor in another court, &c.A definition is here given of the term, for it is said, " villainsare tillers of lands, dwelling in upland villages ; for ofville, Cometh villain — of borough, burgess — and of city,"citizen:" and of villains, mention is made in the GreatCharter of liberties.Sec. 29. In the 29th section it is stated, that neither villains, norinfamous persons, can be summoners.Sec. 30. In the 30th section, burgages are mentioned.Cap. 3. In the third section of the third chapter, it is said, " that"no one within a franchise has any jurisdiction of a thingdone in the gildableJ" Here the distinction between thecity, borough, and franchise, on the one hand, and thecounty or gildable on the other, to which we have beforereferred, is expressly recognized.Sec. 14. The 14th section of the same chapter says, that " to anapprover it may be answered thus — I am a true man, swornFrankpledge." to the king, and within a frank-pledge ; — and the appro-theMirrors-FREEDOM. 613ver is a felon attainted and out of the king's protection, ^^'^- ii-andby consequence, out of the king's peace, wherebyhe hath lost his free voice, and every right and action, so'^ as he is not to be admitted in any action no more than aman who is outlawed by judgment." From which passagewe may collect on the one hand, the effect of being in frankpledge,and of being " law-worthy* as we have seen before,and on the other hand, the total loss of civil rights byattainder.In the 18th section of the same chapter, privileged places, Sec. 18.where the king's writ iimneth not of an act done in aforeign place, nor ^ contra, in a franchise, of an act done in agildable, are again mentioned.Places enfranchised, and the gildable, again occur in the Sec. 23.23rd section ; and also the plea of freedom, by fine, stock, orbirth, to an action of villainage, and also the writ de liberateprobanda. It is also stated, that ** freedom is never lost byprescription of time ;" which has led to the common position,that once free, always free ; and from which in a great degreearose the abuse of non-resident freemen. For it was supposed,that if this doctrine was accurate, when a person had oncebeen admitted as a freeman of a particular place, he alwayscontinued so, and was entitled to all the privileges ; assumingthat the being recognized as a freeman, gave him all therights of a citizen or burgess — whereas, the being of freecondition was only a precedent qualification for either ofthose situations; to which they were not entitled, unless theywere inhabitant householders of, and belong in ff to, the cityor borough : — a distinction, which being overlooked, has led tothe common error of confounding freemen with citizens andburgesses, both with reference to municipal and parliamentaryrights.In several places, reference is made, as in our former lawauthorities, to females not being bound to be in frankpledge,nor being capable of outlawry ; which circumstances are thereal ground also of their not being admissible as citizens orburgesses.The presentments by sheriffs and bailiffs, in louis and 9*^* ^'I614 THE MIRROR.Edw. II. views of frank-pledge, are mentioned. In the articles of Eyre,the claimers of franchises is one.Sec. 22. In the 22nd section, it is expressly stated, that it islawful for every one who finder himself grieved, to sue forthe king, to seize every franchise forfeited for contumacy —as if the bailiff of a franchise do not execution of the returnof the sheriff, according to the demand of the king ; or forany abuse — as by using his franchise too largely, not duly.And the writ commands the sheriff to enter the franchise,and the king doth recover the seizure thereof, and so thesame became gildable which was before a franchise.Here the doctrine for which we have before contended, ofthe return of every place which was seized into the king'shand, to the jurisdiction of the sheriff, is most distinctly andunequivocally propounded.Sec. 27. Another article of the Eyre, is as to outlaws, and thenames of their pledges, and whether they were in dozein orfrank-pledge.Cap. 5. The first section of the fifth chapter, contains an enumerationof the abuses of the law — the sixth is, that itis an abuse to suffer any to be in the realm above 40 days,who is of the age of 14, and not sworn to the king, and insome pledge or dozein. And the same occurs again in theSec. 65, 65th. The 89th states, that a villain is not a villain, but soB9,9l. .long as he remaineth in custody; and the 91st section describesit as an abuse, that others suffer villains to be in theirviews of frank-pledge.In the enumeration of the seven punishments inflictedby Alfred, for false judgments, it is said, that he hanged thesuitors of Dorchester, because they judged a man to death,by jurors in their liberty, for a felony which he did out oftheir liberty, and whereof they had not the cognizance, byreason of foreign — than which, a more decisive mark of theprecise limits within which local jurisdictions were restrained,cannot possibly be cited.Sec. 37. The 37th section refers to a forfeiture for a similar offence,in taking a person for a felony done out of the liberty, in thegildable.CONCLUSION. 615The 116th also speaks of privileged places, where the ii^dw.ii.king's writ runneth not, and of franchises and the gildable. See. im.The 144th section says, that it is an abuse that trespassers Sec. 144.who have nothing, are not banished from towns, counties,manors, and hundreds, as they used to be — the real originof the doctrine and practice of disfranchisement.The second section of the same chapter, which relates to See. 2.the defects of the Great Charter, refers to those liberties of ^°*'^°-London which are sufferable by law, and not repugnant toitAnd it is said, that the interpretation of their charters,be the same as those of the Cinque Ports and other places — p*°^®a strong confirmatory proof of the uniformity of the privilegesof all boroughs.The obligation upon merchants to be sworn to the king, ifthey stay longer than 40 days in the realm, is recognized.The remainder of this compilation, relates to the subjectmatter contained in the statutes, from which we have alreadymade our extracts, with illustrative comments.We have now closed the extracts from the statutes, char Conclusionters, documents, and laws occurring in this reign, whichrelate to the subject of our inquiry; and the clear result is,that the general law and the municipal institutions still continuedto be in strict uniformity with the Saxon law — thatthe great distinction in orders of men between the villainsand free, still existed — the system of frank-pledge continued— those of free condition, were sworn and enrolled atthe court leet. And notwithstanding the assertion to which wehave before alluded, of a great revolution having been effectedin the grounds and mode of admission of freemen, it seemsto be without foundation, as no trace whatever appearsof it in any of the certain records of information to which wehave referred ; nor, in truth, is it possible that such a revolutioncould have occurred ; for at the time we are speaking of, noother class of freemen but the liberi homines, defined by thecommon law, existed, or were even thought of; and theprinciples, as well as the practice, upon which the freemenwere admitted, sworn, and enrolled, were all derived from616 CONCLUSION.Edw.ll. the common law. Nor could there be any authority forswearingthem, but under that law — for it was always,upon principle, illegal to administer any oath, but by dueauthority of law ; and there is none, either then, or whichat any time since has existed, for swearing the freemenof corporations merely as such; nor has any right everbeen suggested, or supposed to exist, except under the lawof the court leet; and therefore in practice, the oath of afreeman, even to this day, is in fact taken with reference tothe law of the court leet, and contains, as it ought by thatlaw, the oath of allegiance. The concurring testimony,therefore, of all documents, and even of practice, to the presenttime, tends to deny the great revolution suggested, whichwould, indeed, seem to carry along with itself, its own refutation,for it is founded on no express authority; and such achange could not have been effected, without leaving behindit some traces of the occurrence.The modem notions of freemen of corporations, is foundedupon mere misapprehension, arising from forgetfulness of theorigin and nature of these things, and omitting to distinguishand discern the course of events. The admission and swearingof freemen, who are, in consequence of such admissionand swearing, entitled to be of the body of incorporatedcitizens and burgesses, is mistakenly referred, as well as theprivileges of admission by birth, marriage, and service, tosome supposed peculiar right or law of corporations ; but novestige of any such provisions is to be found in our ancient laws,statutes, or charters ; nor is there any authority in either theprinciples or practice of our institutions for adopting such aterniy as that of ^^ freemen of corporations :'' — and it seems amost extraordinary gratuitous assumption, to attribute thesethings to some unknown and undiscoverable cause, of whichthere is no evidence, when there is a clear, known, and allowedsource, to which they may be attributed. Thus to assumethat the freemen by birth, marriage, and service, are connectedwith any peculiar undefined and unproved corporate rights,is most absurd, when they have so distinct an explanationin the "liberi homines'' of the common law, and the un-conclusion.617varying course of ascertaining the right to freedom by birth, ^^- ^l*or other circumstances, to which the statutes, charters, andlaw treatises which we have quoted, every where refer. Thedirect and simple mode therefore, in which the ancient law,and modem practice is to be reconciled, is this : — that theancient liberi homines, were those, who by birth, marriage,service, or other probable acts, could be shown to be of freecondition : — and who actually having a house, or domicile inacity or borough, were, in the strictest sense of the word, themen q/*, and belonging to that city or borough, and who, as anecessary consequence of inhabiting such houses, were boundby law, to pay the scot, or pecuniary contributions to thecommon burdens of the place ; and also to execute the publicoffices and functions, which came to them in due rotation,and which is, in the language of antiquity, familiar however,even to these times, performing lot ; and who in consequenceof their resiancy, were entitled at any period, and bound afterthe expiration of a year, under the penalty of amercement, toattend at the court leet, and there be enrolled, giving theirpledges, and taking the oath of allegiance ; and these liberihomines, or freemen of the boroughs, were the burgesses, whoin subsequent times, had superadded to the original commonlaw privileges, or duties, the power of taking lands or possessionsin their common name, and by succession, and ofsuing, and being sued by one common name ; and which, intruth, and nothing else, gave them the superinduced rightsand privileges of incorporations, — the state in which we nowfind them.Thus it is clear that there has been no change ; the classof burgesses has ever continued the same — and the privilegesof all the boroughs in England, Ireland, Scotland,and Wales have, in effect, been similar. Nor was anychange at all effected even in the form of their creation, orthe language of the charters of confirmation or new grant,excepting only, that in the last reign, and in this, theterm ** successors y*' was added to that of heirs; the latterterm being borrowed, as we have seen, from the ecclesiasticaldocuments and charters, and being undoubtedly618 CONCLUSION.Edw. 11. properly applicable to aggregate bodies, ivho did, in fact,enjoy by succession, though not at that time by any realor supposed corporate right, for no such principles werethen applicable to municipal bodies. This matter has beenput upon such clear and distinct grounds, and supported bysuch indisputable authorities in Mr. Madox s Firma Burgh,that it is unnecessary to add to his facts or reasoning, as itis impossible to increase their weight or cogency.EDWARD III.1327 In entering upon the records of this reign, we shall adopt1377. a similar division of the subject to that which we have previouslypursued ; premising only, that it was at this periodjustices of the peace were first established.STATUTES.1327. With respect to the statutes, we find in the 1st of .2. * .Cap. 5. ward III. the local liability towards claims of the state, towhich we have made frequent allusion, is again recognizedby a provision, which declares that no man should be chargeableto arm himself otherwise than as he was wont in the timeof the king's progenitors ; and that no man should be compelledto go out of his shire but when special necessityrequired.Cap. 9. In the 9th chapter it is declared, cities arid boroughs andfranchised towns shall enjoy their franchises customs andusages as they ought and were wont to do.Cap. 11. And in the lath chapter, indictments before sheriffs intheir touruy are mentioned.Cap. 17. The 17th chapter provides, that the sheriffs and bailiffs offranchises, and all other that do take indictments in theirtoums, or elsewhere, where indictments ought to be made,(which would at that time include the leets,) shall take suchSTATUTES. eiindictment by roll indented, whereof the one part shall remain ^^- m*with the indicator and the other part with him that takeththe inquest.In the statutes made at Northampton, in the 3d chapter, 1328.which relates to the going armed, it is enacted that no man, North-exceptthe hinges servants j in his presence, &c. ; and also upon Cap. 3.a cry made far arms to keep the peace j ^c, shall be so hardy asto come before the hinges justices j or other of the king'sministers doing their of&ce, with fire and arms, upon pain toforfeit their armour to the king, and their bodies to prisonat the king's pleasure. And that the king's justices, in theirpresence, sheriffs, and other ministers in their bailiwick, lordsof franchises, and their bailifis in the same, and mayors andbailiffs of cities and boroughs, within the same cities andboroughs, and borough-holders, constables, and wardens ofthe peace within their wards, shall have power to executethis act.In this statute we have a reference to the Hue and Cry,which occurred so frequently in the early laws. We havelikewise a distinct enumeration of the king's officers for thepreservation of the peace, according to the different localdivisions of the county into shires — franchises — cities —boroughs and wards.The next chapter, which relates to the confirmation of the Cap. 4.statute of Lincoln, refers again to the same officers, with theaddition also of the hundreds. And in conformity withthe previous statute, directs, that all sheriffs, hundreds,and bailiffs, should have lands in their shires or bailiwicks ;that sheriffs and bailiffs of fees, should cause their countiesand bailiwicks to be kept by such as have lands.Probably this was one of the earliest instances in whichthe necessity of having lands was attached as a qualificationfor the exercise of any office.The 9th chapter directs, amongst other things, in conform Cap. 9.city with the Great Charter, that all merchant strangers' Strangers.merchandises might come and go into England. That writsthereupon should be sent to all sheriffs of England, andto the mayors and bailiffs of towns.620 STATUTES.Edw. III. In this statute we perceive a recognition of the provisionswith respect to merchant strangers, which occur sofrequently in the charters we have quoted, and a recognitionagain of the local divisions into shires and towns. The sameprovisions are repeated in the 14th of Edward III. stat. 3,chap. 2, with a saving of the franchises and free customsgranted to the city of London, and other cities, boroughs,and good towns of the realm.Cap. 12. The 12th chapter of the same act relates to the fernswhich had been paid for hundreds and wapentakes, and providesfor their annexation to the farm of the counties byreciting.That all the counties in England were, in old time, assessedto a certain /<?nit, and then were all the hundreds and wakensin the sheriff's hands, rated to thisferm ; and after wereapprovers sent into divers counties, which did increase theferms of some hundreds and wapentakes. " And after, thekings, at divers times, have granted to many men, part ofthe same hundreds and wapentakes, for the old ferms only ;and now late, the sheriffs be wholly charged of the increase,'^ which amounted to a great sum, to the great hurt of thepeople, and disherison of the sheriff and their heirs — it isordained, that the hundreds and wapentakes let to fern bythe king that now is, be it for term of life or otherwise,which were sometimes annexed to the ferms of the counties,when the sheriffs be charged, shall be joined again to the** counties ; and that the sheriffs and their heirs have allowancefor the time that is past ; and that from henceforth,such hundreds and wapentakes shall not be given or severedfrom the counties."These provisions were, in all probability, intended to correctthe abuses in this respect, which had been introduced bythe favouritism of Edward II. ; and they are material to ourpresent investigation, as showing the jealousy with whichthe ancient local divisions were maintained — a proof of whichoccurs again in the 14th of Edward III., chap. 9.1330. The qualification of possessing lands, was also exteudeil ix*^* ' other officers, and the reason of it stated in the 4 th of EdwarditSTATUTES. 621III., chap. 9, whereby it was directed, that no sheriff, bailiff ^^^ l^^*of hundred, wapentake, nor of franchise, nor under-escheated,shall be from henceforth, except they have lands sufficient inthe place where they be ministers, whereof to answer theking and his people, in case that any man complain againstthem, as was ordained at the Parliament at Lincoln; andwhich by the 5th of Edward III., chap. 4, is extended alsoto tithings ; and by the 14th of Edward III., to the clerks ofrecognizances in cities and boroughs.The 6th of Edward III., chap. 14, recites, that in the q^^\^statute of Winchester, it is contained, that if any strangerpass by the country in the night, of whom any have suspicion,he shall presently be arrested and delivered to the sheriff, andremain in ward, till he be duly delivered. And because therehave been divers manslaughters, felonies, and robberies donein times past, by people that be called roberdesmen, wasters,and draw-latches, — " it is accorded, that if any may haveany evil suspicion of such, be it by day or by night, theyshall be incontinently arrested by the constables of the towns.And if they be arrested within franchises, they shall be deliveredto the bailiffs of the franchises ; and if in gildable,they shall be delivered to the sheriffs, and kept in prison tillthe coming down of the justices assigned to deliver the gaol.And in the mean time, the sheriffs or bailiffs of the franchisesshall inquire of such arrests," &c.Here we have again a recognition of the distinction betweenthe gildable, or county, and the franchises, with theirrespective officers to keep the peace of the king.In this year. Parliament granted a fifteenth, from the per- i333.sonal estates of the nobility and gentry, and a tenth of themoveables of the burgesses. And their importance seems at 1335.that time to have increased, and was generally recognized, aswe shortly afterwards find express mention made of them asone component part of the House of Commons, and aredescribed as belonging to the local divisions of the county, inastatute reciting — "That whereas, before this time in manyParliaments, and now at this present Parliament summonedat York, it was showed to our said lord the king, by the(J22 STATUTES.Edw. III. knights of the shires, citizens of the cities, and " burgesses ofthe boroughs," which come for the commons of the said shires,cities, and boroughs, that in divers cities, boroughs, and otherplaces of his realm, great damage has been done to him andhis people, by some people of cities, boroughs, ports of thesea, and other places of the said realm, which will not suffermerchant strangers to sell or deliver such wines, livings,victuals, nor other things, to any other than themselves ofthe cities, boroughs, ports of the sea, or other places, by reasonwhereof such stuff as aforesaid is sold to the king and tohis people, in the hands of the said citizens, burgesses, andother people, denizens, more dear than they should be, ifsuch merchant strangers might freely sell them to whom theywould, to the great damage of our lord the king*' &c.The reader will trace in this recital, the grievances whichin all probability arose from usages and bye-laws, such asthose adopted by the Cinque Ports, in the custumals we havebefore quoted.And to remedy these grievances, it was ordained, '^ That allmerchants, strangers, and denizens, who will buy or sellcom, &c., and all other things vendible, from whencesoeverthey come, by foreigners or denizens, at what place soeverit be, city, borough, town, port of the sea, fair, market, orelsewhere within the realm, within franchise or without, mayfreely, without interruption, sell them to what persons it shallplease them, as well to foreigners as denizens. And if haplyany disturbance be done to any merchant, stranger, or denizen,or any other, for the sale of such things in any city,borough, town, port of the sea, or other place which hathfranchise ; and the mayors and bailiffs, or other which haththe rule of such franchise, being required by the said merchantsor other, thereof to provide remedy, and do not, andbe thereof attainted, the franchise shall be seized into theking's hands. And nevertheless, he and the other whichhath done this disturbance against this statute, shall be boundto yield and restore to the said merchant, his double damageswhich he hath thereby sustained. And if such disturbanceor interruption be done to such merchants, or to other, in suchSTATUTES. g23towns or places where no franchise is, and the lord, if he be ^^' m*present, or his bailiff, constable, or other ruler of the saidtowns and places, in the absence of the lords, being thereinrequired to do right, and do not, and thereof be attainted,they shall yield to the party plaintiff his double damages,as afore is said ; and the disturbers in the one case and theother, as well within franchises as without, if they be attainted,shall have one year's imprisonment, and nevertheless, be ransomedat the king's will." '* And it is enacted and established,that the things aforesaid shall be observed, performed, andkept in every city, borough, town, port of the sea, and otherplaces within the realm, notwithstanding charters of franchisegranted to them in usage and custom to the contrary."Here we have not only the king's officers in the cities andboroughs expressly mentioned, as having the rule of suchfranchises, but we have also the distinction pointed outbetween the enfranchised places, and those which have nofranchises.In the statute of the 10th of Edward III., after the king, 1336.the prelates, earls, barons, and others of the king's council,the commons are expressly mentioned.In the statute of the 23d of Edward III, chapter 7, relay 1349.Cap. 7.time to beggars, we find an expression, which seems stronglyto mark the difference between cities, boroughs, and markettowns, and opposed to the opinion expressed by Brady andother authors, that they were identical.It is there provided, that the writs sent in pursuance ofthat statute, should be proclaimed in the cities, boroughs,market towns, and ports of the sea.The 2dchapterof the statute of Labourers, 2dth Edward III. I35i.prohibits the departing in the summer from the town, wherethe individual had dwelt in the winter — ^which is anotherstrong instance of the prohibitions denounced by the lawfrom the earliest periods against vagrancy, and for the purposeof providing fixed residences.Residence appears, from the earliest periods of our history. Residence,to have been a most important consideration, and that whichregulated the greater proportion of the relations of life.624 STATUTES.Edw. III. Thus it was agreed in Parliament in this year, that Lombbards and other merchant strangers should be taxed wherethey dwelt, as other merchants denizens.1342. The same policy which pervaded the common law of Eng-i.aw. land, requiring every man to do his suit in the place wherehe resided, is observable also in the canon law. By theconstitution of Archbishop Stratford, made at London in the16th year of the reign of Edward III. A. D. 1342, there is aclause particularly providing, that no person should sufferecclesiastical punishment but in the place where he inhabited;first, because there his offence is known ; and next,on the ground of unnecessary trouble and expence to theparty punished.*1349. 23d Edward III. chapter 1. — This statute, as to the serviceof those who are not able to support themselves, provides," That evert man and woman of our realm of England,of what condition he he^free or bond, able in body, and withinthe age of three-score years, not living in merchandise, norexercising any craft, nor having of his own whereof he maylive, nor proper land, about whose tillage he may himselfoccupy, and not serving any other, — if he in convenient service,his estate considered, be required to serve, he shall bebounden to serve him which so shall him require ; and takethe only wages, allowances, rewards, or salary, which wereaccustomed to be given in the places where he oweth to serve,in the twentieth year of our reign of England, or five or sixother common years next before. Provided always, that thelords be preferred before other in their bondmen, or their landtenants, so in their service to be retained ; so that neverthelessthe said lords shall retain no more than be necessary forthem ; and if any such man or woman being so required toserve, will not the same do, that proved by two true menbefore the sheriff (or the bailiffs of our sovereign lord theking, or the constables,) of the town where the same shallhappen to be done, he shall anon be taken by them, or anyof them, and committed to the next gaol, there to remainLand. in fine, p. 52.STATUTES.— LONDON. asunderstrait keeping till he find surety to serve in the form Edw. ill.aforesaid."This and the following statute clearly establish, that vil vicinage.manage was at this period in full use ; and that the greatdistinction between freemen and villains was palpably discernible.In the 25th of Edward III. it was provided, *that not J350.Stat. 5.withstanding adjournment made in Eyre, by wnt of libertate Cap. 18.probanda, purchased in favour of villains, to delay the lordsof their actions of such villains, the same lord shall be receivedto allege the exception of villainage against theirvillains in all writs, whether that the said writs of libertateprobanda were purchased by deceit, or in other manner;and that the lords may seize the bodies of their villains, aswell as they might before that the writs of libertate probandawere ordained or purchased."28 Edward III. chap. 10.* — ^^This statute for the correction ^^3^-Cap. 10.of abuses in London, provides, " Because the errors, defaults,and misprisions which be notoriously used in the city ofLondon, for default of good governance of the mayor, sheriffs, London,and aldermen, cannot be inquired nor found by people of thesame city ; it is ordained and established, that the said mayor,sheriffs, and aldermen, which have the governance of thesame city, shall cause to be corrected these defaults, errors,and misprisions, and the same duly punish, upon a certainpain : that is to say, at the first default, a thousand marksto the king; and at the second default, two thousand marks ;and at the third default, that the franchise and liberty of thecity be taken in the king's hand: to be inquired into atSt Michael next coming, so that if they do not cause to bemade due redress as aforesaid, it shall be inquired of theirdefaults by inquests of people of foreign counties ; that is tosay, of Kent, Essex, Sussex, Hertford, Buckingham, andBerks, as well at the king's suit as others that will complain.And if the (mayors,) sheriffs, and aldermen be by such inquests(thereto assigned) indicted, they shall be caused tocome by due process before the king's justices, which shall• Mag. Rot. Tur. Lord.SS62G Statutes-LONDON.£dw. III. be to the same assigned out of the said city, before whomthey shall have their answer, as well to the king as to theparty ; and if they put (them in) inquests, the same shall betakenby foreign people as afore is said ; and if they be attainted,the said pain shall incur and be levied of the saidmayor, sheriffs and aldermen, for default of their governance ;and nevertheless the plaintiffs shall recover (the) trebledamages against the said mayor, sheriffs and aldermen. Andbecause that the sheriffs of London be parties to this business,the constable of the Tower, or his lieutenant, shall servein the place of the sheriffs to receive the writs, as well originalsof the Chancery, as judicial, under the seal of thejustices, to do thereof execution in the said city ; and processshall be made by attachment and distress, and by exigent,if need be ; so that, at the king's suit, the exigent shall beawarded after the first capias returned, and at the third capiasreturned at the suit of the party : And if the mayor, sheriffs,and aldermen, have lands or tenements out of the city, processshall be made against them by attachments and distressesin the same counties where the lands or tenementsbe : And that every of the said mayors, sheriffs, and aldermen,which do appear before the said justices, shall answer particularlyfor himself, as well at the peril of other which beabsent as of himself: And this ordinance shall be holdenfirm and stable, notwithstanding any manner of franchise,privileges, or customs: And this ordinance shall extend toall cities and boroughs of the realm where such defaults ormisprisions be used, and not duly corrected nor redressed ;saving that the inquests shall be taken by foreign people ofthe same county where such cities or boroughs be : And thatthe pain of those of the said boroughs and towns, whichshall be thereof attainted, shall be proved by the discretionof the justices thereto assigned."In this statute the mayor, sheriffs, and aldermen, are statedto have the governance of the city, similar to that which wehave previously seen ; and the king's head officer was describedto have in the borough the rule and governancethereof. It also clearly appears, as we have previouslySTATUTES. 627urged, ^that the Tower was distinct from the city — ^that the Edw. ill.persons living in the counties, and out of the boroughs,were Considered as foreigners j and that those districts werecontradistinguished from each other.The 28th of Edward III. provides for fresh suit, and hue p^^-,and cry for robbers, in accordance with the early Saxcm laws ;the cry being directed to be made in all places where solemnassemblies of the people should be held.The statute of the 31st of Edward III., as to the sheriff's ^ ^357.Cap. 15.toum, recites, '^ that in the Great Charter it is contained, Stat. i.no sheriff, nor his bailiff, shall make his tourn (by hundreds)but two times in the year, in a place due andaccustomed, that is to say, once after Easter, and anothertime after Michaelmas; and now divers of the commons havegrievously complained them, that some sheriffs make theirtoums oftentimes in Lent, when men ought to intend devotion,and other works of charity, for remedy of their souls; andsometimes after the gale of August, when every man almost isoccupied about the cutting and entering of his com, wherebythe people perceived them much grieved and disquieted : ourlord the king, desiring the quietness of his people, hathordained and established," that every sheriff from henceforthshall make his toum yearly, one time within the month afterEaster, and another time within the month after Saint Michael;and if they hold them in other manner, that then they shalllose their toum for the time. " And every county, that is tosay, the people dwelling in the county y shall answer for therobberies done ; and the same as to the hundreds and franchises,which is to be done within 40 days."The 34th Edward III. chap. 11, provides, "that if any ^^360-^labourer, servant, or artificer, absent himself in any city orborough, and the party plaintiff come to the mayor and bailiffs(who in the title are described as the chief officers of the bosrough and require delivery of his servant, they shall make himdelivery without delay ; and if they refuse to do the same, theparty shall have his suit against the mayor and bailiffs beforethe justices of labourers ; and if they be thereof attainted theyshall pay to the king 10/., and to the party 100«."ss2628 STATUTES.Edw. III. By the 37th Edward III. chap. 6, it was ordained, "that1363. artificers, handicraft people, hold them every one to one^^' ' mystery, which he will choose, betwixt this and the feast ofCandlemas; and two of every craft shall be chosen to surveythat none use other craft than the same which he hathchosen."In this statute we must remark, that there is no mentionof either cities or boroughs ; but the crafts and mysteriesappear to be dealt with altogether separately and distinctlyfrom the places in which they might happen to exist.Cap. 17. And by the 37th Edward III. chap. 17, it is ordained, asto villainage, that no writ be abated by exception of acknowledgmentof villainage, if the demandant or plaintiff willaver that he who alleged the exception, was free the dayof the writ purchased,purveyor. The interference of purveyors, which we have seen frommany charters, was so great a source of oppression to thepeople, was in some degree regulated by several confirmatorystatutes in many years of this reign, in one of which it isdirected, that the heinous name of purveyor should bechanged into that of buyer.We find in this reign, as in the former, that the appellationof" Men" occurs frequently in all documents, and withreference to all local divisions — thus, the " men of the wapentake,"as well as the " men of the county," are mentioned in1333. the pleas before the king at York, in the 7th year of his reign.*And the following instances of the use of commonalty, ^c.occur in the several statutes of this period.Commonalty, — Ist Edward III., 1327, statute of Westminster,*^de la commune de son rosalie" — ^2nd Edward III,,1328, statute of Northampton, " et tote la commonalty du roi-ale,"— 4th Edward III., 1330, "a larequestede la commonalty*'— 9th Edward III., statute 1, 1336, "e< le poeple deson rosalie." — 9th Edward III., statute 2, chapter 1, 1335,^* et oppression de son poeple.'* — 16 Edward III., 1343, stat.3, Ex. Rot. in Turn. Lond., *set la commonalty," — 16th EdwardIII., 1344, statute 2, Ex. Rot. in Turn. Lond., " la com-• Trin. T. 12 Coke's Rep. 127.LONDON. 629munalte." — ^'^ It is assented and accorded for the good go-Edw. iii.penance of the commons' 42nd Edward III., chapter 3,1368. — ** La commonalty" 42nd Edward III., chapter 10,1368.15th Edward III., statute 3, 1343, chapter 3, *spar bonesgentz du pais*' — 17th Edward III., "fe parliament tenus aWestminster** — ** Que bones gents et loialse** — 26th EdwardIII., statute 5, 1350, Ex. Rot. in Turn. Lond., ** des bones etloialx;* " loialx gentz.**— 2%i\i Edward III., chapter 6, 1354,"proeto Aomwe*."— 28th Edward III., chapter 13, 1354," reshones gentz et loialx,** 34th Edward III., chapter 13, 1360.CHARTERS.Having extracted the statutes of this reign material to ourpresent researches, we proceed now to collect the chartersillustrative of the subject.We shall commence with those of London, as the place of ^'^^'oo-the greatest importance.*A charter was granted to this city, in the first year of this 1327.reign; by which the king, with the assent of the earls, barons,and all the commonalty of the realm in Parliament, confirmedto the citizens, their heirs and successors, that accordingto the Great Charter of liberties, they might have all theirancient franchises enjoyed by custom, from the time ofKing Edward, William the Conqueror, and other predecessorsof the king, as well by charter as without. Thatthe mayor should be one of the justices of gaol deliveryat Newgate. And also that the citizens might have infantsand outfangthef, with the chattels of felons.The king likewise granted to the citizens, confirmations ofthe sheriff wick of London and Middlesex, for 300Z. yearly,instead of 400Z. ; — and that they might bequeath their tenements,as well in mortmain, as in any other manner. Heconfirmed the charter of Edward II., as to amercements; —There is said to be a manuscript book in existence, written about the middle ofthis reign, touching the customs of London. It is quoted by Mr. Hargrave in hinLaw Tracts, p. 118.630 LONDON.Edw.ill. directing; that the sheriff should be no more amerced, thanother sheriffs on this side the Trent. And that the citizensshould not be changed for the custody of those who fled to thechurches ; nor for having their immunities; otherwise than ofold they had been accustomed to be charged.The k ing also confirmed the power of taking away the weirs : —and adds the provision from the laws of Henry 11., that allthe merchants should sell their merchandise within 40 days ;and that they should continue with their free hosts, withoutany households or societies by them to be kept.That neither the marshal, nor clerk of the market was tointerfere in the city, nor draw the citizens to plead without thewalls. That^none were to be escheators within the city butthe mayor, who should be sworn for that purpose; — and thatthe citizens should not be compelled to do military servicewithout the city. That the constable of the Tower shouldnot make any prises of the men of the city. That the citizensshould also have keepers of the pleas at fairs, &c. Andthat notwithstanding a late iter in the Tower, the citizensmight record their customs, as they were wont to do.That no summons should be made by the officers of theking within the city ; but only by the ministers of the samecity. That the sheriffs should have forfeitures of victuals, &c.That the citizens at the items in the Tower, should be guidedby their ancient customs, as in the times of King John andKing Henry. That the citizens should be taxed with the** commonalty of the realm* as common persons, and notas " men " of the city : — that they should be quit of all othertalliages. — sand that the liberties of the city should not beseized into the hands of the king for any personal trespass, orjudgment of any minister of the city.In conformity with the numerous general statutes we havereferred to in this reign, it was also granted, that no purveyorshould make any prises in the city, &c. That no prisagewas to be made of wines. That no officer of the king shouldmerchandise within the city. And their lands both withinand without the city, should be liable to indemnify the cityagainst any thing concerning the execution of their offices.LONDON.— SOUTH W ARK. 631And that none of the freemen of the city, should be^^Hi.impleaded at the Exchequer.With respect to the provision, as to bequests in Mortmain Mortmain.in this charter it is justly observed by Mr. Norton,"*^ that theperpetual bodies to whom the grants in mortmain were made,viet ecclesiastic f and not civic; — for all the early statutes forbiddingalienation in mortmain, respected only ecclesiasticalbodies, and religious fraternities, and did not relate to municipalbodies : — a striking confirmation of our general doctrinethat there were no municipal corporations at that time.The probable ground upon which the doctrine of mortmainwas ever considered as applicable to municipal aggregate bodiesis, that their existence was supposed to be for the publicgood — ^in protecting and advancing the general police, andmunicipal government of the cities and boroughs — and thesubstantial services rendered by the citizens and burgesses.Whereas the grant of .property to the ecclesiastical houses,withdrew it from public circulation, and no services wererendered by the possessors.Mr. Norton states that another charter of this date was ^^'^'granted to the citizens, that they should be no more talliaged,but pay their aids according as the counties did, and not asthe cities and boroughs.This appears to confirm the record we have beforequoted in the reign of Edward I., describing London as acounty.This king, by the consent of Parliament, upon the same southwarkday as the foregoing, granted another charter to the citizensof London, for the purpose of preventing the escape of felonsfrom London into Southwark, where the ministers of the citycould not arrest them ; and that they might hold to them,their heirs, and successors, citizens of the city, the village ofSouthwark, at fee-farm.This charter again establishes that the jurisdiction of thecity was confined within its limits ; — and we ought also to observe,that notwithstanding this charter, Southwark did notPage 449. f Lib. Alb. Norton, 110.632 LONDON.^' return members to Parliament, mitil after the restoration ofCharles IL*1337. A charter was fronted in this year, relative to the merchantMerchant ® .Strange. Strangers, and English born; — ^which recited the statute of theninth year of this reign, and directed that the citizens ofLondon, notwithstanding the confirmation by the Great Charter,and since by Parliament, should enjoy their former libertiesand free customs.B saws ^y ^ charter of this detest all the former customs of the citywere confirmed, and additional power was given to the mayorand aldermen, by the consent of the commonalty, to makeordinances for the remedy of any evils within the city: — ^whichseems to be the first instance of any grant of a power to makebye-laws.1354. 'pjjg citizens in this year, J received the privilege of having agold or silver mace, to be carried by the Serjeants, beforethe chief magistrate ; other cities and boroughs being by aprecept of the king, expressly forbidden from using maces ofany other metal, than of copper.It is said that at this period, the title of 'lord," was firstprefixed to that of mayor ; but it seems that it was in the sameyear, in which these empty honours were obtained, that thestatute we have before quoted, was passed to correct theconduct, and regulate the proceedings of the citizens.^^^' It is stated also in a record of the next year, that all thetenements in London, and the whole city, were held of theking in capite1349. It seems that about this period there was a company ofgoldsmiths in London, as some houses are devised to them.||1354. And in the 28th of Edward III.,1[ there is a writ from theking, requiring to be informed whether two persons were inscot and lot, and ought to enjoy the liberties of the city —and if so, when they were admitted ; and the return is, thatthey were in scot and lot, and ought to enjoy the liberties ofthe city.13()3. It also appears, from a record in the 37th year of thisSee Carew. t Lib. Alb. See Wagoner's case, 8 Coke 241.X Lib. Alb. $ 2 Rot. Pat. pars 2. m. 19. H 4 Coke, p. 1 13. % Q. 176.LONDON. 633reign,* that certain lands and tenements were found, by the ^^« ^^^'mayor of London, as escheator, to be holden of the king incapite, in ^^ free burgage like as the whole city of London isholden.And many other such findings are to be met with at thatperiod, notwithstanding there is no appearance whateverof any burgage tenure right having been in practice or usein London, although the tenure was undoubtedly of thatdescription.In this year, we find the following important caserf — An ^^office was found before the king's escheator in London, that ^^*^*one Otes de G was seized of certain lands in the dtyofLondonf and had devised them to the warden of the Houseof St. Mary Overes, in mortmain, without the king's license ;and this office was returned into the Chancery. On whichthere issued a scire facias against the terre tenants, to showcause why the said lands should not be seized into the king'shand, as forfeited ; and upon this, appeared a woman, andalleged, that the warden, by the assent of the chapter, leasedthe lands to her, for term of life, saving the reversion, &c., andshe made profert of the lease, and prayed aid of them —which was granted: and a writ awarded to the sheriff ofLondon, to warn the said warden, returnable at this day. Thesheriff returned, that the warden and chapter had nothingin the city, by which they could be warned, except thereversion of the same lands in which he had warnedthem. Belknap (who seems to have been the counsel inthe cause for the defendant) urged, that inasmuch as thewarden was not warned in his proper person nor in hislands, but in the freehold of another — the writ was not served :et non allocatur, for a man shall be warned in terre petit. j;Belli. — We say that in all times the usages of the city of Londonare and have been, that each citizen shall be able to devisehis tenements, as well in mortmain as otherwise, which franchiseswere confirmed to the citizens, by the charter of the• Mad. Fir. Bur. p. 21.t Book of Assise, 38 Edw. III. place. 18 ; and Year Book, 45 Edw. 111. fol. 26.% And so is the law stated in the book of the Egham Majestatis.634 LONDON.£dw. III.king's father, anno 1 1 ; and we say, that every one that hasland in fee in the same city, is a citizen* — and that this sameOtes was seised of the same land in his demesne, as of fee, andwas a citizen, and so devised the land : and we ask judgmentof execution. Incident for the king, said, he grantedthe citizens ought to have such franchise — viz. thoseto whom it extended — that is, those who are bam and kerrtable in the same citj/y by descent of inheritance, or who areresiants, and taxable to scot and lot; and this franchise• In the report of the same case in the Year Book, (45 Edward III., fol. 26 B.)the words t€nen»entt in fee, are used instead of land in fee, and perhaps withpropriety — because there might be a question, whether the term "land " wouldinclude every tenement in fee which would make a citizen. However, they areboth equally opposed to the modem mode of making citizens, by the choice orelection of the corporation, or by redemption. Here the land or tenement is statedas giving an absolute right to a person to be a citizen, or rather actually making theowner a citizen. But this must still be taken with Ime limitation— namely, thatthe party was reticent in London, as appears by the subsequent objection to Otes,that he was a foreigner. And also it must be understood, that this was not the onlymode of acquiring the freedom ; but that every other person of/rse eondUion, raidingthere, were his freedom established by fine, tenure, or by other means, was also acitizen.There is also another difference in the report of this case in the Year Book. Theword and is introduced, which makes the passage run thus — " every one who hastenements in fee, and is a citizen, can devise, &c."— which probably is the properconstruction of the passage ; because the power of devising, which is here added,seems necessary to complete the sense ; and both the reports afterwards concur instating,that Otes was seised of the land, and was a citizen. But this differenceis not material, as the citizens also are afterwards distinctly described ; and thedistinction between them nndfonignen clearly marked out. From the whole itappears, that the right of being a citizen, as it was then allowed on all sides, was anabsolute right, depending on certain qualifications possessed by the citizen, and notconferred by election or choice. The most general of those qualifications was,being resident, and taxable to seat and lot. The other, from its nature, must havebeen very limited, namely, from being born in the city, and taking lands there byinheritance.It should be observed, that one of the terms used in describing a citizen, is taiabUto scot and lot ; and which appears on principle to be the proper term— for if a manis liable to be rated and to pay the tax, he ought to be entitled to the privilege ofcitizenship ; and so of other privileges, whether he is rated and pays or not— becausehe may be rated — the rate can be enforced against him — ^and the omission ofeither the one or the other is not his fault, but that of others.It is true the modem practice is otherwise ; but there seems to be the authorityof Lord Holt, for the principle above contended for— since, in the case of Kinlcin-ttont and Eden, he decided, that to support a distress for a duty, due in considerationof the repair of an harbour, it was sufficient to show the liability of the party whoclaimed the duty to do the repair, without showing that the repair was actuallydone— saying, as reported in Cartier, " it is the obligation which lies on them todothe thing, and not the performance of the thing itself, which is the considerationof the duty"— Garth. 369.««LONDON. 636was so declared and claimed in Eyre, and by them prayed, ^^' Hi-thatthis should not extend to any other persons; and het.e. Belknap,) acknowledged, that this same Otes wasnot of such condition, but was a foreigner. We ask judgment,and pray execution. Belknap. — And we pray judgment,since this is a thing and usage annexed to frank-tenement; and you have not denied but that he was a citizen.And we pray that you may be barred.Green. — sand because you cannot deny that he was neitherresident nor tcLxabUj ^c, nor inherited by succession — so hewas not a citizen to whom this franchise could descend : andyou do not deny but that the lands are alienated in mortmain,and in no other case has this been adjudged beforethis time : — so the court awards that the king have execution.From the annals of William of Worcester in the secondvolume of Heave's Liber Niger,* it appears that the king 1376.had caused the mayor and elders, seigniories, (probably thealdermen, of the city) to be displaced, and others to be electedin their stead, for their riotous attack upon the house of theDuke of Lancaster in the Savoy.However in the same year, the king granted another Ardennes.charter, reciting the articles by Edward IL in the I2th year ofhis reign, which states them as having been given to the citizensof London for the common profit of those who " dwell " in thecity, and repair thereto. That the aldermen should be removedby the commonalty every year; and that those displacedshould not be chosen again next year, but others, bythe same wards.That as divers opinions and strife had arisen betweenthe aldermen and commonalty, upon their removal, by thewrong interpretation of the words in the charter, viz., thealdermen affirming, that by the words '^ sint mobile percommunicated," they ought not to be removed from theoffice of aldermanship, without some sufficient or notoriousoffence; but others of the citizens being of a contraryopinion — the commonalty had besought the king to explainthe words, and remove all doubt.Whereupon the king declared, " that every alderman should• Page 440.636 LONDON.Edw. 111. << annually cease from his oflSce, and not be chosen again, andthat other aldermen should annually be elected by theward, in the place of those removed."From this charter it appears expressly, that all mattersgranted for the government and regulation of the city, wereintended for the benefit of those who dwelt within it, — and itis evident beyond all possibility of dispute, that the aldermenwere to be elected by the commonalty in the wards —that is, by the inhabitant householders — as they are to thisday.Another charter also was granted in this year, referring tothe former, as to the merchant strangers remaining with theirhosts without keeping any houses or societies; and it directedthat there should be no brokers of any merchandise, unlessthey were chosen by the merchants in their mystery, andsworn; and that none who were not of the liberty of the city,should sell by retail.The king then recites, the mayor, aldermen, and com-monaltj/y had complained to Parliament, of their libertieshaving been restrained and taken away — and also of grievancesarising from strangers dwelling in the city, keepinghouse, and being brokers ; and selling by retail ; therebyenhancing the price of merchandise. And that such personsremained there more than 40 days — contrary to their chartersall of which, in a petition to the king, they prayed mightbe corrected, by the strangers being restrained in thesepoints;* — ^and that the mayor, aldermen, and commons mighthave their liberties. The king, on condition that they putthe city under good government, granted, that no strangersshould sell in the city or suburbs by retail — nor keep anyhouse — ^nor be a broker there — saving always to the merchantsof High Alkaline, their liberties.Year Books We have in this reign, an important case in the YearBooks, relative to LondonerUpon an inquest before the mayor,! ^^ ^^ found, thata person had devised certain tenements in London to awoman for life — remainder to two of the best men of the♦ Hard. MS. 21, p. 91, m. 143. t Fol. 36.t Videetiam Lib. Ass. 49 Edward 111., fol. 320 B. pi. 8.LONDON. g37Whitaker in London, to find a chaplain. After herEdw. iii.death, two persons, as wardens of the guild, entered into Year Book,the tenements, and found the chaplain ; but the testatorhaving died without heirs, the tenements were claimed forthe king, as an escheat. It was answered, that, by thecustom of the city of London, the people of each art couldact as a guild or fraternity ; and that devises might be madeto them ; — the king and his predecessors having confirmedall the customs of London. But it was replied, that such afraternity could not commence without a charter from theking — and therefore the devise to them was void.One of the judges said, that, although the commonaltyof London is perpetual; nevertheless they cannot makea commonalty without the charter of the king. And thefraternity could not take an estate of frank-tenement ; for ifso, they could sue and be sued ; which cannot be without*especial charter of the king. That such fraternities werenot perpetual, but commenced by the will of the people of aparticular art — and whoever wished might relinquish it whenhe liked; — but he who was one of the commonalty of London,was perpetually so, for the city is perpetual.Holt contended, that, by the custom of the city, theymight make such guilds of a fraternity of even two ; — theking and his progenitors having confirmed the ancient usagesand customs by charters. So that, if this was the custombefore, it is the same as if it had been granted by thecharter ; that, by usage, the city could make statutes betweenthemselves, and correct the law without Parliament. ButCandid asked, if they had a charter of the king's to makea guild and fraternity forthwith as they pleased ? To whichthe customs and the confirmation was answered, as before.But it was determined, that they could not call the charterin aid, unless it granted that privilege by express words. —With respect to the making of statutes, it was laid down,that they could not do so, to alter the course of inheritance ;and it was denied that the devise could be good to the fraternityof the guild. And although it was admitted, thatthe commonalty of the city was a body, who could purchase638 LONDON.Edw. III. frank-tenements and was perpetual — yet, as to such a fraternityas this, ail might refuse to be upon it, but two or three,who might then claim to be the commonalty, which cannotbe understood but of mam.But it was decided by the court, that a commonalty ofthe guild could not be affirmed but by charter of the king ;and that it could not be adjudged to be a body to purchasean estate of frank-tenement: therefore they awarded, theking should have execution.This case is important in many points of view.Guilds. It establishes that this fraternity was one of the adulterineguilds, to which we have before referred, not having anyauthority by charter from the crown : the doctrine, that theking alone can create such bodies, being fully and expresslyrecognized. And although it was argued, that the usage ofmaking such guilds was included in the general confirmationof the customs of the city (an argument so frequently resortedto in the disputes relative to the rights of the citizens ofLondon) still this doctrine also was overruled.Common It was however stated, that the commonalty of Londonwas perpetual — but the reason for it is given, " that the cityis perpetual;" which is the position laid down by Madox,'' that inasmuch as the inhabitants of towns would always** continue in perpetual succession, so every municipal body'^ was, by natural succession, perpetual, whether incorporated'^ or not." And as we find in this case, that the doctrine ofperpetual succession is insisted upon — but referred to theperpetual existence of the city, and not to any peculiar rightbelonging to London, or other places, as corporations — thisis again another proof, that the doctrine of incorporationwas not at that time applied to municipal bodies ; but theirperpetual succession was accounted for upon other grounds.From this case, therefore, as well as from the other documents,the most prejudiced must submit to the inevitableconclusion, that London was not at this period incorporated.We next proceed to the charters of Bristol from whichwe shall establish the same conclusion as to that city.BRISTOL. 639In the fifth year of this reign, we find a petition presented Edw. iii .to the king* by the mayor and burgesses of Bristol, against Bristol.Thomas and Maurice de Berkeley, for compelling the burgessesby violence to do suit at their toum. It is most probablethat the charter of this year was granted in consequence ofthat petition. It recognizes the existence of an immemorialcourt leet, and view offrankrpledge, and confirms it to them ; fby which court it was, as we have before had occasion toremark respecting other boroughs, that they were exemptfrom the jurisdiction of the sheriff in his toum ; and didtheir suit, real or royal, (that is, by taking the oath ofallegiance, and giving pledges for their good behaviourwithin their own district. This duty was imperative uponevery inhabitant householder, wherever he resided;;}: andit was to be done in the county, if he resided in it; orat the leet of the town or borough, if he resided within itsjurisdiction. Nor could any body be exempted by the charterof the crown, or otherwise, from suit at the sheriff* s toum^except he did that suit at some leet. And however thismatter may now be misunderstood or perverted, there can beDO question but the court here allowed to the burgesses ofBristol was that which gave them their exclusive jurisdiction;and that the oath which is now administered to thefreemen on their admission ought legally , to be nothing morethan the oath of allegiance ; which alone is sanctioned andrequired by the law, (with the exception of those added bystatutes;) for neither could the king by his charter, nor themunicipal government of the place, by any bye-law, imposean oath which was not required by the law.The charter we have alluded to, after confirming those of I33i.previous dates, and providing for the goods of orphans, whichhad been dissipated by their guardians, states, that by an inquisitiontaken by William Marshall, and Robert de Ashton,and returned into Chancery, it had been found, that the burgessestheir ancestors and predecessors, burgesses of the sametown, from time immemorial had always view oi frank-pledge• Ryl. Place. Pari. p. 288. t 4 Inst. 72.X Kitchen on Court Leets, passim.640 BRISTOL.Edw. ll. of the town and suburbs, together with all things appertainingto such vieWy of the men who dwelt in the same town andsuburbs ; that the burgesses being fearful they might be molestedor impeached for the same, not having any charter forit — the king had granted to the burgesses, their heirs andsuccessors, burgesses of the same town, that they should foreverhave view of frank-pledge in the town and suburbs, withallthings belonging to such view, of the men dwelling in thesame town and suburbs, being unwilling the burgesses, theirheirs and successors, should be hindered or molested onaccount of the aforesaid view in time past.1346. William de Comfort appears to have been recorder of Bristolat this time, and with the mayor and 48 of the principalinhabitants is said to have transcribed the ordinances andcustoms of the town,* in a regular series, with the bye-lawswhich had been subsequently added. But we have been unableto ascertain, that such a book is now in existence ; hadit been, we might have found illustrations of the admissionof burgesses at this period, and the customs and usages ofthe place, as we have before done with Ipswich, Manchesterand the Cinque Ports.1347. A charter was granted at this period, in which the kingrecites, that many evil-doers and disturbers of his peace,wander and run about by day and night, in the town ofBristol, doing harms, mischiefs, and excesses to the peoplethere ; and desiring that the peace should be strictly kept,and the disturbers punished, granted to the mayor, bailiffsand good men of the town of Bristol, that they might havefor themselves and successors, one place of confinement for prisonerswithin their town, in order to imprison any evil doersand disturbers of the peace, if any should happen to be foundwandering about by night, in the same manner as is usual inLondon.And the king gave power to inflict punishment upon thosebakers who break the assise, as is practised in like mannerwith regard to such bakers in London.The recital of this charter, states the proper grounds upon• Corry*9 History of Bristol, 184.which the king could in the exercise of his prerogative, as the ^■'- ^chief repository of the executive power of the state, grant acharter to any particular place, to enforce the due executionof the law, and for keeping the peace within the town, whichwas the chief and expressed object of the greatest portion ofour early laws; and which must be treated as the object ofthis charter.It should first be observed, that this grant is to the foodnen, " probi homines " of Bristol, a term which we have beforecommented upon as used in all our early laws and charters,to express the general body of free people, sometimes ofthe county, hundred, wapentake, city, borough, or town : —and it seems a strange perversion of language to infer, thatsuch a term can mean any thing bot the "inhabitants " of theplace, including all of them, and excluding alt non-residents.If it is so treated, and the " burgesses " meant (as urged before)the " inhabitants," then this charter is granted to thesame persons as the former charters, though under a differentname : — but if the probi homines were a different class fromthe burgesses, then it is not granted to the same personsas the former, which is an inference highly improbable,particularly as the next charter of the same king, speaksgenerally of his confirmation of these before granted to theburgesses.The assise of bread, mentioned in this charter, was amatter also inquirable at the court leet.The burgesses, as appears amongst the records of chancery 137Gin the Tower of London, petitioned the king that the charterwhich he had granted to the burgesses, "that the town with itssuburbs and precincts, should be a county of itself," might beconfirmed by Parliament, with a perambulation of the boundsof the town — to them, their heirs and successors.Bristol, at this period, received another grant from theking, who after confirming all previous charters,* which hadbeen given to the bui^esses, their heirs and successors, recitesthat the mayor and commonalty of the city, had petitionedand asserted that their town was situate partly in the county•Rol.Ciul.« Ed*,lII.n.26,642 BRISTOL.Edw. HI. Qf Gloucester, and partly in the county of Somerset, and thatalthough Bristol was distant 30 miles from the towns ofGloucester and Chester, where the county courts assises,juries, and inquests were taken before the justices, &c.;the burgesses of Bristol were bound to be present at holdingthe county courts, and taking of the assises, juries,&c., by which they were prevented from attending to theirshipping and merchandise, &c. ; the king in considerationof the sum of 600 marks, and by the assent of the skilfulpersons of his council, granted to the burgesses, their heirsand successors for ever, that the town of Bristol, with itssuburbs and precincts should be for ever in future alike separated,and in all respects exempted from the counties of Gloucesterand Somerset, both by land and by water, and that itbe a county of itself, and called the " county of Bristol."That the mayor should be the escheator. That the burgessesand commonalty, yearly should elect from themselves threepersons, whose names under the common seal, should be forwardedto the king's council, who would make selection ofone as a sheriff. That the escheator and sheriff should accountat the Exchequer. That the sheriff should hold hiscounty court monthly, as other sheriffs. That the mayorshould hold his court, and the profits thereof to be for theuse of the commonalty, as had been theretofore accustomed.That no sheriff, or officer of other counties should intromitwithin the city and county of Bristol. That the mayor shouldswear before his predecessor, and not before the constable ofthe castle ; — ^that the sheriff should take his oath before themayor, so that they in no rise be forced to make their oathsout of the town.That the mayor and sheriff might hear and determine civilcauses, and determine felonies. That the gaol should belongto the burgesses, their heirs and successors, as well as infantsand outfangthef. That felons taken with the manor,should be tried. That no burgess, or any other person whoshould be in the town of Bristol, should plead, or be impleadedout of the town. That the mayor and sheriff shouldhave cognizance of all pleas and trespasses. That pleas inBRISTOL. 643the Tolsey court, should be held before the steward, and no ^^' smotherjustice should intromit.The mayor should have power to take recognizance of deedstouching lands, &c. of any persons, married women excepted.That the mayor and sheriff might levy fines concerning lands,and tenements, and the estreats thereof should be deliveredinto the Exchequer; and that the mayor and sheriff shouldreceive probate of wills, and put them in execution.That all writs should be directed to the sheriff, eschecUor,and coroner of Bristol. And that the burgesses, their heirsand successors, should not be burdened to send more than twomen to Parliament, as had been customary hitherto, whichtwo men should be bound to answer for the same townand borough in those Parliaments, both as knights of thecounty of Bristol, and as burgesses of the town and borough.That as to the customs or rules, &c., within the town of Bristolor suburbs, if there should be any difficulties or defects towhich no remedy had been applied, the tnayor, sheriff andtheir successors, with the assent of the commonalty of the town,^c, should be empowered to elect successively from time totime 40 men of the better and more honest men of the sametown, &c., which mayor, sheriff, and 40 men for the time being,by their common consent, should have power of ordaining andestablishing any competent remedy that should be reasonableand useful to the commonalty, and to others who resorted tothe town, &c. ; and should be empowered to assess taxes uponthe goods of all the men of the town. That the mayor, sheriffand 40 men, should have power to levy rates and taxes.That two honest men of the town should be appointed treasurers,and should be accountable before the mayor andothers, to be deputed for that purpose by the commonalty.That persons disobedient to the ordinances of the mayor,sheriff, and the 40 men ordained by common assent, aspremised, should be punished, &c. The charter then concludeswith a confirmation of all previous privileges.This charter introduces a new term, descriptive of the 1373.persons at whose request it was granted. It recites theformer grants to the burgesses, and the petition of theT T 2644 BRISTOL.^^- ^^^' commonalty complaining of the burgesses going to thecounty courts at a distance from Bristol, whereby the townwas impoverished. The king in consideration of the goodbehaviour of the burgesses, and of 600 marks, grants bythe consent of his council, to the burgesses, their heirsand successors, that Bristol should be separated and exempted/rowi the counties of Gloucester and Somerset, andthat it should be a county of itself; and directs that the mayorshould be escheator: — ^that a sheriff should be annuallychosen by the burgesses and commonalty, choosing out ofthemselves three persons, of whom the king in council shallchoose one to be sheriff, and gives the sheriff a county courtfrom month to month, as other sheriffs have. The profits ofwhich court were to be to the use of the commonalty, astheretofore accustomed. The sheriff and escheator were toaccount in the Exchequer, and to be sworn in such manner,as not to be bound to go out of the town. The charter thengrants the ordinary powers which were necessary to givefull effect to the local jurisdiction of Bristol, and to excludeall other jurisdiction. And expressly provides that noburgess shall plead out of the town, or be convicted otherwisethan by his fellow burgesses : a provision which couldonly apply to inhabitants, and would seem beyond alldoubt to extend to all the inhabitants, — particularly as thereis an express provision, that not only the burgesses, butany other person should be under the same protection as totenures within the town, which would include all the personswho had not been sworn as burgesses; namely, peers,strangers, women, ecclesiastics, and minors.There is also a non-intermittent clause as tother justices,and the king's officers ; the return of writs is given to thsheriff, escheator, and coroner of Bristol. After which followsthe singular clause which we have met with in no othercharter, that Bristol should not be burdened to send more thantwo men to Parliament, as had been customary.This provision may be accounted for, either by the factthat Bristol being situated in two counties, might be supposedto be liable to have two precepts sent to it ; one fromBristol-COMMON COUNCIL. 645each of the sheriffs : — or having been made a county of itself, ^^* l^^-it might have been supposed liable to send two members fortheir county, and two for their borough, — the latter is themore probable hypothesis, because, although Tamworth wassituated in two counties, it never returned but two membersto Parliament.For the purpose of making additional regulations for thegovernment of the place, the mayor and sheriff, with theassent of the commonalty, are empowered to elect 40 men ofthe better and more honest men of the town, (de meritoriouset probioribus hominibtis ville,) who have authority given tothem to do what may be useful to the commonalty, andothers who resort to the town ; from which form of expressionit seems impossible not to conclude, that by the word'' commonalty," all the permanent inhabitants were included,and by the latter expression occasional residents and strangers.The next clause, enforcing taxes upon all '' the men of thetowns appears to confirm that conclusion ; and tends to theirresistible inference that all the inhabitants were included ;particularly as the same expression of " men " of Bristol isapplied to the treasurers, who are to be persons of the town ;and who must have been inhabitants. The same observationapplies also to the power of punishment given to the mayorand sheriff, which must necessarily have been confined toresidents within the town, because the jurisdiction of thoseofficers was limited by its boundaries. Nor can any doubtbe entertained from the whole context of this charter, thatits object was to regulate the local jurisdiction for thebenefit and government of the inhabitants of the town.The clause appointing the select body of the 40 better andmost honest men, is probably the origin of the commoncouncil ; and it should be observed, that the clauses whichrelate to the select body and their functions, do not in anymanner refer to the existence of such a body before this time,and as this is within the time of legal memory, it is clear thatthere is no prescriptive or select body or common council inBristol.646 Bristol-COMMON COUNCIL.^^' ^^^' The purpose for which this body was created, was in effectto make bye-laws for the correction of any difficulties whichshould from time to time arise out of the usages or customsof the town,* as was granted by a charter of the same kingin the 13th year of his reign to the city of London. Theking himself had no power to make such bye-laws, andconsequently could not give it to others ; — the body of theinhabitants had such a power as has been recognized inmany cases for their own regulation, and if they thought fit,could delegate it to others ; and consequently could assentto its being exercised by any portion of themselves. Henceby the acceptance of this charter of the king, containingsuch a provision, they in effect give their assent to thatdelegation, which however it should be remembered, doesnot originate in any power of the crown, but is an actemanating from the inhabitants ; and therefore this clause,empowering the mayor and sheriff to elect the 40 men, takesits effect from the assent of the commonalty ; for withoutsuch assent, the mayor and sheriff, who were merely theofficers of the crown, could not have the power, neithercould they acquire such authority from the crown. It istrue that the words of the clause are capable of the construction,that the assent of the commonalty should only benecessary for establishing that there should be such an election,without giving them a voice in it ; — but this would be aforced construction, in opposition to the general law ; — the generalscope of the charter ; — and the reason of the thing. And asubsequent clause, speaking of the ordinances, describes themas made '' by the common consent, as premised ; " so that uponthe whole, we conceive the authority of these 40 men, thoughmentioned in the charter of the crown, in fact emanated fromthe inhabitants at large ; and by the fair import of the clause,they were to be elected by the consent of the whole commonalty,— thai they existed solely at their will; and could at anytimebe destroyed, and their authority annihilated by the actof the commonalty.The same observations apply equally to their power of• 8 Co. 24.BRISTOL. 647taxing the men of the town, who could only be the inhabits ^^^'tantSy for they alone could be affected by the acceptance ofthis charter; they only could be intended by the termmen of the town' with reference to this subject of taxation; — they were evidently included under the words, " allmen of the town'' and the assent of the inhabitants wasindispensable for the grant and exercise of this power.Indeed the real purport and object of the clause is merelythis; that inasmuch as raising money upon the subject waslessening their means of paying taxes and debts to the king,every tax or levy was indirectly in derogation of the rightsand prerogative of the crown, and therefore the king couldcall any person to account for making any such levy ortaxation ; on which ground, to protect the mayor, sheriff andthe 40 men from any proceeding on behalf of the crown, formaking such levies and taxes, the king allows them to do sowithout the impeachment of himself, his justices or officers.It is also confirmatory of this construction, that themoney collected is to be expended for the good and profitof the town; and that two treasurers are to be answerablebefore the mayor and persons deputed by the commonalty.It must not be overlooked, that notwithstanding the particularityof this charter m many respects, there is no mentionwhatever of any mode of electing, admitting or swearingthe burgesses ; but the class of persons of whom they wereto consist, is still left to be ascertained from the general law,and the general scope of the charters.This king also granted in the same year, letters patent tocommissioners for the purpose of ascertaining the exact metesand hounds of the town and counties of Gloucester andSomerset.The report of the commissioners' perambulation was exemplifiedby letters patent, and with the charter of this yearwas confirmed by Parliament ; although it does not distinctlyappear so to have been from these documents, for it purportsonly to be the charter of the king, and merely recites theconfirmation by Parliament; yet there is no doubt it was soconfirmed.648 BRISTOL.— UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE.Edw. III. During the 7th year of Richard II., about 10 years afterthis grant, the charters and privileges of London receivedparliamentary confirmation, which was recognized as ofbinding authority, 7 Henry IV. c. 9:* — and also in the cityof London's case against Wagoner decided during the7th year of James I. : — it was again asserted in argumentupon the quo warranto in the reign of Charles II.; andalthough the decision of that case militated against theargument, still as that judgment was declared illegal bystatute, the charters of London have ever since been assumedto rest upon parliamentary confirmation.There are also other places where the charters have beenenforced by Parliament ; and if such a confirmation actuallyexists as recited in this charter to Bristol, of which there canbe no doubt, then it is clear that there is a parliamentaryconfirmation of all the former privileges of that place, andthe charters previously granted to the burgesses — and,being so, upon the clear principles of law, as well as the authorityof the King and Miller, J and other cases, these privilegescould not be afterwards altered, either by the charterof the crown, the assent of the burgesses themselves, or byboth conjointly ; or, indeed, by any power but by Parliament.So that at least, as far as regards Bristol, when itwas afterwards incorporated, that circumstance could notalter the class of the burgesses, '' the free sworn inhabitanthomeholdersj^ whose privileges had before received the indeliblestamp of parliamentary sanction.UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE.In the first year of this reign we find the king confirmedall the previous charters to the University of Cambridge, andadded also the following privilegesFirst, providing against forestalling, and referring for thatpurpose to the charter of Henry III., to the clauses of which,relative to injuries done to the clergy or laity, and imprisonmentfor them, reference is also made — and all the provisionsof the former charter are expanded and amplified.• Vide 4 Inst. 249. t 8 Co. 242. | 6 T. Rep. 2«8. j 1 Pet. MS. 1096.UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE. 649The clerks having lay fees are mentioned ; and the students, Edw. in.described as privileged so long as they apply themselvesto their studies there, and laudably proceed in them undertheir clerical habit, from being placed in assises, juries,or recognizances. The killing of the scholars is providedagainst — and the liability of the burgesses for all who arewithin their families, is repeated — and the special provisionswith respect to the assise of bread and beer. The mayor andbailiffs are directed, upon the sentence of the vice-chancellor,to convey to prison all those who are convicted of any injuries;and if it is necessary, that they should take with them theposse of the town.The attention of the reader is here again directed tothe mode in which the common law jurisdiction, andauthority of the municipal magistrates were called inaid, to carry into effect the judgments of the vice chancellor— so as to make them subservient for the purposes ofhis jurisdiction.The same king also granted in this year,* to the chancellor 1343.and scholars of the university, and their successors, that inall clerical causes of the same university, and in all mutualcontracts arising in the town of Cambridge or the suburbs,the king's prohibition should not lie for the future — but thatthose causes should be decided by the chancellor for thetime being, or his deputy ; and the burgesses are made responsiblefor their families and servants in all purchases,&c.In the 50th of Edward III., error on a record was broughtinto Chancery from Oxford It was stated by the bailiffs,that no burgess of that town should implead or be impleadedof tenements within the borough, but before the mayor andbailiffs : and it is said, that these franchises were granted byKing Henry, in a charter which gave them cognizance of allmanner of pleas, but contained no precise words as to fines.It was asserted, that from time immemorial, before thecharter of King Henry, they had a mayor and bailiffs of♦ Rot. Pat. 17 Edw. III. in.23. 1 Pet. MS. 101.t Lib. Assisarum, fol. 325, 50 Edw. III.660 COVENTRY.Edw. III. Oxford ; and were used to plead of their frank-tenements inthe hustings. And it was held, that they could not levyfines, without express grant to that effect.Coventry. A charter of this date granted, among other liberties andfranchises, to the then burgesses of Coventry ^ that if anyinquisition ought to be taken before the king, or his justicesor ministers, for any contracts, &c. made within the sametown — concerning lands, &c. within it — the same shouldbe taken by the burgesses and men of the toum, and not byforeigners — so that such contracts, &c. should not concernthe king, nor the commonalty of the town. Which charterrecognizes the exclusive jurisdiction of Coventry, and thedistinction between its burgesses and foreigners, or strangersto the borough.1334. The same king, wishing the quiet and tranquillity of theMerchants merchants of Coventry, that they might the more securelyCoventry, take care of their businesses, granted to the merchants,that they, their heirs and successors, merchants of the town,for ever should be quit of toll, passage, pontage, and murage,for their wares and merchandises throughout all thekingdom.Notwithstanding at the commencement of this reign, acharter had been granted to the burgesses of Coventry, yetwe have here a separate grant to the merchants of that towna more decisive refutation of Brady's doctrine, or a morestriking illustration of the distinct character of those bodies,for which we have throughout contended, could not beexpected.Yet the reader will be surprised to find, that, upon thepressure of the assessment for the ninth and fifteenth, whichthe Parliament had granted to the king, about six years afterwards,the men of Coventry alleged, that they were not acity or borough — ^which irresistibly establishes another principlefor which we have contended, that the question, withreference to any place, always was — whether it was excludedfrom the county as a borough — or not being so, wasto be treated as part of the county — or, according to theCOVENTRY^EVESHAM. 651language of the statutes in this reign, ^* a part of the gild ^^- m*able."The roll of Fines of this year contains a writ,* directed 13^«assettorilnts et venditorUms naruB et' guinttBdecimm of thecounty of Warwick, and reciting the complaint of the men ofthe town of Coventry, that it not being either a city or borough,but the men of the town being accustomed to be taxed withthe commonalty of the county, and not as citizens or burgesses,and that of the last fifteenth they had paid only 60/«, andthat, by various misfortunes, they were so destitute thatthey could hardly support themselves — whereupon the writcommands that they shall pay only 100 marks a year fortheir fifteenth or ninth. Provided that they render the ninthgarb, the ninth fleece, and the ninth lamb— according to thegrant of the commonalty of the county.In this document the term *' commonalty of the county,"is applied precisely in the same sense in which we haveseen it before used, with respect to cities and boroughs.However, notwithstanding this writ, we find the mayor 1346.and bailifis insisting upon their separate jurisdiction sixyears afterwards, by demanding cognizance, and showing acharter to that effect ; and the franchise was disputed by astrangers*In the first year of the reign of Edward III., that king, by ^^^•a charter given at Nottingham and directed to the bailiffsand good men of the town of Evesham, states, that, at therequest of Roger Mortimer, he had granted, in aid of pavingthe said town, for three years, that they might take, by thehand of their deputies, of all saleable things coming to thesame town, the customs there enumerated. Although itseems from this charter, that bailifis were then existingin the place, of which no mention had been made before,yet there is still no trace of its being a borough ; but thepeople there are called the good men of Evesham, and not theburgesses.In this year, as in the 23d Edward I., Tindal gives, in his ^338.1 Pet. MS. p. 120 B. t Rot. Cart. 20 Edw. III. n. 16. Jenk. 18.X Rot. Pat. 1 Edw. HI. m. 2.662 Yarmouth-LYNN.Edw. III. History of Evesham, the names of Richard de Trapenhall,Richard de Newbury, and Robert de Ireton, as the membersreturned ; but for the reasons given before, the fact is verydoubtful.1341. It seems that the sum collected under the former charterof tahiti king, within the three years limited by it for the collection,was not sufficient to complete the purpose for whichit was intended, and therefore the same king, in the 15thyear of his reign, renewed the former charter for two yearslonger : — the second charter being granted, like the former,to the bailiffs and good men of Evesham.1332. A grant of Edward III. of this date, reciting the former*™**" charters, and the previous dispute which had arisen betweenthe burgesses of Great Yarmouth and the men and tenantsof the towns of Little Yarmouth and Gorleston, and thedecision of the council thereupon, confirms that determination,for the purpose of removing all doubts, and declaresthat it extends to all persons, as well natives as foreigners,saving only the rights of the city of London, Norwich, andthe Barons of the Cinque Ports, and of all others who haveany thing by charters of earlier date.It should be observed of this charter, that it speaks of theburgesses of Great Yarmouth, and the men and tenants ofLittle Yarmouth and Gorleston, which are before said not tobe boroughs, as of distinct classes, and as contradistinguishedthe one from the other : and the burgesses are described bythe name of commonalty; the real import of which has beenbefore defined in a former part of this work, and may bemore particularly ascertained with respect to this borough,by the subsequent decision, in 1660, as to the persons whowere entitled to vote in parliamentary elections as the .gesses. And it appears, that in the 31st of Edward III. thereturn to Parliament for this borough was made by thebailiffs and commonalty.Lynn. We have been favoured by Mr. Gummy with an inspectionof extracts from the early documents of the borough ofLynn, (in the possession of the corporation,) which enablesus to present the reader with some records of this reign, asLYNN. 663illustrative of the charters to this place which we have had ^^'^^t*occasion previously to quote.It appears that in this year it was agreed by the burgesses ^3^-in the guildhall of Lynn, that 12 men (probably the leetjury) should be sent to the prince for all the commonalty tospeak concerning the affairs of Lynn.The armed men sent to the king gave pledges — as the ^347.suitors at the court leet and the members to Parliament werewont to do.And by a record in the same year, it appears that theBishop of Ely* had obtained a view of frank-pledge, withallits appurtenances, of his men and tenants in the town ofLynn, and cognizance of pleas to be held every week, fromthe mayor and commonalty of the town, in the time of KingEdward. That the bishop had granted the same to themayor and commonalty for an annual payment as long as itshould please the king, in the same manner as he held itbefore it was seized into the king's hands.A coroner for the town, and a keeper of the key of the 1361.treasury, were chosen by the \2 jurymen.In this year, a person who upon pain of breaking his 1376.oath which he had taken to the mayor and commonalty,when he entered upon his freedom, and upon pain of the lossof his liberty, having been many times summoned, but notappearing, by the assent of the mayor and commonalty, wasdeposed and expelled from all meetings in future : and wasto be considered as ^ foreigner y and not a burgess ; nor to enjoyany of the liberties granted to the burgesses of Lynn ; andno one of the commonalty was to associate or trade withhim.The burgesses to Parliament were also chosen by them,upon two several occasions in this year.Here we find the jury of the borough performing all thepublic functions within it, and choosing the proper officersfor all purposes : — not electing according to the modem acceptationof the word, and guided only by caprice or interest y• Rot. Fin. Tur. Lond. mes. 2 Pet. MS. 86.654 TAMWORTH.—WORCEflTER.— DORCHESTER.Edw. III. but choosing under the sanction of the law, and their oathsaccording to the qualifications of the person, and the proprietyof the selection.T*«^fl». A charter was also granted to the men and tenants of thehalf of the town of Tamworth.* It commences with aninspeximus of the letters patent of King Edward, fatherof Edward III., to his men and tenants of half of the town;and it grants the half of the town, which was of ancientdemesne, to them, their heirs and successors with all libertiesbelonging to it, according as they and their ancestorshad reasonably held the same ; — rendering from thence annuallyas they hitherto have been accustomed to render, and20«. of increase — saving talliage, aids, and other customs.Worcester. Worcester in the 4th year of this reign, obtained a confirmationof all previous liberties ; and the citizens received anincrease of them, by the justices of the peace and assisebeing empowered to hold their sessions within the walls ofthe city, and exempting them to answer for any thing withoutthe walls during this reign.^TaJT"* '^^® ^*^ ^^^ granted to the burgesses of Dorchestertheir borough at fee-farm, for 10 years — to the intent thatthey might not be disquieted by any custos of the borough.So that it is apparent, that the burgesses of Dorchester canhave no right to any prescriptive claims — particularly as1337. we find that, in the 11th year of Edward III.,| they petitioned,that they had held their borough at fee-farm of 20/.for certain terms of years. And that it would not be to thedamage of the king, ^nor others — ^nor to the diminution ofthe farm of the county — ^if the king were to grant the boroughto the burgesses at fee-farm, with the liberties and firecustoms belonging to it. The king accordingly gave theborough to the burgesses, their heirs and successors, forever,at fee-farm, with their liberties and free customs.13S7. This king granted the custom of things sold at Newcastle-rot.Pat. 4 Edw. III. midstMad. Fir. Bur. 20.t Rot. Cart. 11 Edw. III. n. 26. 4 Bro. Will. 550. App. &c.NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE. 666upanrTynefor seven years towards the building or reparation Edw. III.of the walls and fortifications of that town.In the year following, this monarch pardoned and remitted ^•^•to the burgesses of Newcastle-upon-Tyne, all debts andarrears that were owing to him or his progenitors ; as a recompensefor the great losses they had sustained by thefrequent incursions of the Scots : all debts as well of greenwax as arrears of farms, or those otherwise due by thesummons of Exchequer were forgiven them ; as also forfeitedrents and chattels of felons, with every thing whichthey owed to the crown — except debts for victuals, whichthey had purchased of the king's father.Edward III., in the 7th year of his reign, granted a ^^^•charter to the burgesses of Newcastle regulating the electionof their magistrates, and of the other officers of the place —but it does not mention the mysteries; — they may thereforeperhaps be assumed to have been first establishedsome time between this date and the making of the articles,by the burgesses in guild, for the government of the town,in the 16th of Edward III. ; and which were confirmed i^^-by that king — who having seized the town into his hands,re-granted it in this year, by a charter to the townsmen, inconsiderationof their having fortified it.The articles providing for the time and entry, and the assiseof bread and beer, gave the fines to the mayor and 24 of thetown — and allowed to 24 of the most respectable brethrenof the 12 mysteries a participation in the election of mayorsand bailifis, and in auditing the accounts of the town — andprovides, that the common seal should not be used withouttheir consent. The assessors of the taxes were to be chosenfrom amongst them ; and they were to be the depositoriesof the usages and customs of the borough. All showing,that, at that time at least, the men of the 12 mysteries, wereof considerable public importance in the place, and materiallyinstrumental — either as burgesses or as persons ofconsiderable influence — in the government of the town.It should however be observed, that the method for theelection of mayor, prescribed by the articles of 1342, 16th of656 NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE.-NOTTINGHAM.Edw. III. Edward III., and which in effect vested the election in personsselected from the 24, was, in the 19th of Edward1345. ijj^^ upon the seizure of the liberties of the town, in effectrevoked, by the grant of a new charter, which providedanother mode of election, in which the members of the mysteriesdid not as such take a part.1346. In the 20th of Edward III., the next year, the libertieswere again restored ; and an ordinance was made as to themanner of choosing the mayor and other officers : — and moreparticular directions were given in the charter.1358. In this year, the king granted to the burgesses the royaltyof Castle Field and Castle Moor, an extensive tract of landto the north of that town, the property of which belongedto them.The burgesses in their petition to the crown for thisprivilege, to empower them to dig mines of coals, andwork stones there — set forth, that these places were the soilof that town, which, although they had been held from timeimmemorial, with their appurtenances, by them and theirpredecessors, by a fee-farm — yet they apprehended, that as noexpress mention was made of them in any charter, their rightto them might be called in question ; and pleaded at the sametime, as a ground for the grant, their distresses by the formerwars, and the late very grievous pestilence.1384. In this year a confirmation of liberties was granted to theN oiling "^ .ham. bui^esses of Nottingham and their heirs and successors bui^essesof the same town, with the additional clause for theamelioration of the town, and the advantages of the burgesses; and in order that they might the more peaceablytransact their business therein, that none of them shouldplead or be impleaded out of the borough concerning thelands and tenements which were in the borough, or concerningtrespasses or contracts; — that they should not be putwith strangers in assises,juries,or any inquisitions, by reasonof tenements, trespasses, or other foreign business whatsoever ;nor should strangers be put with the same burgessesupon assises, juries, or inquisitions.And that the same burgesses, by charters, have the returnsPL YMPTON.— POOLE. 667of writs and summons of the Exchequer, of all things con Edw. III.coming the said borough ; — that no sheriffs bciiUffy or otherministers whomsoever should enter the borough to executesummonses, attachments or distresses, or other offices there,unless in default of the bailiffs of the town for the time being.And also that the burgesses, their heirs and successors, shouldbe for ever quit of murage, pavage, stallage, savage, keyage,lastage, and passage throughout the kingdom.Baldwin de Recovers granted to the bui^esses otPlympton, ^'^|^*°°'their town ; with the market, fair, and every thing theretobelonging ; to hold at a yearly rent, as fully and freely as thecitizens of Exeter ; and that the burgesses should be freeof toll.By an inquisition of ad quod damnuniy taken at this date, it ^f^}^-was certified, amongst other things, that the town of Poolewas a free borough; that the burgesses had been accustomedto receive, time out of mind, the port duties thereinspecified, in aid of the farm of that borough ; and that itwould not be to the prejudice of the crown or others if thecrown granted a charter of the aforesaid customs to theburgesses of Poole j and all customs ^lhA liberties which the burgessesof Melcombe had by charter or grant from the crown.There is a return of members to Parliament from this ''^^•borough* of this date, but the electors are not mentioned ; thenames of the members only being indorsed on the sherifTsgeneral return for the whole county of Dorset ; as was usualat that time. As however the writ is general to the sheriff, toreturn two burgesses from each borough, there can be no doubtthat the election was by the burgesses, who were to select twoof their own body ; and then the question returns, as it evermust, to the same point, who were the burgesses at thattime? as the same class must still continue to form thatbody. Is there any pretence for saying they were then corporators?and can any other class of persons be suggested,but, according to the primary meaning of the word, " theinhabitants of the borough*'There is in this year, a confirmation by W. de Montague, ^^''*-• 2 Prynne Pari. Writs, p. 48.U U668 POOLE.— SANDWICH.^^' ^^^' lord of the manor of Canford, of the charter of Lord Williamde Longespee. The confirmation also grants to the burgessesand their heirs, amongst other things, the defaults of theassise of bread and ale broken, as also the amercements ofmeasures: but reserved to William Longespee, that fromthenceforth the fine of half a mark should be paid to him atthe first court day: and the fine of 18^., to be paid at theother five courts of the lord before the steward yearly, shouldremain to the burgesses and their successors for ever. — It furtherprovided, that the provost should be called " mayor, ^^and should have the government of the borough as the provosthad hitherto.The fines mentioned in this charter had been paid, togetherwith the chief rent, and a further sum of \0\d. for a poundof wax and a pound of common, in the whole 6Z. \\s. 8d., bythe inhabitants of Poole to the lord of the manor of Canford.What particular advantages were to be derived by theburgesses from the " reeve " having the Norman name ofmayor*' instead of his Latin name " pnepositus,*' it isdifficult to say ; unless it was to make the head officer ofthe borough less like the inferior officer, of reeve or bailiffof the lord. At all events, for the reasons previously given,this name of the head officer did not import a corporation,or any corporate rights.*It should be observed, that in the return by the sheriff ofDorset, the members for the county are stated to be returnedCominuni-j>ro se et communitate comitatus ; and those for the borough,taapro se et communitate decorum Surgensium, — So that, unlesscommunities imported an incorporation of the county, it couldnot do so of the borough ; and even if it does, it imports acorporation of all the boroughs, some of which certainly didnot, and do not, return by the corporation; — as Shaftesbury,— and Sridport.Sandwich. This king granted another charter to Sandwich, inspectingThere is a document in the Canford Court Records, where the word " prae-posts"is thus translated, " Anglice Reeve'*t The eommunUas comitatus, was a common expression as early as the reign of12 Edward 11,SANDWICH.— NORWICH. 669the letters patent of the Lord Edward and reciting, " that the ^^' ^^^•steward and marshal of the household of the king, and the 1343.clerk of the market and certain other ministers of the king,lately came to the town; that the said steward and marshalthere held pleas, and made various attachments andexecutions of the same ; that the clerk of the market, anddivers ministers, exercised their offices, and committed diversoppressions and grievances against the liberties of the town,of old time used, to the prejudice and weakening of theirliberties. The king being unwilling in any thing to diminishthose liberties, but rather to confirm them, granted, that thecoming of the steward, marshal, and clerk of the market,ail others his ministers to the town, and their enteringinto the same, exercising their offices against the liberties ofthe town, to the oppression and grievance of the mayor andbarons, and others of the town, should not in future beinjurious or prejudicial to the mayor and barons, their heirsor successors, or to their liberties ; but that the mayor andbarons, their liberties and privileges before the coming ofthose ministers, by them and their predecessors used, shouldhereafter fully use and enjoy, without hindrance or impediment."This charter is extracted more at length, as it containsa minute description of the proceedings of the clerk of themarket, and other ministers of the crown.Some years afterwards, this king confirmed the chartersof King John, Henry III., and 18th of Edward I., as to theorphans ; and also the confirmation of Edward II., to thebarons and men of Sandwich, their heirs and successors, withalltheir rights, &c.The citizens of Norwich applied in this year for a grant of Norwich.all the royal jurisdictions belonging to the fee of the cattle,*In consequence of which, the next year, commissionerswere appointed, before whom a writ of ad quod damnum wasexecuted, concerning the fee of the castle of Norwich, toascertain whether it belonged to the crown or the Earls ofNorfolk ; when it was adjudged, that it belonged to the king,• Rot. Cart. 19 Edw. III. n. 10.U u2660 NORWICH.-nUNTINGDON.^^'^^^- and that the earls only held as his constables : upon which thecastle was confirmed to the sheriff of Norfolk, to keep theprisoners in ; and as such, continues annexed to the countyof Norfolk, for a county gaol The return also stated, thatthe jurisdiction belonging to it might be granted to the crown,except the I2d. arising from the pleas of that jurisdiction.And the king being also informed, that the inhabitants ofthe castle ditches, being in the fee of the castle, were nottaxable with the city, but exempt from the bailiffs, andout of the city jurisdiction; and that often when citizenswere indicted for felony, they took refuge there to avoidjustice — being screened by the sheriff of the county; — theking therefore granted to the citizens, the jurisdiction of allplaces inhabited about the ditches of the castle, which wereof the fee of the castle ; and that these should be of thesame nature and condition as other places and tenementsof the citizens, in the city aforesaid ; the house called theshire-house where the common pleas of the county are held,only excepted. Thereby giving to the citizens the samejurisdiction with respect to those places, as they had beforepossessed over the rest of the city.This document also appears to define the respective jurisdictionsof the borough and the castle, more distinctly thanthey are usually specified ; and it is also a decisive confirmationof the doctrine we have before asserted, that the castlewas distinct from the borough.Hunting A charter of this date recites, that King: Edward, consider-don.. ' & '1363. mg the town of Huntingdon,* by the pestilence and othercalamities, was so decayed and depopulated, that the fourthpart of it was not inhabited, and those few which were left,had scarce any thing whereof they could subsist ; nor didany lands or rents belong to the town, whereof they mightraise any profit to help them to pay to the king the fee-farmrent, and that the town would be left altogether desolatewithout inhabitants, unless it were relieved.The king therefore, being willing to relieve the town asmuch as in him lay, did grant and confirm, that the burgessesHot. Cart. 37 Edw. 111. n. 5.HUNTINGDON. 661should for ever after have the cognizance of pleas, as well of *^**^- ^^'•assises of novel disseisin and mortdancester, and all otherpleas touching freehold, as of trespasses, covenants, contracts,and plaints there arising, as well of the tenants and residentsas of all other persons.That they should have all fines, ransoms, and issues forfeitedof all persons, as well within the town, as others whoby reason of any plea or plaint touching freehold, or ofany personal action arising there, as well before the king'sjudges, and other justices, barons of the exchequer, andbefore the steward and marshal and clerk of the market ofthe king's house, and before the sheriffs escheators, and allother the king's oflScers and ministers. Also that they shouldhave all goods and chattels of felons, fugitives, and of outlawedpersons, as well of tenants and residents there, as ofstrangers and others who should happen to be found withinthe said town ; so that it shall be lawful, immediately afterthey shall be convicted, for their bailiff to levy and collectthe same, and to take possession thereof, and retain themto their own use, to aid them in the payment of their fee-farmrent, without the hindrance of the king, or his sheriffs orother officers, and without any account or reckoning to him.From the expression " desolate without inhabitants,"and the general import of the recital of this charter, it isclear, that the increase of the actual population of theplace, was one of the principal objects of the grant.Tenants and residents " are both mentioned ; but there areabundant authorities to show — and the history of boroughs ingeneral establishes the same point — that it was in respectof residence and not of tenure, that persons were burgesses.The tenants, are only so called because they were of ahigher class than the ordinary householders; but still it wasnecessary that these tenants should be resident. The additionof " all other persons'' shows clearly, that there wereother occasional inhabitants, not fixed resiants, who were tobe subject to the cii?i/ jurisdiction of the borough court; butthey would not be liable to do suit at the court leet ; or tocontribute to the burdens of the borough; except as to the662 HUNTINGDON.Edw. Ill, latter by express stipulation as was often the case with thoseadmitted by purchase or by favour, into the freedom of theboroughs or cities.*It is also clear from the subsequent part of the charter,that the term '' tenants'' must mean resident tenants; becauseotherwise the chattels of felons could not be seized bythe officers of the borough; inasmuch as being out of theborough they would be without their jurisdiction.This king also, by another patent, states, that the honestmen of his town of Huntingdon had prayed him, thatwhereas they were charged 20Z. of increase beyond thesum they rendered yearly for the fee-arm rent, by reasonthey had not received any thing from the fair at St Ives,they were so much impoverished they could not pay thesaid 20Z. The king, pitying their state, respited to themthe 20/., during pleasure, or until, from the state and ameliorationof the town aforesaid, the king should otherwiseordain.It should be remarked upon this document, that the grantof the fair at St. Ives, in the time of Henry III. is to theburgesses; and, this last document, being on the petition ofthe men of Huntingdon, they were, consequently, synonymousterms.By a patent, reciting the charter of Henry III., and thatalthough the fair of St. Ives was still disused — and from theterror of pestilence and various other adversities, the townwas debilitated and destroyed, nevertheless the rent ofincrease was charged and collected of the poor men of thetown, without any remission, to their no small damage andimpoverishment; whereupon they besought the king toafford them a remedy ; who, being informed of the same,compassionate the state of the said burgesses and willingfor the relief of the town lately to provide, remitted thesaid increase of 20Z.In a charter of Edward Prince of Wales, which was confirmedby Richard II., in the 7th year of his reign, to theSee the admissions to the freedom of Ipswich, as extracted from the DomesdayBook of iktX town.CHESTER.-WELLS.-QUEENBOROUGH. ggSprioress and nuns of Chester* it was granted," that all the men E<lw. in.and tenants of the said nuns at will, or for term of years, Chester.who are within the guild merchant of the city of Chester,or sworn to the liberty of the town, should not be putupon juries and assises, inquests and recognizances, or tomake appearances before the mayor and sheriffs of thecity of Chester :"t but should be free of tolls, &c. &c.In this year Philippa, wife of King Edward III., confirmed ^y^'the grant to the Bishop of Bath and Wells, the dean andchapter of the church of St. Andrew in Wells, and theprior and monks of Bath, excusing them and their successorsfrom payment of toll, piccage, pannage, and kayageof all manner of things in any part of the kingdom ; andmore particularly excused the burgesses of Wells, Axebrigge,Welynton, and Chard from those payments : — also all thenatives of those boroughs.The charter to QueenboroughfX is worthy of observation, ^^^^^as it appears to be given upon the first foundation of the town. 13^-It is described in the margin as a grant to the " burgesses,"and recites, that the castle and town were begun to be builtnear an arm of the sea ; and that it was proposed to namethe place the Queen's Borough; and that a greater concourseof people might more readily come there and dwell, it grantsthe following liberties to the inhabitants, for their greatersecurity, comfort and quiet.That the town should be a free borough, and the " men " of itfree burgesses: — that they should elect annually from amongstthemselves one mayor and two bailiffs, and should havetwo markets and two fairs: — that the burgesses and theirsuccessors should not implead, or be impleaded, elsewherethan within the borough : — that they should have cognizanceof all tenures, trespasses or contracts within the borough —infangthef and outfangthef — quittance from toll, &c. — andshires and hundreds : — that the burgesses should not be put• Harl. MS.201,p. 188.t Id Fisher and Batten, 1 Vent. 155, it was said by the counsel in argument,that Henry, father of John of Gaunt, was the first Duke of Lancaster, and wasmade so in the time of Edward III. and then Chester was made a county palatine.t Hot. Cart. 186,42 £dw. III. n. 8.664 QUEENBOROUGH.-KINGSTON-UPON-HULL.^^' ^^^' in any assises juries, &c. so long as they be inhabiting theborough as burgesses : — ^that foreign men should not be putwith them in assises, juries, &c. within the borough : — that theburgesses, their heirs and successors, inhabiting and to inhabitthe borough, be quit from talliages,&c. — with cognizanceof pleas, and quittance of prisage — and non intermittentclauses as to the warden and barons of the Cinque Ports,justices, escheators, sheriffs, and other bailiffs of the king.A supplemental charter was also granted in the sameyear to provide for the government of the town, till the propertime came round at the next Michaelmas for the electionof the mayor and bailiffs.But notwithstanding both these charters were granted, thefirst creating it a borough, and the second recognizing it assuch, it never returned members to Parliament till 1671, the13th of Elizabeth — 203 years afterwards. Affording a strikinginstance, that the charter of the crown alone was notsufficient to entitle a town to send members to Parliamentalthough it was expressly created a borough.Kingston The charter to Kingston-upon-Hull* of this date, commenceswith a recital, that, for the amelioration of thetown of Kingston-upon-Hull, and for the utility and advantageof the men of that town, the king had granted it shouldbe a free borough, and the men of the town should befree burgesses, with all liberties and customs to a freeborough belonging ; so nevertheless that it should be keptby some faithful man, elected by the king to preserve theliberties of the borough, first taking his oath, &c. — that theburgesses, their heirs and successors, might have the returnof writs — plead and be impleaded within the borough only :and the privilege of choosing a coroner from among themselves— with infangthef' — outfangthef — toll — pontage — passage— pavage — murage — is granted to the burgesses andtheir heirs; and that all those of the borough wishing toenjoy the liberties thereof, f should be at gild and scot withthe burgesses when the borough should be talliaged.• Mad. Fir. Bur. 272. note G.t See the Cinque Port Charters; Hot. Cart. 22 Edw. III. n. 31.Canter RY.— LISKEARD. g65A grant of this date confirmed the former charters to Edw. ill.Canterbury and further provided, that neither the steward, Canter-marshalnor clerk of the market, nor any other officer, should i348.thereafter in anywise intromit themselves to exercise or performtheir offices within the liberty of the city : saving always,that the chancellor, or treasurer, or high-chamberlain,when they, or any one of them, should happen to come personallyto the city, might jointly and severally once or twicein the year, as need should be, inquire of the defects of thecity belonging to the royal cognizance, and reasonablycorrect and amend the same. And recited, that, in thecharter of Henry III. it was contained, that none of thecitizens should implead or be impleaded without the wallsof the city for any plea except pleas of foreign tenures ; andas in the recited charter no mention was made before whompleas arising within the liberty of the city ought to beholden; the king declared that pleas arising within the libertyof the city, should thereafter be holden within thecity, before the bailiffs for the time being, in manner ashad been before used.In this year a commissions issued to four commissioners,upon the complaint of the Archbishop of Canterbury ^ to inquire,whether he and his predecessors, and their men andtenants, had for time immemorial been free of making contributionfor the expense of the knights (militum) coming toParliament, for all their lands and tenements in the countyof Kent, held in gavelkind, as well as in any other manner ;and in the meantime all distress of them for such purpose issuperseded.The king granted, that the men and tenants of Canterburyholding their lands in the county of Kent, as wellin gavelkind as in any other mode, should be quit of contributionfor the expenses of knights to Parliament.In this year, Cornwall, to which we have particularly Lukewarm.referred in the reign of Edward I., was by act of Parliament,1 Pet. MS. 93 B.t Pet. MS. Charters, Inner Temple Lib. vol. i. p. 99 fitSee post. Rot. Pari. 1376, 50 Edw. III.666 DUCHY OF CORNWALL.^^•^^^* erected into a Duchy , and the king's eldest son, Edwardthe Black Prince, was invested with it, who granted acharter to Lisheard^ which is recited by inspeximus in thecharter of Queen Elizabeth, and is as follows :Edward, &c.,* Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall,and Earl of Chester, to our steward and sheriff of Cornwall,&c., &c. We charge and command you, that youdo not suffer that the burgesses of Liskeard be implicatedwithout their franchise, Edward III. with the assent ofhis council, accepted, approved of, and ratified, the saidgrant to the said burgesses, their heirs and successors, &c.,&c."CornmoD- ^j there was a petition from the commonalty of the countyof Cornwall against the undue exercise of the /rancAi^e^f oftinners.The inhabitants of the county in their petition, calledthemselves commonalty: — but do not describe the tinners bythat name : — yet they are said to be incorporated.Launces This king, in favour of his sou Edwards: appears tohave granted, with the consent of Parliament, a generalcharter, giving privileges to Launces ton — the honour ofTrenton — the castle and manor of the town of Saltash —the castle, borough and manor of Tyntagil — Penryn — Lis-heard— and the town of Lostwithiel — as ports of the duchyof Cornwall ; with the prises and customs of wines in thatcounty: and all .the profits of his ports within the samecounty; with wreck, whale, sturgeon, and all other fish; alsothe stannary, and return of writs ; and that no sheriffs shouldintromit to do execution of writs there.Lancaster. This king also granted, with the assent of Parliament,to his son, that he might have a chancery ,§ and writs andjustices, as well for pleas of the crown as other pleas, and allother liberties and royal rights belonging to a county palatine,as the Earl of Chester has.Besides these charters, there were in this reign manyconfirmations.Edw. Ie Black Prince. f Pearce p. 64.X 2 Bro. Will. App. 537. $ Plow. 214.CONFIRMATIONS.One for the men of the town of Adorers and their Edw. Ill,successors of the charter of Henry III. 13S5.Another to the Abbey of Tavistockf-^ of the jurisdiction of 'r^^^J^'^*that hundred with a market and fair.Another to Ihm'wich.%To Rochester a confirmation of the charter of Edward III.And Ipswich, one of a previous charter of this reignsTo Portsmouth, confirmations of the charters of Richard I.,John Henry III.^ and Edward II.; and which were repeatedby Richard II. and Henry VI.||Madox^ quotes many instances in this reign of placeswhich have never been incorporated but which were chargedto the king in the same manner as cities and boroughs.1218.1334.1339.1359.PARLIAMENT ROLLS.We find also in this reign, in the Parliament Rolls, somepassages worthy of observation.Thus there is a petition, the recital and contents of whichmay serve to illustrate more distinctly than has been donebefore, the nature of the hue and cry, and the mode in which ^^^^^^-it should be levied, as one of the effectual means of police atthat period; and the distinction between the towns andthe body of the county, which we have so frequently marked,is again denoted in this document.In consequence of the law being set at defiance by variouslai^e bodies of evil-minded persons, and by the commissionof murders, felonies, &c., it was commanded " That ineach county of England, some of the great men of the samecounty should be assigned keepers of the same, by theking's commission, and that timekeeper of the peace hitherto'* assigned, and the sheriff and all men of the county, whenassigned for that purpose, should attend the great men tokeep the peace, as if the king himself were present ; andthe said great men should compel the attendance of fourmen and the provost of each town, and array the men ofititit€iUii• Rot. Cart. n. 6. 1 Pet. MS. 45.X Rot. Cart. 3 £dw. Ill, n. 45.I RoL Can. 32 Edw. III. n. 4.t Bro. Will. voL ii. 347.Rot. Cart. 12 Edw. III., n. 17.% Mad. Fir. Bur. p. 65.668 PARLIAMENT ROLLS.Edw III. " the same town, so that if persons armed, or suspected ofevil, pass through the same towns, in companies or otherswise, that the men of the town should cause the Hue andCry to be raised, and pursue them from town to town,from hundred to hundred, and from county to county,arrest and safely keep them, and certify the fact to thesaid great men ; and if it should happen that the men ofthe town cannot arrest such passing, that then they shouldcertify where they are to be found ; and the great menshould assemble the power of the county, and pursue themfrom county to county, until they be taken."1343. The commons complain, that the grantees of court leetare in the habit of levying excessive fines, under the nameof chattels forfeited, which the king orders to be amended.*It was also enacted, that merchants alien, who were residingand conversant in the kingdom, taking the profits asmerchants denizen, ought to aid and bear charge with othersof the kingdom, for the time that they resided1351. Again it was ordained, that notwithstanding adjournmentin Eyre by writ de liberate probanda^ the lords should beVillainage allowed to allege exception of villainage against their villainsin all writs. And that they might seize the bodiesof their villains, as well as they could before such writs delibertate probanda were brought.;}; — From which it appears,that villainage, and the opposite distinction of freemen, wereat that time in full operation. And the succeeding documentsestablish the same fact.1^7. It is asserted by the council in Parliament, that the .caption of neifty against the plaintiffs, if it be by the defendantbefore the justices, and he alleges that the plaintiffs arehis neifs, and born in another county — shall be received andallowed; and if the plaintiffs answer that they are/ree andof free estate, and offer to prove it, that then, without anyfurther proceeding in the business, the justices should adjournthe parties before the king, or in the common bench,at the election of the defendants• Pet. Pari. 17 Edw. 111., n. 16. p. 141. t Pet. Pari. 17 Edw. HI., p. 137.X Rot. Pari. 25 Edw. III. n. 38, p. 242. $ Pet. Pari. 21 Edw. 111., n. 21, p. 180.PARLIAMENT ROLLS. 669It was likewise declared, that a lord might allege vil ^^^' ^^ ^manage against his neifs by way of exception, and if the Villainageplaintiffs answer that they are free and of free estate, thejustices shall adjourn the parties before the king, or in eitherof the benches, at the election of the defendant. And theinquest shall be taken by men of the vine of the countywhere the plaintiffs were born.That a writ should not be abated by exception of villain 1363.age, if the defendant or plaintiff against whom it is alleged,vrvLsfree when the writ was purchased.*In exception of villainage alleged by plaintiff, as regard 1371.tant to the manor where the defendant and his ancestors havebeen Theirs, and residing all the time there, the vine was tobe prayed where the manor is laid.fThe lords and the commons of the land complain, that 1373.their villains come to London, and there issue writs of debt,and other contracts against them, to be free; which city hasno knowledge of villainage, nor in what place the attaintlies.JThe king refused to change the common law in this respect.The men of Chewing Toritotiy in the county of Devon, were Torsion.exonerated from sending members to Parliament, never havingsent any before the 21st of Edward III. — ^and then itwas occasioned, as stated, by the sheriff maliciously returningthat it was a borough townsThe exemption from suit at the toum and leets, of womenand clerks, which we have before noted, is upon the ParliamentRolls expressly declared, thus : —Before this time, no man was accustomed to come to ^3''6-wapentakes, or hundreds, to present, unless r€siants;\\ that Resign.women, clerks, and men of religion, have been excusedfrom coming to such wapentakes and hundreds — nevertheless,the bailiffs have grievously amerced them, to thegreat distress of the non-resents, of women, clerks, andmen of religion — and likewise of poor men, who have only• Pet. Pari. 37 Edw. III. m. 4. p. 279. f Pet. Pari. 45 Edw. IH. m. 4, p. 307.I Pet. Pari. 47 Edw. III. n. 15. p. 319. § Rot. Pat. p. 1, m. 21.II Pet. Pari. 50 Edw. III. n. 138, p. 357.670 PARLIAMENT ROLLS.Edw. III. one or two acres of land, and who are not resiant upon it,and who in consequence leave their lands untilled.We also see here a distinct statement, that the poorerpersons, who could not fully bear the public burdens, werenot liable to do this suit.London. The mayor, aldermen, and commons of the city of Londoncomplain, that their franchises have been infringed.* Thatevery stranger can dwell in this city, and keep a shop — be abroker, and buy and sell merchandise by retail — and onestranger sell to another stranger for resale; — and maketheir residence for 40 days, by which the secrets of the landare discovered to enemies, and spies received within theirshopsThe king grants, that under condition they put their cityunder good government, their grievances should be redressed.South The commons and tenants of the town of Southampton1376. ' pray the king to take the farm thereof into his own hands —the expenses of the fortifications being so great, that themajority of the commoners and tenants had departed therefromCinque The men of the county of Sussex — that is, the poor men ofthe hundred of GostelyTig,^ complain that the poor peoplebear all manner of charges belonging to the said hundreds —the men of the Cinque Ports having purchased half of thesaid hundred, and not paying anything to the hundredstowards their franchises, by which they are seriously impoverished.Frank Item — From ancient times, it has been the custom, thatpledge.the presenters ought to present the articles of the leet andview of frank-pledge only twice a year, at Michaelmas andEaster. The bailiffs now compel the poor people and thehusbandmen, who ought to attend their labours, to come everythree weeks, to their wapentakes and hundreds, by colour ofpresentments, &c., otherwise they are fined grievously. ||Calais. The burgesses of Calais, amongst other things, petitionSee before, 1290, 18 Edw. I. t Pet. ParL 50 Edw. III. n. 84, p. 347.t Pet. Pari. 50 Edw. III. a. 78, p. 346. $ Pet.Parl.S0Edw.II].n.n2. p.352.II Pet. Pari. SO Edw. III. m. 30, p. 357.PARLIAMENT ROLLS. 671that every burgess be capable of inheriting in the town, Edw. III.within a year and a day after his oath be taken, upon pain oflosing his franchise, for the profit of the king and reparationof the town. And that no stranger be a burgess within theirtown, except for the salvation of it.*As to the second point, the king wills that it should beso : — saving to himself and his heirs, that he might by favourmake a stranger merchant a burgess.But this reservation must still be taken as only giving theking the power of making such a person a burgess, providedhe resided at Calais; for it is clear, that all these regulationswere made for that town after the king had expelled theFrench from it, and had fixed the English there, and wasdesirous of increasing the number of British inhabitants.The following extract includes the doctrine of prescription,as applicable to cities and boroughs ; —The commons pray, that no lord nor other man, nor cities P«««crip-^ '' ' ^ ' lion.nor boroughs that have franchises, should be compelled toanswer for those to which they claim title by prescription, ifanciently used; and that when they were so held, andclaimed, it should be answered in quo warranto And itwas affirmed, by this present Parliament, to be a sufficienttitle, that they and their ancestors, and those whose estatethey have, used such franchises from time immemorial. Aswell with respect to franchises of cities and boroughs asother lordships — so that they can use and enjoy all theirfranchises and usages, granted and confirmed by the kingand his progenitors, as used by title of prescription, notwithstandingany statute made to the contrary. And thattitle of prescription be limited for certainty — that is to say,from the coronation of Edward 1.The poor commons of cities and boroughs petition that hamlets.hamlets not enfranchised, adjoining to cities and boroughs,may contribute to all charges within their walled towns ; andthat the mayors, &c. may commit all breakers of the peacethere• Pel. Pari. 50 Edw. III. m. 32, p. 358.t Pet. Pari. 51 Edw. 111. n. 12, p. 366. % Pet. Pari. 50 Edw. III. n. 106, p. 351.672 PARLIAMENT ROLLS.-NONiE ROLLS.Edw. Ill, A proper precedent for extending the jurisdiction of citiesand boroughs, to those places in their immediate neighbourhood,which form locally a part of their natural limits.*The commons pray, that the wages of knights of the shiremay be levied of the whole county, &c., with the exceptiononly of cities and boroughs, &c. — those who go to Parliamentby writ — and bond-tenants.Here the separation of the cities and boroughs from thecounties, as to the payment of the wages of members ofParliament, is most distinctly mentioned; as well as theexemption of bond-tenants from the payment.None ROLLS.1340. By the statutes, 14th and 15th of Edward III.,t the ninthpart of all the goods and chattels in cities and boroughs wasgranted by Parliament to the king.And it was declared, ** that merchants foreign, which dwellnot in the cities nor boroughs — and also other people, thatdwell in forests and wastes — and all other that live not oftheir gain nor store — ^by the good advice of them which shallbe deputed taxors, shall be set lawfully at their value to thefifteens, without being unreasonably chained. And it is notthe intent of the king, nor of other great men, nor the commons,that by this grant made to the king, of fifteens, thepoor oracle people, nor other that live of their bodily travail,shall be comprised within the tax of the said fifteens —but shall be discharged, by the advice of them which bedeputed taxors, and of the great men which be deputedsurveyors."In these provisions, we see that the people in the countyare charged with the fifteenth whilst the cities and boroughs,in respect of their peculiar privileges, are chained a ninth ;but the statute declares, that persons in the inferior walks oflife were not to be charged with these payments — as we haveseen before, that they were quit from other burdens.The ninths were directed to be collected according: to the• Pet. Pari. 61 Edw. III. n. 28. p. 368.f Nostrum Inquisitions, in Curia Scaccarii, Temp. Reg. Edw. III. in preface.None ROLLS. 673valuation of Pope Nicholas, iii the 20th of Edward I., and Edw. III.from the laity only, not from the religious ; except from thosewho held by barony, and were returned to Parliament whenthe grant was made; and except possessions acquired bythe religious after the 20th of Edward I. — which otherwisewould have wholly escaped the charge, not being includedin Pope Nicholas's taxation, which was used as the guidetill the time of Henry VIII.In this document, the distinction between the laity andclergy, is again apparent; the latter being only liable to becharged in respect of their lay fees.With respect to these rolls it is observable, that the commissionersreturn the ninth of the goods of the burgessesgenerally, without any other description — which no doubtincluded all the inhabitants, who were, according to the documentswe have lately seen, liable to these burdens.In the return for the boroughs in the county of Dorsetonly the names of particular individuals, who must howeverhave been the burgesses, are entered, the sums charged uponthem being affixed to their names. In Lyme there were 30persons named — Dorchester y 42 — Welcomes 22 — Shaftsthe charge of the fifteenth, the merchants are describedas living (morasses) without the cities and boroughs ; andother persons as living (manentes) in retired places.In the county of Hereford, in the return of the ninth forHerefordy86 persons are named — Leomijister, 32 — Wholly, 17.In the county of Cambridge, the return for the borough ismade according to the different wards, including 428 persons.The fifteenth is charged upon 198 inhabitants of the countyof Lincoln, — Lincoln, 558 — Grimsby, 65 — Torkesoy, 41.Nottingham, 204.In the countyofStt556a:, there is a list of individuals, withoutany description, but who appear by the writ that precedesit, to have been the barons of the Cinque Ports,The charge of the ninth upon the burgesses of Huntingdon,is imposed upon 135 persons, as it is said, by the assent of themen of the borough ; and that of Scarborough, in Yorkshire,X X674 LUDLOW.-UERBY.¥Aw. Il l, jg charged upon the goods of the burgesses and merchantsincluding 105 names.In addition to these extracts from the parliamentary andnone rolls, we have a few miscellaneous records, which itmay be material to quote.In the documents of the reign of King John and Edward I.relative to Ipswich, we have seen grants of the liberty to buyand sell, given to particular individuals, chiefly noblemen andtheir men and villains, for some valuable consideration paidto the burgesses — as, the rent of particular premises — contributionto scot and lot — ^and other payments — being in fact, asubstitution for the tolls which would otherwise have beenpayable by those persons as strangers. We have anotherinstance of the same kind, with respect to Ludlow, in thefollowing singular document:Ludlow. *< I^ Jordan of Bedford, having granted to the Lord Walterde Lacy, and to all the burgesses and men of Ludlow, commonof pasture upon WhitclifFe, to wit, as the dingle takes itscourse from the toum of Bedford, into the woods, as far as myestate continues in wood and plain ; so that all that land shallbe common to them in pasture, between the said now dingle,and the water of Tante. Also I have granted to them, freeingress and egress through the same pasture, as far as theland of others, wheresoever they please. To hold to them andtheir heirs, freely and quietly, in the manner their ancestorsfreely held the same. And for this grant and pasture, Walterde Lacy, and the burgesses of Ludlow, have granted to meand my heirs, and to all my men of my household, freely tobuy and sell in the town of Ludlow, in fairs, and without anycustom to be given or made. Also they have given to me,100^. for confirming the same gift. And I, Jordan, and myheirs, the aforesaid gift to them and their heirs, against allmen will warrant."Derby. In the 4th year of this reign, the burgesses of Derby weresummoned to answer by what warrant they claimed to havetoll ;* and the privileges that none should buy cloth withinten leagues of Derby, except in the same borough, savingPic. quo warrant, apud Derby, R. 21.TORRINGTON.-BARNSTAPLE. 675the liberties of Nottingham ; and that they should be toll ^^' ^^^-free, throughout the king's dominions; that they shouldchoose a bailiff every year; and have a fair on Thursday BrigandFriday in Whitsun week, and another of 17 days, viz.,eight days before the festival of St. James, and on the festival,and on the eight succeeding days ; that they should havea coroner, and markets ; and that none be impleaded out of the Coroner.borough. For the privilege of toll, they produced the charter Market,of King Edward III., dated the 3rd of Time, in the 1st year ^^^*of his reign. Whereupon the king, on their paying a fine of 40marks, restored them their liberties, which he had questionedand seized ; it appearing to him, that they and their ancestors,time out of mind, enjoyed them, and held the said borough —paying yearly a quit rent of 46/. 1 65.The king reciting, in a record of this date,* that the good ^ pSSn?^men and commonalty of Warrington, Devon, had, through the ^^®*malicious return of the sheriff, sent two burgesses to Parliament,from the 21st year of his reign, and that in consequenceof such a burden, they had been greatly impoverished —granted, that for the future, they should be exempted fromreturning any burgesses to Parliament.Dr. Willis justly observes, that many of the suggestions inthis petition are not founded in fact ; and he adds with truth,that it was common, in documents of that period, to allegesuch falsehoods, when it suited the purpose of the partiesThe same author also adds, that our historians build tooperemptorily on general words in records ; and he instanceshis late learned countryman. Dr. Body, who, from a clausein a charter, asserted, that Barnstaple sent to Parliament, Barnstaple.even in King Athelstan's time; and* also from another passage,likewise insinuates, that every market town formerlydid the same. As we have demonstratively shown, thatthere was not at so early a period, any return of membersfor boroughs, it is not only clear, that Body's inferenceis unfounded, but we may also know how to appreciateassertions of a similar description, so common in our booksof law and constitutional history.• Rot. Pat. 42 Edward 111., p. 1. n. 8. f 2 Will, 244.xx676 YEAR BOOKS.Edw. III. Having now quoted a variety of charters and other documentsrelative to the different boroughs, which convincinglyestablish — ^that all their privileges were in effect the same —that there was no distinction between them with respect toburgage tenure — that none of them were incorporated — andthat the burgesses in all were there inhabitants, sworn andenrolled at the Court Leet — ewe shall proceed to extract someof the principal cases from the Year Books, which willequally tend to illustrate our present researches.SECOND YEAR BOOK.The second Year Book, first published in 1596, 39th ofElizabeth — contains the following entries : —South The mayor, bailiffs, and the other men of the commonalty"i328.' of the town of Southampton, are alleged to hold the port andtown of the king at fee-farm, rendering 220/. in the Exchequer;and that they had of right all the custom and toll ofthe town and port of Lymington, which was within theprecinct of ,the port.In this case there is no mention of any corporation atSouthampton ; and from the charters which had been beforethis time granted to that place, it is clear that it was notincorporated.Richmond A writ was directed to the bailiff of Richmond, where theFo1.48'b. abbot of Notre Dame of York had the return of writs byhis bailiff, and of all writs brought against him or his tenants,or the men of their tenants within his franchise ; for whichhe showed the charter of the king : — and it was questionedwhether the justices could try the franchise of the abbey,as in a quo warranto.No corporation is spoken of at Richmond at this time;and from the then state of that place it is clear there couldhave been none : being then in the possession of the abbeyof Notre Dame at York.Villain. It was pleaded to a count, that the plaintiff was the villainVti\ 77 nof the defendant ; and that the defendant was so seised ofhim. It was said that the issue was to try the neifty, whichSECOND YEAR BOOK. 677is spoken of as contradistinguished from a freeman; and it ^^^- ^^^'was objected to the villain, that he was not enfranchised.Here we find villains and freemen spoken of as in the Freeman.Saxon and other laws; the incapacities and rights of theone and the other, being apparently the same as in thoseearlier times.A charter was pleaded which witnesses, that the king had Kingston-grantedto the burgesses and others, keepers of Kingston Hull.upon-fully that they should not plead without it; a writ Fol. 121.appears also to have been directed to the bailiff, and therights of the liberty seem to have been conceded.But there is no mention of a corporation, and it will beseen hereafter, that this place had none till the 18th yearof Henry VI., when it obtained a charter of incorporation —being the first granted to any municipal body.It appears from many passages in the Year Books, thatthe abbots and priors, and other such ecclesiastical persons,were " elected'' from their own bodies : — from which the use ofthat term, with respect to corporate officers, in subsequenttimes, was in all probability derived.In an action in the Exchequer for a messuage in the ^J^^'suburbs of Bristol, as an escheat upon commission of felony, Fol.283B.for which the tenant had abjured the realm, the bailiff* ofBristol demanded conusance of the plea, and showed acharter, granting to the mayor and bailiffs conusance of allmanner of pleas.This charter, giving the jurisdiction, appears, as herestated, to have been granted only to the king's officers in theplace, namely, the mayor and bailiffs — at all events no corporationis mentioned.There is a writ to the Bishop of Salisbury concerning the fol.3i7B.bailiwick of the jewellery of the hundred of Cademunster ; • ofwhich the plaintiff counted that his ancestor was seised in hisdemesne as of fee, and took the spleen, to wit, for every timethat there was a livery in the hundred of lands and tenements,recovered by writ, 2^. ; and for every brewing of ale for sale,Id, ; and for every man who entered into a dozein, Irf., and ^o"****other soil of issues of the bailiwick. Hill contended, that every678 MANUSCRIPT YEAR BOOK.^^' ^^^' praecipe quod reddat ought to be brought in a will, and this isWill. not so brought — and therefore there should be judgment of thewrit, &c. Trew. — ^^The reason why a praecipe quod reddat shouldbe brought in a will is for certainty from what yisne the juryshould come, &c. ; and also that it may be ascertained by theHundreds, hundred, &c. And a man shall have a writ to demand amanor without saying in what will. Stouff. — ^^The hundredis not in vills, nor are the vills in the hundred; and a manmay have a writ to demand the hundred without mentioningthe will, &c. Gayn. — It may be that a part of a hundred isin no will. Echard, — If assise of novel disseisin were broughtof this bailiwick, he agrees that it should be brought inawill, &c« ; and I understand that a praecipe quod reddatof a bailiwick was not given until after the writ ofnovel disseisin was given for that purpose by the statute ;wherefore it appears, that at the common law it shouldbe brought in a will; as should also the other. Stouff.^^The praecipe quod reddat is given at ^^The common law,and not by statute, wherefore the one writ cannot be takenas an example for the other, &c. Echard. — I know that,when there are two hundreds in one will. Stouff. — thatproves that a hundred cannot be demanded in a town, &c.In this entry, the jurisdiction of the toum or leet in hundredsand vills, as to the assise of beer, and the entering intodozeins, mentioned in the last reign in the Mirror, is expresslyrecognized ; and the doctrine of hundreds and vills,according to the common law, fully considered.MANUSCRIPT YEAR BOOK.The second Year Book terminates in the 10th year of thereign of King Edward III., from whence to the 17th, whenthe third Year Book commences, there is a chasm in theprinted volumes, which is supplied by a valuable manuscript,in the possession of the Honourable the Masters of the Benchof the Inner Temple, and from which we have been permittedto make the following extracts.*The public are likely to be further indebted to the learning and industry ofMr. Manning, for a translation of this important volume.MANUSCRIPT YEAR BOOK. 679An assise was brought against an infant within age, Kdw.iii.who pleaded in bar a release made to his lather; andthe complainant denied such deed ; the date of which wasat Warwick: whereupon a writ issued to the sheriff,to make the witnesses come, and the inquest from theneighbourhood where the tenements were. Part. — ^^Thiswas made in the city of Warwick, so that the deed cannotbe tried by any others than by men of that city ; and this in- city,quest is of strangersy* who cannot know of any thing that is strangersy.done in the city; wherefore you cannot by these take thisinquest, &c. Trac. — The court has awarded an inquest ofstrangersy because the tenements are in gildable, wherefore Gildable.it ought to maintain and continue this award. And in thecase where a deed is denied, it can be tried by the mostforeign and most distant who are of the county of the place Foreigners.where the deed was made : and it was said. If I bring mywrit against the mayor and commonalty for a thing done Common-withinthe city, it shall be tried hy foreigners. Aid. — But ifan attaint was brought after on this inquest, the 24 wouldbe men of the city ; and for the same reason those on thisinquest should be of the city. Trac. — Equally well may the24 be of ^^ran^er^; and although it be found, that this is notthe deed of the plaintiff, still it is proper to take the assiseby men of the neighbourhood where the tenements are.The Bishop of Ely sued to the king by bill, because theking had granted to his predecessor by charter, the return ofthe writs in a certain franchise; and afterwards by charter hehad granted to the Abbot of R. to have return of the writsin the same franchise; wherefore the bishop prayed remedy.The king commanded the chancellor that he should causethe parties to come, and that he should see their charters ;and that if there was any thing in the latter to the damageof the former the charter should be to that point repealed ;whereupon k scire facias issued, and the parties came. Parn- ^^V^ing challenged the writ, for that it issued out of no record.Notwithstanding this, the writ was adjudged good. In thiscase the principle is distinctly recognized, that subsequentSet: bac case, post. Lib. A:»s. fol. 26, 1336, 10 Kdw. III.680 MANUSCRIPT YEAR BOOK.^^ ^^^ ' charters of the crown, giving the same privileges which hadbeen before granted, or interfering with prior grants are void,and the mode of repealing such charters, by scire facias,adopted.Villain. A case occurs in which the claims of a villain, as contradistinguishedfrom those of b. freeman, are mentioned.Leet. The Prior of P. avows that he has a leet to be holden onResiants. ^ certain day, at which day all the free resiants and othersought to come ; and his bailiff shall elect 12 freemen to pre-jury.gent things presentable, and shall deliver their names to thesteward, and shall make them swear, and deliver to themArticles, the articles, Sec, ; and he alleges a prescription for this, andsays, that the plaintiff, who is a freeman, was chosen amongstothers, and would not take the oath, wherefore he wasamerced.Here we have a distinct recognition of the leet — the freeresiants, as the suitors there ; — the freemen, who are to besworn upon the jewry — and the steward, presiding in the court.Considering the entries we have seen in the immediately precedingfolios, in which the freemen and villains are particularlyspoken of as contradistinguished from each other, it isimpossible to suppose that the freemen here mentioned, meantany portion of a body corporate, or any other class, but theliberi homines'* of the common law.Weil. The king by his charter, granted to the burgesses of Wells,the privilege that they might choose a mayor of themselves ;and that they might have cognizance of pleas within theborough ; with several other franchises. And afterwards, at thesuit of the king, scire facias issued against the burgessesof Wells, that they should be before the king in his chancery,to show wherefore the said charter, granted to the damage ofthe king, and of the people of the same county, as appearsby evidences shown to the king and his council, and whichcharter was granted in deceit of the king's court, should notbe repealed. The burgesses by attorney came, and thereturn of the sheriff was first challenged, &c. : and thedamages done to the king were assigned, that, whereas theking, in the time of the avoidance of the Bishoprick of BathMANUSCRIPT YEAR BOOK. glandWells, used to be seised of the issues of the perquisites ^*'- 1^^-of the court of Wells of 24/., which was decreased to theking by means of this grant, forasmuch as the burgesses havecognizance, and also have issues, fines, amercements, andransoms, which would be to the king if the grant was not ;and the same thing departs from the bishop, when the see isfull ; and other damages.R. Thorpe. — ^^The charter, by which ^^The franchises aregranted, was of record; and we do not understand that youhave warrant to repeal this charter, which issues from thewill and commandment of the king; for no man can do thiswithout commission from the king, or otherwise in Parliament.Planing. — ^^This suit is taken for the king, and the kingshall not sue in Parliament by petition, nor shall he sue inParliament concerning a matter which touches him; and ifwe can make a commission to another to try this mattertouching the king, il fortiori we ourselves can try it.Thorpe. — In the case that was between Little Gememuthand Great Gememuth, the suit was had in Parliament toreverse the grant and the charter of the king.Paming. — that was between party and party, and wassued by petition in Parliament, and adjourned into theKing's Bench; but the king shall sue in his own courtwhen it pleases him. We adjudge the writ good.R. Thorpe. — We tell you, the burgesses have a mayorswho has possession of the franchise as well as them ; and whois their sovereign, in whose mouth it lies to save the franchise;but he is not named in this writ. — judgment of the writ.W. Thorpe. — ^^The franchise was granted to ^^The burgessesalone ; and although they have appointed a mayor by forceof the charter, which we are by this suit to repeal, and toprove that they ought not to have a mayor, it is not by lawnecessary that any others should be named except those towhom the grant was made.R. Thorpe. — Shall not quo warranto be brought of thefranchise against " the mayor and burgesses?"W. Thorpe. — This writ is taken upon a claim, and must beaccordant with the claim. *682 MANUSCRIPT YEAR BOOK.Edw. III. JJ. 7%orpc. — If a woman, who purchases a freehold, beafterwards covert, and a suit were to be made against thefeme, it is necessary to name the baron.Paming. — ^^This is not similar ; for, if he brought now awrit against '^ the mayor and burgesses*' the suit would confirmthat there should be a mayor, where there ought to benone. And no one shall be party except those to whom thegrant was made ; and no grant is made to the mayor ; whereforehe shall not be named.a. Thorpe, — ^^The king is not apprised of ^^The cause uponwhich he founds this suit ; namely, of his damage, and thatof the people ; either by suit of a party or by indictment : —wherefore we do not understand that the king will chooseto be taken as a party.Paming. — You have been told, that it is by record of theExchequer, which shall be brought, if you will deny that theking is apprised.R. Thorpe. — As to this, the king has granted to the burgessesthe pou^^r to choose a mayor and coroners j and cognizanceofpleasy and to inclose the town ; and this matter lies solely inthe will of the king, and his grace ; and the profit is casual,and not annual. And as to the other point, that he has grantedus to be quit of tonnage, murage, pickage, portage, stallage,&c., we and our ancestors and predecessors, burgesses ofWells, have had it from time whereof memory is not. Sothat this grant is not to the damage of the king, nor anyother. And as to this, that the king has granted to us tohave a gaol, and the keeping thereof, this is only for thekeeping of the peace ; and rather a charge than a profit.W, Thorpe. — As to the first point, the king is injured, if youhave cognizance of pleas which belong to the bishop, as theking is assured by record, and of which the king duringtime of vacancy has been seised of the amercements andissues. And also, if you came not out of the town beforethe justices of the king, as the charter wills, the king wouldlose the issues. As to the other point, of acquittance fromtonnage, murage, &c. you say, that you were quit beforethis grant, and this was perhaps because you did not performMANUSCRIPT YEAR BOOK. 683them ; and non-penzance does not acquit a man, unless he ^ ^'^^^*were acquitted by title of right, quia in negative non est usus.As to the third point, that the keeping of the gaol is notprofitable, but onerous ; this is not so : — for it is found byrecord in the Exchequer, that by keeping of the gaol of thiscounty, the king receives by the year 24Z. ; and if you had thekeeping thereof in this town, so much would decrease fromthe farm. And you claim these things by bargain and fine,in which case, if the king be deceived in his bargain andcovenant, by law he may repeal it. Judgment for the king.And we pray that the franchise may be received, and thecharter repealed.Paming ad idem. — ^^The king cannot grant a franchise toany other tenants but his own, or of some one under him ; andyou are the tenants of the bishop.Adjoumatur. And at another day the reasons were rehearsed.Paming. — If you are tenants of another, the king oughtnot to grant to you a franchise in prejudice of your lord; andthus the charter is void, viz. when it is to his damage, ofwhich he was not apprised. And if you are the tenants ofthe king, we know that which you pay to him; and if youhave paid nothing, we will cause it to be paid. And youshall answer of the time passed, that you have been approversof the king, since you show nothing from the king that youshould hold suit. And you use the charter of the King John,by which he constitutes you burgesses, which can be onlyunderstood, these burgesses.Afterwards, by award in Hilary Term, in the 17th year,the charter was repealed.Here the doctrine is distinctly recognized, which we findpervading most of our early law authorities, that if the kingbe deceived in his grant, it is void.The abbot of Westminster brought a writ of trespass against 1342.Husculf de Whitehall and R. de P. and other of them, thatbe and the others had disturbed his bailiffs in holding viewof frank-pledge at Musham, which view he had by grant fromthe progenitors, and confirmation of the present king. Gayn. —584 MANUSCRIPT YEAR BOOK.Edw.lll. Show that which you have by the grant and confirmation.Hillary. — He shall not, either to you or the court, unless itwere in quo warranto. Gayn. — then we say with regard to thecoming with force and arms, not guilty, and that John de Idlehas view in Musham; to be held on the same day that you havecounted ; without this, that any other has view in this town : —and this view John has as appendant to his manor of Mu-sham,— and this he and the tenants of the manor have hadsince time of memory; and we tell you for R., that he came assteward of John at the same day, to hold the view of his lord,and the abbot by his ministers would have disturbed him,and he would not permit him. And insisted that he mighthold the view of his lord, without doing any thing contraryto the peace ; and Husculf is chief steward, and made R.when he held the view ; and the others are ministers whodid execution by command of R. the steward. Thorpe. — Firsthe took his plea in traverse of the cause of our plaint ; andalso how it was by way of ratification : and afterwards in hisconclusion he descends to say that he has done nothing contraryto the peace, which traverses the disturbance, withoutdenying that we have leet. Thus his answer is contradictory,and we pray judgment and our damages. Black. — If we saythe truth, we did nothing contrary to the peace. Hillary. — Wemust know whether you will justify the fact or not. Gayn. —We tell you as above, without this, that the abbot has beenthere as he supposes, by his plaint. Deren. — You shall not bereceived to say that the abbot has not view ; for in the eyre ofEssex, in the time of the grandfather of the present king, theabbot was summoned to answer by what warrant he claimedthe view, &c. in Musham, of which we tell you that the abbotis lord. At which time, the predecessor of this abbot came andclaimed view by grant of the King Henry, and the action wasthere allowed ; and then one W., whose estate John has, wasof full age, and claimed nothing in the view. Therefore judgment,if you shall be received ; — and he showed the record andconfirmation of the charter. Gayn. — their plea is double, one,that they claim view by the king's charter; another, thai bythe non-claimer of him, whose estate we have, in the eyre, theTHIRD YEAR BOOK. 685view which we claim was lost. Sckardeburgh. — It is not; for Edw. III.all is one answer, and upon record. And then Deren for theplaintiff said, that the king granted to his predecessor, view,&c.y and afterwards in eyre ut supra, this was adjudged to him;thus he has view. Gayn. — We will impart. Thorpe, — Youshall not for we maintain our writ against the averment bywhich you have traversed it, namely, that we have not view.Staff. — ewe have said that there is but one view; which we andthose whose estate we have from all time have had ; withoutthis, that he has view. And he does not maintain that there aretwo views, nor that he has used the view: — whereas, althoughthe king granted to him view, if he has not used it, thatdoes not give him view; wherefore the issue is not good.Hillary. — If he has not used the view he can claim nothing,but he does not answer to your view by your answer to him.Wherefore this shall make issue, whether he has view ornot.In this case the rule, so necessary to the proper understandingthe correct doctrine relative to the exclusive jurisdictionof boroughs by means of their court leet, is fully established: — for it clearly appears there could, not be twoleets in the same place ; and therefore wherever a boroughhad a leet, no other lord could interfere with them, norcould the sheriff hold his toum there. The jurisdiction ofthat officer was therefore excluded from the borough, as wehave seen expressly mentioned in several of the charters.THIRD YEAR BOOK.In a suit brought by the Abbot of Fomeaux, the tourn of 1343.,.> . . , , , 1^ •'Foi.seB.the sheriff \s mentioned, — and also the county court.A claim of villainage occurs. ^ ]^^', . ., Fol.71 B.And a claim of neifty, with a wnt de libertate probanda.1356.The bailiff and commonalty of a town are mentioned : — but Fol. 40.. ^ . 1356.there is no reference to a corporation. Fol. 15 B.The villains of the Abbot of St. Albans are mentioned, 1364.Fol. 33 B.and in folio 34, are contradistinguished from freemen. Fol. 34.And the same occurs as to the villains of a prior, contra 1365.distinguished from the tenants in ancient demesne.686 FOURTH YEAR BOOK.^'^' ^^^ ' It is worthy of observation that in this volume, although itCorpora contains cases from the 17th. to the end of the 39th ofEdward III., being a period of 22 years, and numerous argumentsoccur with respect to many cities and boroughs, andaggregate bodies, there is not throughout the whole, nor inthe index, any mention whatever of any corporation, or of anycorporate powers : — ^a thing almost impossible, if municipalcorporations by prescription, existed at that period.There is a chasm in this volume from the 30th of EdwardIII., to the 38th. The intervening years, however, are quotedStatham. by Baron Statham in his Abridgment, first published in 1467,7th Edward IV. : but there is not amongst the titles of thatcompilation, any of " corporations ;" nor any reference to thathead of the law : which therefore, it is clear, was not knowneither at the time when that work was written or published.FOURTH YEAR BOOK.The succeeding volume of this valuable collection of lawcases, commences in the same manner as the preceding, andcontains matter resembling the former, entered in the samemanner, with similar notes of the contents in the margin.'366. In this year, a case occurs respecting a claim of cognizanceNewcastle. by the mayor and bailiffs of Newcastle.f oi. 17 B. y^Q have before fully shown the numerous succeeding grantsby which the chancellor and University of Oxford obtainedtheir jurisdiction within the borough; we have here an instanceof a prohibition, suggesting that the applicant was impleadedrespecting a house, before the chancellor of Oxford ;and it was said that the clerks of Oxford had a privilegethat they should have the accustomed hostels, before anysecular persons; and that the messuage belonged to the Priorof W., who had leased it; and a clerk went to the house, andgave sureties for the rent, and he was not allowed to have thehouse : — and he, before the chancellor, pleaded this privilege,and that he was a clerk residing within the town, and hadbeen so for one year.Fol. 26 B. John Camels avowed the taking of certain cattle, byreason that at the view of frank-pledge in his manor, it wasFOURTH YEAR BOOK. 687presented by the chief pledges that John de T., permitted ^^- ^^^ 'one William his servant to reside with him more than a yearand a day, and he was not put in the dozein ; for which J. deT. was amerced.In the course of the ailment, it was admitted that thechief pledges were the judges; and that if presentment was notmade in the view of the lard, it should be done in the tourn ofthe sheriff: and if default was made there, it should be presentedin the King's Bench, &c.The ancient law of the frank-pledge and leet — the systemo{ pledges and dozeins as required by the Saxon laws ; —their connection with residence ; — and the liability of the hostfor his inmate — are all here fully recognized : — as well as theresulting obligation of the sheriff of the county to enforcethose duties, when the king's ofHcer in the particular franchiserefused or neglected to do it ; and the exclusive systemof boroughs, founded on the ancient common law as to freemenand their suit royal at the court leet, appears also tohave been acted upon to this time.Villainage and free men are mentioned. f^?^'rTrespass is brought against two; the one says, the Fol.4.plaintiff is his villain, and that he was seized of him as hisvillain, regardant of the manor of G., holding certain lands invillainage of that manor, and that he would not do the serviceswhich he ought to do, but fled, and he pursued him, and tookhim as his villain. In the course of the argument of thiscase, the leaning of the law in favour of freedom, is asserted ;freedom by stock is mentioned ; — as well as a free manborn in another county, and who is described as " attentive "in the place in which he is found ; so that freedom by birthwas not confined to cities or boroughs, but extended also bythe common law over the whole country, wherever that law hadauthority ; which is decisive to show that this was the realorigin of the doctrine of freedom by birth ; and that it originallyhad no affinity to corporations, nor connection withthem.In a case of this date respecting villainage, it was stated in 1369.argument, that if a villain be once free, he can never chain be688 FOURTH Var BOOK.^^' ^^^' a villain ; notwithstanding he is known to hold as a villain inacourt of record : — for as he made his services on accountof tenure, that will not make his body in slavery ; because inmany manors, freemen perform the services as neifs, on accountof tenure; and by reason that it has been the usage to thishour, and we have title of it by prescription, it seems it mustbe good. Thorpe. — It i^ clearly opposed to law, that the villainought to make a fine to his lord on account of his marriage, forhis body J arid all the goods he has are his lords* Kir ton. — Igrant it is against the common law, that the lord should takea fine from his villain ; still it is a custom in many places ;and it would be supposed by my avowry that he held theland, in respect of which he made such services ; thus it isin the nature of a covenant.In this case the doctrine is stated, that a person once freewould always continue so. It is from the perversion andmisapplication of this ancient principle, that in modern timesthe practice of non-resident freemen of corporations has beensupported, — the distinction being overlooked, that althoughthey continued freemen, they were not freemen of the placewhich they had left, but of that where they resided.JV^^Q In trespass, the defendant claimed to be lord of the hundredof L., in which hundred he had waif and estray ; and that arobber had brought certain goods into the hundred, and hueand cry was levied against him, and he waived the goods whichcame into the possession of the plaintiff, and that such usageswas within the hundred, that if the waif or estray was eloigned,it should be presented by the coiners if they came into thepossession of any resiant within the hundred, so that the lordcould distrain the possessor until he made restitution. Andupon this, it was presented against the plaintiff that the waifscame into his possession. The steward and suitors of thehundred commanded that the distress should be taken, andthis was alleged to be the custom from time of memory, &c.Belhnap. — He has justified, because he is the lord of thehundred where the injury was done to himself, and he oughtnot to be judge himself , to take the amends of waif: whichSee before p. 610, Mirror. f Saxon LI.FOURTH YEAR BOOK. 689do not belong to the hundred : but is a thing for the leet ; Mw. ill.and belongs to the king; and should be tried by the presentmentof the coiners ; and if the lord wishes to take amendswithin his hundred of a trespass done to him, it should beby those who are resiants there.In another case, the defendant avows that at a certain day, 1371.the leet was held at W., and that it was presented by thecoiners that the plaintiff was resiant within the precinct ofthe leet, and that he did not come ; and for this cause, it waspresented and affirmed by the grand inquest, that he wasamerced ; and afterwards it was offered by suitors at 6^^. ;and for that amercement, he avows the taking, &c.In an action of trespass by the Prior of Huntingdon against j^* «the burgesses of the totvn, the charter of King John granted tothe burgesses was pleaded.*We have before observed, with respect to the manuscriptYear Book in the Inner Temple, and to the three printed volumes,as well as the Abridgment of Statham, that " corporations*' are not mentioned in either of them, nor in theirindexes or margins.The observation as to the silence of these records on thishead, applies also to the commencement of this fourthvolume of the Year Books, which was first published in the42nd of Queen Elizabeth, 1600."Corporations" and "capacities'* however, occur for the y\^'Bfirst time in the margin of that book ; in folio 29 B ; re-fering to those titles in Brooke's Abridgment; but in thetext itself, there is no allusion either to corporations orcapacities, excepting that the master of St. Lawrence is mentioned,who is the plaintiff against the commonalty of Derby :and no question could have arisen in that case relative toany corporate right, except as far as related to the masterof St. Lawrence ; which would bring the case within the precedentsto which we have before adverted, as to ecclesiasticalbodies.• Vide ante, p. 414.T Y690 FOURTH YEAR BOOK.^^•^^^- The word " corporation," again occurs in the margin,,1372. with a similar reference to Brooke — in Hilary Term, 46 EdwardIII., folio 2 B, in the following case: —1371. The Archbishop of York complained against the mayorand the commonalty of the town of Htdly and another person;alleging, that the archbishop and his predecessorshad used, from time immemorial, to have, in the water ofHull, in Kingston juxta Hull, all deodands and other profits;and that the defendants had disturbed him in taking them.The party named in the writ, pleaded, in abatement, thathe was named with the mayor and the commonalty, wherethere ought to have been several actions ; for the processagainst them would be several : against him it would be bycape and exigence — and against the mayor and the commonalty,by distress : — upon which the plaintiff demurs.For the mayor and commonalty it was said, that they heldthe town of Hull of our lord the king at farm, by charter ;and they say, that the water is parcel of the town — and thatthey have always held it as parcel of their charter — andthey pray aid of the king. And for the plaintiff it was said,that Kingston is another town, and not parcel of Hull : Thusthey pray aid of the king respecting other things, in anothertown, which does not refer to the action; for Kingstonjuxta Hull supposes that it was separated from Hull — andtherefore it was said, that they should not have aid, but beousted of it.But it was ruled, that if assise be brought of tenements inatown, and it is stated, that the demandants held by charterof the king, the tenements in another town, and therefore prayaid of the king, it would be granted, without taking anassise to inquire in what town the tenements were ; — so here :and aid was accordingly granted.The reader will perceive, that in the body of this casethere is no reference either to any corporation or to anycorporate principle : — ^and consequently the adoption of thatBrooke's term could only have been borrowed from Brooke's abridgments*"ment, which is referred to ; and in which there is the head-fourthYEAR BOOK. Oglingof '^ Corporations and Capacities ; " to the 9th and £<lw. III.10th placenta of which head, these two notes in the margin Corpora-refer.The first quotes, under the title of Misnomer, the Capacitiescase respecting the master of St. Lawrence, and which isstated ''to be in effect a misnomer'' The other case isquoted under the head of Process of Outlawry; for thedoctrine, that 'process of outlawry by capias and exigence,does not lie against a corporation, as mayor andcommonalty, and such like ; but distress." Which doctrine— as applied to the " mayor and commonalty of Hull,"is supported by the case — but the original authority doesnot use the word " corporation," introduced gratuitously byBrooke.We have already seen, by the instances quoted from Madox, Madox.that the doctrine which authorizes the proceeding in thismanner against aggregate bodies of counties, hundreds, o^^**^forests, wapentakes, cities, and boroughs, was fully recognized,notwithstanding they were not incorporated, — andtherefore in this case we find the practice referred to generally,and without any particular remark, or any doubt orexplanation accompanying it. Indeed it is rather stated asamatter well known and acknowledged, and requiring noillustration.This could not have been the case, if it had been any newor peculiar doctrine, applicable only, as Brooke quotes it, tocorporations ; but it was that practical doctrine which necessarilyresulted from the recognition of the liability of aggregatebodies, and which we find occurring in the earliest periodsof our law. Nor would the reader have supposed thiscase capable of being applied in this manner, had not Brookeextracted from it this unimportant part of the case, for thepurpose of classing it under his head of corporations.This makes it important to consider, from whence Brookeadopted that doctrine to which he applies these cases.It should first be observed, that the abridgments whichprecede him, have no such title.Nicholas Statham, who was one of the barons of the Ex Stotham*schequer in the reign of Edward IV., cites in his Abridg ment.Y y2692 EARLY LAW ABRIDGMENTS.^dw^l^ ment cases from the Year Books till the end of the reignof Henry VI. ; and his compilation was published at Londonby Pynson, in the time of Henry VIII. It has no date ortitle page. But as it has Pynson's mark, it is supposed tohave been printed by William Tatler, at Rouen, who printedLittleton's Tenures for that publisher.This abridgment contains many cases during the chasmswhich occur in the Year Books ; but it contains no title ofcorporations, nor any allusion to them.Segden'i There is in existence an earlier manuscript abridgement,ment. made by one Thomas Selden, Principal of Fumivars Inn, whichpurports in a fly leaf* at the end of the titles, to have beencopied by one Lake, the abridgment being made by Seldenhimself; but as this has not been published, it may possiblybe of little authority, excepting for the purpose of justifyingthe observation, that there is also in that compilation a similarsilence as to corporations,^j'®'^- The next abridgment is that of Sir Anthony Fitzherbert,Abridg which was also printed by Pynson, in the commencement ofthe reign of Henry VIII.This compilation contains the cases to the 21st of HenryVII., and has ever been considered of the greatest authorityin the law ; embracing much matter not contained in the YearBooks or other authorities. And therefore it is clear, thatif the doctrine of corporations had been adopted in the law,at the time when this collection was framed, it would havefound a place in it ; but on the contrary, this work also is totallysilent with respect to them, notwithstanding we find allthe other heads of the common law to which we have beforealluded; as those of franchise — leets — hundreds — sheriffstoum — and villainage. And in folio 40, under the title ofWinches Aide de Roy, the mayor and commonalty of Winchester arenamed; reference being made to their charters, upon aquestion arising out of them. — And yet there is no mentionof a corporation, nor any reference to the principles ordinarilyapplied to those bodies.We are indebted for the inspection of this book to the kindness of Mr. EdwardGriffith of Gray's Inn, in whose possession it is.EARLY LAW ABRIDGMENTS. 693Again, in a complaint by a burgess of Newcastle-upon Edw. III.Tyne, that toll had been taken from him at Lynn ; the people Lynn.of the latter place, so far from being described as a corporation,are mentioned only as the " mayor and certain persons ofLynn ;" and, in another part of the case, as " those of Lynn."Thus we see that this term " corporation," here for thefirst time introduced into the margin of the Year Books, wasborrowed from Sir Robert Brooke's Abridgment, who wasChief Justice of the Common Pleas, in the second year of thereign of Philip and Mary, and whose book was first publishedin 1586, the 28th year of Queen Elizabeth. In referring tothe head of " Corporations and Capacities," in that work, itwill be found, that of the 91 short placenta of which it consists,24 only relate to municipal corporations. All theearly cases refer to ecclesiastical bodies — as the universities,colleges, abbeys, priories, chantries, societies, hospitals,masters and scholars, churchwardens, churchwardens, guilds,vicars, dean and chapter — those of municipal bodies, whichspeak of them as corporations, are subsequent to the reignof Henry VL Upon the whole it seems clear, from thesefacts, that the doctrines relative to corporations were firstreduced under a head, and arranged in a tangible formby this author, without any authority to support him in theYear Books, we have already quoted, or, as it will beseen, in those for many succeeding years. In fact it will beafterwards demonstrated, that the first distinct recognitionof a municipal corporation was in the Isti of Henry VI, withreference to Kingston-upon-HuU,* which had an expresscharter of incorporation granted to it for the first time in thatyear. — But to proceed with our extracts.In this term a charter of the king was produced, by Mich. T.which, with the consent of his council, and for 500 marks, Bristol,he granted to the mayor, sheriffs and commons, and theirheirs and successors, that the city of Bristol should beacounty by itself, should be called a county, and severedfrom the counties of Gloucester and Somerset, with thesuburbs and divers bounds, as well by land as by water;Vide post. Kingston-upon-Hull, 18th Henry VI.694 FOURTH YEAR BOOK.^^' ^^^' that they should every year elect a mayor j who should besworn before the preceding mayor ; that they should everyyear elect three men of the city, and should send themto the Exchequer, of whom the king should take one to betheir sheriffs to snake execution of all writs of the court ofthe king, and that they might hold their courts beforethe sheriff every Monday ; prove wills ; and do executionaccording to their usage.In the next case which relates to our subject, we find againin the raisin the term '' corporation' with a reference toBrooke's Abridgment ; but there is nothing in the text towarrant it. The case is as follows.Lincoln. The mayor and commonalty of Lincoln brought a writ ofcovenant against the mayor, bailiffs, and commonalty of thetown of Derby. In proof of the covenant the plaintiffs showeda special deed by the predecessors of the mayor and thebailiffs of Derby, to the mayor and the commonalty of Lincoln;which declared that the mayor and the commonaltyshould be quit of murage, pontage, custom and toll in thetown of Derby, of all merchandise of all those of the townof Lincoln, and of all those who have goods in all placesof the town, or within the bounds of Lincoln: and theycounted that certain burgesses of the town of Derby hadtaken toll and custom of certain burgesses of the town of Lincolnin wrong, against their covenant, and to their damage.It was said for the defendants, that this action was foundedupon an especial deed, made by the predecessors of the oneparty, and the predecessors also of the other, and that the writwas general. And by their count the plaintiffs had supposed,that private persons took, and thus arises the variance fromthe specialty ; and they prayed judgment of the count ; butit was not allowed. It was then urged for the defendants,that the writ supposed that certain burgesses of Derby tookcustom of certain private persons of the town of Lincoln,by which an action of trespass was given to them from whomthe goods were taken. And thus the plaintiffs would say thatcertain burgesses of Derby took the customs : but that couldnot be adjudged in breach of this covenant made by all theFOURTH YEAR BOOK. 695commonalty ; for which they prayed judgment of the writ, Edw. ill.as not warranted by the specialty. But for the plaintiffsit was answered, that the common officer of the defendantsdid this for their common benefit ; and that it was reasonablethat all the town should answer for him; and all thecommonalty could not come all at one time to take: — whereforeit was said that the writ was good enough : which thecourt determined. Then the defendants stated, that KingHenry, one of the progenitors of the king, gave by his charterto the mayor and commonalty of Derby, the town to hold infee-fiEurm to them and their successors, rendering to our lordthe king 40 marks per annum, as appears by the patent: —which proves that the town could not be charged or dischargedwithout the king: whereupon the defendants demandedjudgment, and prayed aid of the king. The plaintiffsanswered, that the charge was made by their own deed,under the charter of the king, in which case aid is not grantablein discharge of their own covenant, which is defensiblewithout the king: therefore they prayed judgment whetherthey ought to have aid ; and it was held that aid was notgrantable.This case is abridged in Fitzherbert, title, " Covenant," ^^^Jf '"pi. 22 ; but nothing is there said as to its application to anycorporate principle. On the contrary, it is cited in Brooke,under his head of '* Corporations," and it was quoted in the21st of Charles II., in argument by Saunders, in the case ofMelior r. Statesman,* for the purpose of establishing thepoint, that a corporation might take a grant for the benefitof their particular members, but in quoting it, Saunders doesnot use the term '^ corporation," and it does not appear in theoriginal, but Sir Robert Sawyer quoting it in the 34th ofCharles II., in his argument against the city, in the London Londono o •' ' quo war-quowarranto, without hesitation introduces that term, and canto.asserts, that it was contended in this case, that the act of thetwo burgesses did not oblige the "corporation." He proceedsto state that it was admitted that the act of all the members1 Sound. 344.696 FOURTH YEAR BOOK.J^^« ^^^' met together, would oblige the " corporation'* and that itwas resolved to be a breach binding the ^' corporation ;'* andthat the taking of toll by their officers, was a taking of thetoll by the " corporation'' He states the reason to be given,that all the members of the corporation, could not by anycommon intendment, be understood to meet together totake toll, and concludes by saying, *' There is an express'^ judgment that crimen egreditur personam, and renders the'corporation' liable for wrongs done to a particular memberof another corporation."In this statement of the case, Sir Robert Sawyer introducesa striking repetition of the term " corporation," which wasuseful for his argument, but not justified by the words ofthe case. Even if it were supported by the spirit of thedetermination taken with reference to the principles of thecorporation law, as they are now understood; still in theinvestigation of the time and manner in which the doctrineof corporations was first introduced, it is impossible not totreat this as an unjustifiable representation of the casereported in the Year Books.We must therefore arrive at the conclusion, that neitherthe introduction in the margin of this case, nor the applicationof it by Saunders, or Sir Robert Sawyer, is warrantedby the report.1370. Two citizens of the town of Nichols bring their writ ofFol. 6.' trespass in the King's Bench, against William Wild, bailiffof the town of Lynnee : complaining, that whereas the townand citizens of Nichols by charter of the king and his progenitors,were quit of toll in every city and town of England,yet the bailiff had taken certain of their goods and chattelsfor toll. In answer to which, it is pleaded that they heldthe town at lease, in fee-farm of our lord the king by charter,rendering to the king 100 marks a year : and they pray aidof the king.Afterwards the bailiff and commonalty are mentioned.It seems a singular inconsistency, that in abridging theYear Books, Brooke has not included this case also in hisLIBER ASSISARUM. 397head of corporations ; if either a grant to the " citizens of a Edw. in.city," or the " men of a town," or the mention of a " bailiff,"and " commonalty " imported a corporation.LIBER ASSISARUM.We now proceed to the Liber Assisarum, which also belongsto the reign of Edward III.; but which was not publishedtill 1616, the fifth of Henry VIII., when Rascal editedit, with a prologue prefixed.The abbot of Notre Dame in York brought an assise of j'Jp|7novel disseisin against the abbot of Selby, and another ofhis free tenants in T — . And the writ was challenged, becauseit was not by the name of the abbot of any church.We have observed at length upon some of the cases in thelast Year Book, that although there is not any reference to acorporation in the text, it appears in the margin by referencesto Brooke's Abridgment, that he has classed them underthat head : and the term is inserted therefore in the margin asareference to Brooke. The same occurs here, and in threeother places in the Book of Assises. But as the word *' corporation*'is in neither of these instances to be found in the text,it confirms the inference that the term was not in use at thattime ; and that it was adopted at' a future period, and usedby the printers and publishers of the Year Books in the margin,after Brooke had published his Abridgment.A question arose, whether in a writ brought against the p^336.nutyor and commonalty of York concerning a thing done inthe city, the inquest should be by foreigners ^ or should come Foreigners.from the city.*Here it is obvious that the term ^^ foreigners " is used forpersons inhabiting in the county at large, in contradistinction topersons inhabiting in the city. And the term " corporation "does not occur in the text, though it does in the margin, referringto Brooke ; who introduces that word in his abridgmentof the case.The brothers of a hospital are mentioned ; and Brooke, t ol. 33.corporation " referred to again in the margin.See before, Mine case, Manuscript Year Book, p. 679.698 LIBER ASSISARUM.^^'^^l> The villainage of two men and their wives is pleaded andFoi.33B. allowed.Villainage. -1347. ^® *®"^ " apprentice*' first occurs here,* — but little is toApprentice "^ Collected from the use of the term in this record, becauseit simply speaks of '' an apprentice in office;" and there isnothing more in the entry to show what the nature of theapprenticeship was, — excepting that he was to serve for threeyears, and he was to give eight marks for remaining.If apprentices were then frequent, it is singular that theyare not spoken of elsewhere in the Year Books.Fol Lease for life to a villain ; the lord claims it as the purchaseof the villain.This is another decisive instance, establishing the doctrine,that all the property of a villain belonged. to his lord, andthat this principle was then acted upon.FoL 100 B. Nota per Thorpe. — That a writ of trespass does not lieagainst a commonalty; but it is agreed in such writs thepersons should be named for certainty ; for it is said that youshould never have a capias or exigent against a commonalty.And this appears in a writ of trespass brought by J. of W.against certain persons and the commonalty of the town of S.It was said that the commonalty of a town should never benamed in any action as defendant or plaintiff*: if they havea mayor or bailiffs. But if they have neither mayor norbailiffs, then the commonalty only should be named.This case is also classed by Brooke under the head of '' corporations,"and a reference to his Abridgment occurs in themargin; — but the reader will perceive it is subject to theobservations made before.FoL 116 B. This case is also entered in the index to the Liber Assi-pL 8.sarum, under the title of " Corporation*' But the term doesnot occur in this particular case ; nor in any other part ofthe book ; neither is there any thing which militates againstthe position, that the notion of corporations, and the resultsflowing from it, were a subsequent introduction into our law.Foi 133 B. A few pages further, the right of the men of a town tocommon is stated generally, notwithstanding that right was,Vide ante, London, £dw. II.LIBER ASSISARUM. QQgby Steward's case,* restrained to those inhabitants of Edw. iii.a town who could prescribe in right of ancient houses. —And although an action is spoken of as maintainable by themen of the town, nothing is said of their being incorporated.The charter to Wilton, in Wiltshire, is pleaded ; and a ^^ JJ*-claim made under it : — but nothing said of its being a corps ^*'^'^«rcUian.The mayor and commonalty of Winton are mentioned, and ^^h}^, ®*they plead by their bailiff; and the men (gentz) of the town "**'**®^'are spoken of as contradistinguished from foreigners, who are Foreigners.to make inquest when the mayor and commonalty are parties.But nothing is here said of the mayor and commonaltybeing a corporation. Neither is this case, nor the two preceding,entered by Brooke in his Abridgment under thattitle ; nor are they so entered in the index to this Book ofAssises.We have before quoted, in the documents relative to Consol 227.London.don, a case describing the qualification for citizenship. Thesame description again occurs in this book, in a case inwhich it is stated, that from all times the custom of the cityof London has been, that each citizen could devise his tenementsand goods, as well in mortmain as otherwise ; whichfranchise was affirmed by charter of the father of the king, inhis lath year, to the citizens ; and that every man who hadlands in the city twas a citizen. It was said for the king, thathe allowed the citizens ought to have such franchises, namely,those to whom the franchise extended : — that is to say, thosewho are born and inheritable in the same city by descent ofheritage, or who are resiants, and taxable to scot and lot ;and its franchise was thus declared and claimed in Eyre, andby their petition it ought not to be extended to any otherpersons : and it was stated, that the testator in that case wasnot of such condition, because he was a foreigner. But itwas said for the defendant, that it was not denied that thetestator was a citizen. The court however said, because it isnot denied that he was not resiant, nor taxable, nor inheritedby succession, he was not a citizen, to whom alone this6 Coke*^ tUp. 60.700 LIBER ASSISARUM.Edw. III. franchise could descend. And it cannot be denied, that thelands were not aliened in mortmain ; and in another case itwas so adjudged before this time. And the court awarded,that the king should have execution, &c.It is impossible to define more precisely than in this case,the qualifications which gave to a person the title to be acitizen of London ; and the reader will not fail to observe,how strictly conformable they are with the doctrines of thecommon law, and our previous statements; for we haveurged, that it was not by tenure alone that a person becamea citizen. And in this case, the custom of London is describedto have been, not only that those who were born andSoiTof ^*" i^^^^^ohle in the city by descent were to be citizens ; butCitizens. also those who were resiant, and taxable at scot and lot: —which, coupled with other requisites of the common law —namely, that they should be of free condition — should besworn and enrolled — and be householders, (as not only requiredupon the principles of the common law, but also asanecessary concomitant of their being taxable to scot, andliable to perform lot, which presuppose personal residence,and the necessary occupation of a taxable house,) combinedall the qualifications of a full free citizen, and law-worthyman.1364. The bailiffs of the town of Dartmouth Harding, claimpi. 25. cognizance of all pleas, and plead a charter granted to thebailiffs and commonalty ; but nothing is said of their being:a corporation.1365. In an assise of novel disseisin,* which R. Paine and hisFol 232 BSalisbury.' wife brought against W. of H. and Rob. of F. of lands inSalisbury, it was said, that Salisbury was an ancient burgh,in which there had been a mayor and baily from timeimmemorial, &c. ; and that all lands which a man had bypurchase in the town were devisable, and always had beenso. And a writ ex gravi querela was sworn respecting theselands, before the mayor and the bailiff of Salisbury; and issuewas joined thereon ; and there was a finding by the inquest ;and the record was exemplified under the great seal of theSee also Fifth Year Book.LIBER ASSISARUM. 701king. In answer to which it was said, that a long time ^^^' ^^^*before an assise of novel disseisin was brought for the samelands before Shard and his companions, justices assigned ; &c.and a verdict of assise was found ; and execution allowedafterwards by force of a writ of ex gravi querela ; andit was denied that the mayor and bailiff of S. had jurisdictionin such a kind of plea. But it was answered, thatSalisbury was an ancient burgh, and that the mayor andbaily had been so from time immemorial, &c., and that thisplea appertained to them of right, for otherwise the testamentcannot be put in execution. And a day being givenfor delivering the judgment, the question was stated, whethersuch jurisdiction of common right belonged to the ancientburghs or not; and it was said that they had then sufficientmeans for the purpose without this jurisdiction; for inevery burgh and city the custom is, that a man can enterwithout other execution ; and in any place they will be putout by the baily: and they have also jurisdiction to put thedevisee in execution by writ of ex gravi querela, by whichit seems the averment, that they have not such jurisdiction,is receivable. And it was further urged, that ofnecessity such jurisdiction was given to ancient burghs; andthat the mayor and baily have had and used this jurisdictionin holding such plea from time immemorial, &c.In an assise of frank-tenement in Lodelowe, it was alleged p^''^^that the town of Ludlow is enclosed with walls, and from Ludlow,time immemorial has been held to be a burgh, and that alllands which have been purchased, have immemorially beendevisable ; but it was denied that the commons had any recordto prove that the town was a burgh, and they have notpleaded as a burgh, by ex gravi querela ; and we say theyhave been taxable to the fifteenth as an upland town; and uplandtowns are not burghs : in which case by the common law,the tenements are not devisable. And it was also said, thatwhere lands are devisable, they are pleadable in the sametown, per ex gravi querela : and the writ directs quod civesposset legate tenements sua tanquam catella : and of thisnothing is shewn here. They have not alleged that the lands702 LIBER ASSISARUM.Edw. III. are parcel of any grant in fee, which is subject to suchusages; thus they have shewn nothing to carry the assise. Tothat it was said, that in some towns, the younger issue by theusage would inherit ; and in others would be partible amongthe males : and this is likewise the condition of the land fromtime immemorial. And it is here alleged, that in all times thecondition of the land was such, that by the usage, the purchaserscan devise ; by which it seems that enough has beensaid to have the assise. And tenements in a town or burghare always devisable : and that condition is on account of thesoil, which has always been the use, as alleged. But itwas held that this was not the case of a franchise granted,which would follow the person — as, to be quit of toll —or of holding plea of all manner of pleas — ^which they agreeshould be maintained on account of being a burgess orcitizen in a city, or burgh : — but the condition of this landison account of the soil, and at all times has been of suchcondition, and not at common law ; and the justices directedthey should call the plaintiff; — ^by which he was nonsuited,&c.The reader will remember that this and the last precedingcase, harmonize with the first charter granted to the city ofLondon by William the Conqueror : — by which he gave tothem as burgesses, Ae power of freely devising their lands,which seems to have continued to be the usage of aU boroughsto this period.Mosaic L^^^ds Coming into the hands of ecclesiastical persons are^°MP' spoken of as being in mortmain : — which shows that the doc-foi.275. trine of perpetual succession was at that time applied to ecclesiasticalpersons : but it does not then appear to have beenapplied to municipal bodies: — ^which had they been recognizedas corporations, must have been the case.^**l' 17** ^^ bailiff of the franchise of Ipswich is spoken of; butnothing is said of the town being incorporated.Fot. 266. In a subsequent case, a prior is first described as perpetual,and he is said to have a common seal, with power to plead, andbe impleaded ; but the same capacity and powers do not appearany where in this book to be applied to municipal bodies.LIBER ASSISARUM. 703In the next case, the corporate powers of ecclesiastical bo ^^' ^^^'dies seem to be more clearly and distinctly defined than informercases; but it must be remarked that this is notextended to municipal bodies.A prior of the House of Lepers of Plimpton, brings an assise ^ ^f^Mof novel disseisin against the Prior of Plimpton Priory, and pl*^-made his plaint of a corody, that every day of the week heshould have certain viands, as a canon of the same house : —and it was objected, that the assise was brought by the nameof the Prior of the House of Lepers, he being a layman ; andthat in the house of which he claims to be prior, there is a congregateof poor people of their own authority , without otherfoundation; and in which house there is not convent, college,nor common seal.It was protested for the plaintiff, that he had no knowledgeof that, but that he brought his writ as Prior of thesame house, by the election of his brothers of the house, andthat there have been priors of the same house by election inthe same manner, from time immemorial.But it was urged again for the defendant, that the househad neither foundation, college, nor common seal, but thatthey were lay persons ; and if such an election was madeamongst them, it was no rule they could have it by law, as youcannot by law make those who have no priories able to havean action by the name of priors. But it was held, that asthey did not deny that a prior had always been elected inthe same house, the writ was good.It must be remarked, in confirmation of what we havebefore observed, that the objection here made to the plaintiffsbeing enabled to enjoy the grant, was, that they were laypersons, and not ecclesiastical ; showing clearly, that it wassupposed at that time, such privileges could be enjoyed onlyby the ecclesiastics, and not by the laity.The abbot of St. Oswald of York is stated among 1376.other things to be free of gilds, and of all services and secular pi. 6 B.'actions. And a grant is made by him, with the consent ofthe chapter, under the common seal.704 Charters-WALES.Edw. III.WALES.Having concluded our extracts from the important recordsof the Year Books for this reign, we proceed to quote thefew charters which will be necessary to establish that theboroughs of Wales, Scotland, and Ireland continued in thesame relative position, with respect to those of England.This will be proved by the charters in this reign to Balaand Cardiff.North The king granted to the burgesses of Bala, in Penthlyn,Bala. ^^ *^^ county of Merionyth,* their town to hold, to them,their heirs and successors, burgesses of the talon, at fee-farmfor ever — rendering at the Exchequer at Carnarvon, los. I2s.annually.1340. Hugh le Despencer, lord of Glamorgan, granted to thebui^esses of the town of Cardiff , that they and their heirsshould be free of toll, murage, &c. ; and that they mightchoose annually from the burgesses, four provosts, from whomthe constable of the castle should take two at his discretion, tobe the king's bailiffs ; and two ale tasters, who should be receivedand sworn at the Exchequer of Cardiff, before the constable :that they should be accountable for the issues of their bailiwick; and for their services should be quit for the year of therent of one burgage: — that notice of all merchandise comingto the town should be given to the provost : and that noneof the burgesses should be imprisoned in the castle, as longas they could find pledges at the outward gate of the castle :and that inquests as to all things done in the borough, shouldbe determined by the inhabitants and not by others. Thatneither the bui^esses nor their heirs should be made receiversof the king's rents, &c. : that they should be free to sell :and that they and their heirs might freely bequeath theirburgage tenures : that they should not be compelled to goout of the ancient bounds, or the liberty of the town, on anybusiness against their will. That no stranger should buy anymerchandise out of the fairs or markets within the boundsof the boroughs, but only burgesses; except the natives• Rot. 26.WALES. 705of Glamorgan for their victuals, and not on account ofEdw. III.merchandise ; nor should any hold any shop of any merchant Cardiff.discs, &c., unless he should have been living with the burgesses,and paying scot and lot, and received into the guildof the liberty.It was also granted to the burgesses and their heirs,that they might make a guild among themselves, with theusual clause as to the liability of debts. That no bailiffor officer should make summons or attachments within thebounds of the borough, but the constable and bailiffs of thetown, elected by the burgesses themselves : — that they shouldhave common of pasture : — and attachments in the hundredcourt of the town were provided for. That all merchantsand others who lived by buying and selling, should reside inthe borough, and not in the uplands ; and that they shouldtransact their merchandise in the fairs and markets of thetown, and not elsewhere. That neither the burgesses northeir heirs should keep any watch ; nor keep any fugitive inchurch without the walls : that they should have assise ofbread and ale, and that the burgesses should not be boundby any claims made in the county of Glamorgan : — that theyshould have their own prison, and execution before the constable,and two fairs, with the toll and custom due to the king,also power to hold pleas of the crown during the fair. And thatno merchant should buy any merchandise out of the fair.There was likewise granted to the burgesses, all pleasand plaints in the hundred court of the town, exceptingpleas of the crown, forestalling, homesoken, and pleas ofland : — the constable to hold the hundred court, and pleasof pie-powder, and to be mayor of the town.In this charter, we perceive, that the burgages of the bo burgages,rough are twice mentioned ; so that burgage tenure ought tohave prevailed in this borough, as well as others, if that peculiarright had any legal foundation — but there has neverbeen any trace of it in Cardiff.The merchandise being brought into the town, and thefinding of pledges at the castle gate, the reader will rememberare founded on the early English laws.z z706 WALES.-1RELAND.Edw. III. The inquests, it will be observed, are to be taken by theinhabit inhabitants. The exemption from all services without theborough, is in strict conformity with the laws, charters, andpractice of the English boroughs. The prohibition againstStrangers, trading within the borough, for strangers is also in strictanalogy with the usages of this part of the kingdom ; andNaiivM, natives are mentioned — respecting which we have quoted somany of our early law authors. In the same manner also,we find reference to the payment of scot and lot ; and thenecessity of being in a guild, to authorize a person to opena shop and trade, is defined with a precision even more distinctthan in the English charters. The exclusion of theother bailiffs of the king, and the substitution of a localjurisdiction in the hundred court, characterises this grant, aswell as the English charters. The same distinction is alsopreserved between the borough, uplands, and foreign, whichwe have remarked in the numerous documents before quoted ;and we find likewise a reference to watch and ward — theassise of bread and beer — and the exemption from suit to thecounty — in all which provisions this charter resembles thoseof England.1559. This king also confirmed the grant of Edward II., toEdward Le Despencer, cousin and heir of Hugh Le De-spencer,and to the then burgesses, and other men, tenantsof Cardiff — Usk — Carlton — Newport — Cambridge — Neathand Kenfig.IRELAND.One or two charters will prove the same points with respectto Ireland.1338. Thus, Edward III. established, that the same privilegeswere intended to be continued to the city of Dublin, byconfirming the charter which was granted by King John tothat city.1363. And in the 37th year of his reign, confirmed to the citizens,their heirs and successors, the former charters ; by LettersPatent, which commence by reciting,* that considering the• Rot. Cart. 37 £dw. III. n.l.IRELAND. 707laudable services which the citizens had rendered the king, ^^' ^^^-particularly in defending the city — and that they might be Dublin.able the more peacefully to carry on their commerce — andas certain privileges had been confirmed to the cities ofWaterford and Cork, and the town of Drogheda — the kinggrants to the citizens of Dublin, all the privileges whichthose cities enjoyed. That the mayor, chosen every yearfrom among themselves, might, in the presence of the comnumalty, take his oath before his last predecessor. That thecitizens, their heirs and successors, citizens of the city,should have the return of writs; that no minister of the kingmight enter the city, unless on the failure of the mayor andbailiffs of the city — except in four pleas, rape, arson, forestalling,and treasuretrove. That the citizens should not beimpannelled upon juries without the city, so long as theyshould be residents there : and that they should not be impleadedwithout their city, but within their walls, in theirguildhall — except concerning pleas of foreign tenure, whichdo not appertain to the hundreds of the city. That the mayorand bailiffs might hold cognizance of all pleas; and that noneof the citizens should be impleaded without the city ; andthat they might account by their attorneys; and that nobailiff of the king should take any citizen as long as hecould obtain any bail, unless for felony. That the citizens,their heirs and successors, citizens of the city, might holdthe city, with all the liberties and free customs they hadtheretofore enjoyed.That the mayor and citizens might hold their court ; andaccording to their petition, which stated that the foreignmerchants, had bought and sold in the city, engrossing theprofits of merchandise there, yet making no contributiontowards the charges incumbent on the city — the king thereforegranted, that all foreign merchants who should buy orsell within the city, should pay with the citizens, to talliageand other charges upon it.The provisions of this charter are in perfect conformitywith the English; and the cities of Dublin, Waterford,Cork, and the town of Drogheda, are all placed upon i708 Ireland-SCOTLAND.^^^' '^^' wisely the same footing. So that it may with safety be inferred,that, notwithstanding any slight variances in thecharters, or the usages of the English or Irish boroughs,they were all originally intended to be, in substance, thesame; particularly as it appears, that the king granted a1330. confirmation to the citizens of Waterford, their heirs andsuccessors, of the charters of Henry III., Edward I., andEdward II.: which it will be remembered, were in conformitywith the provisions of the Saxon and English lawsand customs.SCOTLAND.With respect to the Scotch boroughs at this period weJ have little information, excepting that David II., in the22nd of Edward III., holding a Parliament at Perth, astatute was passed by the three estates of the realm, providing,that as long as the two boroughs of Berwick andRoxburgh, which were two of the four courts, remained inthe hands of the English, the boroughs of Lanark andLinlithgow should be received in their places. In thedirections which follow for the regulation of the jurisdictionand proceedings of the court, it was, amongst other things,ordained, that all matters concerning the utility of the commonweal of the king's boroughs, their liberties, and courts,should be ordered and determined at it. And in one of thesections, provisions are made relative to the assise of breadand flesh, and the disturbers of the peace, within the boroughs.All these regulations presenting the strictest analogyto the boroughs in England.MSwtatem ^" ^^® Same book with the Regiamm Majestatem, is usuallyCourt found the form of holding a court baron — which is clearly"°°' not of so early a date as that work, but is said to have beenwritten some time after.suitors Ijj |.]^g 3j^j section, both the suitors and outsiders of theOuttmton. j.Q^p^ 2^j.g mentioned — which is one of the circumstancesclearly distinguishing that court from the court leet; thelatter being, from its very nature, confined to resiants withinthe leet — whilst the tenants of the manor, who are the suitorsSCOTLAND. 709at the court baron i^iay, or may not, be resident within the Kdw. in.manor.Throughout this work, another distinction also betweenthe court baron and court leet is apparent — namely, that thejurisdiction of the former is confined to civil suits betweenparties — and the proper jurisdiction of the latter, is in criminalcases and matters of police.In the 17th chapter, the four boroughs of Edinburgh Stir FourBoroughs.ling, Lanark, and Linlithgow, are mentioned; as well as the Cap. 17.burgh of Haddington; where the chamberlain sits; beforewhom three or four of the most discreet burgesses of theother boroughs are to appear, on appeals against judgmentsin the borough courts.From what has been stated before, it would seem that thiswork must have been written after the laws of the four courtswere made by David II. ; by which the boroughs of Lanarkand Linlithgow were substituted in the place of Berwick andRoxburgh.In the 68th chapter it is stated, that any strangely man Cap. 68.that is, any one who has aught within the jurisdiction of thebailie, by which he may be distrained — may be a burgh.David Bruce granted a charter to his faithful burgesses of I3:iiInverness, and the community of the borough, devising to 1343.them at fee-farm and in fee for ever, all the borough, withDrakes in the county of Inverness, to hold to the communityand bui^esses, and their heirs for ever, in fee andinheritance, Sec. ; with the fisheries, mills, mill toll, and theirproceeds, with the toll and little custom of the borough —with all liberties, &c., and appurtenances to the town, &c.belonging, rendering therefore 80 marks.This charter is granted to the community, the burgesses,and their heirs : but there is no mention of successors, norany words referring to a corporate body, or conferring corporaterights, except that of giving them the borough inperpetuity; which, however, it must be remembered, wasthen frequently done; and lands and property were so held,without the bodies holding them being treated as corporations.710 SCOTLAND.Edw. III . Amongst the statutes enacted during the reign of thisCap. 12. king, the 12th chapter contains four sections against vagrantsand for their imprisonment ; and the same is repeated inthe 14th chapter of the book on capital crimes. In the 12thchapter of pecunia crimes, it is directed, that if a man isfound without a master, he shall be charged to seek one ;which if he does not, he shall pay aught kye, and shall beput in the king's ward until he find a master.Cap. 16. The 16th chapter requires malefactors who are summoned,to appear within forty days ; which is also the time allowedfor appeal by any of the king's lieges who find themselvesexcommunicated by any unjust or wrongous process, underthe statutes of Robert III.Sec. 2. And by the 2d section, sheriffs, provosts and baillies, failingto put in execution the act against beggars, and everyperson who is found begging, should pay to the king, Ss. 4rf. : —that is to say, those who are not crooked, sick, impotent, orweak folk.Sec. 3. The 3d section directs, that provosts and baillies of boroughsshould keep the streets fire from beggars, under thepain of 40«.Cap. 19. Chapter 19 of the same book provides, that all earls, lordsand barons of Parliament, prelate, or burgh, being lawfullywarned, and absenting themselves from Parliament withoutlawful excuse allowed by the lords of the articles, shouldforfeit — every earl, 300Z. ; every lord, lOOZ. ; every prelate,200Z. ; and every burgh, 200 marks.Cap. 27. Chapter 27 provides, that every man should dwell at homein his own house — and that no person other than hostlersshould receive any strangers.Cap. 39. By chapter 39, wapinshaving was to be made by all menbetween 60 and 16 years, under certain pains pecunia.Residence.In the form of process before the lords of council — addedat the end of the Regiamm Majestatem — the 4th chapter, whichconcerns the service of summons, divides it into personal —and at the dwelling place — which is described to be wherethe defender makes daily residence with his wife, bairns homeSCOTLAND. 711and family. Nam uniuscuj usque domus et familia ibi esse ^^- m*intelligible ubi ejus uxor habitat* — which is m precise accordancewith the doctrine we have before adopted as therule of residence in England.In the book concerning crimes, neither capital nor pecu- Cap. ii.nialy chapter 1 1 provides, that no man shall be suffered tobeg betwixt 14 years and threescore and ten years ; and idlemen shall be compelled to pass to the king's ships, andlabour therein, under the pain of banishment :t becauseidle men, who have not of their own, shall be kept in warduntil they find burgh or caution — that the country shouldbe unscathed of them; and the same being found, thesheriff should cause them to get a master, or to fasten themto lawful craft ; and if they fail they shall be put in prison,and punished at the king's will, j:Chap. 47. It is not lawful to any burgh to sell their free ^*P' ^^*dom and privilege, under the pain of tinsel of their freedomswhich was also in substance declared to be law in England,in the case of Rex v. Breton. ||Chapter 60. If any man is disobedient or rebel within ^ap- 50.burgh, his house shall be cast down, and he shall be banishedforth of the burghsA provision precisely similar to what we have before seenin the custumals of the Cinque Ports.The chapter of the justitia general, near the end of the inhabitMajestatem, section 16, speaks of the inhabitantslying in different sheriffdom; and directs in what courtsthey shall answer. And the 25th chapter speaks of theinhabitants of stewart's and railleries.In chapter 30, the baillies of burrows are directed to be Cap. 30.called upon to say, if they are ready to present to the king's burgesses.justice, &c., each burgess indicted within their burgh.All these provisions, in a greater or less degree, confirm• Lac. V. Pari. 6, c. 75, 1. I, sec. 1. — Et ibi Barton. ff. de liber agnoscend.t James IV. Pari, 4, c. 49. % James 1. Pari. 3, c. 66.i James. Pari. Il,c.ll2. || 4 Burr. p. 2260.\ Leges Burgorura, c. 122.712 CONCLUSION.Edw, 111. with respect to Scotland, that which we have asserted asto Wales and Ireland ; and it is impossible to withstand theconviction resulting from all these documents, that the samesystem of county and borough jurisdiction originally existedin all the three divisions of the empire, although they maynow vary in some particulars, having been perverted anddeformed by local customs or usurpations.conclusion. We have now arrived at the conclusion of the documentsrelative to this reign — not more celebrated for its militaryexploits, than for the great advances which were then madetowards the formation of a more permanent and better regulatedsystem of government.Hume justly observes, " there is no reign among thoseof the ancient English monarchs, which deserves more tobe studied than that of Edward III. ; nor one where thedomestic transactions will better discover the true geniusof that kind of mixed government which was then establishedin England."The records which have occurred during this long dynasty,have afforded us some of the most important facts to illustrateour subject.Thus, besides the important results to be collected from thestatutes and charters, — that the freemen and villains, theshires and boroughs, were still contradistinguished from eachother, — that the burgesses still continued the same class asbefore, — that there were no additional traces of corporations,that the boroughs of Wales, Scotland, and Ireland, wereupon essentially the same footing as those of England — weLondon, find in the records relative to London, the precise and distinctdescription of whom the body of the bui^esses or citizensconsisted ; — viz., of all those who were born inheritableIN the city, or who were resiants, and taxableTO SCOT AND LOT ; — which was the deliberate decisionby a court of competent jurisdiction, upon a question distinctlybrought before them : — so that we may with certaintyrely upon the fact, that this class of persons were at thatperiod the citizens of London ; — and if that be correct, theCONCLUSION. 713same class of persons would continue to be the citizens to the Edw. in.present day, unless the qualifications have been altered bysome competent authority ; a subject it will be necessary forus to investigate, when we arrive at the statute passed in1725, 11 George I., relative to the elections for London. '* Geo. I.If this was the proper description of the persons who werethe citizens of London, and we are accurate in the position,which the numerous charters we have quoted establish —that the burgesses of all the boroughs were the same ; — itthen follows, that this was likewise the real description of allthe other citizens and burgesses. And when we consider inaddition to this, that all the laws which we have cited, bothof the Saxon and Norman periods — as well as the subsequentcompilations and treatises — all tend to confirm the samedoctrine ; there can be no rational doubt that this is the legitimatedefinition of a burgess.There is also another point of equal importance, which isdecisively put at rest during this reign, viz., the non-existenceof municipal corporations, and the total silence with respectto them in all the statutes and records; a point placedbeyond the possibility of doubt, by the facts we have collected,relative to the subsequent introduction of the term inthe printed copies of the Year Books.The documents we have extracted with reference to theuniversities, also establish the same point ; and fix the periodwhen the ecclesiastical bodies began to be interwovenwith the municipal institutions.We therefore close this long and important reign with thesatisfactory conclusions, that there were no municipalCORPORATIONS AT THAT PERIOD, THAT THE CITIZENS ANDBURGESSES WERE THE FREE INHABITANTS OF THE PLACE,WHO WERE BORN HERITABLE THERE, OR WHO WERE RemnantsPAYING SCOT AND LOT WITHIN IT; and as a necessary consequenceof those facts, were sworn and enrolled thereAS burgesses.RICHARD 11.We have now advanced to the shorter — weaker — and lessimportant reign of the degenerate son of the Black Prince ;and we shall consider the documents according to thearrangement we have hitherto adopted.STATUTES.Purveyor. j^ many chapters of the statutes, traces of the publicanxiety to be protected from the abuses of purveyors, arestrikingly exemplified.1377. xhe 6th chapter directs, that commissions shall beawarded, to inquire of, and punish the misbehaviour oftenants and land tenants, in villainage, to their lords. Thebook of Domesday is mentioned, as well as the manors andtowns where the villains are described as dwelling; and givesto the lord, remedy against the excesses of those persons.Cap. 7. The 7th chapter prohibits the giving of liberties for maintenance.1378. In the 1st chapter provisions are made, that all merchantsmight buy and sell within the realm, without disturbance —the preamble reciting, that '^ great complaint had been made,that in many cities, boroughs, ports of the sea, and otherplaces, the citizens, burgesses, and other people, had notsuffered the merchant strangers to sell their commodities,to any but them of the cities, boroughs, &c., by whichmeans a great dearth had been created." The act provides,that all merchants, aliens, in amity of the king, shouldthenceforth safely come ; and in all boroughs, cities, portsof the sea, fairs, and markets, abide with their goods,under the protection of the king, as long as they pleased,without disturbance or denial of any person — except that allwines should be sold in gross and not at retail, in any of theSTATUTES. 715cities, boroughs, or other towns franchised ; but only by the ^'*^^'^^*inhabitants and freemen* in the same. In another part inhia>itaiitoof the statute, those who are to sell by retail are described, Freemen.as only the ** citizens and burgesses' in their own cities andboroughs, and other good towns franchised. The merchantstrangers were to pay all the customs and subsidies due.All charters and franchises preventing their selling, beingthereby annulled. And the king's officers of the cities andboroughs are described, as the mayor, bailiffs, or other thathave the keeping of such franchise. And other towns andplaces where no franchise is, and the bailiffs and constables,or other wardens of them, are mentioned.In the 6th year of Richard II., it was enacted, " That all ^^'\*^ and singular persons and commonalties, which from henceforth shall have the summons of the Parliament, shall^ come from henceforth to the Parliaments in the manner as** they are bound to do, and (have) been accustomed within'' the realm of England of old times. And if any person of^' the same realm, which from henceforth shall have the^ same summons, be he archbishop, bishop, abbot, prior,** duke, earl, baron, banneret, knight of the shire, citizen ofcity, burgess of borough, or other singular person, orcommonalty, do absent himself, and come not at the saidsummons, except we may reasonably and honestly excusehim to our lord the king — she shall be amerced, and otherwisepunished, according as of old times hath been used^' to be done, within the said realm, in the said case. Andif any sheriff of the realm be from henceforth negligent inmaking his returns of writs of the Parliament — or that he*' leave out of the said returns, any cities or boroughs, which** be found, and of old time were wont to come to the Pareliament — she shall be (amerced, or otherwise) punished, in'^ the manner as was accustomed to be done in the said case** in times past."In the 6th year of Richard II., stat. 1, chap. 9, the English 1382." Freemen." — Considering the several documents extracted in this and thepreceding reigns, it is impossible that this term could here apply to any but the*liberi homines'' of the common law. It cannot be referred to any corporatemeaning.i€4€4iU716 STATUTES.Rich. II, title of the chapter is, " That no victualler shall execute aTown judicial place in a city or town corporate'*oro . ^j^^ reader is no doubt aware, that the title forms no partof the act ; and after a very careful investigation of theoriginal Statute Rolls, at the Tower of London, no authoritywhatsoever is to be found for the insertion of the termcorporate,"We therefore have no hesitation in asserting, that theexpression " town corporate " does not occur upon theStatute Roll ; and was therefore introduced, without authority,at some subsequent period: — being a similar interpolationto that which we have seen practised in theYear Books of the preceding reign. It would be singularif it did — for it would be the only document of that periodcontaining such a term ; for we have before seen, that thestatute relative to the merchant strangers, which speaks ofthe cities, boroughs, ports, or towns franchised, mentionsnothing of corporations. And the same observation may bemade with respect to the last statute of the 5th of Richard II.chapter 4.It is certainly extraordinary, that in the recent authorizedpublication of the Statutes of the Realm, the same error iscontinued of introducing the term " corporate," in this andother places of the Statute Book — which is altogether inexcusable,being unjustified by any warrant of the originalrolls, which have no titles — and totally unnecessary to thecompletion, or explanation of the text. The translation ofthe statute is as follows : —Item. — It is ordained and enacted, That neither in the cityof London, nor in other cities, boroughs towns or ports ofthe sea, through the realm, any victualler shall have, exercise,or in anywise occupy any judicial office, but in suchtown where none other person sufficient may be found tohave the same office. In which case, nevertheless, the samejudge, for the time in which he shall continue in the saidoffice, shall utterly omit and abstain, as well by himself ashis servants, from the exercise of victualling, upon pain offorfeiture of his victuals so sold."STATUTES. 717The following chapter, relative to aliens selling in England, Rich. ii.again mentions cities, boroughs, and toms, as well within Cap. 10.liberties as without ; but makes no allusion to corporations.The 11th chapter, which relates to the sale of fish by Cap. ii.hosts in cities and toms provides, that all hosts, as well ofthe city of London, and the towns of Great Yarmouth, Scarborough,Winchester and Rye, as also in all other tovxns andplaces upon the coast of the sea, and elsewhere, as wellwithin liberties as without, shall abstain from forestalling.Notwithstanding the above enumeration of towns andliberties, there is no mention of corporations or towns corporate.The English title of the next chapter has the same term Cap. 12.introduced, for it is described to be an Act, that " All chiefofficers of towns corporate shall be sworn to observe theaforesaid ordinance respecting fishmongers ;" but there isno such expression upon the statute rolls. The translationof which is as follows:'* Item. — It is ordained, that every mayor of London for thetime being, especially amongst other things, shall be chargedon his oath, to be given to him at the king's Exchequer, thathe shall hold and keep the ordinance of fishmongers andvictuallers made as is aforesaid within his bailiwick ; andthe same, all favour set apart, shall from time to time requireto be put in due execution. And likewise, in the samemanner from henceforth, let all the mayors and bailiffs, andall other governors of cities, boroughs, and towns, and ofsuch victuallers, in every place through the said realm,within liberties and without, be specially charged in all theiroaths to be taken upon their new creation in their offices,that they shall cause such ordinance of victuallers to beholdenand firmly kept in their bailiwicks, as much as tothem and every of them pertained''The 7th Richard II., chapter 11, enacts, inter alia, "That ^^^^all the vintners and victuallers, as well fishers as other, London.coming with their victuals to the city of London, shall befrom henceforth under the governance and rule of the mayor718 STATUTES.Rich. II. and aldermen of the said city for the time being, as in timepast it hath been used'From whence it appears, that the mayor and aldermenthen, and for a long time past, had been the rulers andgovernors of the city.1385. The 9th Richard II., chapter 2, recites, Whereas diversviUauu and neifsy as well of great lords as of other people,as well spiritual as temporal, do fly within cities towns,and places enfranchised, as the city of London, and otherlike, and feign divers suits against their lords, to the intentto make themyrcc by the answer of their lords: — It is accordedand assented, that the lords nor others, shall not beforewarned of their villains, because of their answer in thelaw.From this statute we see most distinctly, that the doctrineof villainage was still acted upon ; and that the prescriptionof manumission by the neglect of the lord, was by this lawin some slight degree restrained.1387. In the 1 1 th year of Richard II., chapter 7, other enactmentswere made respecting merchants, aliens, and denizens; —and although the same enumeration occurs of cities, boroughs,towns, ports and other places, yet there is no reference toany corporation ; nor in this case, even in the English titlewhich precedes this statute.The same observation may be made upon the 11th chapterin the same year ; and the 12th of Richard II., chapter 13 ;and also upon the statute as to servants in husbandry, inthe same year, chapter 3.This last statute is an ample confirmation of many ofthe principles of the Saxon laws ; and recites and confirmsthe former statutes by the same king, and further ordains,Vagrancy, that no servant nor labourer shall depart at the end ofhis term out of the hundred, rape, or wapentake whereResidence he is dwelling, to serve or dwell elsewhere, or by colourto go from thence in pilgrimage, unless he bring a letterpatent containing the cause of his going, and the timeof his return, if he ought to return, under the king's seal,which for this intent shall be delivered to the keeping ofSTATUTES. 719some good men of the hundred, rape, wapentake, city, or ^*^^'^^'borough, after the discretion of the justices of the peace to Residencebe kept; and that about the same seal there shall be writtenthe name of the county ; and athwart the said seal, the nameof the hundred, rape or wapentake, city or borough ; andalso, if any servant or labourer be found in any city orborough, or elsewhere, coming from any place, wanderingwithout such letter, he shall be immediately taken by thesaid mayors, bailiffs, stewards or constables, and put in thestocks, and kept till he hath found surety to return to hisservice,* or to serve or labour in the town from whence hecame, till he have such letter to depart, for a reasonablecause. And it is to be remembered, that a servant or labourermay freely depart out of his service at the end of his term,and to serve in another place, so that he be in a certaintywith whom, and shall have such letter as afore. But themeaning of this ordinance is not, that any servants, whichride or go in the business of their lords or masters, shall becomprised within the same ordinance for the time of the samebusiness ; and if any bear such letter, which may be foundforged or false, he shall have imprisonment oi forty days forthe falsity, and further till he hath surety to return, or serveor labour, as before is said. And that none receive servantor labourer going out of their hundred, rape or wapentake,city or borough, without letter testimonial, nor with lettertestimonial above one night,* except it be for cause of sickness,or other cause reasonable, or which will and may serveand labour there by the same testimonial, upon a pain to belimited by the justices of the peace; and that as well artificersand people of mystery, as servants and apprentices,which be of no great property, and of which craft or mysterya man hath no great need in harvest time, shall be compelledto serve in harvest, to cut, gather, and bring in the com ;and that these statutes be duly executed by mayors, bailiffs,stewards, and constables of towns.The 5th chapter of this year relates to the same subject Cap. 6.matter, and ordains, that whosoever used to labour at the• Sai. Lh720 STATUTES.Rich. II. plough and cart, or other labour of service of husbandry,Ue^iiJence till they be of the age of 12 years, shall from thenceforthabide at the same labour, without being put to any mysteryor handicraft ; and if any covenant, or bond o( apprentice, befrom henceforth made to the contrary, the same shall beholdenfor nought.Cap. 7. So also the 7th chapter provides, that every person whogoeth begging, and is able to serve or labour, shall bedealt with in the same manner as he who departed out of thehundred, &c., as aforesaid ; except people of religion, and hermitshaving letters testimonial of their ordinaries. And thatthe beggars impotent to serve, shall abide in the cities andtowns, where they be dwelling at the time of the proclamationof this statute ; and if the people of cities or othertoums will not, or may not suffice to provide for them, thatthen the said beggars shall draw them to other towns, withinthe hundreds, rape, or wapentake, or to the towns where theywere born, within /or^yciay^ after the proclamation made, andthere shall continually abide during their lives. And thatall of them that go in pilgrimage as beggars, and be able totravail, it shall be done as of the said servants and labourers,if they have no letters testimonial of their pilgrimage, underthe said seals. And that the scholars of the universities thatgo so begging, have letters testimonial of their chancellor,upon the same pain.Cap. 9. In the 9th chapter, provision is made for the executionof the Statute of Labourers within cities and boroughs, by thesheriffs, mayors, bailiffs, and wardens of gaols.In the code of laws contained in the last preceding statutes,relative to labourers, apprentices, beggars, and impotentpersons, we trace the important link which connects the Saxonlaws with those which are at present in use, with respect tothe provision and settlement of the poor.Responsible residence was the broad basis of the Saxonlaw; and to insure it, vagrancy was prohibited, and theremoval from one place to another not allowed, exceptingunder the security of responsible pledges, or the testimonialsof persons to whom they were known. In the same manner.STATUTES. 721we perceive in these enactments, that the removal of servants ^'<^^- ^^'and others from place to place, without testimonial letters,is prohibited, in conformity with the principles of the Saxonlaws : — sto the analogy with which, the more modem practiceof granting certificates may be attributed.As a consequence of this restraint upon capricious changeof residence, it was necessary to define where such personsshould permanently dwell ; and therefore it is declared, ^' thatthey shall remain where they were resident at the time ofthe proclamation of that statute" — an early statutablerecognition of the settlement, under the common law, byresidence. But if the places in which they were so residentcould not support them, they were to depart vriihin forty daysto those where they were born — the first statutable recognitionof the settlement by birth. The title to the privilegesof burgess-ship — ^as well as to support in case of poverty —thus depend upon the same general principles: — and areconnected either with actual permanent residence ; or withthe title permanently to inhabit within the place, by reasonof birth. And therefore it was, as we have before seen, thatbirth in London was one of the qualifications for a citizen;as here it is a title to maintenance. It appears from thecorporation records of the city of London, that a proclamationwas made in the 5lst of Edward IIL,* that all those 1377,who were enfranchised of the freedom of the city of London,should be residing within the city, within eight days, on painof losing their freedoms: and that the freemen of the citywho were within it, should not pass the franchise withoutleave of the mayor, upon the same penalty. And hence weperceive the connexion established between those rights.It should also be remarked, that both these titles arerecognized with reference to the common law divisions ofthe county, — into hundreds — wapentakes — and towns: — andnot with reference to parishes ; which we shall find hereafterapplied to the matters of relief and settlement by the statutes,in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, subsequently to the dissolutionof monasteries.•H. fo.73B.3 A722 STATUTES.7^'<^^-^^' The statute of Richard IL, upon which we are commenting,also provides, that these vagrants are to be sent away withinForty days forty days ; which is in strict conformity with the principlesof the Saxon laws, and with the records we have beforequoted. This likewise appears to be the first statutablerecognition of compulsory removal; upon which the presentpractice of removing the poor was probably founded : andit was evidently from the same provision, that the fortydays residence without removal, became so important a featurein the poor laws. The principle upon which that periodis mentioned in the statute, and which is borrowed, as wehave repeatedly remarked, from our earliest laws, beingclearly this — that if the pauper was allowed to remain 40days unremoved, it was to be presumed, either that hebelonged there by birth, or otherwise ; or that the place wasable and willing to support him — it being always borne inmind, that it was after the period of forty days that thetithingman was bound to report a resiant to the king'sofficer, for the purpose of his being sworn and enrolled.Another class of persons referred to in these laws, also requiresparticular consideration.Apparent In the reign of Edward II., the apprentices are mentionedin the articles for the government of the city of London, andthey occur again in one of the statutes in the reign of Edward1388. III.: — they are referred to, more particularly in the fifthchapter of this reign.We have already explained the principles extracted fromGlanville, and our other legal treatises, upon which theapprentices were considered entitled to be treated 2isfreemenyor liberi homines : — it therefore only remains here shortlyto observe, upon the first reference to them in our publicdocuments ; and the general nature of their situation at thistime.^\??2- The first mention which we have discovered of apprentices ison the corse of a writ in the Parliament Rolls, 20th Edward I.,by which writ the king enjoined J. de Nottingham and hiscompanions, that they should by their discretion, provide acertain number from every county, of the better and moreSTATUTES. 723lawful and the most free to learn, by which they might under ^^^^' standwhat would best avail, and be most fit for their court, Apprehendthe people of the kingdom ; and that those whom theyshould elect for this purpose, should follow the court, andshould intromit themselves in the business in that court, andnot others. And it seems to the king and his council, thatseven times 20, (140) would suffice ; nevertheless let the saidjustices appoint more if they should think fit."Although the writ is indorsed " De Automatic et Apprentices,"and the same title is entered in the margin, yet theterm " apprentices " does not occur in the body of it ; sothat this appellation was not probably in use at the time ofthe framing of this writ, but became so soon afterwards, whenthe marginal note and indorsement were added. That theterms " automata et apprentice " were subsequently affixed,is the more probable, because, as is observed in the marginof Seaman's Glossary, it seems attorneys did not exist in the20th Edward I.These apprentices appear to have been particularly addictedto the law, and were perhaps of the same grade as thebarristers of modem times."^When the term was first applied to those learning crafts ormysteries, does not distinctly appear. The first allusion tothe apprentices of the crafts, of which we are aware, is inthe London articles. We next find them in the statutes ofthe reign of Edward III. In the 12th year of which reign,the word is also used in a deeds in its present signification.In the 21st of Edward III., they are mentioned in the LiberAssisarum,j: which is followed by this statute of Richard11. : — from whence the reasonable inference is, that the termhad been at that time introduced into general use; and thatbinding by covenant or indenture was the general form ofapprenticeship.In the 10th of Richard II., from a memorandum at this i387.period, we find that it was ordained by the mayor, aldermen,It ic suggested by some, that they were the attorney's clerks ; by others, thatthey were the Serjeants.t Ken. Par. Ant. Glo;^«. verb. App. X Lib. Ass. 83 B. pi. 18.3a2724 STATUTES.^' ^^ ^^' and common council, that no foreigner should be enrolled anApparent apprentice nor be received into the franchise of the city, bywayof apprenticeship, unless he first swear he is 9l freeman,and not a native. — In which document, the term "fireman,"as applied to apprenticeship, is evidently used in the senseof the ancient conmion law expression, " Liber homo ;" andnot in any corporate meaning : — and is applied in contradistinctionto the term "native," borrowed from the early lawof villainage, to which we have before attributed the origin ofapprentices becoming free.The name is afterwards again applied particularly to theapprentices of the law, in the clause introduced into the1404. parliamentary writ in the 6th year of Henry IV., by whichthe sheriff is prohibited from returning to Parliament anyapprentice, or any other man of the law : where the term isevidently used as only applicable to lawyers.1405. In the next year, the 7th of Henry IV., a statute waspassed, prohibiting persons from binding their children asapprentices, unless they had 205. in land or rent. Fromwhich it would seem, that it was then the practice to apprenticechildren to " miseries or crafts." For it is recited,that although former statutes had directed, that those whowere engaged in husbandry should remain at their labour,without being sent to " miseries or crafts ;" and that covenantsor licenses to the contrary were void ; nevertheless, thatchildren born within the towns and lordships of upland, whosefathers and mothers have no land or rent, nor other living, butonly their service or mystery, be put to serve as apprenticesto divers crafts within cities and boroughs, sometime at theage of 12 years, and sometime within ; so that there is sogreat scarcity of labourers and other servants of husbandry,that the gentlemen and other people of the realm be greatlyimpoverished for the cause aforesaid : and it was ordained,that no man nor woman, of what estate or condition they be,should put their son or daughter, of whatsoever age he orshe be, to serve as apprentice to any craft or other labour,within any city or borough in the realm, except he have land• Liber Tiger, fol. 66.STATUTES. 726or rent to the value of 20s, by the year at the least but ^*^**-^^'they shall be put to other labours, as their estates doth Aj^pren-require. And any covenant to the contrary should be holdenvoid. And every person that would make his son ordaughter apprentice to any craft within city or boroughsshould bring to the mayor or bailiffs of the said city orboroughy a bill sealed under the seals of two justices of thepeace of the county where such infant was born, testifyingthe value of the lands or rents of his said father andmother, as afore is said. And that in every leety be it inthe king's hand, or of any other, once in the year all thelabourers and artificers dwelling in the leet should be swamto serve, and take for their service after the form of thesaid statutes."An indenture of apprenticeship in Latin, of about this date,is stated by Madox, in his Formulae Anglican, to havebeen in existence in the Augmentation Office.The statute of Henry IV. appears to have produced ***29.some difficulties to the citizens of London, and a petition waspresented in the 8th year of Henry VL, to the Commonsin Parliament by the mayor, aldermen, and commons of thecity of London,* stating, that amongst other franchises it hadbeen granted to them by the. king and his progenitors, thatthe manner of taking apprentices in their city ancientlyused should be observed. That by the immemorial usageof the city, every person who was not of villain estate orcondition, but o{ free estate and condition, might himself placehis son or daughter in apprenticeship to any freeman of thesame city, to learn his art or mystery ; and that everyfreeman of the city could take such person in apprenticeship.That they had been vexed by colour of an article in thestatute of the 7th of Henry IV., directing that no one shouldput their son in apprenticeship but those who had to thevalue of 205. a year in land or rent. And they pray that theancient custom may be observed : referring also to the Statuteof Labourers — 12 Richard II.The king directs, that the ancient custom shall be Pet. Pari. n. 20, p. 354.726 STATUTES.Rich. II. served as long as it pleases the king, and that the petitionersAppreD- shall not incur the penalties of the statute.1436! Apprentices are said to be mentioned at this date inthe ordinances of the Sadler' and Glovers' Companies ofNewcastle-upon-Tyne.*15G2. The 5th Elizabeth, chap. 4, authorizes any person, beinga householder, to take as an apprentice the son of any free1660. man, not occupying husbandry. And in the 12th and 13thof Charles II., in an action of covenant, upon an indenture ofapprenticeship, it was averred in the declaration, that thecustom of London was that time out of mind, every Freemanhad been accustomed to take apprentices In the13th and 14th of Charles II. the settlement of the poor byapprenticeship was recognized : — ^which concludes the referencesnecessary to be made upon this head.The result of the whole is, that there is no reason to believethat apprentices existed before the time of legal memory ; —and consequently, that there can be no prescriptive rights re-petting them. Next, that the first apprentices which are mentioned,are those which were addicted to the study of the lawthat the first legislative enactment with regard to them, isin restraint of children being indiscriminately bound as apprentices— that from the earliest times they appear to havebeen bound by covenants and indentures ; a solemn contractof which kind must have been requisite to give full effectto the principles we have before adopted, for the purposeof explaining their manumission from their lords. And,finally, it should be remarked, that they were to be swornin the court leet, which we have before shown would berequisite by the common law. They were also requiredto be bound to freemen, both in London and generally;which, for the reasons we have adduced, could only meanthe " liberi homines " of the common law : — for they couldnot be bound to villains ; nor if villains, could they be boundat all, as is expressly recognized in the London petition ;and they obtained, under the general operation of the PoorLaws, a settlement in the place in which they had served,•2 Brand, 367. f 1 Lev. 12.STATUTES. 727BS fixed and permanent inhabitants there, by virtue of their ^*c'»' *^'binding and residence.Tins it is clearly demonstrable, that apprentices hadNOT their origin in any corporate principle : — nor hadany connexion with corporations ; but that their conditionrested upon the earliest principles of our common law ; andthey have gradually risen to their present state, and presentrights, by the combined effects of the common and statutelaw, without the slightest reference to corporations.The statute 12 Richard II., chapter 12, relative to the ex 1388.pence of knights of the shire, ordains that the levying ofthem should be made as hath been used ; and if any lord, orany other man spiritual or temporal, had purchased any landsor tenements, or other possessions that were wont to be contributoryto such expences before the time of the purchase,the lands, tenements, and possessions, and the tenants ofthe same, should be contributory to the said expences, asthe same lands, tenements, and possessions were wont to dobefore the time of the purchase.This statute, in fact, recognizes the exemption of spiritualpersons from these expences ; but makes them liable, accordingto the principles of the common law, for lay fees recentlyacquired.In the 15th chapter, it is ordained, that the king's castles 1391.and gaols, which were wont to be joined to the bodies of thecounties, and be now severed, shall be rejoined to the samecounties.This clause seems to confirm the doctrine we have so often Castles.asserted, that the castles were distinct from the boroughs,and belonged to the counties.The 5th chapter recites the statute of mortmain 7 Edward ^»'»rtmain1391.I., statute 2 ; and provides, that no religious persons shallcontinue to hold lands in perpetuity, without license from thecrown, and it adds, that " the same statute should extend andbe observed of all lands, tenements, fees, advowson, andother possessions purchased, or to be purchased to the useof guilds or fraternities. And moreover it is assented, be Guilds.728 STATUTES.^^^' ^^' " cause mayors, bailiffs, and commons of cities, boroughs,and other towns which have a perpetual commonalty andothers which have offices perpetual, be as perpetual aspeople of religion, that from henceforth they shall notpurchase to them and to their commons or office, upon*^ pain contained in the first statute de religionis."From this statute it is evident, that the doctrine of mortmaindid not before apply even to guilds or fraternities ; andstill less to mayors, bailiffs, commons of cities and boroughs,and other towns which are stated to be perpetual bodies;but it is obvious, that they were only considered as such bynatural succession, and not by any artificial notion of a bodycorporate or politic. Had they been so, this statute wouldhave been unnecessary : and therefore its enactment is astrong confirmation of the position we have adopted, ** thatthere were no municipal corporations recognized before thisperiod." Nor does this statute recognize them, but merelydeclares in substance, that this succession of individuals inatown, being as perpetual as the succession of the clergy,in abbeys, priories, &c., therefore grants of lands to them,are within the same mischief, and consequently should bewithin the same remedy. But it must be remembered, itdoes not describe the cities and boroughs as incorporated, ormake them incorporations.The anxiety of Parliament to uphold and preserve theconmion law, may be seen in the preamble of the 12th chapterof this year. And we should also observe with respect toLiverymen the liverymen, who have in modem times become so importanta body, that the statute of the 10th year of this reign,chapter 4, provides against yeomen, and all under the estateof esquires, taking any livery called " livery of company,"from any lord, if he be not menial, and continually dwellingas one of the family in the hostel of the lord. The sameprovision is in substance repeated in the second chapter ofthe 20th of Richard II.PARLIAMENT Rolls-LONDON. 729Rich. II.PARLIAMENT ROLLS.With respect to the city of London and Southwark, we London.find upon the parliament rolls of this reign, the followingrecords: —The mayor, aldermen and commons of the city of London, 13^7.in consequence of victuallers, felons, &c., escaping punishmentfrom the city, by going into Southwark, where the ministersof the city cannot arrest them, in consequence of thecourt of the Marshalsea being there, notwithstanding the saidtown had been granted to them ; pray a re-grant containingthe express words, ** That the ministers of the city can makedue executions and punishments upon the malefactors in thetown, according to the usages and customs of their city ; thatno ministers of the Marshalsea, or any other except the ministersof the city, issue in the said town, that is to say in thatpart which is called gildablej^ any attachment or other executionswhatsoever, but that such part of the town, shouldremain perpetually annexed to the jurisdiction of the city, inmanner as the other suburbs of the same city."tHere we have a part of Southwark, which was not originallya borough, but belonged to the county of Surrey, describedas "gildable:" — a term frequently applied before in thesame manner.The citizens of London also petition for a confirmation oftheir former charters; J which is granted. And they prayfor the continuation of the following four franchises : —Ist. — that no stranger of their franchises should sell orbuy of another stranger, any merchandises within the franchiseof their city, under forfeiture, &c. ; and that all controversieson this head, may be taken away by the grant ofthe king's charter.The king wills it to be between merchant and merchantonly, saving the privileges of his lieges of Aquitain.2nd. — That as the citizens of London have not from ancient• Sec before, l'293. 21 Edward I. t Pet. ParL n.30, p. 19.X Pel. Pari. n. 1, el stq. p. 27.730 PARLIAMENT ROLLS.— LONDON.^'^^' ^^* times been accustomed to receive the commands or orders ofany lord, constable, seneschal, steward, marshal, &c., but onlythe mandates or commands of the king, sealed with his publicor private seal, except the mandates of the justices, accordingto the form of their charters ; the citizens, in order to appeaseall future controversies on this head, pray that this alsomay be expressed by the charter of the king.The king answers, that it should be used as of ancienttime.3rd. — That as it has been customary that only the citizensshould inquire of the customs, impositions, metes, and boundsof the franchise of the same city ; and of purprestures, andall other things within the franchise, regarding the commonaltyof the city ; the citizens pray that this also may beexpressed by the charter of the king.The king answers, that the customs, impositions, and pur-pressures,should be inquired of by themselves. And as tothe bounds and metes, they should be defined, if any doubtthere be.The 4th claim relates to the lands and possessions oforphans. And they generally claim that their charters shouldbe favourably interpreted.The king answers: — The interpretation of charters belongsto the king. And if any doubt should arise, the king,by the advice of his council, would make such interpretationas should be accordant to reason and good faith.The citizens farther claim a right to enjoy any franchisesthat the king and his progenitors might think proper to grantto any city or borough in England'sThe constable and marshal of England pray, that themayor and sheriffs of London may answer for a contempt beforethe council, in having hindered and disturbed him indoing right, and executing justice in causes which appertainto his jurisdiction in the city of London, upon them whowere enfranchised in the said city.f1378. Theclei^, lords of the realm, justices, Serjeants at law,and other lay people, who are not continually resiant in• Pet. Par!, n. 4, p. 28. t Pet. Pari. n. 4, p. 30.PARLIAMENT ROLLS.— LONDON. 731London and other towns, are exempted from the payment of ^'^^' ^^'tenths and fifteenths for their houses, horses, books, vessels,or other goods, on account of their residence there.*In this document, the doctrine of resiancy is expresslymaintained, as subjecting the party to the liabilities andburdens of the place ; and is, in conformity with our formerassertions, confined to continual residence.An entry on the Parliament Rolls of the 17th of Richard II., 1393.chapter 11, recites the grants by Edward II. and Edward III.that the aldermen of the city of London should be removedfrom their office every year, at the feast of SaintGregory ; and that they should not be re-elected the yearnext ensuing ; but that other sufficient persons of the cityshould be every year newly elected. Nevertheless, for thebetter governance of this city, it was ordained, —** That thenceforth the aldermen be not ousted from theoffice of alderman, at the feast of St. Gregory, nor at anyother time of the year, without good and reasonable cause,nor any other elected in their places ; but that they shouldremain from year to year in their said office, until they beremoved for just and reasonable cause as above, notwithstandingthe ordinances aforesaid."The following entry also occurs in the 12th chapters** Although it were ordained and granted by King Edward,great grandfather to our lord the king that now is, in the28th year of his reign, that the mayor, sheriffs, and aldermenof the city of London, which had the governance of the city,should cause to be redressed and corrected, the errors, defaults,and misprisions, which were notoriously used in thecity, for default of good governance of the mayor, sheriffs, andaldermen ; and the same duly punish from time to time, upona certain pain, that is to say, at the first default, 1000 marksto the king ; and at the second default, 2000 marks ; and atthe third default, that the franchise of the city should be takeninto the king's hand : and that every of the mayor, sheriffs,and aldermen, which should appear before the king's justices,• Pet. Pari. m. 3, p. 48. t Rot. Pari. 317.732 PARLIAMENT Rolls-LONDON.^'^'''^^' in manner and form as is ordained by the said statute, andshould answer particularly for himself, as well at the peril ofothers which be absent, as of himself; and that such ordinanceshould be holden firm and stable, notwithstanding anymanner of franchises, privileges, or customs, as in the saidstatute is more filly contained. — Now our lord the king, consideringthe generality of the said words, that is to say, 'errors,defaults, and misprisions,' and the several intendments whichmay thereof be conceived, hath, at the supplication of themayor, sheriffs, and aldermen of the city, declared and granted,by the advice and assent of the lords spiritual and temporal,in this present Parliament, that it is not his will, nor hisintent, nor the intent of the said statute, that the mayor,sheriffs, and aldermen of the said city, who now are, or haveheretofore been, or hereafter shall be, should incur nor sufferthe pain of the said statute, for any erroneous judgmentgiven within the said city."The 13th chapter recites, that the ward of WarringtonWithin and Without the city of London, is so increasedin possessions and inhabitants therein, within these few yearspast, that the governance thereof, is too laborious and grievousfor one person to occupy and duly govern the same— ourlord the king, by the assent of his council in this presentParliament, at the prayer of the mayor, aldermen, and commonaltyof the city, hath ordained and granted, that betweenthis and the feast of Saint Gregory next coming, the peopleof the ward of Farringdon Within, may elect an alderman,wise, sufficient, and able to govern the said Ward Within,and to be named — the alderman of the ward of FarringdonWithin ; and that between this and the feast of Saint Gregory,the people of the ward of Farringdon Without, may electanother alderman, wise, sufficient, and able to govern thesaid Ward Without, and to be named — the alderman of theward of Farringdon Without. And that the said two aldermenso elected, may be established, and not removed, exceptfor cause reasonable, as is ordained and granted.We also find on the Parliament rolls of this reign, a recog-CHARTERS, &C.-LONDON. 733nation of the law of villainage, as being then acted upon, in ^^^^' ^^•the following entry :* — VillainageDavid Tremors issues a writ de homines replegiando, againstthe Earl of Warwick, and others, directed to the sheriff ofCornwall; and the suit therein, for determining upon thevillainage, having been several times adjourned, — the earlhad permission granted to him, that it should be determinedin the King's Bench, without nisi prius being granted duringthe plea.CHARTERS.In pursuance of the petitions to Parliament in the first ^™"-year of this reign, the king, with the consent of Parliament,granted a charter to the citizens of London, reciting, byinspeximus, and confirming, all their former charters ; alsogranting and confirming to them, notwithstanding thestatutes which were passed in this reign, that no foreignershould buy or sell within the liberties of the city. And thatthe citizens were not bound by the precepts, or process ofthe constables, marshals, &c., but only those at the king'ssuit; and authorizes the citizens to take inquisition bythemselves, as prayed.In the 7th year of this same reign, another charter is ^383.granted to London, referring also to petitions presented toParliament by the citizens. And the king also gave anotherconfirmation of all the former charters ; and granted that nosummons, attachment, or execution, by any ministers of theking, should be made within the liberties of the city, butby their own officers. And that they should be restored toall their former liberties, notwithstanding any non-use, orabuse of them.With respect to the tenure of London, there is no doubt BufKaRe1 enure.that it continued to be held, as it always had been, by burgagetenure ; for there is an inquisition, post mortem, of the6th year of this reign, upon the death of Roger Estrangewhich finds, that he was possessed of one great tenement,• Pet. Pari. n. 8. p. 326.734 CHARTERS, &c.~LONDON.^*^*lliL* Lincoln's Inn, in St. Andrew's, Holbom, in the suburbs ofLondon, held in free bur gage j as the whole city of London.1390. In the 13th year of this reign, there is another inquisition,before the mayor, as the king's escheator, upon the deathof Roger Clifford, stating, Clifford's Inn to have been heldby him in free burgoyne, as the whole city of London.* Andsimilar documents occur in the 15th of Richard II., the3rd and 4th of Henry IV., the 10th Henry V., and in thereigns of Henry VI., and Henry VIII.The citizens of London having obtained the restoration oftheir civic rights, and secured the confirmation of them bythe king, appear to have applied themselves to correct theabuses which had crept into the administration of theirelections and affairs, by their own misconduct. Deputies,or representatives from the wards, had, in the reign ofEdward III., been chosen, as persons who were to be summonedby the mayor, to deliberate for the common good ofthe city ; and persons elected in the same manner, as deputies,or representatives, were also to make the elections.It is however obvious, that both these bodies were onlydeputed by the wardmotes ; and having nothing but deputedauthority, it was liable to be rescinded by the same powerwhich had created it.However, during the continuance of this deputed authority,it seems either to have occasioned, or to be chargedwith occasioning abuses — which were afterwards attemptedto be corrected, by expedients more objectionable than thosefor which they were substituted. For, at the close of thereign of Edward III., it was ordained, by many of the chiefcitizens, that the persons whom we have before named,instead of being selected by the wardmotes, should for thefuture be nominated by the trading companies — a thingaltogether unauthorized by the common law, or any of thecharters of the crownsFrom these illegal proceedings, greater confusion andirregularity is stated to have prevailed ; and the citizens at• Mad. Fir. Bur. 22. t Norton, 163.CHARTERS, fitch-LONDON. 735large still persisted in interfering at the meeting, and at the ^'<^^*^''elections.We have been unable to examine the original ordinances 1384.and records of the city, which relate to these circumstances ;and therefore we are obliged to quote these facts from theaccurate work of Mr. Norton, who states, that, in the 7thyear of this reign, by an ordinance of the whole commonaltyconvened for the purpose, the former mode of nomination bythe trading companies, was repudiated ; and the electionswere directed for the future to be made, as they originallyhad been, at the wardmotes.Unquestionably this was, in every respect, a more legaland constitutional method — more consistent with the generallaw, and the particular charters of London ; because the lattermeetings were, in fact, courts recognized and sanctioned bothby the one and the other ; and the suitors were there actingunder the oaths they had taken in the wardmote : — whilst,upon the other hand, the trading companies had no suchoriginal legal foundation, nor legally the sanction of suchoaths. And it should always be borne in mind, by whatevermode these persons were selected, they possessed onlya delegated authority, which could at any time be recalled,by those from whom it had been derived and conceded.Nevertheless, Mr. Norton states, " that although theordinance of the 7th of Richard II. corrected the formerabuses in many respects, yet it did not affect the meetings incommon hall; which, therefore, continued for many yearsafterwards, to consist of persons appointed by the tradingcompanies." So difficult is it, when an abuse has onceexisted, perfectly to correct it — particularly if, having continuedfor some time, the original nature and object of theinstitution which is abused, has been partly obliterated, orperhaps altogether forgotten.736 CHARTERS, &C.-OXFORD AND CAMBRIDGE.Rich. II.THE UNIVERSITIES AND BOROUGHS OF OXFORD ANDCAMBRIDGE.We now proceed to the records relative to the boroughsand universities of Oxford and Cambridge, as far as theymay tend to illustrate our subject.1377. The king, in the first year of his reign, granted to the bur-oxford.9^^^ of Oxford a charter confirmatory of their previous1379. liberties. And in the next year, confirmed the liberties andprivileges gi-anted to the university by Edward III.1391. In the 14th year of his reign, he re-granted to the chancellor,his deputies, and successors, the jurisdiction over allthe members of the university, and their servants and attendants: and further directed, that the pleas should be held atany place within the town, or any other place within theprecinct of the university — which is mentioned here for thefirst time : — the chancellor's jurisdiction being always beforespoken of, with reference to the persons of the scholars andstudents, and not to any local limit. The limits of theborough are specifically mentioned in a subsequent charterof the first of Edward IV.This charter also contains a non-intermittent clause, as toall judges, sheriffs, mayors, bailiffs, and other ministers ofthe king ; — and enables the chancellor, his deputy, and hissuccessors, to imprison offenders in the castle of Oxford, orelsewhere in the town; — and that the sheriff of Oxford, thekeeper of the castle, the mayor and bailiffs of the town,shall receive them, and keep them in custody.We find upon the Patent Rolls,* a declaration fromthe king, that the visitation of the university of Oxfordbelongs to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and not to theking.1381. The king in the fifth year of his reign granted to the changcellar and scholars of the university of Cambridge,'^ the custodyof the assise of bread and wine — which was a part of thejurisdiction of the leet of the borough — and the cognizance ofall other personal pleas, — with power of imprisonment when• Rot. Pat. p. 3, in. 9. t 4 Inst. 228.CHARTERS, &c.— OXFORD AND Cambridge. 737the master and scholars, or their servants were either party. ^^'<^*>- ^^'That no other justice, sheriff, or minister should intromit, unlessthe chancellor should make default. And the king prohibitedthe official of the court of Canterbury, and the Bishop 13^8,of Ely, that they should not send their inhibitions or citationsto the chancellor of the university, to the injury of theliberties, or to the disturbance of the cognizance and executionof pleas.In the second year of the same reign, the men of Cambridgerender an account in the Exchequer,* in which themayor and bailiffs of the town are mentioned.In the sixth year of Richard II., there were proceedings in 1382.an action, in which the plaintiff declared for an assault andfalse imprisonment; and the defendant, on the behalf of themayor and commonalty of Cambridge, claimed cognizance ofthe plea, and for that purpose he cited all the charters thathad been granted to the borough of Cambridge, and amongthem one by Heniy I. The king then sent a writ to thejudges of the court, directing them to inspect those originalcharters; which the judgment of the court states they haddone, and that they had found them to be correct ; and theyallowed the cognizance, as the liberty and franchise wasclaimed.During this reign the mayor appears to have had thegeneral care of the town, — the charge of keeping it cleanand free from nuisances, and that the inhabitants were boundto keep the streets paved.BRISTOL.It appears that Bristol and the suburbs were at this period i378.in the possession of two keepers of the town, at fee-farmswho held it in the same manner as the mayor and commonaltyhad held it by the grant of Queen Philippa, then latelyQueen of England, reserving to the king all his royalties andliberties in the same town ; and also saving the constableshipof the castle. But it seems that in the same year, theking re-granted their privileges to the citizens, by giving• Mad. Fir. Bur. 8. f Rot. Fin. pi. ra, 17; 1 Pet. MS. 57.3b738 CHARTERS, &c.Rich. II. them a confirmation of the charters of the 6th, 21st, and 47thof Ed ward III.1396. The king in this year again confirmed all the former grants,although not used ; and directed that the steward, marshal,and clerk of the king's household, should not sit in the cityof Bristol : — as before had been granted in substance to thecitizens of London.Liverpool. This king also gave a charter to Liverpool, containingby inspeximus the charters of King John and Henry III., andthe confirmation of Edward III. And granted that no personnot of the guild, should buy or sell any merchandise inthe borough without the consent of the burgesses.This is another instance, establishing that the merchant-guildrelated to the privileges of buying and selling withinthe borough, and was not connected, like burgess-ship, withits police or municipal government.^T*^?*^" ^^ *^^ ^^^ y^^' ^^ ^^^® reign, we find a writ to the mayory^y' and bailiffs of Newcastle-upon-Tyne, for levying upon thecommonalty of the town the wages of the members of Parliament.Inhabitant It is obviously to be inferred, that the commonalty uponholders, whom this levy was to be made, must have been the inhabitanthouseholders within the borough : because they couldonly have been subject to such an impost in case they wereresiding there; and there would be nothing to levy upon,unless they were householders. Nor could they be subjectto this charge if they were villains, and not of free condition.If then they were freemen, inhabiting houses withinthe borough, they necessarily would, as such free resiants,have been sworn and enrolled at the court leet; and inrespect of their houses, they must have paid scot and lot.Therefore being free inhabitant householders, sworn and enrolled,and paying scot and lot, they would be the fullBurgesses, burgesses of the place ; entitled, amongst other things, to votefor members of Parliament ; and on the same grounds boundto pay the levy for the wages of the members whom theyhad elected.1399. In this year, the king granted a charter to separate theCHARTERS, &c. 739town of Newcastle-upon-Tyne from the county of Nor t hum ^^^^' ^^'berlandf and to make it a distinct county of itself. It is observable,that there is no express mention, in the abovecharter, of any exception of the castle, or castle yard.There is at the Rolls Chapel, a private act of Parliament forputting this castle, and the yard, into the county of Northumberland,for the convenience of the judges at the assises.The act must have been obtained soon after the abovecharter of separation: — for in 1447, 26 Henry VI., in an 1*47.inquisition, dated January the 5th, it is mentioned in thefollowing words, " Apud Castrum Domini Regis de novoCastro super Tynam in comitatu Northumbria." As also,in a subsequent entry, in the '^ Golden Duke," of a memorialof the Ist of Edward IV., it is described as follows : — " Be it 1461.remember, that I, Rob. Rode, sat at the castell, in theNewcastel-on-Tyne, in the county of Northumberland."It is also said to be in the county of Northumberland, inamore recent charter to the corporation of Newcastle.In an old manuscript, entitled, " A copy of Sir Thos.Tempest instructions to defend the town of Newcastle'srights against a survey lately returned, wherein" it is certified,that the greatest part of the town is held of the town —and, speaking of the charter of separation by Henry IV., it isobserved, " but the castle was still reserved for the prison ofNorthumberland."A licence was granted by this king to the mayor and ^,^^^'citizens of the city of York, their heirs and successors, topurchase lands, tenements and rents, to the value of lOOZ.per annum, to be holden of him in burgage, with the city and Burgage.suburbs, for the support of the bridges of Ouse and Foss ;and the same to be certified into chancery, that it could bedone without damage of the king or of others.That they should have cognizance of all pleas of assise, ofnovel disseisin, &c. of all manner of lands and tenementswithin the city, &c. before all justices and ministers of theking, to be holden and kept before the mayor and bailiffs inthe guildhall.That the keepers of the peace, and justices assigned to hear3b2740 CHARTERS, &c.^'^*'*^^* and determine felonies, &c. in the three ridings within theYork, county of York, or in any places of the same, should notintermeddle within the city, &c.That the mayor and 12 aldermen of the city, and theirsuccessors, or four, three, or two of them, with the mayor,should have full correction, punishing, hearing and determiningall things and matters, as well of all manner offelonies, trespasses, imprisonments, and extortions, as of allother causes and quarrels whatsoever, happening within thecity, &c.That the city of York, with the suburbs and precincts ofthe same, according to the then limits and bounds, andwhich are now contained within the body of the county ofYork, be from henceforth clearly separated and exemptedfrom the county, in all things, as well by land as by water,and that the city of York, and suburbs of the same, andprecincts, be from henceforth a county by itself, and be calledfor ever " the county of the city of York''That every mayor of the city should be the escheator in thecity, &c.That the citizens and commonalty, instead of their threebailiffs, should have two sheriffs, &c.; and should chooseevery year, of themselves, two fit persons for their sheriffs inthe city, &c.; which sheriffs forthwith, after their election induemanner, should take their oaths in due form before themayor, whose names should be sent yearly for ever underthe common seal of the city unto the Exchequer, &c.That the said sheriffs of the city might hold their countycourt on Monday, from month to month, &c.That the mayor, sheriffs and aldermen, with the commonaltyof the city, their heirs and successors, for ever,should have the forfeiture of victuals, by the laws to be forfeited,viz. bread, wine, ale, and all other things that do notpertain unto merchandise.That the stewards and marshals of the king's house,and the clerk of the market, from henceforth should notenter or sit within the liberties of the city, nor exercisetheir office there, nor inquire of any thing done, or to beCHAR] Es. &c. 741done, within the liberty; nor do in anywise intermeddle *^>c*»- 1^«themselves, &c. York.That the coroners of the city, and their successors, mightexercise their office, as well in the presence of the king as inhis absence, as they have ever been accustomed.That the citizens be not bound to attend nor obey anyprecepts or commandments of the constables, marshals, oradmirals of England, nor the keepers of the marches towardsScotland, nor any of the king's officers or ministers, &c.;except of the king's great and privy seal, &c. ; and the commandmentsof the king's justices, according to the form ofthe statutes, &c.That foreign merchants, not being free of the city, shouldnot sell any merchandise to any other merchant not beingfree ; neither should any foreign merchant buy any merchandisewithin the liberty of the city of any foreign merchant ;always provided, that against rebels, and the king's enemiesof Scotland, to resist, &c.That the hundred or wapentake of the Ansty, with theappurtenances in the county of the city of York, be annexedand united to be parcel of the county ; and that the suburbsof the city, precincts, hundred or wapentake, and every oneof them, with their appurtenances, and every thing that iscontained in them and every of them, (except the castle ofYork, and its towers and ditches pertaining thereto,) be ofthe county of the city of York, as well by land as by water ;and that all bailiffs of free lieges within the county of thecity of York, be attendant and obedient only to the preceptsand commands of the sheriffs of the county of the cityof York, and to no other sheriffs.That the mayor, citizens, and their successors, have allgoods and chattels of felons, fugitives, &c.That the mayor and citizens should have for ever all andsingular the customs of things to be sold, coming to the city,without any account to be made thereon ; to be levied andgathered for the closure and suppuration of the walls of thecity, &c. (except always the church of York, archbishop,dean and chapter of the same,) with all profits, privileges, &c.742 CHARTERS, &c.^^^^' ^^' That the mayor and aldermen, and also the recorder of theYork, city for the time being, four, three, or two of them, of whomthe mayor and recorder always should be two, for ever bejustices, to oversee and keep the waters and great rivers ofOuse, Humber, Wharf, Derwent, Aine, and Dunn, as wellwithin the county of York and Lincoln as in the county ofthe city of York, &c.The king further granted to the mayor and citizens, ormayor and commonalty, of the city of York, and their successors,that they should hold two fairs or markets yearly atthe city, &c.^7^8 *** The king, in this year, confirmed the former charters to theburgesses of Ipswich, as they had heretofore used and enjoyedthem.*And by charter granted in substance as follows: —That his subjects of Ipswich had besought him, that theyand their predecessors, by virtue of their charters and confirmation,from the time of the making thereof, have alwayshad the cognizance of all pleas concerning lands, tenements,and rents, as well by writ of assise as by other writs ; andcognizance of pleas, trespasses, debts, compacts, contracts,covenants of assise, fresh force, and other pleas whateverarising in the town ; that dissensions had arisen among theburgesses ; and justice had also been retarded, because suchcognizance had not been granted with certainty to someofficers of the town ; and praying that the king would begraciously pleased to grant such cognizance to the bailies ofthe town who should annually be chosen by the burgesses.The king then grants, with the assent of his council, andfor 405., which the burgesses should pay to him in thehanaper of his chancery, that the bailies of the town annuallychosen, and to be chosen by the burgesses of thesame for the time being, might have and take cognizance ofall manner of pleas concerning lands, tenements, and rents,as well by writs of assise as by the other writs of him andhis heirs ; and also cognizance of pleas concerning trespasses,debts, compacts, contracts, covenants of assise, fresh force,• Rot. Cart. 2 Rich. II. n. 2.Chattels, &c. 743and all other pleas whatsoever arising within the town, as ^ '^*'- ^ ^-fitly and wholly as the burgesses by virtue of their charters ipswich.and confirmations have always hitherto had.And in the third year of his reign, Richard II. again confirmedthe charters to Ipswich.*There is also a charter of this date to Huntingdon wherein Hummingof King John and Edward III. are recited and confirmedat the request of the burgesses of Huntingdon, forafine paid by them. This charter also grants certainother liberties and customs. That they should have thereturn and execution of all the king's writs; and of the summonsof the Exchequer, concerning all things arising withinthe borough, so that no sheriff, bailiff, nor minister, shouldenter into that liberty to execute such process, but in defectof the bailiffs ; and that the burgesses should answer at theExchequer.That they should have a gaol for all such as should bearrested within that liberty for felony, trespasses, and allother offences; to be kept by those whom the burgessesshould cause to be deputed.That the burgesses and their successors, and their heirs,burgesses of the borough should for ever be quit of toll,murage, pontage, &c.This passage shows, that neither birth nor inheritancemade a burgess ; but that the heir of a burgess, must alsohimself become a burgess, before he was entitled to theprivileges of the borough.This charter further granted, that the burgesses shouldhave the cognizance of all pleas by their bailiffs or theirdeputies there ; as well of all lands, tenements and rents,being within the same town, as of trespasses, covenants,contracts and plaints, arising or done there, by all tenantsor residents within the same town.That they should not be put with foreigners upon juries,assises, or inquisitions, which, by reason of foreign pleas orbusiness, should happen before the king's justices, so longas they dwell within the borough. Nor should foreigners• Rot. Cart. 3 Rich. II. n. 10.744 CHARTERS, &c.Rich. II. be put with the burgesses upon the like juries or inquisitionsHunting which, by reason of the lands and tenements, or of thecauses of actions arising there, should happen. Nor shouldthey be convicted of any pleas arising there by foreigners,but only by the burgesses, unless the matter concern theking or the commonalty* of that borough. And this withoutthe let or hindrance of the king, or his heirs or successors,or their justices, sheriffs or other ministers.That strangers coming with their grain and other merchandiseto the town, had, for carrying on their trade, hiredhouses, there to lay up their grain and merchandise, andbad paid a custom called Gamers^e^f that the strangerswho hired such houses, seeing the town so wasted, and voidof inhabitants, did deny to pay the custom ; and the kingbeing willing to provide for the peace and quiet of the burgesses,granted and confirmed that the burgesses there dwell-^ing, should have and receive the custom called Average,of all strangers who should have and hold such houses inthe town; and should compel them, as often as there shouldbe need, to pay the custom for ever, as before that timethey were wont to do : — ^and therefore did command, thatthe burgesses and their successors, should have and holdtheir liberties and immunities for ever.The provision in this charter expressly limiting the exemptionsfrom juries to the burgesses, as long as they dweltin the borough, shows that the object was to confine theprivileges to the inhabitants. But it may be said, that theimport of this very passage is, that the burgesses might dwellwithout the borough. However, it must be recollected, thatalthough a burgess should leave his borough, and live in another,he would still, for a year and a day, continue a suitor at theThe word in the original is " community," from which some might infer,that this place was then incorporated ; but, in fact, the word, " community,"was, at the time of this charter, as we have abundantly shown before, frequentlyapplied to the inhabitant$ of a place, though not incorporated ; and the other circumstancesof this borough at this time, as well as long subsequent to this period,will clearly show that it was not then a corporate placetDr. Brady contends, that the burgesses were merchants— here persons tradingwith their merchandise at Huntingdon, and hiring houses for their merchandises, &c.,were not burgesses, but were called Ranger,CHARTERS, &c. 745court leet of the place he had left; and it might be during ^'c**- ^^-this interval that the passage introduced in the charter was Hunting-intendedto exclude him from the privilege contained in thatclause — and reasonably and properly so — ^because if hewere so residing in another place, where there should be adeficiency of burgesses, or, if in the county at large, ofsuitors, to make a jury, the steward of the court leet, orthe sheriff in the toum, would be entitled, by the commonlaw, to put such a person on the jury, although he was notaburgess or a suitor there. That being the general law, itwould have been incongruous to have made the provision ofthis charter interfere unnecessarily with it; particularly asthe foreign steward or sheriff would not be privy to thischarter ; and the party leaving the borough at his own willcould have no reason to complain of losing by his absenceany of the privileges enjoyed whilst he was within theborough.In the fifth year of Richard II., there is also a patent to the isti.escheator, to deliver up to the burgesses of Huntingdon,goods and chattels seized by them under their charters, andclaimed by the escheator on the part of the king.And in the same year, a patent granting passage andpiccage to the good men of the borough.A charter of this date recites, that,* considering the laus 1382.table behaviour of the burgesses of Huntingdon to hismajesty and the nation in the last insurrection, in the courageousand valiant resisting and encountering the rebels therecoming, who would have run through the whole kingdom,the king being therefore willing to extend his favour moreparticularly to them, did grant and confirm, that althoughthe burgesses or their ancestors had not hitherto so fullyused their liberties and privileges as in their charters werecontained, yet, notwithstanding, for the future they shouldentirely use and enjoy them without the hindrance of theking or any of his officers, &c. : —The king, also, by a charter of this date, of his special Canterburygrace, to the honour of " God, and of St. Thomas the glorious• Rot. Cart. 5 Rich. II. n.22.746 CHARTERS, &c.Rich. II. " martyr enshrined in the metropolitan church of Canter-canterbury" bury ; and for this, that the body of his father was buried** in the same church ; and also at the request of his'^ mother; granted, that all and singular the former charters,** customs and confirmations, should be ratified and confirmedto the bailiffs and citizens of the city of Canterbury andtheir heirs &c."The king then granted, that although the bailiffs andcitizens of the city, and their predecessors, had not fully usedthe liberties, customs, and quittances, or any of them, in anycase hitherto, nevertheless, they and their heirs and successors,might and should thereafter fully enjoy and use thesame, without the let or impediment of the king, his justices,escheators, sheriffs, coroners, or other bailiffs or ministerswhomsoever.1385. And upon the Parliament Rolls it is stated, that the bailiffsand citizens of Canterbury have granted to them for murage,power to tax all rents and farms of houses being in the city,as well foreigners as denizens, and men of the holy church, fortheir rents, houses, and places in the same city.This charges the ecclesiastics in the same manner as weshall find them charged in Melcombe.^^\2^^' ^^ ^^^Sf ^y * charter of this date,* recites, that from defectof good government, many injuries, evils and dangers had arisenbetween the inhabitants and commons in the town o( Beverley yon account of the neglect of the ancient and approved customused there for many years, that twelve men of the townshould annually be elected on the Feast of St. Mark the Evangelist,by the common assent of the burgesses in the guildhall,to rule and govern the town ; but that this custom being destroyed,and instead of the 12 men, an alderman and twochamberlains had been elected to govern the place: — the king,for the better governance thereof, and for the remedying ofthese defects, commands the burgesses, by the faith and allegiancewhich they owe to him, that assembling according tothe custom at the guildhall, at the Feast of St. Mark theEvangelist, by common assent, considering and thoroughly• Rot. Cart. 3 Ric. 11. n. 11. 1 Pet. MS. 85 9.CHARTERS, fcc-COLCHESTER. 747understanding these premises, and ceasing all strife and R'c*** ^J«contentions, they should preserve the peace and the good Beverley.government of the town, in the manner as had been accustomed; under the peril of otherwise losing their privilegesand liberties.In this document we see the government of the boroughby the jury of the leet, to which we have before so frequentlyalluded, distinctly recognized : — the evils arising from its discontinuancepointed out : — and directed to be remedied by itsrestoration.The men of Andover were charged with 80Z. for the fee A?.'Jyv«r.farm of their town ; and 20/. of increment, and 200Z. for thepast years.*And in the 14th year there is a grant of the manor at fee 1391.farm, with the hundred. fThe citizens of Worcester received a confirmation of their ^**»^?<^'-previous charters,;}; with the additional privileges of takingall deodands and fines within the city ; and power to holdall real and personal pleas, &c., before their bailiffs.COLCHESTER.From the ancient constitutions for the borough of Colchester ^ '377.made in this reign, and still extant in the original NormanFrench, some inferences may be drawn to illustrate our presentsubject of inquiry. It has been already shown, from theearliest charters down to the close of the reign of the threeEdwards, that the persons to whom the respective charterswere granted, must have been the " inhabitants."From the ordinances now referred to, it appears that theprofits of the town were to be received by two persons, whowere to be elected by twenty-four of the town. In order toform which body, four persons were to be elected ; one outof each wards by the advice of the whole commonalty —which latter term, from the documents previously adduced,as well as from the obvious reason of the thing, must meanthe " whole inhabitants." The four persons so appointedMag. Rot. 2 Rid I.; Northamptonshire, rn.2A.; Mad. Fir. Bur., p. 9, note.t Pet. MS. In. Temp. Lib. t Rot. Carl. 18 Richly. n. 4. $ So London.748 CHARTERS, &c.Rich. II. were to elect to themselves 20 more of the best and mostColchester. Sufficient commoners ; — which term also, for the same reasonwould apply to the inhabitants. The two receivers aredirected to deliver the profits of the town in the presence ofthe whole commonalty, (" en presence de tote la communes')Over which last four words is written in a later hand, '^ lesaldermen"* By which interpolation, it is obvious, that itwas intended a colour should be given to the interposition ofthe aldermen, to the exclusion of the commonalty; as inBeverley, where the alderman and chamberlains were substitutedfor the jury at the court leet.Another similar alteration occurs in a subsequent part ofthe same constitutions, with a view of giving a justificationto the interference of the common council ; to the exclusionof the commonalty, — for the original constitution is, that theprofits of the town should be put into the common chest, forthe expences proper for the town, "by the advice of the wholecommonalty," ("p'lavis de tote la commune") over whichlatter words, are written in a later hand, " la counsel de laville."In another clause, 16 persons are directed to be electedout of the most wise of those who have most in the town ;the names of whom shall be enrolled in the courts; and these,with the bailiffs and auditors, are to be the council of theborough. And it is provided, that all the burgesses resident,and all those to be made in time to come, shall be sworn toobey the ordinances made by the council.From these constitutions, the intelligent reader will be enabledto form a tolerably correct view of the object, nature,and application of the local municipal government of theplace, and the privileges that had been granted. All ofwhich appear to have had but one object, viz., the peace andsecurity of the borough, — the proper application of the commonstock belonging to it ; — and that, as well the administrationof that fund, as the government of the town, should beeffected by the social union of all within it.It seems that there were no aldermen till after the constitutions, in the time ofHenry IV.CHARTERS, &C.-CONFIRMATIONS. 749Henry III. having granted a charter to the burgesses of R»^*»ll«Colchester confirming that of Richard I., with a special con Colchester.formation of the clause relating to the pledges for the debts ofothers ; and also having given the burgesses the return ofwrits; — in the succeeding reign of Edward I., when the boroughswere called upon to return members to Parliament,the sheriff sent, in the ordinary course, a precept to Colchesterfor that purpose. In the 23rd of Edward I., two memberswere returned, "pro communitate burgi;" and similarreturns were continued in the reigns of Edward II. and III.,and in this reign of Richard II. ; who, in his sixth year,made a grant to the burgesses of the town of Colchester,towards the relief of the expences they had incurred inwalling their town — that they might be exonerated from sendingtheir comburgenses to Parliament: — thereby strongly indicatingthat the inhabitants were the burgesses. Nevertheless,they continued to return members, as if this grant had notbeen made.The king, by a charter of this date, recites, that he had ^°/®!JJ^-lately granted to the mayor, bailiffs, and commonalty ofthe town of Coventry, that when any of them should thenceforthbe elected and created mayor of the town of Coventry,the same mayor should personally take the accustomed oathof office before the king's coroner of the town, in the presenceof the commonalty.The abbot of Shaftesbury petitioned the king, amongst Shatterthings, that no escheator should interfere there, which I38i.was allowed.The king also granted the farm of the toll of the town,which, in the 8th year of the last reign, was held by RichardScamnell, to the abbess : and confirmed the grant of the37thof Henrj'III.CONFIRMATIONS.Besides the foregoing charters, many confirmations alsooccur in this reign — as to,Carlisle — the town having been burnt; and 1,500 houses i390.destroyed there.750 CONFIRMATIONS, &c.^^i^h^. Saltash — made also a free borough.1381. Doncaster — confirming the charter of Richard I.1385. Plympton also: — and Gloucester,1393. fiiwdon— confirming the charter of Henry III., and freeingthe inhabitants from all tolls.1383. A writ for the repair of the bridge in the borough of Marlowj in Buckinghamshire, of this date, is directed to the bailiffsand good men of Marlow : — " Ballivis et promis omnibus."And there are writs in the same form in the 1st and 6th ofHenry IV.Sandwich. In this year we find a writ fix)m the king, directed tothe constable of the castle of Dover and warden of theCinque Ports, or his lieutenant; which commences witha recital, that, understanding the town of Sandwich, bydivers pestilences and other grievous damages and misfortunes,which to the town had repeatedly happened, wasso exhausted and weakened that the inhabitants werenot able to defend the same, and could not perfect thefortifications which, both in walls and ditches, they hadbegun, at great expences, unless they were otherwise aided.The king then commands, that the constable should callbefore him those persons who own any ground not builtupon in places exposed to danger in the same town, or withinthe liberty thereof ; in order to direct them that it shouldbe sufficiently built upon and fortified before the Ist day ofMay next. And if the owners of such ground, havingbeen sufficiently warned, should not come before him, orperform the premises; or should expressly refuse to do so;then the king, by advice of his council, granted licence tohis beloved the mayor , good men and commonalty of the townaforesaid, at their special request, that such ground of allthose who will not, or should refuse to perform the premisesfor avoiding the dangers aforesaid, and for the greater fortificationof the same town, they, at the proper costs of thesame mayor, good men, and commonalty, might build upon andreasonably fortify; and such ground so built upon mighthold ; and the rents and profits thereof receive freely, withoutany impediment ; until they should be satisfied, for theCONFIRMATIONS, &c.— CORNWALL. 761costs reasonably applied by them, upon the building on, and Rachel.fortification of, the ground.This king also confirmed the charters of Sandwich, as Sandwich.may be seen by an inspeximus of the 3d of June, 10 HenryVI.The prior and convent of St. Dennis at Portswood, who ashton.were the lords of Portswood, came to an i^eement with ^•^•the commonalty of Southampton that the inhabitants ofPortswood should attend the court leet at Cut Those; andthat of the fines and agreements there made by the inhabitantsof Portswood, the prior and convent should havetwo-third parts, and the mayor, &c. one-third : and of felons,goods, and forfeitures, happening in Portswood, the mayor,&c. should have two-thirds, and the prior and convent one-third.The agreement also directed that Portswood shouldbe rated for the king's supplies with the town of Southampton;and that their proportion should be for everyfifteenth, 1/. 6s. 8rf. to be collected by the aldermen of Ports-wood: and the said prior and convent quitted claim to a certainrent of 40s. a year due fi*om the town of Southampton ;of which 32s. 2d. was for the lepers in the hospital of Southampton,and 8s. 2d. to be paid fi*om the lands of Southwarknear Portswood.By an ordinance made by certain burgesses of the town ^f.^"**of Stafford f sworn in the great court, (no doubt the jury at thecourt leet,) with all the commonalty of the same town, reciting,that the bailiffs of the aforesaid town of Stafford, all andsingular the profits from waifs and strays, and forfeitures, inright of their office have had, so that no profit to the commonutility of the aforesaid town came; directs, that no bailiff*presume to take such profits ; but whatever the bailifis aforesaid,or either of them, may receive of those things thereofin their account, they shall faithfully enter.CORNWALL.Cornwall being, as we have observed before, a countypeculiarly circumstanced ; particularly with reference to itsboroughs ; we add a few documents relative to one or two752 - Charters-CORNWALL.^'^^' ^^' of its towns; including Grampound ; although long since disfranchised; as it serves to illustrate some of the privilegesenjoyed by a Cornish borough at this period.^™nd '^^ charter to Grampound^ in the first year of this reign,*1378. grants to the burgesses certain lands near the ditch of thetown ; and. also certain mills, with their tolls ; that they mighthave view offrank-pledgey with all pleas within the borough ;that they might be free of toll ; that they might have a guildmerchant; that they might hold all pleas in the borough ,except pleas of the crown and land, before the reeve of theborough ; that no foreign bailiff should make any summons,attachments, or executions within the borough; that thehundred of Bondeostire should be always held in the sameborough ; that it might be a free borough ; and that the saidlands and mills may also be free — rendering an annual fee-farmfor the same.Awkward. There was also an inquisition taken at Liskeard, in the22nd year of Richard II., before the commissioners of theking, upon the oath of 12 persons; who said, that the prior,canon, clerk, and several others, of Launceston, came in awarlike way in the night, to the town of Liskeard, and theretook away Henry Friend, the vicar of Liskeard, who wasarrested per decennum of the manor of Liskeard, to answermany of the tenants of that manor, in divers fines levied uponhim, according to the custom of the county of Cornwall, " acarestationem decent praedicti fregerunt," — and took awaya book and two towels of the goods of the parishioners ofLiskeard ; — and other charges were made against the prior ;and amongst them, that he had acquired lands without thelicense of the king ; — and a writ is added, to distrain the priorto render an account of the profits of the lands he hadacquired without license ; — and further proceedings were hadthereinTruro. Richard II. remitted to the burgesses of TVwrOjJ a part of*^^' the tenth and fifteenth — the collectors of those subsidieshaving suggested to the king, that they were unable to levy• Rot. Pat. p. 6. in.7. 1 Pet. MS. 314. t Mad. Fir. Bur. 112. H.t Rot. Pal. p. 6, Tn.38.YARMOUTH ROLLS. 753the sum assessed upon the town, on account of the poverty richlandwant of the burgesses ; and it being found by diversinquisitions, that the town had been greatly impoverishedfrom various causes, and a great part thereof uninhabitedthat many of the men had withdrawn themselves therefrom,and that the few remaining now inhabiting the said town, werequite incompetent to pay the sum annually assessed upon.it ;the king grants to the same burgesses for ten years, that theyshall be charged only 60s, for every tenth.The tenth and fifteenth were to be collected from the inhabitantsand this document states, that they could not becollected upon account of the poverty of the burgesses —from which it is apparent, that the inhabitants were the burgesses.This inference is supported by the rest of the document,which speaks of the impoverished and uninhabitedstate of the town — many having withdrawn from it, and thefew remaining now inhabiting being unable to pay — which isimmediately followed by the king granting to the same burgesses(that is to say, the few remaining inhabitants), thatthey should for the next 10 years, pay only 50«. for everytenth.YARMOUTH ROLLS.We have already seen the burgesses of Yarmouth mentionedin Domesday, and also privileges granted to that borough, inthe reigns of Henry II., John, Henry III., Edward I., andEdward III.; which in substance, resemble those of all theother boroughs.The privileges given and confirmed by the above charters —and which, from documents among the Harleian Mss,* wefind were confirmed in the 10th year of this reign, upon con 1386.edition, that all strangers should have free liberty to buy, sell,and carry away during the fair — were granted to the burgesses;but they do not define the class of persons, who were to betheburgesses.There are, however, original rolls in existence, in the possessionof Mr. Dawson Turner, of this date, which describe ^^^'• HarL MSS., 2L pp. 133, 168,3c754 YARMOUTH ROLLS.Riches the proceedings at that period, in the public courts of theborough — in what manner the inhabitants, beyond a certainage, were presented and sworn at the leets of the borough —what were the privileges the burgesses enjoyed — and howforeigners, and persons not sworn burgesses, were excludedfrom participation in the benefits of the place.V292. These documents begin in the 21st year of Edward I.^^The first contains only ^^The pleas of plaints and transgressions,and nothing worthy of observation as to the subject ofour present inquiry, excepting, that the court was held beforethe four bailiffs of the borough, and the bailiffs of the severalCinque Ports.1379. In this year, the leets of the borough are first mentioned.It appears that there were four leets for the four divisions ofthe town, — ^which, probably, was the origin of there beingfour bailiffs — one of them presiding over each of the divisionsof the town in which the leets were held : those divisions were,the north leet — the north middle leet — the south leet — ^andthe south middle leet ; separating the town into two divisionsof north and south, and each of those into a subdivision ofthe middle leet ; making together the four.It is not inconsistent, either with the general law or theusage of other places, that there should be several leets inthe same district ; because the division of the leet dependedupon the number of the resiants within its district — ^and itwould seem, that when they were too numerous for one leet,a subdivision took place: — thus Fitzherbert says,* "thatthere were many leets in the hundred." We have previouslyseen, that in London there were many wardmotes, which arein fact the same ; and many other places present, at thisperiod, an equally striking uniformity in the relation oftheir municipal police.At Yarmouth, the division was not, properly speaking, intoso many leets ; but the same leet was held in different partsof the town, upon different days, for the local convenience ofthe inhabitants — ^because they were held under the authority,of the same mayor, and before all the four bailiffs, and not• Fitzherbert, fol. 117.YARMOUTH ROLLS. 755by each bailiff separately ; therefore it is apparent that these ^»<^*»- ^^•separate courts were part of the same leet, and held atdifferent times and places, for the ease and convenience ofthe people.The rolls of each leet contain the names of 12 persons,who are called in the margin the capital pledges, being nodoubt the jury — whose province it was, to present to thecourt every free inhabitant above the age of 12 years, in orderthat he might be sworn to his allegiance, and give pledgesfor his good conduct, and " to abide the law."These capital pledges, or juries, appointed for this purpose,were the origin, as we have had occasion to mentionbefore, of the 12 and 24 — or of the aldermen, capital burgesses,and the common councilmen.The swearing the inhabitants, taking their pledges, andenrolling them amongst the resiants, was the mode by whichthey were made part of the decenna and tithing, and was thesuit royal which they owed to the king at the court leet ;and being thus classed among the permanent inhabitants ofthe place, they were entitled to the privileges of it, and, atthe same time, bound to bear and perform all those burdensand duties, personal and pecuniary, belonging to permanent,responsible residence, called from the earliest periods of ourhistory, " scot and lot."These duties commenced, by their being swam to theirallegiance after the age of 12 years ; and those of that age,who had not been duly sworn and enrolled in the decenna,were in mercy, and fined for their defaults.Other persons were also presented by the capital pledges,or jury, as having bought and sold in the town as burgesses,when they were not so — and therefore they also were inmercy, and fined accordingly.These persons would be individuals not belonging to theborough, not being resident there, and therefore not liable tobe presented, like the former, for being above 12 years of age,and not sworn and enrolled in the decenna ; because beinginhabitants of other places, where they would have beensworn and enrolled, or have been presented, and fined, they3c2756 YARMOUTH ROLLS.^^*^^-^^- had come to Yarmouth, and there bought and sold, as if theyhad beei> burgesses of that borough.In the same manner, the jury also present and fine awoman ; because she claimed to be of the liberty of Yarmouth,and was not a burgess. From which it appearsplainly, that she was not then an inhabitant of the place,but claimed to be of the liberty, or belonging to the libertyof the town, as having been horn and previously enrolled thereas a resiant — in which sense, and that only, could she besaid to be, or not to be, a burgess. Because a woman wasnot bound by the law to be sworn ; nor could she be enrolledas a burgess ; for she was incapable of performing all the personalduties of that station ; — but if she had been a permanentinhabitant of the place, she was, in that sense, of, orbelonging to the liberty ; and was entitled to share in someof the privileges, as buying, selling, and trading there.The following are a few of the entries, from which, asspecimens, the reader may learn their general form andimport :—The North Leet, then holden upon Monday next afterthe Feast of St. Barnabas, in the third year of the reignof King Richard II., from the conquest," (four names, describedas bailiffs, then follow.)Capital Twelve names are then entered as capital pledges y who,upon their oaths, present, that 15 persons (whose names aregiven,) exceed the age of 12 years, and are not in decenna ;therefore they are in mercy.North " The North Middle Leet, holden on Wednesday nextMiddle ^ , T^ nr. T^ , ,.Leet. " after the Feast of St. Barnabas.Capital The capital pledges are entered in the same manner as inthe North Leet ; and they present 77 persons, in the samemanner as in that leet. They also present, upon their oaths,nine persons, who had bought and sold as burgesses, andwere not — therefore they are in mercy.Henry Glover is presented for forestalling,* and they state,that he calls himself, ** advocate se," of the liberty of Yarmouth,and is not a burgess — therefore he is in mercy.See Custumal of the Cinque Ports.YARMOUTH ROLLS.SouthMiddleLeet.SouthLeet.1384.1398.South Middle Leet'' — Capital pledges as before ; and t^^ch.iithey present 161 in the same manner.South Leet" — Capital pledges as before ; and theypresent 147 for the same cause.In the eighth year of Richard XL, similar entries occur foreach of the four leets^ in the same succession ; but in someinstances, the fines placed opposite the names are erased, andsometimes there is inserted '^ quia in leta.'^Meaning doubtless, either that the party was discovered tohave been previously swoni and enrolled at the leet : or thathe had submitted subsequently to the imposition of the fine,and had duly done his suit by being entered in the decenna.The same again occurs in the 22nd of Richard II., and inprecisely the same form.We have previously observed, that there were many personsresiding in every place who would not be received indecenna, as ecclesiastics — women — villains — and infamouspersons. — So also there would be some who would be excludedon other grounds ; — as for dangerous and infectiousdiseases. Thus, we find in these rolls one is presented as aleper, and inhabiting in the town ; but he is not charged witha fine for not being in decenna.Another is presented that " he holds apprentices, and isnot a burgess."The ground of this presentment is, that the burgesses mightbe made liable, in the maimer we shall see referred to uponthe Parliament Rolls of this reign, for the act of any person inthe town, taking as apprentice the villain of any lord ; which,if the person himself was not a freeman, he was clearly notentitled to do; — on the other hand, if he was a freeman, heought to be in the decenna, — and therefore either on the oneground or the other, the burgesses were entitled to call him inquestion. The j fury, therefore, properly present him for takingapprentices, not being a burgess. If, however, he should comein as a freeman, and do his suit by being put in decenna, thenhe would not be fined, but be entered as before, " quia est inlet ;" and would, consequently, be a burgess.768 YARMOUTH ROLLS.^^'<^h'^^* From hence therefore, it is placed beyond all controversy,(as is also to be seen in the case of Stockbridge,) that neitherthe taking of apprentices, nor the being a burgess, had atYarmouth any connexion with the corporation ; but was infact founded upon the common law, as administered in thecourt leet.Four persons are presented as ** merchandising in thetown, not being burgesses."These have a fine imposed upon them, because they hadbeen guilty of a misfeasance by trading in the town withoutbeing entitled to do so. But the person who had taken theapprentices was not fined, because his situation was capableof being explained, as, — ^by showing that he was not a freeman,and therefore not bound to come to the leet. But the• merchants must have been freemen, because otherwise theycould not have traded. And trading in the place, andtherefore resiant, they ought to have come to the leet, andbeen enrolled there as burgesses. On the other hand, themaster of the apprentices might have been a freeman, belongingto another place, not having resided at Yarmoutha sufficient time to be a burgess there. As a freeman hemight have been entitled to have the apprentices, but theywould acquire no local rights at Yarmouth by serving underhim : the burgesses of Yarmouth not being bound to takenotice of his contracts, unless he was a freeman and burgessof that place.The same person who was presented as a leper inhabitingwithin the town, in the south middle leet, is also presentedin the south leet as " dwelling in the town:" and it is added,he ought to be put out."In the north leet the same entries occur: — and of threepersons for having apprentices: and one person as commorant with another j and merchandising.Inmates. It will be remembered that inmates were not bound toattend at the leet, because their hosts were liable for them ;and therefore this person was not bound to do his suit there,nor would he be enrolled as a burgess : but the fact of beingYARMOUTH ROLLS. 759cormorants and merchandising, ought nevertheless to be ^*^**- ^^*presented by the jury.Others are presented as " merchandising in the town,and are not burgesses :" but are returned as " proper to bebui^esses."A decisive proof that it was the duty of the jury on theiroaths, to present of the free inhabitant householders payingscot and lot, only such as in their sound discretion and conscience,they believed to be fit and entitled to be burgesses ;not selecting them according to whim— caprice — interestfavour — or affection, — but honestly, according to the factof their fitness and their title ; the only reasonable, sound,and constitutional basis, upon which the qualification ought,according to the principles and pure practice of our law, tobe still placed.It must always be borne in mind, that notwithstandingthe particularity of these rolls, there is no mode by whichthe burgess is pointed out ; except by the fact of his beingfirst stated not to be in decenna, and its being subsequentlyadded, '' quia est in let."A person is presented for " taking away the stones of awall belonging to the commonalty — ^that commonalty being,as these records establish, the free inhabitant householders,sworn and enrolled at the leet, paying scot and bearing lot : —a part of the scot being the contribution to the making andrepairing of those walls, the stones of which had been takenaway.It cannot escape observation, that these entries entirelycorrespond with the common law, as shown from the quotationspreviously made from Bracton, Britton, Fleta, theMirror, and the Year Books ; and that they confirm, in astriking manner, by the evidence of actual practice, the viewbefore taken of the municipal government, and the internaleconomy of the towns, in the early periods of our history.LYNN.The records in this reign relative to Lynn, are very import i379tant. The first that presents itself, is a petition upon the760 LYNN.Rich. II. Parliament Rolls, which states, that " the mayor and burgessesof Lyntij and their progenitors, having had the charger^. " of the town against enemies, and for the further preservethe town « nation of it, pray that the men of the town (gentz) be not" arrayed out of it, but that they should be arrayed beforeThe good ^ , imen of the " the said mayor y and other good men of the town."Here it is clear, that the burgesses of Lynn, are describedby the terms to which we have before so frequently adverted,of " the men of the town," and " the good men of the town."The return to Parliament of this date, of the burgesses forLynn, appears in the corporation books, in this form : —1378. " On the same day, the mayor and commonalty caused toCommonalty." be chosen, two discreet men — viz., Nicholas de Luerdestonand Hugh de Bellingham — to be present in the Parliamentof our lord the king ; to be held at Gloucester, on Wednesdaynext after the Feast of Saint Luke the Evangelist,by virtue of a writ on that account directed to the aforesaidmayor and commonalty, by John Locke," &c. — ^^The namesof 11 other persons then occur, and who are stated to havebeen shoon. These persons, no doubt, composed the leetJury. jury.In another manuscript book, in the possession of the corporation,is preserved the will of John de Spalding, burgess ;who among other things, bequeaths to the community ofLynn, 4/., to abridge the tax of the poor of Lynn.Poor rate. This establishes, that a tax was at that time levied forthe support of the poor, although it was not, as since thestatute of Elizabeth, assessed upon the parishes, but uponthe towns, hundreds, and tithings, according to the commonlaw division of the country.Freedom. There is also another entry: — That "William Bandes-dale,of Scarborough, entered into the freedom of the townof Lynn, on Tuesday next before the Feast of Saint *the Virgin, in the year of the reign of the king aforesaid,and made the fine for his entrance, and is sworn." And hefound " pledges as well for his good conduct, as for the paymentof the said fine."The name is effaced in the original.LYNN. 761These entries of persons not natives of Lynn acquiring the ^^^^^' libertiesof the town, are frequent ; but not so much so asthose acquiring it by servitude, which are very numerous in Servitude.the Red Register. The former seem to have obtained thefreedom in consequence of their coming to reside at Lynn — Residencefor the expression, that ^' he entered into the freedom of thetown' appears to import, that he came to reside within theliberties; local residence being at that time the legal andreasonable qualification for all duties and privileges, andtherefore being universal, would not be mentioned — ^whichaccounts for the general silence of the ancient records, uponthe subject of residence.We have also m this entry, which we shall see con P**=<^8e8.firmed by the extracts from the documents of Wells, anexpress instance of the pledges given in conformity withthe law of the leet, upon the swearing and enrolling of thebui^esses.The following entries are likewise to be found in the corporationbooks : —On the aforesaid day were elected for the Parliament,to be held at Westminster, at the feast of St. Martin,John de Wentworth and Thomas Watermen, by RobertRene" and 1 1 others, " swom.^'These were the leet jury, who being in office, returned the •'"'^*members of Parliament, in the same manner as they wouldpresent any other officers, or functionaries, for the borough ;and in the next entry, they also appear to have chosen thecoroner.In the aforesaid day, William Erl is elected for coroner,in the place of Edmund Billegate, by the aforesaid jurymen."When in documents of this description, relative to the Klucuon.court leet, the word " elected " is used, we should be carefulnot to be misled by our modem notions of that term. Undoubtedlyit was an election, in the pure sense of the word,because one person was elected, or selected, out of many ;but it was not according to our modern notions of election —the jury deciding merely according to their fancies or it762 LYNN.^^^' ^^ ' tions — but it was a selection by them, under the sanction oftheir oaths, with reference to the real fitness, proper time,and due succession or liability of the party ; as for instance,the modem mode of pricking for sheriffs, by the judges, withthe assistance of those who are best qualified to state the realsituation of the parties, nth reference to their fitness, and thepropriety of their being appointed for that turn.Apparent <« It ig ordered by the hall, that in future, no burgess shallUC68* ^'^ receive any one into his apprenticeship unless the same'' apprentice shall be oifree condition, and subject to no serevirtute of birth; and whenever such apprentice shall be** about to be received, the receiver shall come to the mayorat the guildhall, with the same apprentice, and his indenture,&c., and there the apprentice shall be examined by themayor, in the presence, of other burgesses, whether he be'^ oifree or similar condition and not a natives from another** place ; and a paper or some other memorandum of the'' guildhall shall be enrolled, of the day, term, and year ofthe reception of the apprentice : for which enrolment, the*' clerk of the community shall have 4d. And if it shall** happen, that such apprentice, after the completion of his'* term, shall be found of such condition of nativity, the term'' of his service shall not at all avail for his having the libertyof the town."Here we have the general doctrine relative to apprentices,which we have hitherto maintained, most strikingly illustratedby the particular instance occurring in this entry,relative to the borough of Lynn ; and which also forcibly confirmsthe extracts we have before made, from the ancientrecords of Yarmouth.Free coQ. It is distinctly ordered, that no burgess shall receive anyoneas an apprentice, unless he is of free condition ; for, uponthe principles recognized in our own and the Scotch laws,no villain could be an apprentice. The material distinctionis here also marked, between the servitude as an apprenticefor the purpose of learning any science, art or craft, and theservitude of a villain.Mayor. This entry also discloses the ground upon which the mayor'sLYNN. 763interference was necessary, which was not either with respect ^^'c^« ^^'to trade, or any supposed corporate right, but simply for thepurpose of taking care that the common law with referenceto villainage and freedom, was duly regarded ; and thereforethe mayor was to examine him in the presence of the otherburgesses — all of whom would be liable to the lord, if a fugitiveor villain were received — whether the person proposedas an apprentice, was of free condition, and not a natives from ^ eif.another place.The concluding provision of this ordinance, that if itshould eventually turn out that the apprentice was a nativevillain, his service was not to make him free, seems somewhatin derogation of the general law, that a residence forayear and a day without claim of the lord, should make aperson free. But it should be considered, that such a factoperated against the lord only as a presumption of his havingwaived the villainage ; and we have before seen that althoughthe lord was not entitled by his own act to take back thevillain, yet it seems very questionable whether he was notentitled by a writ de nativo de replegiando, to re-obtainpossession of his villain ; and therefore the real effect of thisprovision was — ^that by the public notice thus given by themayor and bui^esses of Lynn, through the medium of thisordinance, they had taken the precaution of declaring, thatthe service of a person as an apprentice should go for nothing,if it eventually appeared that he was a villain at the time ofhis apprenticeship; by which means, if the mayor and burgessesshould have inadvertently admitted a villain, theywould clearly stand without blame, and could by this evidenceanswer any demand of his lord, because they wouldhave used due diligence themselves, and the fault, if any,would be attributable to his own laches.As to the apprentice, he would have no reason to complainthat his service was to go for nothing, because at the time ofhis entering into the apprenticeship, he had by means of thisordinance, fill notice of what would be the effect of his beinga villain ; a fact that must have been within his own knowledge,and the consequence of suppressing which he ought764 LYNN.Rich. II. to bear himself, otherwise he would be allowed to take advantageof his own fraud.As to the lordy he would have no substantial reason to complainfor the temporary interruption of the servitude of hisvillain, for it would be attributable only to his own laches,and he would recover his villain again.1386. ** On the aforesaid day, it is commanded by the mayorby birth. ^' and community to be observed henceforth, that no son of** a burgess, unless he be bora in lawful marriage, and begottenafter the entrance of his father into his freedom,*^ shall enter into the freedom of the town, unless he pays a'' fine to the community for his entrance, like a stranger."This entry also confirms the general doctrine as to theright of freedom and burgess-ship : — if a villain had residedwithout claim for a year and a day in a privileged town orborough, without a claim from his lord, he was thereby free ;but if he had any children before he so became free, theywould still be villains.If a borough treated as a freeman, any person so circumstanced,all his children born after he had been so received,were to the knowledge of the borough, free, and therefore theywere bound to receive them as such ; and, consequently, if theywere resident householders within the borough, to swear andenrol them as burgesses. But as his children born before hewas sworn as a burgess, might or might not be free, for thereasons we have previously stated, so they stood preciselyin the same situation as any other strangers ; and ought togive a fine, as a contribution to the common stock, and as asecurity to the borough, if he should be a fugitive villain, inwhich case the lord might prosecute the borough for receivinghim. And therefore the children of the burgess, mentionedin this ordinance as not born in lawful marriage, were not tobe admitted without paying the fine : — because though thefather was free, they obtained through him, no proof of freedom.Those children also born before the father was receivedas a freeman, though born in wedlock, stood in the samepredicament; and were likewise to pay a fine: — not thatthey were to be altogether excluded, if they had lived in theLYNN. 765place a year and a day, (for then they were both bound and ^^^^' ^^'entitled to be sworn and enrolled as burgesses,) but theywere obliged to pay the fine, upon the reasonable and practicalgrounds before explained, of contribution and surety.In the constable wick of Wentworth, Simon de Feltwell, 1394.(and there are eight other similar entries for other constable Pledges,wicks,) is sworn " to make the pledges at the leet of thisyear."And from other entries it appears that there were then —as there are now — nine wards in Lynn.At this time there are also other returns of members toParliament, in these forms : —In the time of Thomas CJonteshal were elected for the 1393.'' Parliament, to be held at Westminster the 15th of Hilary,Thomas Drew and Thomas Morton, by (then follow thenames of 12 persons,) sworn''Election made for the Parliament by John Style," (and 1395.1 1 others,) " sworn." And they choose for the aforesaid Parliament," John de Grandson and Thomas de Watermen ; andthe aforesaid 12 jurats taxed the tax of this year in thesame day."On the same day were elected, as collectors to assess thetenth, William de Underfoot, Edward Egmere, Thomas deSpartan, Richard de Fransham, by William de Bilsey, (and11 others,) sworn to choose faithfully the said collectors.The observations made on the former entries, are sufficientlyexplanatory of these.It is impossible to quit these important documents fromthe borough of Lynn, without again reminding the reader,that the irresistible inference from them is, — first, negatively,that neither apprenticeship, the obtaining of freedom, nor theadmission of burgesses had any connexion with corporations orcorporate principles. And next, affirmatively, that they allhad a direct connexion with the common law — were in practicetransacted at the leet, and were altogether founded uponthe law as administered in that court.766 WELLS.llich.H.WELLS.Leet. We have also in this reign, entries at the leet of theborough of Wells which will serve further to illustrate ourPledges, general doctrine with respect to pledges, and the admissionof burgesses. It will be observed that they are, as the pro-steward,meetings in the leet ought to be, before the steward.They are in the following form : —Convocation tent, die Jov. proximo post festum sancti LuciaEvangelists. — san. Regis 1 Ric. II.1377. Quo die Johannes Cowed, venit et dat seneschal communicatesburgi Well.' pro libertate ville Well, speculum et Xs.solvent de fine in testis apostolorum Philippi, et Jacobi, etnative. sancti Johannes per legions finis Johannes Still etPhilippi Cow.Item, Johannes Grandson, goldsmith, eodem modo, venitet dat Xs. magistri communicates pro libertate, ville Well,per legions de fine Joh. Still et Mxm. Tevoer solvent. definein testis sancti Andrew, et Philippi, et Jacobi.Mayor. Magistri seems to be the mayoTy that is, the same officerwho is called by the Saxons " reeve, * and by the Normans,"bailiff" ** provost' or "maire'' those names all meaningthe king's head officer, in the place over which he presided, tocollect for the king the fee-farm rents, and issues of theSteward, borough. The senescallus was the steward, whose duty itwas to hold the king's court leet, and to be the judge there.This admission before him is in strict conformity with thecommon law.From the word " venit " it appears that CJowel was presentat the court ; and considering the context, it may be inferredthat he resided in the place.The first fine is paid to the steward, and not, as subsequently,to the master and the commonalty. The fines areexpressly paid for the liberty of the town.By the general law of the land, as derived from the earliestSaxon institutions, every freeman coming to live withinthe jurisdiction of any leet, of which there was one in everyborough, was bound to give pledges for his good behaviour.WELLS. 7g7In subsequent times, when pledges were found inconvenient, Riches.a larger fine was substituted. There seems also to have beenan intermediate states in which pledges were taken till thefine was paid. In another entry it appears that when thefine was paid, no pledges were given.Although Grandson is mentioned as a goldsmith, Cowed,Drake, and many others have no such description, it cannotbe inferred that it was in consequence of his trade that hewas admitted.The variety in the form of these admissions, is sufficient toshow that the precise form is not to be regarded.Another person comes, and gives to the master and commonaltyof Wells, for having the liberty of the borough, 10«.,12 pairs of gloves, an ounce of wax, and a pint of wine, andbinds himself to pay this fine upon two specified days, bytwo pledges.Convoc. tent, die Jovis prox. ante fest. Sci. Petri advincula.Quo die Willis Canaille venit et dat agro. et coitat.Well, ceram potu. et chiro. pro Ingres, habet. in libtat.Well, et non plus quia filius burg.Here the form of the admission is expressly for his entranceinto the liberty. — How his being a son of a burgess affects Son.the admission, we have recently explained in discussing therecords of Lynn.Convoc. tent, die Jovis in festa Sancti Agathe. Quo die Jo 1383.hes. Kyng venit et dat agro. comitatus. Well. p. lib. lend. inburg. Well. potu. chiro. et Xs. none. finis in testis Trinket. etLaurence. Leg. de fine R. Tworum et Joh. Clotheroc.In this instance we have another form of admission, whichis " for having the freedom," — pro libertate habend^.Convoc. tent. &c. — Quo die Jones. Rene venit et dat mro.comitatus. pro lib. lend. in die burgh potu. chiro. et ceram.Convoc. tent, die Jovis prox. post Fes. Sci. Marie Magdalen, 1384.&c.Quo die Hen. Maundewan Braysy, venit et dat micro. etcoitati. Well, pro lib. lend. in eodem burg. potu. ceram chiro.et non plus quia dispose. Filial Burgs.768 WELLS.— HYTHE. PARLIAMENT ROLLS.^'*^^-^^' This person who had married a burgess's daughter, byMarriage, which, upon the principles we have explained before, hebecame free, is admitted without the payment of any fine asasecurity against his being claimed as a villain ; but hegives the gloves, as a present to the mayor — the wine, as apresent for the conviviality of the burgesses, probably withreference to the ancient scale — and the wax, for the purposeof supplying the church with the candles necessary forthe service of that period.The next entry is nearly in the same form.1387. Convoc. tent, die Jov. prox. post Fest. Circumcision.Quo die Hen. Cardamakyne venit et dat agro. et coitati.Well, ceram chiro. et potu. et non plus qui dispose. UxoremBurgs.Of course, this means vitam — another instance of theinaccuracy of these entries in point of form ; though they areno doubt correct in substance.HYTHE.We also find the following entry in this reign, in the corporationbooks of Hythe:* —John Brewer, of Hethe, came before the jurats^ on theSunday next after the Feast of St. John Portlatin, andbecame a freeman ; and on that day was sworn to thetown ; and gave for his freedom, 3^. 4rf., and paid it thesame day."PARLIAMENT ROLLS.In addition to the documents we have already extractedrelative to London from the Parliament Rolls, we also find inthose repositories the following entries : —^^^^379*^ The first relates to Melcombe. The mayor and commonalty,or rather those who were formerly of the town, whichhad been lately destroyed, by the enemy suddenly landingthere, so that no man was residing within the said town,pray that they may have granted to them, tonnage andmurage, and other customs, as the men of Southampton ;• Book B. fol. 2 a.PARLIAMENT ROLLS. 7(59and also that they might be released of their prisage of Rich. ii.wines, and all other taxes, kc.y as the citizens of Londonwere.*The citizens of Norwich also state, in a petition, that, fromancient times, no stranger of their franchise had power to sellor buy any merchandise ; and pray Parliament to confirm thecustom.They likewise recite in the petition, that a custom had ex Norwich.iste for the citizens, upon default and mischief being committed,to make ordinances among themselves, as it appearedto them, according to good faith and reason, for the commonprofit of their town, of the citizens, and others coming, orresident with them ; but that recently, many of the commonaltyhad acted contrary to the best remedies and ordinances.And for this, they prayed that it might be grantedto them and their successors, by charter, for greater andmore forcible authority towards the said citizens, and forthe better government of the town, that the four bailiffs and Twentycitizens elected every year by the commonalty of the town, citizens.or the greater part of them, should have power to makeand establish within the city, such ordinances and remedies,for the good government of the town, and the citizens andpeople there coming and resident, as should seem to thembest, &c., &c. — ^^The prayer was granted.Again, the commons pray redress because the sheriffs l'^""-in their tourns had taken indictments of manslaughter, byreason of which, the indicted had been taken and imprisonedand put to great ransoms, and had no deliverance beforejustices assigned to deliver the gaols; and some justicesheld the opinion, that the sheriffs in their toums had notthe power to take such indictments.In answer to which, the counties of Northumberland,Cumberland, and Westmoreland, were directed to do as theyhad been accustomed ; but elsewhere, the old law shouldhold.The sheriffs tourns are here expressly mentioned, as atthat time in full practice.♦ Pet. Pari. m. 7, p. 70. t Rot. Part n. 45, p. 21.3d770 PARLIAMENT ROLLS.^!^!!lMl '^'^^ ^^^^ entry in these Rolls relates generally to " thecommons o( cities and boroughs; who being obliged, for thesalvation of themselves and the kingdom, to keep theirwalls, &c. in reparation, at great expense, which they canenot henceforth maintain, without the assistance of those'' who have tenements, possessions, or rents, in such citiesor boroughs, as well religious as others, who have nevercontributed to their sustenance, or maintenance hitherto,and therefore pray that they may do so in future : '** andthe same was allowed.Ecclesiae Here we have a distinct recognition, that the ecclesiasticstu-s. . , .and their possessions had been exempted, till this time, frommurage, as one of the temporal charges which fell upon thecitizens and burgesses of the realm.After this, follow many entries respecting villains, whichwe shall transcribe ; that the reader may learn to how greatan extent that doctrine was at this period in use, and howimportant were its results.A petition states that ** many villains and land tenants'^ in villainage, who owed custom and service to their lordswithin their lordships, had, by the procurement of certainpersons, purchased, in the court of the king, exemplificationsof the Book of Domesday, of manors and townswithin which the said villains and land tenants were residing; by colour of which exemplifications, and the badunderstanding and interpretation of them, made by certainpersons, they had withdrawn their customs and servicesfrom their lords, &c., &c." A commission was ordered, toinquire why they refused their services.It will be observed, that the liabilities of the villains to doResidence, their services, are here connected with their residence.1381. Another entry states that "in consequence of certaindisturbances in the kingdom, the king was constrained toNeifs. " grant his letters patent to the neifs of his kingdoms andothers, of liberty, franchise and manumission, well knowinghe could not do it but against good faith and the law of• Pet. Pari. n. 35, p. 20. t Pet. Pari. n. 45. p. 21.t Rot. Parley. 1. p. 99.rPARLIAMENT ROLLS. 771<fthe land: but that he thought it better to do it, in order to ^^^^' i^-** check their clamour and malice, as the king was not then inhis right power. But that the moment he regained his powerhe had repealed his letters patent in that respect." Theking desires Parliament to confirm his acts, which they do.The king further commands the chancellor to ascertainfrom the lords and commons, whether the grant which he hadmade of franchise and manumission to the neifs and villainsof the land pleased them or not. The lords and commonsunanimously answered, that the repeal was well done ; butthat such manumission or franchise of neifs could not bewithout their assent, who had the greater interest. Thatthey did not assent ; and humbly prayed, that as the manumissionsand franchises had been granted by coercion, and totheir inheritance, and the destruction of the kingdom,they should be destroyed and annulled by the authority ofParliament.Here the principle of law is expressly recognized, thatvillains could not be manumitted or enfranchised withoutthe consent of their lords ; hence the grant of a charter bythe king, that the inhabitants of any place should be freeburgesses, had not the effect of enfranchising the villain ofany lord residing there — and therefore villains were notburgesses.The villains having been guilty of insurrection in divers Villains,parts of the kingdom, their lords, to appease such mischief,had punished them according to their own judgment, withoutdue process of law. Whereupon the lords and commonsin Parliament indemnified them against any future proceedingstherefrom.*Many villains and neifs of great lords, &c. having fledinto cities, towns, and enfranchised places, and there commenceddivers suits against their lords, in order to berendered free by the answer of their lords: — the commonstherefore pray that the lords shall not be forewarned by reasonof such answer in law.-f-This petition discloses another principle with respect to• Rot. Pari. m. 12. p. 100. t Pet. Pari. m. 2. p. 212.3o2772 PARLIAMENT ROLLS.^*!!!llll villains ; that if their lords answered them in any suit as ifthey were free, they were then in effect manumitted.1391. The lords also complained, that their villains left themand their lands, and entered cities and boroughs that wereenfranchised, the men of such cities and boroughs notpermitting them to be disturbed, upon account of their franchises:— they therefore pray that they may be permitted toenter the said cities and boroughs, peaceably to retakethem.We have before seen that, by the common law, the lordsmight do this within a year and a day, but not afterwards ;because the villains, after a residence for that period, wouldbe bound to be sworn and enrolled at the court leet, andthereby became free.The commons also prayed,* that no nef or villain of anarchbishop, bishop, abbot, prior, &c. should purchase landsor tenements in fee, upon pain of forfeiture ; because thesepurchases leave the hands of temporal men for those ofspiritual men, to the great destruction of the lay fee of thekingdom. And that no nef or villain should place hischildren at school to prepare them for the church.The knights of the shire in Parliament complain, (as thelords had done,)t that there are many villains who fly fromtheir lands into cities and boroughs enfranchised ; the menof which places will not permit the lords to retake them, onaccount of their franchises : — they therefore pray that theymay have liberty to enter and take away the villains, notwithstandingsuch liberties.1393. It having been provided by statute, that no religious housesshould purchase any lands or tenements, by which theywould fall into mortmain, yet the religious houses, notwithstanding,having lately encroached upon many lands and freetenements, as well in other lordships as their own, by causingtheir villains to marry free women, who have free lands todescend to their sons or daughters, which lands and tenementsthey seized, contrary to the said statute, &c. : J it• Pet. Pari. m. 2, p. 294. f Pet. Pari. m. 1. p. 296.t Pet. Pari. m. 3, p. 319.Liveries.YEAR BOOKS. 773was ordained that the child of a free woman marrying a ^^^^ villainshould be a bondman ; — which ordinance is in conformitywith the law before quoted from Glanville and Fleta.The commons of the counties of Salop, Stafford, Worcester, 1384.. Franchises.Gloucester, and seven other counties,* complain that manymen of the county of Chester come daily and nightly armed,and kill persons, bum houses, ravish women and maids, andwound other people, badly treat, and destroy their cattle,and injure their goods, &c.; and no punishment nor forfeitureis provided against them, upon account of their franchise.And they pray a remedy, and that it may extend toDurham, and other such franchises.The commons pray, that no livery be granted under colour 1389.of any guild, fraternity, or other association ; or such guildsand fraternities should lose their franchisesThis corresponds with the tenor of the statutes of thisreign, t© which we have before referred, respecting liveries;and shows that the adoption of liveries by guilds and fraternitieswas a usurpation, and not sanctioned by law.YEAR BOOKS.There is a chasm in the Year Books at this period, and nocases of this reign are reported in those compilations.A few are to be found in Jenkins, but they are not materialto our subject. Some others are abridged by Believe,in his compilation of the cases of Richard II. from the abridgmentsof Statham, Fitzherbert and Brooke. As that workwas published subsequently to Brooke's Abridgment, theauthor has taken, in a great degree, the running titles of hispredecessor, and accordingly he has entered these casesunder Brooke's title of " Corporations and Capacities : " —they are only three ; — the first relating to the name of an'abbot; — the second to the church of St. Andrew, in Hole— and the last to a bishop; in which the distinctionis marked between his right to take by inheritance, and thatof abbots and friars, who can only take in right of theirchurch.Pet. Pari. n. 22, p. 201. t Pet. Pari. m. 7, p. 266.774 CHARTERS.Rich. II.CHARTERS.We have already quoted and extracted many chartersrelating to different places; and have mentioned others onlyby name ; a considerable number have also been omitted ;but before we quit the English documents of this periodit is proper to mention a circumstance which occurred inthe reign of Richard 11.^ as negativing the presumption sooften adopted for the purpose of supporting existing usages,** that a charter confirming them might have been granted inancient times, though since lost."In order to uphold what we find existing, and whichwe dignify with the name of " usage," though properly itshould be termed usurpation, this doctrine of charters,lost by time and accident," (to use the common legalphraseology,) has been received without scruple, or considerationof its nature, origin, or the real foundation uponwhich it rests.It is however, comparatively speaking, a notion of modemdate ; — and in fact, a special pleading expedient, in defianceof history and truth. And a stronger proof of the unjustifiablenature of this assumption can hardly be found thanin the contents of the following deed, which we have discoveredin this reign.John de Waltham, a great favourite of the king, was masterof the rolls, and when he quitted his office, with great precision,delivered over all the records in his possession to hissuccessor by an indenture, minutely specifying every documenthe had. And it is a circumstance worthy of observation,that every document entered by him in that list,is at this moment in existence. So that, if we considerthis fact, as well as the minute particularity with whichevery former charter is specified by inspeximus in thosesucceeding, it seems in defiance of every probability and fairpresumption, to assume that any of the charters have beenlost ; or that there ever were any in existence which are notnow to be traced, either by the originals or inspeximus./Scotland-IRELAND. 775Rich. 11.SCOTLAND.Nothing occurs at this period material to insert for thepurpose of further illustrating the history of the boroughsof Scotland; but they as well as the boroughs of Ireland,continued in the same state in which they were before.IRELAND.This king confirmed, in the 18th year of his reign, the Dublin.charter of Edward III. to Dublin; as well as those ofHenry 11. and of King John, with respect to the shears andbounds: and, that foreign merchants should, as in the city ofLondon, be liable with the citizens, to the taxes and dutiesincumbent on the city. Also cognizance of pleas to themayors and bailiffs, which was claimed in this reign, andallowed — and that the citizens might, as in England, be suedand sue in their city court. These, with other privileges,they are stated to have enjoyed from the Conquest.From the oath taken by the provost, in the 12th year ofthis reign, it appears that his duties were the same as thoseof the mayors in this country.In the 7th year of his reign, the king also confirmed theliberties of Kilkenny, with a fair once a year. And that/owr Kilkennymen of the town should be elected barons, to hold the pleasof the fair before them in all personal actions within thebounds of the town. These and other privileges were to beenjoyed by the commonalty of the town. And that they socontinued till the time of Henry VI., appears from a charterof that king, which provides, that all ordinances to affecthim and his heirs should be made by the common assent ofall the commonalty. And Richard III., as to the election ofthe provost, by charter directs, that the commonalty should,before Michaelmas, in every year, elect four of the town forthe office o( provost, and should present them to the lord ofthe town, or his attorney, who should accept two, one toserve for half a year, to Easter, and the other to serve forthe other half year, from Easter to Michaelmas ; neither of776 IRELAND.Rich. II. them to depute any person in their place unless by theassent of the superior and the common assent of the toum.^"379 '^ Richard II. granted to the burgesses of Dundalk* a charter,containing all the privileges usually enjoyed by the Englishboroughs : — ^that their town should be a free borough: — ^thatthe burgesses should have a mercatorial guild, with a hanseand other liberties, &c. : — that none who were not of thatguild should merchandise within the borough, unless by theconsent of the burgesses ; and that they should have sok andsak,them,&c.: — ^that they should be released of tolls throughoutall the ports of the sea, and the king's dominions : — thatno person should plead without the hundred of the boroughof Dundalk, except of pleas of foreign tenure ; and that theburgesses should be released of murder within the boundsof the town : — that none of them should make duel of anyappeal ; and as to the pleas of the crown, they should beaccording to the custom of the city of Dublin: — that no oneshould take a guest by force of the marshal: — that theyjustly should have their lands, tenements, sureties anddebts, &c. according to the custom of the borough of thecity of Dublin : — that they might have ingress and egressinto the borough with all their merchandises: — that thehundred should be held + once within every fifteen days :that they should make as reeve annually whomsoever theywished, and who should be fit to the king, and to themselves:that by the common council of the same burgesses theyshould elect two of the most lawful and most discreet men ofthe borough, before the justices when they come into thetown of Dundalk to take the assises, and to keep the pleasof the crown, to see that in the same borough justly andlegitimately they treat as well the poor as the ricci : — thatthey should have a fishery in the waters of Dundalk as wellandas freely as ever they had : — that no foreign merchantshould sell cloth or wine by retail, unless in gross: — thatno foreign victualler should carry away from the port ofEnrolment in Exchequer Roll of charter by Richard II. mem. Rot. 8, 9.Hen. VIII. mem. 10.t So Hustings in London.IRELAND. * 777Dundalk any victuals unless by the will or license of the Rich. ii.burgesses: — that they might freely many their sons, daughtersand widows to whomsoever they wished : — that no sheriff orjustice of the peace, &c. should intromit within the borough,except their reeve or coroners, who should answer for thepleas of the crown before the justices itinerant: — that theymight elect from among themselves one seneschal (or steward)who should see that the reeve and other bailiffs justly treatthe rich as well as the poor: — that no foreign merchantshould delay in the same borough with his merchandisesto sell, beyond 40 days : — that no burgess should be boundto replevy any thing unless he wished it, although it beremaining upon his land ; nor answer without the boroughby any writ unless by writ of right for lands within the boundsof the borough : — that no person should hinder any kind ofmerchandise which any merchant to the borough shoulddesire to bring, neither by land nor by sea, but in peacefreely to come and go without any impediment : — that if anyburgess be attached without the bounds of the borough, theseneschal and burgesses should have him at their court, andjustice should be exhibited there, as the earl, baron, or othergreat men in Ireland in their courts to their men ought tohave according to law.WALES.One or two charters will suffice to establish the same positionrespecting Wales; that the privileges of their boroughs,corresponded with those of England, and continued at thisperiod the same as they had been before : — thus Richard II.,in the first year of his reign, granted to the burgesses of Car Cardigan.divan, their heirs and successors, that they should in nomanner be convicted or adjudged in the counties of Cardiganor Carmarthen, or in the sessions house, or in any othercourts.The king confirmed the charter of Edward III. as tothe election of the bailiff.And also in the 12th year of his reign, granted that the 1388.town should be a free borough, and that the men inhabiting778 CONCLUSION.^^^' ^^' the boroughy should be the free burgesses. That theyshould have a merchant guild with a hanse ; and all libertiesand free customs which the burgesses of Newborough in thecounty of Anglesey have in their borough. That the town ofPertheley. Pertheletf should be held at the fee-farm rent of 40/.A grant of two fairs and a market then follows, nth a provisionthat ** all the people of the commode of Cafflogian, shouldbe bound to come to the market in the hundred court ;" witha general confirmation of the liberties they had before used.The king also confirmed the charter of Hugh Le Despencer^J^^- to Cardiff; and further granted to the burgesses and theirsuccessors, that all pleas of forestalling and hamesockenshould be pleaded and determined in their hundred court,the jurisdiction over them being before excepted from thecharter of Hugh Le Despencer.CONCLUSION.We have now arrived at the close of the records to be foundin this reign, which are highly important, as confirming thedoctrines before maintained; and irresistibly establishingtheir existence and application down to this period.Statutes. In the titles and margin of the statutes, we have seen theterm " corporation " introduced without authority, as in thelast preceding reign we found it interpolated into the YearBooks : nor will the reader forget the striking interlineationsin the records of Colchester.We also find among the statutes, the mention of '^ apprentices'which has led us to an explanation of their history;confirmed by the documents relative to '^ Yarmouth" andLynn." And we have also ascertained that the doctrinesof villainage, as defined in our early laws, were referred to,and recognized by the legislature ; and were in practice inthe boroughs.Charters. The charters clearly establish that the boroughs and burgessescontinued in substance at this aera, the same as theyhad existed in the preceding reigns. And the progressiveprivileges of the Universities, serve to establish, by theirCONCLUSION. 779peculiar character as contradistinguished from the boroughs, ^>c*»- n.that the rights, privileges and jurisdictions were altogetherlocal, and not of the artificial character of the corporationsat the present time.The Parliament Rolls also exhibit the importance, and Parliamentgeneral applicability of the doctrine of villainage, which ismaterial as connecting them with the local documents of thecities and boroughs.Scotland Ireland and Wales are shown to have continuedin the same state, as they were in the preceding reigns. Andit cannot be disputed '* that to this time, freemen were only Freemen.contradistinguished Tram villains, under the principles of thecommon law, and not with reference to corporations."That apprenticeship was also unconnected with those bo Apprentices,and was only one mode of ^,cqixinng freedom, with referenceto the general common law. That all these matterswere determined and adjusted in the court leet by Hi juries. Courtin the presence of the burgesses at large ; and by the systemof municipal government then prevalent, free condition, underthe common law, being the indispensable pre-existing qualificationfor a burgess ; and resiancy as an inhabitant householderpaying scot and lot, completing the title to be so admitted.And above all, it is the irresistible conclusion from the factsapparent from the Rolls of Parliament, that there were atTHIS PERIOD, "no MUNICIPAL CORPORATIONS."Leet.HENRY IV.The reign of Henry IV., short in its duration, and unimportantin its results, does not afford many records illustrativeof our subject. But it is at this period of our history thatthe doctrine and .appellation of corporations are first introduced.We shall collect and extract some few documents,according to the course of our previous arrangement.780 STATUTES.Hen. IV.STATUTES.In the statutes of this reign we find several fresh provisionsmade and confirmed to prohibit the unlawful bearing orLiveries, giving of Liveries.1399. In a statute of the first year of Henry IV., relative to thecharging of the sheriff with the ferms of the counties, theInhabitants oppressions and mischiefs which had arisen to the inhabitantsof the counties is made the foundation of the enactment.So that we find, as we have throughout contended,that all questions as to charge and discharge, duty and protection,both in the counties and in the boroughs, alwaysrelated to the inhabitants of those respective districts:subject only to the general restrictions of the common law,as to their being of free condition, and as to their residencebeing permanent, in which case they were entitled to privileges,and subject to burdens in the same manner in thecounties as in the boroughs.Cap. 13. The 13th chapter of the same year requires, that all theResidence king's officers should be resident upon their offices.Cap. 16. The 16th chapter, relative to the punishment of the mayorLondon, of London, for defaults committed there, recites the statutesof the 23d of Edward III. chap. 10, and speaks of the mayor,sheriffs and aldermen, as having the governance in the city,and refers to what is done in other cities and boroughs withinthe realm: strongly importing, that all the boroughs weresubstantially considered to be upon the same footing.Cap. 16. The 16th chapter directs, that the merchants of Londonshould be as free to pack their cloths as other merchants.Cap. 17. And the 17th gives to foreigners and aliens coming withinthe city of London, and other cities, boroughs, and townswithin the realm, according to the statute of Richard Ii,*power to buy and sell victuals within the realm, in grossor by retail ; and other indemnities and obligations are providedfor them by the 7th and 9th chapters of the 6th .Henry IV.; — also by the 4th chapter of the 6th, and the9th chapter of the 7th year of the same king : — showing thatStat. 6 Ric. II. cap. 10.STATUTES. 781all other citizens and bui^esses of the other cities and *^«n- 1^'*boroughs are put upon the same footing as those of London.It is provided also, that all merchandises may be sold ingross as well to all others as to citizens of London.We must likewise observe, that in this enumeration of the Corpora-cities,boroughs, towns and franchises, there is no mentionof any corporations.Tie 18th chapter directs, according to the title, what Cap. 18.Residence.process should be awarded against one of the county ofChester, who committed an offence in another county.And in the body of the act the persons so described arementioned as resident or dwelling within the county ; — whichis a decisive confirmation of the construction we have givenbefore to that expression in the early charters, and is in conformitywith its obvious meaning.The provisions against purveyance are continued: — and Purvey-thefees of the marshal of the marshalsea of the king's houseare regulated.In the general confirmation of liberties in the first chapter 1402.of the 4th year of Henry IV., the title of the chapter in the Corpora-commonprinted statutes, describes it as '^ a confirmation ofthe liberties of the church, and of all corporations and persons;" but upon referring to the statute itself, there is nosuch word as " corporation:" but the terms used are " cities,boroughs, and towns franchised." So that the observationswe made in the last reign upon the interpolation of this wordin the titles of the statutes, are equally applicable to this ;and upon reference to the new edition of the statutes publishedby the commissioners from the Statute Rolls, itappears that it is omitted in the title. As a proof of theirregularity and uncertainty with which these terms wereused, in the confirmation of the 7th of Henry IV., althoughthe same words, " cities, boroughs, towns franchised, libertiesand franchises," occur, there is in that instance no mentionin the common printed statutes, of " corporations" in thetitle.The 5th chapter of the 4th Henry IV. relative to sheriffs, Capers.requires that they should abide in their proper persons782 STATUTES.Hen. IV. within their bailiwicks for the time they should be suchofficers; and that this should be contained among the articlesin the oath.Cap. 20. The 20th chapter, in the same year, makes similar provisionsfor other officers of the king.1403. The 3d chapter of the 6th of Henry IV. provides, thatWatchers, watches should be made upon the sea coast throughout therealm by the number oi people in the places ^ and in mannerand form as they were wont to be made in times past. Andthat the statute of Winchester be observed, and that thisarticle be put in the commissions of the peace.From hence it is clear, that the xontch and wards of whichwe have before spoken with respect to cities and boroughs,were also, under some circumstances, required to be done inthe counties at large. And that they were to be kept bythe inhabitants of counties, who are in this statute simplydescribed as '* the people of the places."Although the late provisions of the legislature have, to acertain degree, made the early statutes relative to the returnof members to Parliament immaterial, yet, as the followingact is important in an historical point of view, we shall insertthe substance.Cap. 15. The 16th chapter of the 7th of Henry IV., recites, that theof the king, at the grievous complaint of the commons, of theundue election of the knights of counties for the Parliament,which be sometime made of affection of sheriffs, andotherwise against the form of the writs, to the great slanderof the counties, and hinderance of the business of the commonaltyin the said county; — It was ordained, that fromthenceforth, at the next county to be holden after thedelivery of the writ, proclamation should be made in thefull county, of the day and place of the Parliament ; andthat all they that be there present, as well suitors dulysummoned for the same cause, as other, shall attend tothe election of the knights ; and then, in the full county,they shall proceed to the election, freely and indifferently,notwithstanding any request or commandment to the contrary; and after they be chosen, the names of the personsshire.STATUTES. 783SO chosen be they present or absent, shall be written in an Hen. IV.indenture under the seals of all that did choose them.This statute is further enforced by the first chapter of the1 th of Henry IV.: — ^in which there is no mention of anyqualification of freehold; but on the contrary, by fair intendment,the election was to be by the commonalty of the county,expressly including not only the suitors at the county court,who, by some appearance of plausibility, may be contendedto be freeholders, but also " others," who no doubt comprisedall the free inhabitants of the county.The 17th chapter, with respect to apprentices, we have Cap. 17.already observed upon in the reign of Richard II. times.In the 6th chapter of the 9th of Henry IV. which relates to \4irj,^* novel disseisin," franchised towns are mentioned, as well as ^^'mayors, bailiffs, and commonalties ; but there is no referenceeither in the title or body of the statute, to " corporations."As we have before referred to the None Rolls, for the purpose Inhabitsshowing upon whom they were assessed, and have hadfrequent occasion to mention the collection of the ^^ dismes "and " quindismes," it should be observed, that the 7th chap Cap. 7.ter of the 9th of Henry IV., relative to the payment of themhy foreigners, speaks of the inhabitants as the persons whoare to be contributory to them.LONDON.Few documents relative to London occur in this reign. 'sallits rights had been effectually confirmed in the 7th ofRichard II. This king, however, re-confirmed them, in thefirst year of his reign, granting, in addition, the custodyof Newgate and Lydgate, and all the other gates and posternsof the city. Also the gathering of the tolls and customsin Cheap, Billingsgate and Smithfield : and the tonnageand weighing of all goods.But considerable complaints were made respecting themisgovernment of the city, by the mayor, sheriffs, and aldermen; and to correct it, the constable of the Tower had powergiven him * " to execute process against the mayor, sheriffsPet. Pari. m. 3, p. 442.784 LONDON.Hen. IV. « and aldermen, for neglecting to redress their errors, defaultsand misprisions, which were notoriously used in thecity by defaults of their good government : " and thesedefaults were to be inquired of by men of foreign counties,that is to say, Kent, Essex, Sussex, Hertford, Buckinghamshire,and Berkshire, as well at the suit of the king, as ofothers who wish to complain of them. And the statute wasdirected to extend to all cities and boroughs ; but Henry IV.ordered it to be repealed.1406. The weavers of the city of London state, in a petition toGuild. Parliament,* that their predecessors, weavers of the city,had granted to them and their successors, that they were tohave a guild, and that no other should intermeddle in theirtrade in London, or in Southwark, or other places belongingto London, if they were not of the said guild : — ^which privilegesthey enjoyed until the time of King Edward IIL ;who, against their liberties and franchises, at the instance andsupplication of alien weavers, granted to them that theyshould be exempt from their guild ; by which they have beenseriously injured, and pray that the said weavers alien beof the guild of the English weavers, and under the governanceof the mayor and aldermen of the city, and the bailiffsof the trade for the time being, and contributory to the fee-farmrent, &c.We have before seen that this was one of the most ancientguilds in the city of London ; but still it appears from thisdocument, that it was altogether confined to the regulationof the trade of the weavers ; and had nothing to do with thegeneral body of citizens : — except that they were necessarilyfor the purposes of police and government, under the controland jurisdiction, like all other citizens, of the mayor andaldermen of London.1407. In this year, the king, referring to the statute of the 7thStrangers, of his reign, chap. 9,t before quoted, which gave power tosell merchandises in gross to ^11 others, as well as to thecitizens of London, granted that no merchant strangershould traffic by buying of, or selling to, any other merchant• Pel. Pari. m. 3, p. 600. f 8 Co. 254.LONDON. 785stranger in London for the purpose of selling again, but HenM.v.only for their own use.Thomas Chaucer, butler to the king, also complained to p^^^^^Parliament,* that it had been the custom theretofore forevery king to have prisage of wine in every port in England,except in that of London and the Cinque Ports; in whichplaces every man who was enfranchised could freely takehis wines where it pleased him without any prisage ; whichprivilege was granted to the people only who abided C demur Residence.rants); and for their service, being continually abidiiyfin the said places ; and their children born there, and such Birth,only, ought to have the benefit of the franchise. But in thecity of London it is, and has been accustomed, that everyforeign man, not enfranchised in the city, who goes to the Strangers.mayor, chamberlain, or master of any trade in the same city,and for a small sum of money paid to the chamber, or tothe master of such trade, is accepted to the franchise, shouldenjoy the privileges as well as he who has been alwayscontinually abiding in the same city, notwithstanding theperson accepted is of another town or borough in England ;to the damage, &c. ; and they pray redress.The king answers, that he will send for the mayor and aldermen; and declared, by the advice of the lords in Parliament,that no one ought to enjoy such franchise if he be not acitizen, resiant and abiding within the city ; and that all Resiants.others, abiding in all other cities, boroughs or towns, shouldhave and enjoy their franchises to them granted.Here it appears that the citizens of London had abusedthe privilege which the common law allowed, of receivingstrangers who were willing to come and reside in the city. Strangers,on the payment of a suitable fine or contribution to thecommon stock; and had been in the habit of illegallyadmitting into their liberty persons who did not continuallyabide in the city, as was required by the ancient charters toLondon, as well as the Cinque Ports: but the king declares,with the advice of Parliament, that such usage was illegal ; —which is in perfect conformity with the decision of the courts• Rot. Pari. m. 1, p. 646. f Dover. Domesday, *' manensin villa assiduous."3 u786 LONDON.Hen. IV. of law, which we extracted in the last year, declaring that nopersons should enjoy the franchise but citizens resiant (in thelanguage of the court leet and wardmotes) and abiding withinthe city, according to the description of the bui^esses ofDover in Domesday. It is singular, that, notwithstandingthe former decision, and this express and decisive declaration^.^"- by the kins: and Parliament, non-residents should neverthelesshave been allowed to be citizens of London, by whichmeans the essential parts of their institutions have been perverted,and the privileges can no longer with propriety becalled the privileges of the city of London, — because thegreater portion of the real inhabitants, resiant and continuallyabiding there, are excluded from the privileges : —whilst persons non-resident are enjoying them. And it shouldbe remembered, that this being a parliamentary declaration,could not be altered by any charter, nor by any means butby Act of Parliament ; and it is at this moment the proper lawfor the city of London.Guildhall. It is a common opinion, that the possession of a guildhallis, in some undefined manner, proof of the existence of acorporation; but no one has condescended to reduce thisproposition into any tangible shape, or to point out in whatmanner these two things are connected ; but, like many othererroneous assumptions of the kind, it is left to support itself.A contrary position can easily be established by historicaland documentary proof: — thus we have incontrovertibly established,that there were no municipal corporations at theperiod of which we are now writing : — and yet Dover has aguildhall recorded in Domesday. On the other hand, thecity of London continued without one until this reign.The guildhall was originally nothing more than the placeat which the burgesses paid their guild or taxes : — gildasbeing the Saxon term for paying; which, for the sake ofeuphony, has been converted into " yield,' — the guildhall atReading, and other places, being described in old documentsas the " Yield Hall."CHARTERS. 737Hen. IV.UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD.A charter of this date,* confirms and recites a variety of 1399.others, which had been previously granted, but does not giveany additional liberties.In this year, Henry IV. granted a charter to the Universities 1403.of Oxford and Cambridge respecting the presentation tochurches and internal regulation of the Universities; butwhich is foreign to our present researches.The same king also, by his letters patent, granted to thetwo Universities, that they might proceed according to thecivil law in their vice-chancellor's courts for causes arisingwithin the Universities, touching any of their scholars ormembers. But this patent was held to be void ; for the king: King's^ ' o grant soul.cannot, by such a grant, alter the law of the land. An Act 13 Elis.of Parliament, however, which is not printed, enacts that theymay proceed in that manner ; except in cases of freehold,felony, or mayhem.§In the first chapter, in the general confirmation of liberties Stat. 9.of this year, there is express mention of those granted to the T^!'scholars of the University of Oxford : — which is repeated inthe corresponding chapter for the same purpose, in the 13thof Henry IV.We shall see hereafter, in the extracts from the YearBooks of this reign, in which the word " corporate" is firstintroduced into the text, that the universities were about thisperiod, considered to be incorporated. But it will also appear,that they were only so considered upon the grounds of theirspiritual or ecclesiastical character. And as they had obtaineda charter from the king, authorizing them to proceed accordingto the civil law, by which the clergy were at that time regulated,the suggestion upon that point made at the commencementof this work, that we derived our notions of corporationsfrom the civil law, is here fully justified : — because wefind that the word " corporate" is thus first introduced, withrespect to a body described as " spiritual ;" and which had• Rot. Cart. I Hen. IV. p. I, n. 7. t Rot. Pat. m. 20, p. 1.t Jerk. 2 Cent. 97, ca. 88.' § Br. Cases, 288. 396. Same, p. 117.3 e2788 Charters-OXFORD AND CAMBRIDGE.Hen. IV. obtained a charter from the crown, to allow it to adopt thecivil law. And as that system of jurisprudence was repeatedlyrepudiated in this country, we may not only assume, as thefacts above warrant, that this doctrine of Corporations wasborrowed from the ** Universities" of the Roman law : — butwe may also infer, from the decision in Jenkins, that thiswas contrary to the common law, and unwarrantably introduced: — which will account for the absence of the word inany of our early legal documents, and likewise affords anexplanation of the mode by which it was irregularly introducedinto the margin of the Year Books, and the titles ofthe printed statutes.Cambridge. This king, in the first year of his reign, granted (in consequenceof a petition from the Commons of England in Parliament)a confirmation of all the privileges hitherto receivedby the burgesses of Cambridge, saving the franchises of theUniversities of Oxford and Cambridge.*Bristol. We have no charters relative to Bristol, in this reicni ; but1409. . .in the Year Book of this period, there is a case reported atsome length, of a claim of cognizance, by the burgesses ofBristol: — founded, no doubt, on the previous charters whichhad given them an exclusive jurisdictionsFor in the case, reference is made to the charters grantedby former kings ; and it was said, that the cognizance had beenallowed to them long before the statute of Richard II., uponwhich the question arose ; and it was also stated, that theircharters had been confirmed by every king, since the cognizancewas given. In the report there is no mention ofthe mayor and burgesses being a body corporate; notwithstanding,that term is in the same compilation applied to theuniversities only three years before. But here the people ofBristol are simply described as the mayor and burgesses : —their franchise is spoken of, and the jurisdiction they mayexercise within it ; as if that term was applicable only tosome local limited district, and had not a corporate import.• Rot. Cart. n. 12, p. 2. t 6 Year Book Phil. T., fol. 20, pi. 24.CHARTERS.— NEWCASTLE.-CANTERBURY. 789This king granted, that Newcastle-upon-Tyne, with the Hen. IV.suburbs and precincts thereof, according to the ancient limits Newcastle-thenbelonging to the county of Northumberland, should be '^l^-separated from thence, and be a county of itself, with the titleof the " county of the town of Newcastle-upon-Tyne." Thatthe burgesses, instead of bailiffs as formerly, should have asheriff, to be chosen annually, by 24 of the most reputable ofthat number. That the sheriff so chosen, should be swornbefore the mayor of the town for the time being, and account inthe Exchequer for the annual profits of his office. That heshould have the same power as other sheriffs of counties had,and the privilege of holding a county court every month.That none of the burgesses should plead or be impleadedwithout their town, concerning any tenements or tenureswithin the same, its suburbs, or the precincts thereof, or concerningany offences, or other matters arising there, but thatthe mayor and sheriff should have cognizance of all pleas inthe guildhall of that town. That the burgesses and theirheirs should be exempt from serving on juries without thetown. That they should have power to choose six aldermen,who with the mayor, should be justices of the peace. Andthat the mayor and sheriff should continue to hold the annualcourts, theretofore held by the mayor and bailiffs.This king also, by a patent of this date, on a petition uaj.in Parliament, pardoned and released to the men of thecounties of Northumberland, Cumberland, and ,all escapes of felons, fines, issues, and mercianwith all kinds of tenths, fifteenths, &c. — on account ofthe grievous injuries they had sustained by the Scots, andtheir great losses by the falling of bridges, occasioned bysudden inundations of waters ; and on account of the greatexpenses of the men of Newcastle in keeping several of theirships well victualled and armed at sea; and in supporting anightly watch by 100 men on the walls, for the defence ofthe town and country adjacent.This king also granted a charter to Canterbury, in the first ^*i^"'^year of his reign, as appears by an inspeximus in a charterof Edward IV., which commences by reciting, that, " for the790 Charters-CANTERBURY.Hen. IV. « greater security and quiet of the bailiffs and citizens theirheirs and successors; and also to remove the ambiguitiesand controversies which had theretofore, or might peradventurethereafter happen to arise upon their liberties, by** reason of certain obscure and general words in the sameclauses in the former charters contained" — and thendirects, that no stewards, marshals, or clerk of the market ofthe household, nor any other minister or officer of the king,should enter the liberty of the city, to perform any matterstouching their offices there ; but that the bailiffs of the cityshould perform and exercise all things pertaining to theoffices of the steward and marshals, and clerk of the marketwithin the liberty, and should have and receive the profitstherefrom coming: — saving always, that when the chancelloror treasurer, or high chamberlain of the king, shouldhappen to come personally to the city, they might jointlyor severally, once or twice in the year, as need should be,inquire of the defects of the city belonging to the royalcognizance, and in the king's name correct and amend thesame, as might be reasonably required. That the bailiffsshould thenceforth for ever have cognizance of all mannerof pleas arising within the precinct of the city and suburbsthereof; and should have, hold and determine the samepleas within the city before the bailiffs, or one of them, inthe absence of the other. That they should receive thefines, issues and amerciaments, and all other profits therefromcoming, to the use of the bailiffs and citizens and oftheir heirs and successors, in aid of the payment of 60Z. duefor the yearly farm of the city: — except nevertheless, pleasupon actions arising within the precinct of the hamlet ofStablegate within the city; which is parcel of the will ofEstate, without the city: and which will and hamlet arewithin the fee and lordship of the Archbishop of Canterbury: — and except also the fines, issues, and amerciaments,as well of tenants as of resiants within the lands and fees ofthe archbishop.1401. In this year also, the walls of the city of Canterbury weremeasured ; and in the following year, as appears by the bookCHARTERS.-EVESHAM.-NOTTINGHAM. 79Iof murage in the city chamber, the whole of the city was ^*«n- IV.taxed and assessed to the repair of the walls ; for bearingwhich charge, the king granted the citizens license to purchaselands and tenements to the value of 20Z. by the yearwithin the city, to hold to them and their successors, citizensof the city : the statute of mortmain, or that the city washolden of the king in burgage notwithstanding: — with a ^n^^^^^^proviso for an inquisition of ad quod damnum — and withpower for them " to dress up ardent, and build up all landsand places void and waste within the city"*In the 2d year of the reign of Henry IV., that king, by a Evesham.charter, dated at Westminster, and directed to ^q good men ofEvesham also granted in aid of the paving of that town, forfour years, that they might take by the hands of good andfaithful men, under the direction and supervision of theabbots of Evesham, certain customs there mentioned.From this charter it appears, that the prohi homines orinhabitants of the town of Evesham, had, like the burgessesof Reading, Abingdon, and other places near ecclesiasticalestablishments, began to procure privileges for themselves;although it seems that they were still to continue under thedirection and supervision of the abbot. But there is no traceup to this time of the place having been made a borough.There is a confirmation of this date, of their liberties to the l^otiing-nam.burgesses of Nottingham and their heirs and successors And H03-4.the king, after reciting that the town, together with theliberties, in the present Eyre, for certain causes, by the considerationof the same court, had been taken into the king'shands ; re-grants all their liberties to them, their heirs andsuccessors, burgesses of the same town ; and that they andtheir heirs should have return of writs as formerly.And moreover the king recites, that by an inquisition itwas found that the burgesses, from time out of mind, hada gaol in the county of Nottingham : — and he re-grants it tothem, their heirs and successors. He further recites, thatthe burgesses, by pretext of the words in former charters,Som. Ant. Can. p. 7. t Rol. Pat. 2 Hen. IV. m. 2J, p. 2.t Vide etiam Hot. Cart. 1 Hen. IV. n. 4.792 CHARTERS.-DUNWICH.— NORWICH."^°- ^^ ' that " the men of Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire oughtto come to the borough of Nottingham, on Friday and"saturday, with their carts and packhorses" — have had inthe same borough one market every week on Saturday : — andthat the burgesses might not be hindered in their market ;he granted to them, their heirs and successors, that theyshould for ever have and hold the market aforesaid weekly,with all liberties and free customs appertaining thereto; andalso, that they, their heirs and successors, should be foreverquit of pontage, &c.Dunwich. In this year the kins: Granted the town oiDunwich at .J ^ ofarm to Thomas Mowbray, the marshal.* But in the 9th yearof his reign, he gave a confirmation to the mayor and bailiffsof all their former privileges.1409. It appears also in the year book of this reign, that theyheld cognizance of a writ of formed :f — but it was said,that the court of the franchise had failed of right, and thedemandant sued a resumption returnable ; and the tenantbeing demanded, an assign was secured by his attorney.TSfi' This king (whose object seems to have been, first to seizeand then to restore the privileges of the several boroughs,)granted to the citizens of York's their heirs and successors,a restoration of all their liberties and franchises, which hadbeen seized into his hands.Norwich. He also, in the first year df his reign, granted to thecitizens of Norwich a general confirmation of all their formercharters. And in this year another's which appears by1403. inspeximus in subsequent charters to this place, by which theking made Norwich a county of itself. A mayor was substitutedfor the bailiffs, and was appointed the king's escheator.Two sheriffs were also granted : — the escheator and sheriffsof the county being expressly excluded.In an anonymous case in Walked, it is said,|| that this kingincorporated" Norwich ; but the inspection of the abovecharter will clearly show this to be the same error into• Rot. Cart. 9 Hen. IV. n. 7.t Sixth Year Book, Trine. fo. 87 B, pi. 38.t Rot. Pat. p. 2, m. 29. 1 Pet. MS. 1936.< Rex V. Haywood, 4 Mod. 270. || 1 Salk. 191.CHARTERS.-UNCOLN.-POMFRET. 793which the courts, and writers both legal and historical, have "en. rv.so often fallen, in assuming that the early charters werecharters of incorporation; for no words of that descriptionoccur in these letters patent: which may be seen more atlength in Mr. Corbett's learned and interesting work uponthose places in England which are counties of themselves.This king, in the 11th year of his reign, also granted a ^j^JJ*"*charter to Lincoln, confirming by inspeximus the chartersof Henry III., Edward I. and II., and Richard II.; and fixingthe fee-farm. He also granted the city and precincts, tooththe exception of the castle, to the mayor and citizens, anddirected that the city, suburbs and its precincts, shouldfrom thenceforth be called " the county of the city ofLincoln ;" — that they should have view of frank-pledge, andpower to elect two sheriffs ; — the former name of the bailiffsbeing expressly directed to be translated into that of sheriffs.Tliat the mayor should be the escheator ; and the mayor,sheriffs and four of the citizens should be justices of thepeace: — and that the citizens should enjoy all their formerliberties.This charter is not one of incorporation, although thatterm is applied to the place in a statute in the next reign :^in which, however, the term is used as before explained,in its primitive local meaning.There is a charter to Pomfret of this date; which iss^ranted Pomfret.14(13to the mayor and burgesses, but it is not a charter of incorporation,although it is expressly stated to be so in the report ofthe case in Glanville* relative to this borough : affording anotherstriking instance, in which the term is used withoutany authority, even by so learned and talented a committeeas that which recorded the above assertion. It should atthe same time be observed, that even if it were incorporated,the same committee decided, " that the burgesses who oughtto return the members to Parliament, were the inhabitanthouseholders, and residents within the borough." And thereis no pretence for saying, that there can be two classes ofburgesses in any borough, who are to partake of the priviesRep. p. 140.794 CHARTERS.-LIVEKPOOL, &c.Hen. IV. leges under the charter; one who should vote for membersto Parliament, and the other not; and therefore when the committeethus decided, they determined that the persons whowere entitled to enjoy the privileges of Pomfret, as theburgesses of that place, were the inhabitant householdersresident.Liverpool. TTiis king also, in the first year of his reign, granted acharter of confirmation to Liverpool.^'yjJP*on- A charter of this date, containing an inspeximus of formercharters to Plymptony confirms them to the then burgessesand their heirs and successors.Hunting Hie bui^csses of Huntingdon also received a confirmation1402. of their previous charters.Sandwich. This king, in the 1st and 4th years of his reign, confirmedthe former charters of Sandwich particularly that ofthe 17th of Edward III., as may be seen by inspeximus inthe charter of confirmation of Henry VI.Poole. Thomas de Montacute, Earl of Salisbury, by a charter,confirmed the former grants to the burgesses of Poole andtheir heirs; but it does not contain any words of incorporationor of succession, the grant being only to them and theirheirs,i^yme. The burgesses and other inhabitants of Lyme in consequenceof their town being desolate from various causes, arereleased from all arrears of their fee-farms and demesnes ;and their fee-farm is reduced from 21Z. Qs. Sd. to 5/.*Ip»wjch- In the same manner, the poor burgesses of the town ofIpswich humbly shows that anciently their town, at the timewhen they took it to farm, was rich, &c.; but that lately ithad become impoverished and destroyed by the death ofburgesses and the honest men, and therefore pray a release ofthe annual farm of 60Z.Coventry. In this year the mayor and bailifis of Coventry claimedNol. 41 B. . "^ . "^ ^1409. cognizance in a plea of debt, and it was objected to them,that they showed no charter for their franchise ; J to which itwas answered, that it had been allowed of record, and nothingfarther appears as to the objection.Rot. Pari, n, 15, p. 640. t Pet. Pari. n. 1, p. 477. t <Jth Year Book.CONSTITUTIONS OF COLCHESTER. 796We proceed now to the local documents of some of the Hen. IV.boroughs, which will serve as specimens of the mode in whichthe law of the leet was administered at this time, and theburgesses sworn and enrolled.The constitutions of Colchester, which, in the reign of ^^j^**''-Richard II., afforded us a considerable insight into the earlycondition of that place, present, after an interval of 20 years,an opportunity of farther illustrating its municipal history,and showing with what uniformity its government had beencontinued. The election of one individual from each ward,by the advice of all the commonalty y again occurs : — and stillmore extraordinary interpolations than the former ; for thereis twice introduced by interlineations in Norman French,after the words by the advice of the commonalty, this importantaddition, *^ who have lands or tenements to the valueof 40s. a year at least beyond reprizes:'*- — words which, in allprobability, were borrowed from the statute of Henry VI.relative to electors for knights of the shire, but which hadnot any application to municipal elections of this description.Supposing them, therefore, to have been borrowed from thatsource, it is clear that it was a subsequent and illegal applicationof the words : — and it would probably establish theperiod of the interlineation ; particularly as at the close ofthe same clause, there is written in a later hand, a passagerelative to the election of justices of the peace ; who were notgenerally granted by charter until the reign of Henry VI.Another clause speaks of the election of aldermen, insteadof auditors, which obviously indicates, that the interlineationsin the constitutions of Richard II. must have been subsequentto this period.It must be remembered, that these constitutions ofRichard II. and Henry IV., which were altered as statedabove, for the purpose of giving the select body a controulover the commonalty, are themselves subsequent to thetime of legal memory ; and the alterations appear to havebeen even of later date. It is therefore clear, that the exclusivecontroul of a select body in Colchester could nothave existed before the time of legal prescription.796 HYTHE.Hen. IV. The clause in the constitutions of Richard IL, as to theburgesses being sworn, is repeated, and the ordinances aredirected to be read openly before the commonalty everyyear.1472. The return of members to Parliament for Colchester ofthis year, gives a fuller description of the burgesses whomade it than is usually found at this period of our history,as it describes " the burgesses" in conformity with the ordinances,to be ** the men sufficient within the borough dwellingand residing."1477. And the returns of Henry VI. and Edward IV. are in thesame form.Hyihe. Amongst the corporation records of Hythe, are to be foundthe following entries : —1399. ** Thomas Goodeale came before the jurats in the commonhall, on the 10th day of October, and covenanted to give forhis freedom 20d., and so he was received and swam to bearfealty to our lord the king, and his successors, and to thecommonalty and liberty of the port of Hethe ; and to renderLots and faithful account of his lots and scots as freemen there are^"*^^- wont:'B fossa, " Be it remembered, that on the last day of the monthof March, in the common house, John Brandon covenantedto give for his freedom 6s, Sd,, and he was stood to bearfealty to the lord the king, and to the commonalty and libertyof the port of Hethe ; and to render faithful account of hisLets and lots and scots, when they shall accrue, as persons are wontto do ; and the said John Brandon is admitted."Walter Butter, on the 6th day of May, covenanted to givefor having his freedom, 2*.; and he was sworn to bear fealtyto the lord the king, and to the commonalty and liberty ofLots and Hethe, and to render faithful account of his lots and scotswhen, &c. as freemen are wont to do : — and he is admitted."1400. And there is also in this year, the following charter grantedby the king ;For the then of the town of Hethe. — Henry, &c. WhereasHY.THE. 797on the third day of May last past,* more than 200 houses ^^°' ^^^'in the town and port of Hethe, together with all the goodsand chattels being in the same houses, were unfortunatelyburnt by fire; and five ships of the said town, together with100 men being therein, were lately lost and drowned at seatothe manifest destruction of the town and port aforesaid ;and the remaining inhabitants there, by reason of the premises,and also of the pestilences and other damages latelyhappening to the same port, are fully resolved on forsakingthe aforesaid town, departing therefrom, and settling elsewhere.We, contemplating as well the premises, as thegreat and excessive burden with which the said town ischarged to our service of the Cinque Ports, by reason thatthe same town is bound to serve with five ships, togetherwith 100 men and five boys in the same, without any aid orassistance of any other member of the Cinque Ports, for thedoing the aforesaid service during 15 days, at their own expences,at the supplication of the commonalty of the townand port aforesaid, have pardoned and released for us andour heirs, to the barons and commonalty of the same town,and to their successors, their proportion of our service, to wit,of five ships, with 100 men and five boys belonging to thesame, for five turns, from the time when the said service shallhappen during our time and that of our heirs, unless extraordinaryoccasion shall demand it, &c."With respect to these documents, it should be observed,that the swearing of the freemen by their taking the oath ofallegiance and undertaking to pay scot and lot, are in conformitywith the general common law, upon which we havebefore insisted ; and although the three entries vary a littlein form, yet they are in substance the same ; and amount tonothing more than an enrolment of these persons as freemen;but they are not described as burgesses, that being thenecessary result of their inhabiting and free condition andtheir consequent swearing and enrolment as resiants of— orbelonging to — the borough.• Rot. Pat. 2 Hen. IV. m. 22.798 YARMOUTH.Hen. IV. This charter, like many others to which we have beforereferred, is granted to the men op the town — a term wehave already explained, and which, as the place was aborough, is in fact, a description of the burgesses. Thatthis was the real meaning of the charter, is obvious, for itspeaks of the burdens upon the inhabitants of the servicesto be done for the Cinque Ports : — now that service was tobe performed by the barons or burgesses : — therefore the inhabitantswere the barons or burgesses. This is also confirmedby the subsequent parts of the charter, in which the termsbarons or commonalty are used.YARMOUTH.1408. We find on the rolls of Yarmouth of this date, a continuanceof entries of the north leet north middle leet, south middleleet, and the south leet, as we have seen in the last reign. Andthe capital pledges present in the same manner, those above12 years, who are not in decenna — those who have sold inthe town, not being burgesses — those who hold apprentices,not being burgesses — and those who are worthy of beingbui^esses — as well as forestallers — the latter being describedas not willing that the other compresses should have a partof the traffic, as the customs of the borough require.One person is presented as claiming to be of the liberty,but he is found not to be a burgess. It is obvious, therefore,in this case, as we have previously observed with respect toHythe, that being of the liberty of the borough, and being aburgess were, as reason and common sense would dictate,convertible terms.Inmates. Two persons are presented as inmates, or dwelling in thehouse of another, and holding or carrying on arts or mysteries," tenant artificial'* — and are not burgesses : — that is, theyare not resiant householders, and therefore have not beenduly sworn; for we find it is expressly ordered, upon the1406. Parliament Rolls, in this reign,* that artificers should besworn every year, at the court leet, within which they are• Rot. Parl.m.2, p.GOl.TRURO. 799hiding to serve according to the statutes of the 25th of ^^en^^v.Edward III. and 12th of Richard II. 1406.A remonstrance of the poor burgesses and commons of Truro ^'JJ?*to Parliament* recites a petition to the council, in the firstyear of Richard II., that from the destruction of the enemy 1377.by sea and land, and particularly by the great surcharge of12/. Is. lOd. for a tenth every time that a tenth was levied,the town had become so poor, as to make it uninhabited sothat it could not bear the surcharge ; that upon an inquisitiontaken, King Richard II. had granted to the burgessesand commons of the town, that in every grant of a tenth, forthe then next 10 years, they should only pay 60*. Thatupon the expiration of those 10 years, upon another petition,the same king had made another similar grant. That lately,after the last tenth, the bui^esses and commons, seeing thatthey could not inhabit without bearing the surcharge, removedall their goods out of the town, and purposed to leaveit uninhabited for ever.Thereupon the now king granted that they should pay 60*.,until other remedy should be provided by Parliament.They therefore pray the king, that he would grant to theburgesses and commons, and to their heirs, burgesses andcommons of Truro, that in every grant of a tenth in futuremade, they should only pay 60*.To which the answer was, " Let them sue the king, andhe will do thereupon, as shall best seem to him in the case."In the next entry the commons also prayed for the poor 1409.burgesses and men of TrurOy-y in consequence of the townbeing impoverished by pestilence, invasion, &c., and from thesurcharge of 12Z. \s, \^d, for a tenth; and that from defaultof the inhabitants, the town had become unable to pay thesurcharge ; that upon inquisition found, Richard II. grantedthat the town should only pay 60*. for the 20 years nextensuing ; that the now king had granted the same to thetown for six years, which period had now expired; andthat because they had the grant only by patent for a term• Pet. Pari. n. 10, p. 515. + Rot. Pari. m. 6, p. 368.800 PARLIAMENT ROLLS.Hen IV' of years, they had not repaired their houses, and even purposeto forsake the toum, and take up their habitation in anotherplace, if suitable remedy be not applied.They then pray that it might please his majesty to grant tothe burgesses and men of the town, and their successors andheirs, burgesses andmenofthe town, for ever only to pay bOs.These documents, like those which we have recentlyquoted as to Hythe, indisputably establish, that the inhabitantswere the burgesses; as in truth they are to thisday: for all the charters are granted to the burgesses, andthere is no other class of persons at Truro to answer thatdescription, but the inhabitants. And it seems also clearfrom this document, that none could be burgesses but thosewho were inhabitants.Parliament ROLLS.Upon the Parliament Rolls of this reign we again meetwith entries showing that the ancient laws with respect tovillains and strangers were in full operation.1399. The villains of lords, bishops, abbots, priors and othernobles of the realm, fly from day to day to merchant towns,Villains, who claim by their franchise, to detain such villains,* andretain them thus forcibly, by which the lords are deprived oftheir services, &c.+Guilds. It also appears from the same Rolls]; that the king declaredthat guilds, fraternities, and men of trade, in citiesand boroughs within the kingdom, which are founded andordered to good intent and purpose, shall and may grantLiveries, liveries.Here we have the guilds and fraternities spoken of, asthey were to be, in connexion with trade ; and as being inthe boroughs, though not necessarily connected with them,nor with the burgesses. And we have an express grant madeto them, that they should have liveries ; from which we shallfind, that the liverymen of the several companies in the cityPet. Pari, n.6, p. 448. f See before, Glanville.X Rot. Pari. ra. 4, p. 662.PARLIAMENT ROLLS.— PLYMOUTH. 801of London were subsequently derived ; and who, like the ***»• ^V.origin from whence they sprang, ought not to have had anyconnexion with the citizens or their privileges ; though underthe sanction of the legislature, in the reign of George I.,*they were allowed to continue their usurpations upon thewarden or the resiant inhabitant householders of the wards,of many of their important privileges ; and eventually theywere the means of introducing that extensive mischief ofnon-resident freemeriy to which we have before with so muchdissatisfaction referred.From the commencement of our researches we have frequentlydrawn the attention of the reader to the absence ofall terms of" incorporation" in our early documents. We haveshown how those terms crept into the margin of the YearBooks, and the titles of the Statutes ; and we have seen itintroduced into the Year Books, as applied to the Universities;being " ecclesiastical," — or, as they are called, —"spiritual bodies." But in no instance has it been adoptedwith reference to any " municipal body." On one or twooccasions it was used in its primitive sense, to describe localincorporations — as in the case of Bristol, and Drogheda. Butwe are at length arrived at the period, when it is used in itslegal corporate sense, and applied strictly to corporate powersfor in the Parliament Rolls of this reign we find the followingpetition.PLYMOUTH.The inhabitants and resiants in the town of Sutton Priorand Sutton Vautort, otherwise called Plj/mouth,f state thattheir town is a great port and resort for ships coming there,and that oftentimes it had been destroyed by the king's enemies,because it had not been enclosed with any walls or defensiblefortress to resist the enemy; and pray that his majestywould grant to them, their heirs and successors, inhabitantsand resiants within the same town, power annually to elect amayor for the good governance of the same town ; and thatthey, their heirs and successors, may be a body corporate, to Body corporate.• Stat. 11 Geo. I. t Pel. ParL 13 Hen. IV. m. 4, p. 663.3 F802 PARLIAMENT Rolls-PLYMOUTH.^^"•^^' purchase free tenements for term of life or in fee, without thePlymouth, king's royal license, &c.The king will advise to do that which shall seem best inthis case.From this document one inference, at all events, is indisputable,that the people of Plymouth were not incorporatedbefore this date. It is also clear, that the persons who appliedto be incorporated, were the inhabitants and resiants —the proper suitors at the court leet. And the applicants werenot confined to Plymouth alone, but to the two towns ofSutton ; which, if the petition were granted, would require tobe incorporated with Plymouth, in the primitive sense of theword, to which we have before alluded ; and in which meaningwe shall find it hereafter applied to these places, in thereign of Henry VI.One object of the petition was, that they might be able toelect a mayor ; which, we have before seen by numerous instances,might be done by places not incorporated.They then require expressly to be made a body corporate ;but the purpose for which they make that request is alsomost distinctly stated — namely — that they should be enabledto purchase lands ; and not with a view to interfere in anymanner with their municipal rights or duties, or with thepolice or government of the place ; or in the least affectingtheir elections, or the swearing or admission of burgesses.But the request is simply confined to that which is one andthe principal effect of incorporation — ** to give them thepower of purchasing lands"*What induced the people of Plymouth to think of presentingthis petition — and why they should have been the firstexcept the Universities — to urge this novel claim, it wouldnow be very difficult to ascertain ; but there can be no doubtof the fact, that they were the first who made the application; in which, however, they were unsuccessful ; for it wasnot till Parliament, 28 years afterwards, directed the matterto be submitted to the lords of the king's council and the• Rot. Pari. 8 Hen. VI n. 15, pp. 9 and 18.SIXTH YEAR BOOK. 803two chief justices, that they obtained their grant of in- J^«»- IV.corporation.From the investigation therefore of these facts connected ^^\JJj5f "with Pl3nnouth — and those which will be hereafter pointedout with respect to Kingston-upon-HuIl — there is everyreasonable ground to satisfy the human mind — and history,law, practice, and reason, justify us in arriving at the conclusion— ^that this was the first and real introduction of theproposal for municipal incorporations — that these incorporationswere intended only for the purpose of giving thecorporate powers of purchasing and holding lands and ofsuing and being sued by their corporate names — that this wasnot effected, as we shall hereafter prove, till the 18thyear of the reign of Henry VI. — and that when municipalcorporations were thus commenced, they were not designed,nor had they the effect, in any degree — of altering the generallaw of the land with respect to freemen — or the laws orusages with respect to burgesses — nor the internal government,police, nor elections of boroughs ; but that in all thoserespects freemen, burgesses, and boroughs, were leftunchanged; having only the additional powers OFTAKING AND SUING AS BODIES CORPORATE — SUPERINDUCEDUPON THEM.SIXTH YEAR BOOK.We now resume our extracts from the Year Books, fromwhich we have obtained such important materials in the precedingreigns.Those of this period will also supply us with some information.Thus we find one of the essential principles of thelaw — " that no person could be judge in his own cause" —established by an entry in the second year of this reign, whichstates —That the mayor and bailiffs of Lincoln had-cognizance Lincoln."^ . . ^ 1400.of pleas: — and one of the bailiffs sued in the court there; Foi.4B,the party sued came into the Court of Chancery, and Met.*showed, that one of the bailiffs was judge, and prayed thatthe suit might not be received in the common pleas : — andit was so.3 f2804 SIXTH YEAR BOOK.^^°'^^- A juror was also challenged, that he was not of the hun-jury.dred — establishing the rigid administration of the law, accord.22! ing to these local limits — as under the Saxon institutions.Court Leet ^^^ ^^^^ ^^^ court leet was in full practice at this time,*pi.' 19*^' relative to bui^esses, appears from the entry of an ment, for not coming to the view of frank-pledge of Duel,to which all the burgesses ought to come, before the stewardand port-reeve of the town.FoJToB ^^^ ^" ^^^^ y^^h a fii^c was imposed upon a person, ??• cause, being elected mayor of Lincoln, he would not go tothe guildhall, to take upon himself the office.tom?" The word " corporation" occurs also in this book in themargin, but there is nothing in the text to justify its insertion.This Year Book seems to have been first printed in the year1605 — when, no doubt, corporations being then commonly inexistence,the word was introduced into the margin,, in conformitywith the then notions respecting them.^^J**°^- There is'^also an instance of a plea' of villainage showing|J-|^- that the doctrine of the law as to villains, was then adoptedand in practice.Sherirs It was also laid down, that amercement at the toum ofl40o! the ^Aeri/f might be levied over all the county, and throughpi*. J7. ' the whole hundred.Fran^i!" ^^^ franchises and the guildahle are also contradicting^. gushed from each other, in the following entry : — Error is^i- Assigned for that the sheriff commanded the bailiffs of thefranchise to make all the pannel, when one of the three townsable** ^^'^ *" ^^^ guildahle ; in which town the sheriff ought himselfto make the array.Foi. 12?, The following question as to villainage, also occurs : —h] ?!?• Trespass by the abbot of Bury against the defendant, fortaking his servant out of his service. Tyl said, that one B.was seized-of the manor of F., and. that the servant was hisvillain regardant ; and he, and those whose estate he had,have been seized of him and his ancestors, as villains regardant; and that the same B., by deed, gave the same villainto the defendant, and to another ; and says, the other had releasedto him by a deed, &c., by which he became his villain;SIXTH YEAR BOOK. 805and because he had need of a servant, he took him as his ^*«n- IV.villain, to serve him as it was lawful for him. Reade said,that a long time before the defendant took to him, the abbotfound him a vagrant, and he made a covenant to serve him,hy force of which covenant* he was in his service until thedefendant took him. TyL — Suppose I have, upon a certainday, sufficient servants, and my villain makes covenant withanother to serve him, and afterwards my servants die, I shouldthen take my villain to serve me. Gascoigne denied thistleBishop of Lincoln claimed one as his villain, whose fo}'*^5'}jgoods he demanded of his executor. pl.s.E.T.And one was claimed as villain regardant to a manor. haln!*^"The bailiffs of Nottingham are impleaded by the king as FoVS^'pIlord of Leicester; J because those of Leicester ought not to pay ^'jj^ *toll in any place in England; and that those of Nottingham ^®i'||^'have taken toll of them of Leicester ^ ^' T-Leicester.The word " corporation" again occurs in the margin; but corpora-thereis no reference to any corporation in the case ; which f oK 26 Brelates simply to an alien. j[- ^•The guardians only of the house of the brethren of the Guardianminors of London bring an action of trespass; and the pl*57.*mayor of London is mentioned as having the governance of ' 'the city.In another case it was held, that lands purchased by relic Prior,pious houses, after 21 Edward L, were liable to dismes and Fol.33 B.quinine : and the action was brought by the prior alone. h! t.In a subsequent case the jurors were challenged because Jurors,they had nothing in the hundred. pl.7.In another of this date it is recited, that, if a lord, who Leet.has a franchise and a leet, does not inquire of the things y^^^inquirable, and punish them at his leety the sheriff, for default ^'^:The reader will recall to his recollection the doctrine we have urged as to themode iu which the indentures of apprenticeship operated to disprove villainage, andestablish the right io freedom.t See 50 Edw. III. fol. 21, Belknap, C. J. K. B.X The general and simple terms by which the respective burgesses of Leicesterand Nottingham arc here described, should be remarked.§ See Stat. 9 Ric. II.806 SIXTH YEAR BOOK.Hen. IV. of the lord, shall inquire of them at his toum, and makeTourn. punishment thereon.Here the doctrine we have so often asserted is most clearlyand explicitly announced ; that, if the borough ceased toexercise its exclusive jurisdiction, it reverted to the sheriff.Expences From the following case we may discover the relativeof mem . .hers of position of the boroughs with respect to the shires, and whoment. were liable to pay the expences of the representatives inFoi . 2, Parliament.pi 4M. T. Replevin for certain sheep, &c. : — The defendant avows thetaking, for the expences of the knights of the shire, of whicheach hundred was to pay part ; and Wheat, which is a willwithin a hundred, was assessed to 40s. ; and the sheep weretaken there, and sold, and the money was paid.For the plaintiff it was said, that WhertP is an ancientboroughy all times paying dismes, and therefore not chargeablefor the expences of knights of the shire.From. — If two burgesses of the same town ought to cometo Parliament, as other burgesses, and do not come, theyshall be amerced.Thir. said, that the lands of the lords who come to Parliamentby writ, shall not contribute to the expences ofknights. Hank, — In any case it will be contributory : for ifa lord yesterday, or to-day, purchases a new lordship, andbefore the purchase, the same lordship was charged ; it wouldnot serve as a discharge by the new purchaser; but theancient seigniories, which are parcel of ancient seignioriesand baronies, would be discharged and quit.Cul. — It is so by the statute, 12 Richard II. chap. 12, madeupon the same case. — Quaere. If a lord purchases an ancientlordship of the lord, will it serve as a discharge ? Or, if onewho is not born a lord, purchases an ancient seigniory, willhe be held discharged, or not ?*Abbot. An instance occurs of an abbot bringing an action alone,pi 37 ' without joining any of his house with him — a strong instanceM*. T.'Vide the same case, M. T. 10 Hen. IV. tit. Gage deliverance. 13 Hen. IV.tit. Avowry, 239.SIXTH YEAR BOOK. 807that even with respect to ecclesiastical bodies, the doctrine *'«"• iv.of corporations was not in perfect practice. It was by theabbot of Glastonbury, respecting the levying of the quinineat Wells.In another case the churchwardens bring an action of tres ^'^}\}'^»pass against the vicar of the church, for an injury to one of Met.the parish bells ; and it was held it would lie.A reference is also introduced into the margin to Brooke, Cor{K>ra-tit. Corporation, 84; but there is nothing relative to corporaltions in the case ; although Brooke draws the inference, thatthe churchwardens were incorporated.John de B sued a writ de nativo habendo against A. T. j^^^g^*in the county of Norfolk, and the sheriff did nothing ; upon pj ^f •which a sicut alias was awarded, and then a sicut pluries,returnable the last term : to which writ the sheriff returned,that he had sent to the bailiff of the franchise, who had done Franche.nothing — and he was excused of contempt.Trespass by two masters of the grammar school against School.another master, counting that collation to their place of the pi. '21.'Grammar School of Gloucester, from time immemorialbelonged to the Prior of Leone, near Gloucester ; that theprior had made the collation to the plaintiffs, to have thegovernance of the scholars, &c., which was said to be aspiritual thing. And it was assimilated to the case of a disturbanceof a market : but it was answered, that a marketwas that in which the party had a free tenement and inheritance; but here the plaintiffs had no estate in the school-mastership,&c., but for a time uncertain ; and it would beagainst reason, that a master should be disturbed fromholding his school where it pleased him, unless it was in a Corporate.case when a university was corporate, and schools foundedfrom ancient times.After strict search, we are convinced that this is the firstplace in which this term " corporate '' occurs, either in theParliament Rolls, the Statutes, the Year Books, or in anyrecord relating to municipal corporations. And here, it willbe observed, it is applied to a body described as spiritual.It was not till two years afterwards — the 13th of Henry IV.808 SIXTH YEAR BOOK.Hen. IV. that we find the same term occurring in the petition of thepeople of Plymouth ; and it was 28 years after that period,that their petition was granted.^^\ %^' ^^ ^^ action of debt, by the Abbot of Battaill, for a penaltyT. T. for non-payment of a composition for tithes, it was agreed byall, that the church which was chained was a prebendaryof the cathedral church of Chichester. Norton. — Sir, It wassaid that the count was, that the penalty for non-paymentof the composition was to the abbot and the convent, andthere was no mention of his successors; and the actiondoes not lie for the abbot that now is, and his convent,without naming his successor. Hank. — If I give land tothe abbot and his convent without naming the successors,they have the fee: — which was granted. Thir. said, that ifthe lands be given by the words dedit et conceit, to thechurch of such a place, the parson and his successors wouldinherit.This case again establishes how little the doctrine ofcorporations was at this time understood, even for ecclesiasticalbodies.1411. In another case it is said, ^' If an abbot, without theV*. 1. ' assent of his convent, makes a deed of annuity, and a writ"• ^' of annuity be brought against the successor, and the plaintiffcounts upon the deed which was made by the predecessor,the successor shall be discharged, because the deed at thecommencement was not effectual to charge the successor —and consequently, cannot be effectual to charge the house'*&c., &c. And Hank, said, " that as there is a convent andcommon seal, nothing can be done to charge the house withoutthe assent of the convent," &c., &c.Here, although the corporate doctrines are not very clearlydefined, yet it is obvious that they were applied to ecclesiasticalinstitutions; but there is no appearance, at thisperiod, that they were also recognized with respect to municipalbodies.Fol. 13, As to the use of seals at this time, it may be useful topi.3.H. T. extract this dictum : — In the case of the Abbot of Glastonbury,inter alia, it was said, ^' That in ancient times, franchisesSCOTLAND.— IRELAND. 809and lands have been granted by codicils not sealed, but ^^°' ^^'under crosses and other signs made upon them."SCOTLAND.With respect to Scotland, we find that, in the first year of i^ekW,'!this reign, Robert III. granted a charter to Inverheithing,giving the borough at fee-farm to the burgesses and common"city. And it is in this year, being the 13th of Robert III.of Scotland, in the statutes relative to that country, made atScone, that the " burgesses " are for the first time mentionedin the title of the statutes, after the bishops, abbots, priors,dukes, earls, barons, and freeholders.IRELAND.This king granted a confirmation of all the former charters H^qIJ"'to Dublin again specifying the boundaries of the city;and also made to them other grants, which are not materialto our present inquiry, further than that the general conclusionmay be drawn from them, that the Irish boroughs,like the English, continued in the same condition to thepresent time. And as an instance that the Irish boroughsreceived similar grants to those of England, it may be observed,that, in the 11th year of Henry IV., Dublin obtaineda discharge from a part of its fee-farm, in consequence ofthe pestilence ; as Lyme Truro j and other places in England,did upon other grounds. There were also grants for appointinga mayor, and constable of the staple, for the city ofDublin.This king also granted a charter to Athbotfy which com- \^J'menaces by reciting, that the provost and commons of thetown of Athboy had supplicated him, that as the town wasfrom time immemorial an ancient borough, and situate nearthe marches ; and a great defence to other towns of theparts of Meath, as well against English rebels as Irishenemies; but that, from misfortunes, it had become soimpoverished, that it could not any longer sustain itself,without his aid, &c. ; and that the commons had thefollowing liberties, and used them — viz. electing a provost810 IRELAND.-ATHBOY.Hen. IV. from among themselves, and presenting him before the lordAihboy. of Athboy, to continue for the then year next ensuing: thatthe provost and commons always had pleas of all mannerof debts, &c. ; and of all other personal contracts withinthe town and liberties ; and of all pleas of assise, of noveldisseisin, and of the tenures of those within the bounds ofthe city, &c. : — rendering to the lord of the town, all issues,&c. of the hundred court, and all other courts within thetown : — that they had been used to elect from among themselvesan officer called a serjeant, for the execution of judgmentof pleas, and for holding a weekly market within thetown.The king, therefore, confirms these privileges to the burgesses,their heirs, and successors ; and further grants to themThat they might have a guild merchant, with a hanse, andother franchises to that guild pertaining ; that no one not ofthe guild might have or deal in any merchandise within thetown, unless at the will of the burgesses, their heirs, andsuccessors; that they might have soc, sac, &c. ; freedomfrom toll ; that none should make duel, &c. ; that they mightdischarge themselves of pleas pertaining to the crown,according to the custom of the city of Dublin ; that no foreignmerchant should sell cloth by retail in the town, or vendwine, beer, &c., nor delay beyond forty days with his merchandise,against the will of the provost and burgesses.That they should not be placed in assises, juries, &c. byreason of their external lands ; nor in personal actions beforethe king's justices, during the time they should dwell in thetoum. That foreign men should not be placed with burgessesin assises, &c., on account of their lands or tenementsbeing in the town.That no bui^ess should be convicted upon any appeals, &c.,hy foreigners, but only by their fellow-burgesses, unless theaffair should affect the commons of the town. That theyshould not be sheriffs, coroners, &c., without the town, contraryto their will, while they dwell in the town. That theyshould have the assise of bread and wine ; and that theyshould not be impleaded without the town.Ireland-DROGHEDA. 811The mayor and commonalty of the town of Drogheda also Hen. IV .received from the king a charter in this year, reciting, that Drogheda.the town of Drogheda is situate in the county of Louth andMeath, and is divided by a certain water, called Boyne, intwo parts ; that the men and burgesses residing in the countyof Louth were governed by a mayor and two bailiffs ; themen and burgesses dwelling in the county of Meath had beengoverned by a seneschal and two bailiffs ; that separate fee-farmshad been granted by the kings of England, but thatvarious dissensions had arisen, and that merchants had refusedto bring their merchandise to the town. That the king,upon the supplication, and with the unanimous assent ofthe burgesses and commonalty of Drogheda, granted to them,their heirs and successors for ever, that the town, with its suburbs,and all places in which the burgesses and commonaltyhave had the liberties and franchises in either of the aforesaidcounties, should be one entire and '' incorporate countyby itself; and that the town should be holden for ever atfee-farm. That the town, with the suburbs, should be oneliberty and franchise, and under the governance of one mayorand two sheriffs, by the burgesses and commonalty of theaforesaid town to be elected, with their common assent,and ceasing the names and states of the seneschal andbailiffs, that the town of one liberty and franchise shouldbe perpetually holden. That the mayor should be theescheator. And the mayor, sheriffs, burgesses and commonaltywithin the town, for the common utility mightassemble every year, and might fully and without hinderancemake ordinances and statutes for the sound governanceof the town. That the mayor, immediately after his preferment,should take his oath, the first time before those who inthe aforesaid town have hitherto been called ^* jurats"* (and Jurats,who in the same town were thenceforth to be named alder Aldermen.The reader will remember the suggestion we have before made, of the aldermenand common councilmen having been originally the grand and petty juries atthe court leet :— and that the term '* jurats" is applied to the higher officers of theCinque Ports and many of the towns in Kent. It is impossible not to remark, howstrikingly our suggestion is supported by those facts, and this portion of the charterof Drogheda.8 1 2 Ireland D.- Dog Hed A.^^°- ^^' ' men), to do and execute the offices of mayor and escheator ;and that the same mayor and his successors, as mayors andescheators of the same town, should have all power and jurisdictionwithin the town and suburbs, &c. That the sheriffsshould not go out of the town aforesaid to take their oaths ;that their names should be sent under the common seal of thetown into chancery annually. And that the mayor andaldermen of the town aforesaid, for the time being, and theirsuccessors, mayors and aldermen of the town aforesaid,should have full power of receiving the oath of the sheriffsin the hall of the guildhall of the town aforesaid for hisoffice.That no sheriff or escheator of the counties of Louth andMeath should presume to enter within the town or suburbs,or should in any manner intromit themselves to exercise theiroffices there. That the escheator and sheriffs of Droghedashould have the same power, jurisdiction and liberty towhatsoever other things to the offices of escheator and sheriffspertaining in the town, suburbs, &c. which other escheatorsand sheriffs elsewhere within the kingdom of Ireland have ;that the sheriffs of Drogheda, upon every Monday, frommonth to month, should hold in the same manner as othersheriffs of our dominion of Ireland held their court whensoeverit shall please them concerning their liberties ; andthe profits thereof should receive in common, to the commonutility of the burgesses and commonalty dwelling on bothsides of the water; as the bailiffs of the town aforesaid hadhitherto severally been accustomed to hold and receive;that the mayor, sheriffs, burgesses and commonalty, andtheir successors, should have, within the town aforesaid, onecommon gaol ; and all chattels called waif and stray, andchattels of felons and fugitives, and also escapes, and otherforfeitures of such chattels there, in aid of the support oftheir farm; that the burgesses and commonalty by themselvesor by their ministers thereunto deputed, might levy,demand and receive tolls, customs and other things whatsoever;exactions of merchants and other persons, as wellby land as by water, there resorting in common, and to theIreland-DROGHEDA. 813common utility of the same burgesses and commonalty as ^^®"- ^V.by virtue of the liberty and one franchise, and not separately,and confirmed to the bui^esses and commonalty, and totheir heirs and successors for ever, that none of them shouldplead or be impleaded before any justices without the townof lands or tenements which they hold within the liberty ofthe town, nor of any trespass, agreement, or other contractmade in the town or suburbs, &c.That the mayor and sheriffs should have cognizance of allpleas of trespasses, agreements, contracts, and debts whatsoever,within the town and suburbs. That the burgessesand commonalty, and their heirs and successors, should havecognizance of all manner of pleas, assise of novel disseisin,and mort d 'ancestor, of all manner of lands and tenementswithin the town and suburbs. That the burgesses and commonalty,and their heirs and successors for ever, shouldhave full correction, punishment, authority and power toinquire, hear and determine by the mayor of the town aforesaid,and four other good and lawful men of the said town,by the same mayor and his successors to be elected, allmatters, plaints, defects, causes, and articles, which to theoffice of justice of peace of labourers and artificers do pertain,and other things whatsoever within the town and suburbs,as well by land as by water. That the mayor, and four ofthe more discreet and lawful men of the town for the timebeing, do not in any manner proceed to the determination ofany felony, without a special mandate, &c. That the burgessesand commonalty, their heirs and successors for ever,should have all fines, issues, and amercements to justices ofthe peace, within the liberty of the town aforesaid, and thesuburbs, bounds, metes, limits, and precincts aforesaid pertaining,and from the same judgment in any manner coming,by their proper ministers to be levied and received in supportof the repair of the bridges of the town aforesaid, and of othercharges of the said town, daily arising or happening ; andthat the mayor, sheriffs, burgesses, and commonalty of thetown aforesaid, and their heirs and successors for ever, shouldhave the forfeiture of victuals by law, within the town, IRELAND.— DROGHEDA.— WALES.^'^"' ^^' burbs,&c. — ^viz.yofbreadywineyale, and of other things whichto merchandise do not pertain ; also, that by translation, alteration,and changing of the names of the seneschal and bailiffs,none of the franchises, liberties, privileges, immunities, quittances,or commodities, to the aforesaid burgesses and commonalty,their heirs and successors, and the tenants and re-giants within the same town of Drogheda, the suburbs, bounds,metes, limits, and precincts aforesaid, by our progenitorsheretofore granted, and by us confirmed, towards the nowmayor, sheriffs, burgesses, and commonalty, or the tenantsand resiants within the town, suburbs, bounds, metes, limits,and precincts aforesaid, or their heirs and successors, as incommon to them to be used, should be in any manner denied,restrained, lessened, or abbreviated.The original charter is very long and minute — in substance,however, corresponding with those of England. Andalthough it runs to so great a length, there is no mention ofany corporate privileges, nor any reference to such a body;but on the contrary, the word " incorporate" is used in thecharter in its primitive sense, as applied to the actual localincorporation of the two parts of the town — one on one sideof the river, and the other on the opposite side ; whichmakes it highly improbable, that as the term is mentionedhere in one sense, it should not also occur in its more extensivemeaning, if, as some suppose, corporations were at thattime common throughout the realm.WALES.The offence which the king had taken against the inhabitantsof Wales, from their attachment to Richard II., and theresistance they made to the pretensions of Henry IV. to thethrone, as well as the disturbances of which they were guilty,under the conduct of their warlike and powerful nobles,seem to have excited against them, the animosity of thecrown and parliament, during this reign.Cap^i*2 ^^ ^^^ second year of Henry IV. chap. 12,* certain restraintswere imposed upon entire born Welshmen, whom the com-• Pet. Pari. m. 3, p. 476.WALES. 815mons prayed should be prohibited from purchasing lands Hen. IV .within the towns of Salop Bridgeport, Lodelowe, Leomyfi'stern Hereford, Gloucester, Winchester, and all other merchanttowns whatsoever, adjoining to the marches of Wales, neitherin the suburbs of them, upon the forfeiture of such lands andtenements to the lords of whom such lands and tenementswere held in chief. And also that no Welshnum henceforth beelected or received to be a citizen or burgess, in any city orborough, or town merchant ; and that Welshmen who are inany such city, borough, or town enfranchised, being citizenor burgess, shall find there sufficient security and cautionfor their good behaviour, as well towards our sovereign, as fortheir loyalty towards the governors of such cities, boroughs,or toums, for the time being, for the safety of the same, ifthey should desire to remain there. That none of them bein the office of mayor, bailiff, chamberlain, constable, or gaol-keeper; nor of the common council of such cities, boroughs,or towns henceforth, be received, accepted or occupied inany manner.And the king answered, that he willed it so to be. That is tosay, of entire Welshmen, born in Wales, and having fatherand mother born there.The 16th chapter of the same year provides, that if Welsh Cap. 16.men did not restore to Englishmen the distresses taken bythem, within seven days. Englishmen might return the likemeasure to them ; and complaint of these acts, was to bemade to the governors or stewards, where such malefactorswere resiant, under the seal of the sheriffs of the counties, orthe mayors or bailiffs of the cities and boroughs where thestewards of the franchises or such persons dwell: — ^whichseems directly to assume, that both the officers and theparties, were residing in the respective places.The 17th chapter enacts, that if a Welshman commit a Cap 17.felony in England, and thereof is attainted, and after fiiethinto Wales, — upon certificate of the king's justices, he shallbe executed.And the dangers apprehended from Wales, are denoted by Cap. 18.816 WALES.Hgn. 1 V. the 18th chapter, which provides, that the lord-marcherskeep sufficient guards in their castles.Cap. 19. The 19th chapter, (confirmed by the 26th of the 4thof Henry Iv,) ordains, that no whole Englishman, by threeyears next following, shall be convicted at the suit of anyWelshman within Wales y except it be by the judgment ofEnglish justices ; or by the judgment of vfhole Englishmenburgesses ;orbs inquest of boroughs towns and Englishmenof the seigniories where such Englishmen be arrested.Cap. 20. And the 20th chapter provides, that from henceforth, noWelshmen be received to purchase lands nor tenements withinEngland — nor within the boroughs — nor English towns ofWales — upon pain to forfeit the same purchases to the lordsof whom the said lands and tenements be holden, as suchestate which the said purchaser had in the same ; and that noWelshman shall be accepted burgess nor have any otherliberty within the realm, nor within the boroughs and townsaforesaid.So that there are in this year six several statutes againstthe Welsh — five of them immediately following each other.And in the fourth year of this reign, nine several provisionsare directed against them — one, that there should be nowasters, rymer, minstrels, nor other vagabonds."That there should be no meetings or congregations there.That Welshmen should not be armed.That neither victuals nor armour should be carried intoWales.That no Welshman should have any castle, fortress, orhouse of defence ; nor be made justice, chamberlain, chancellor,treasurer, sheriff, steward, constable of the castle,receiver, escheator, coroner, chief forester, nor other officer,nor keeper of the records, nor of the council of any Englishlord.That the castles and walled towns in Wales should be keptby Englishmen.And finally it was provided, that no Englishman whomarried a Welshwoman, should be in any office in Wales.Charters-WALES. yi7From the enumeration of offices in the seventh statute Hen. iv.above, with respect to Wales, it is clear, that they had inthat country officers in every respect similar to those inEngland.TEN BY.We also find some charters previously granted to theburgesses of Tenby y by William de Valencia and the CountessJohanna his wife; by which the burgesses are exempted fromstallage, passage, toll, &c., and from carrying, mowing, binding,and gathering on the lands and meadows of the earl,and from all other labours pertaining to their mills, houses,or lands : and also from guards of castles — array of arms,&c.Right of common is likewise granted to them : and powerto choose two bailiffs fit for the earl's business; who should besubject to no other labours than the holding of the hundredcourt and collecting the different fines, rents, and tolls in thetown and port, &c.No burgess attached, except for felony, shall be takenfurther than the gate of the castle of Tenby, if he can findsufficient bail.Another charter also by Adomar de Valencia, confirms theabove; and grants a market, and permission to bequeaththe lands or tenements which any burgess might have acquiredin the town, or the burgage lands belonging to it.There is also a confirmation by Lawrence de Hastings,who increases the power of the hundred court.These charters were confirmed by Edward III. andRichard II.And Henry IV., at the supplication of the burgesses, allowsthem to choose out of their own* body, a mayor and twobailifis, annually, on the feast of St. Michael ; who with theirfellow burgesses y are empowered to hold all kind of pleas,and decide on all offences within the town and precincts,except in cases of treason.The bailiffs are to account at the king's Exchequer for allfines, &c.3g820 STATUTES.Henry V. and the knights and esquires and others, which shall bechoosers of those knights of the shires, shall be also residentwithin the same; the citizens and burgesses of the cities andboroughs shall be chosen men, citizens and burgesses, resiant,dwelling, and free, in the same cities and boroughs, and noneother in any wisest'Here we have the general doctrine of residence applied tothe persons who were to vote in the shires, as the inhabitantsBurgesses, of the county. And as to the citizens and burgesses, thelatter are described, in conformity with the doctrine for whichwe have contended, in words so clear and so distinct, thatit is impossible to entertain any doubt upon the subject ;they must be resiant — that is, suitors at the court leet ; theymust be dwelling — that is, householders ; they must be of freecondition, and consequently would be sworn and enrolled.Justices. Other statutes of the same reign require, that the justicesof the peace should be resiants, resident and dwellingin the same shire.Jurors. It is a matter worthy of observation, that the first generalstatute which required the possession of lands, as a qualificationfor a juror on all inquests, occurs in this reign.In that of Edward I., there had been a statute specifyingthe number and the age of the jurors; which howevermentions nothing of any qualification in respect of land, butannexes the duty of being jurors to those who are resiant,complaining of persons being placed in assises who did notdwell in the county — and it prohibits such from being im-panelled,as well as any person who cannot dispend 20^.yearly.1293. The 21st of Edward I. provided, that no persons shouldbe put on assises, &c., out of their proper counties, unlessthey had lands and tenements to the value of IOO5. ; butthat provision was expressly confined to assises out of thecounty — as to those within the county, the jurors wererequired to have lands to the value of 40^. And there is anexpress saving, that before the justices errant, and in cities,boroughs, and market towns, it should be done as had beenaccustomed.STATUTES. 821The 28th Edward I., chap, 3, stat. 9, requires, that the ^^^^ V-jurors should be neighbours, most sufficient, and lesssuspicious. The 34th of Edward III., chap. 4, requires, that 1243.they shall be of the next people, which shall not be suspector procured. And the 42nd of Edward III., chap. 11,provides, that the copies of pannels shall be delivered sixdays before the sessions ; and that none shall be put uponthem, but the most substantial people, and worthy of credit,and not suspect, which have best knowledge of the truth, andbe nearest. After which follows the enactment to which wearereferring, and which provides, that no person shall passin any inquest upon the death of a man, or between partyand party whereof the damage exceeds 40 marks, if theperson has not lands or tenements of the value of 40^.Considering these several statutes, the documents we havebefore quoted, and the laws which relate to the electionof sheriffs, escheators, and coroners — all of which stategenerally, that the elections shall be by the commons ofthe counties — it is impossible not to conclude, that the in- In*»abi-habitants generally of the counties, performed all the publicfunctions within them, subject only to the restriction of theirbeing, like those in the boroughs, reliant dwelling , Budfree;and the qualification of possessing lands, particularly tothe amount of 40^. per annum, which was, by the subsequentstatute of Henry VI., made necessary for voting for membersof Parliament, was at first only introduced for thelimited purpose of showing who should be jurors.The statutes of this reign, like the former, contain provisionsrelative to the Welsh — purveyance — merchantstrangers — and hosts. And with respect to the latter, thatas the statutes of the 6th of Henry IV., chap. 9, requiringsufficient hosts to be assigned to them by the mayors, &c.,and that the merchants should not remain in other placesbut with the hosts, had not been carried into due execution ;it is provided, that those statutes should be firmly holdenand kept in all points — which, it will be remembered,would, in some degree, repeal some of the charters we havebefore extracted.822 STATUTES.— Lincoln-OXFORD.Henry V. There is also a statute relative to false verdicts given inLincoln, the city of Lincoln, which recites the statute of the 13thctl%. of Richard II., and the charter of the 13th of Henry IV.to that place, which has been before quoted amongst thecharters of that reign.This statute afterwards directs, that the pannel may bemade from the people of the county of Lincoln, notwithstandingthat charter, or any thing therein contained; orany franchise granted to the citizens, or other usage to thecontrary ; or that the said city of Lincoln is so made an^°rat?^ i^^^^<^^^^ county of itself y and severed from the county ofLincoln. From which form of expression it is clearlyobvious, that the word is used in its primitive sense, as denotingthe load incorporation of the city, suburbs, andprecincts, and their severance from the county at large. Butbearing in mind the unauthorized introduction before of theword *' corporate," in the titles of some of the statutes, itshould also be here remarked, that the English translationis, '' or that the said city of Lincoln is so made incorporate,"instead of ** is so made an incorporate county by itself, andsevered from the county of Lincoln." The above view of thestatute is confirmed, by the fact of the mayor and commonaltyof Lincoln, in the 10th year of Henry VI., petitioningParliament for a licence to hold lands in succession, whichwould not have been necessary if they had been previouslyincorporated.Oxford. It appears also from the statutes of this reign, that theCap. 8. scholars and clerks of the University of Oxford had beenin arms, and had disseised many persons of their lands andtenements, and had done other acts, of which complaintshad been made, and for which they were declared to beoutlawed ; and upon the certificate of the chancellor, werepronounced to be banished the realm.1415. The 7th chap, of the 2d statute of the same reign, withreference to the weights of gold, speaks of cities, boroughs,and market towns ; but like the statutes of the precedingreigns, says nothing of their being corporate.Cap. 7.CHARTERS.-LONDON.-LYME.-NOTTINGHAM. 823Henry V.CHARTERS.The charters of this period are neither numerous nor important:grand consist principally of confirmations: — thus,of 43 charters entered upon the charter rolls of the first yearof this reign, 40 were confirmatory of previous grants.*All the previous charters, customs, and franchises, were London,twice confirmed to the citizens of Lotion.And this king, in the third year of his reign, by letters Lyme.patent, recites, that his father, late king of England, had,on the 8th day of May, in the 11th year of his reign, amongother things, granted, for himself and his heirs, to his burgessesof the town of Lyme, in the county of Dorset, situateupon the sea coast, their towriy with the liberties and franchisesto the same in any manner belonging, for ten years,under the rent for the fee-farm of 100«., yearly, and fortenths and fifteenths, 13^. Ad. only. And the king, becausethe burgesses had restored, to be cancelled, the letters ofconfirmation, to the intent that Thomas Cook and Joan hiswife, might have the town, with the liberties and franchisesthereof, from the king's grant, with the assent of the burgesses,did grant, for himself and his heirs, to the aforesaidThomas and Joan, the town, with the liberties and franchises,for the whole life of the said Thomas and Joan, and either ofthem longest liver, under the same rent.This king also, in the first year of his reign, granted anon Netting-thercharter to the mayor, bailiffs, and burgesses of dotting 1413.ham, confirming all former grants ; — that they should havecognizance of pleas, chattels of felons, fines for trespasses,return of all writs ; and that the mayor, recorder, and fourothers, should be justices of the peace.Mr. Corbett, in describing this charter, states, that pur-pressures,and all the waste within the town, were to be insupport of the corporation thereof: but it is obvious fromDomesday, and the charters of Henry II., John, Henry III.,Edward I., Edward II., Edward III., and Richard II., whichwe have before quoted, that it was not incorporated beforeVide Cal. Rot. Cart., p. 197.824 Charters-NORWICH, fitc-GLlLDS.Henry V. this time; and the charter, of which the author was speaking,is clearly not one of incorporation, as appears from ourinspection of the original rolls at the Tower. The term thereforecould not, with propriety, be applied to this place.Norwich. Xhe king, in the 5th year of his reign, for the purpose ofsettling disputes then existing between the commons and themayor of Norwich, granted a new charter, confirming all theformer, particularly that of Henry IV., and directing themode in which future elections should be conducted.^14?T* ^^^^ ^^^S ^'^^ granted, whilst Earl of Chester, a confirmationof former charters and liberties to that place; andPiymptoa. the Same to the burgesses of Plympton and their heirs : — inHIS. the second year of his reign, the same to Gloucester — YarmouthScarborough — and various other places.^421** ^^^ ^^ ^^^ ninth year, he also granted confirmations toWells and Dumoich,GUILDS.^141*6 *' ^^ ^^^ ^^^^ there were at this time, grants of guilds andfraternities to some of the boroughs. Thus, in the fourth year ofthis reign, there is a charter respecting the foundation of afraternity at Bristol, referring to letters patent of Henry IV.,authorizing the establishment of an hospital, almonry, or guild,in the suburbs of Bristol ; and that it should be a perpetualIncorpo- incorporation near Lawford's gate. That there should beamaster or guardian of the fraternity ; and that he shouldbe a person capable to receive lands and tenements to him andhis successors for ever ;* to plead and be impleaded ; andto have a common seal ; that they might make ordinancesand constitutions for the government of the house ; that theymight transfer this almonry or guild, and found a guild orfraternity, in honour of the Holy Trinity, of St. George ; incorporatingand giving it the usual corporate powers, withauthority to elect a master of the guild or fraternity.Here the important and characteristic capacity of a corporation to hold landsand tenements by ixiceemon^ Vk^ for the first time, expressly and distinctly given toan eleemosynary fraternity :— but it was not, as yet, conceded expressly to municipalbodies, although they did, in point of fact, and always had, held and enjoyedlands and franchises in succession and perpetuity.GUILDS. 825A similar grant is made to Norwich reciting, that a fra ^^^^ n V-lenity or guild of St. Geoi^e had existed in that city for Norwich.thirty years then past — which the king ratifies and confirms G^jid.and grants that the brothers and sisters thereof, who maywish to be of the fraternity or guild, should be a perpetual Perpetualcommunity ; and should have the name of the " Guild of St. city.George of Norwich." Also that they might yearly choose analderman and two masters ; that they should be capable ofacquiring lands, tenements, and rents to them and their 5ttc- Successor*.cessors for ever ; plead and be impleaded ; and have a commonseal. That they might hold lands and tenements withinthe city to the value of 10/. a year ; to be held of the king inburgage notwithstanding the Statute of Mortmain. Burgage.We have before suggested, that the doctrine of corporations Corpora-wasborrowed from the civil law through the ecclesiasticalinstitutions of this country, and the eleemosynary guilds,which were in a great degree connected with them.We have seen the term " corporate" applied to an ecclesiasticalbody in the case of one of the universities: — andan ineffectual attempt made by a municipal body to obtainthat character. Notwithstanding which here are two guildsactually incorporated, with the same corporate powers, whichin subsequent periods were so generally granted to municipalbodies.The positions therefore for which we have contended,are greatly confirmed by these documents, viz., that therewere originally no municipal corporations: — that the corporatedoctrine was first borrowed from the ecclesiasticaland eleemosynary bodies : — ^that, even with respect to them,the language and doctrine of corporations was not fullyor publicly adopted, nor reduced to clear and distinct principlestill about this period : — and that although they wereadopted about this time by those bodies, they were thenwithheld from the municipal establishments. And as theincorporation of the guild at Bristol is made in such clearand precise terms, it will be curious to contrast it with adocument of the same reign, after the interval of only a826 BRISTOL.Henry V. few years, respecting the election of sheriffs for that place ;which, although of considerable length, and referring repeatedlyto the transactions of the mayor and citizens, hasnot in it one word relative to a " corporation'' — so that thiscontrast between the " guild" and the " municipal body" ofthe same place is decisive to establish the distinction betweenthem, for which we have throughout contended.Bristol. The document is as follows : Translation of an entry of1421. .the election of sheriff of Bristol, taken from the Red Both —Be it remembered, that Nicholas Bagot, late sheriff of thetown of Bristol, in the time of John Spine, mayor, died whilstthe said Nicholas was serving in his office of sheriff; afterwhose death, the mayor caused the good men of the commoncouncil of the same town to be summoned together, whobeing assembled, elected out of themselves, according to theform and effect of the charter of King Edward III. granted tothe burgesses of the town aforesaid, in order that out of thesame three persons, one might be chosen by the king and hiscounsel, as sheriff of Bristol. And hereupon, they sent tothe chancellor of England, letters patent, concerning thatelection, under the common seal of the said town, recitingletters patent from the king, which stated " that the mayorand commonalty of the said town of Bristol, of their commonassent, had elected out of themselves, three persons, whosenames had been sent to the king in his chancery, under thecommon seal of the said town, for one of the same three tobe preferred by the king, as sheriff of Bristol, according to acertain form, specified in the said charter of Edward III. ; andthat the king, confiding in the fidelity and circumspection of theaforesaid Nicholas Bagot, had committed to him the said countyof Bristol, with the appurtenances, to be kept during one year ;and inasmuch as the said Nicholas Bagot, whilst he (by forcethereof,) was in the execution of his aforesaid office of sheriffof the same county, on the day of the making these presents,has departed this life — vouchsafe your lordship to know, thatthe aforesaid mayor and commonalty, of common assent, havechosen three persons out of themselves, in order that out of thesame three persons, one may be chosen by the king, and hisBRISTOL. 827Henry V.council, as sheriff of Bristol for one year, to do all thingswhich pertain to the office of sheriff in the county ofBristol ; which said letters patent had been received by thechancellor. And by himself, and by the council of the king,John Milton had been preferred as sheriff to keep the countyof Bristol." After which follows the appointment of JohnMilton by the king.Considering the charters which had been before granted toBristol, and those which were subsequently conceded, up tothe year 1684, 36th Charles II., when it vf2L& first incorporated,the reader must be fully satisfied, that Bristol, like many otherplaces, continued, for many centuries after the time of legalmemory, before the particular advantages of incorporationwere superinduced upon its general character as a municipalbody. And in truth, the circumstances with respect to thisplace are still more striking, because not only was the guildto which we have before referred, incorporated first in thesuburbs, and afterwards in the city itself; but also in the15th of Henry VII., 1499, a chamberlain being appointed Chambercharter at that time, it is expressly declared in the sameletters patent, that he shall have perpetual succession — thathe shall be called by the name of chamberlain — ^that he shallhave a seal — plead and he impleaded by the name of thechamberlain of the town of Bristol — and that he and his suclessons shall keep the revenues, profits, and emoluments, forthe use of the mayor and commonalty, with all charters, evidences,and muniments. But nothing is said in that charterof the incorporation of the body at large. So that these corporatepowers are given to the chamberlain but withheld fromthe citizens. And probably it was given to the former, becausethe latter had no such rights; for it appears, that in 1681,34th of Charles II., a quo warranto was filed against them,for assuming, amongst other things, to be a body corporate : —which from the former charters, and the particular nature ofthat of the 15th of Henry VII., it is obvious they had no rightto claim. And therefore we find, as might be expected, thatin consequence of the quo warranto, the mayor, burgesses,and commonalty surrendered their charters. Upon which.828 BRISTOL.— Yarmouth-HUNTINGDON.^^^ Charles II., in the Syst year of his reign, made them a newgrant, expressly incorporating the citizens and inhabitants ; —giving them a corporate name — perpetual succession — makingthem capable o{ pleading and being impleaded by their corporatename — and of holding lands and tenements by themand their successors, &c. So that the period when Bristolfirst became incorporated is in this instance, as will hereafterbe proved respecting the greater part of the other boroughs,most clearly and accurately defined,Yarmouth. As to Yarmouth, the entries of the four leets — the capitalpledges or jury, and their presentments, continue precisely inthe same form during this reign.Return of There is a peculiarity attending the return of members tomembers ^^ • • • •ID the Parliament at this period, which has been much commentedcourts, upon by authors who have written upon the subject, andhas been considered of much importance, though it seemscapable of easy explanation. The members for the boroughsare stated to be returned at the county courts ; the followingis a specimen of the kind.Hunting The usual writ was directed to the sheriff of Huntingdon ;1413. to which he returns, that two burgesses had been duly electedfor that borough, each having given their pledges, and refersto the indenture of Huntingdon thereto annexed, which states,that at the county court for Huntingdon, held at St. Ives,George Gydyng, John Taylor, John Foxton, John Feller,John Light, Simon Clapthome, Thomas Pursued, and RogerChamberlain (eight persons), who were present at theproclamation, had elected Robert Dance and John Denton,two fit burgesses, with the assent of the whole commonaltyof the borough aforesaid (ex assent toties com-mutatis burgi praedicti), who did full and sufficient powerfor themselves and the commonalty of the borough aforesaid,to do and consent to all things in the Parliament.In witness whereof the said George, and the said electors,set their seals to one part, and the sheriff his seal to theother.1414. And in the next year a similar writ issued, and a similarreturn was made, excepting that it was at the county court ofHUNTINGDON.-PARLIAMENT ROLLS. §29Huntingdon instead of St. Ives, and that 14 persons instead Henry V.of eight joined in the return as burgesses; many of themdifferent persons from those who signed the former return.*Brady, and other authors, have described these generally"as returns made in the county court for the boroughs,"from which it has been loosely inferred, " that the electionswere also there;" but from the above documents it willbe seen, that the election was made in the borough, with theassent of the whole commonalty ; but instead of sending thereturn by a common messenger to the sheriff, wherever hemight be found, some of the electors themselves carry it tothe sheriff in his county court, where he was sure to be metwith, as presiding at the election for the county.In this reign we also find many returns at the same periodby the whole commonalty ^ of which Oxford, and other places,are instances.PARLIAMENT ROLLS.In the Parliament Rolls of this date we find the following H14.entry as to Liverpool : —The poor tenants of the king of his duchy of Lancaster, Liverpool,the burgesses of the borough of Liverpool, pray the Parliament,f that as King John, by his letters patent, granted, thatthose who held any burgage within the town of Liverpoolought to have all manner of liberties and free customs,as any borough upon the sea had ; and that King Henry III.had granted, that the town of Liverpool should be a freeborough; that the burgesses of the same borough shouldhave a merchant guild and a hanse, with all liberties theretobelonging, with soc, sak, thou, them, which the now king hadconfirmed generally, and that the word " sak " is interpretedfree court," as is declared of record in the Exchequer; byauthority of which grants the burgesses have always held acourt within the borough, and the perquisites thereof received,but that of late the hinges ministers of the countyof Lancaster had usurped and held certain courts within the• I Pet. MS. In. Temp. Lib. p. 369.t Pet. Pari. n. 2. p. 55.830 PARLIAMENT ROLLS.Henry V. borough, since the aforesaid confirmation, and never before,Liverpool, and had molested and disturbed the burgesses in their libertiesand franchises, against the said charters.The petition then concludes by praying redress for thesame, and the enjoyment of their liberties under thecharters.The matter is referred to the king's council, with authorityto do justice therein.If there is any borough in England in which burgagetenure ought to prevail, surely it should be Liverpool, inrespect to which this statement is made, " that the privilegesgranted by King John were given to those holding burgageswithin the town." On the contrary, however, the privilegesof that place have never been enjoyed under thatright, but under one totally different, and even less justifiedby law.Burgage tenure, in the sense in which it is commonly used,ought NOT to have prevailed in any borough, for it has nolegal foundation, excepting as explained in the manner wehave stated before — viz., as descriptive of the occupiers ofhouses within a borough : — ^that is, the " inhabitant householders"who, as every house within the borough must beheldby burgage tenure, were necessarily burgage tenants.In this sense, and in this sense only, it is a legal right,founded upon our ancient law, and ought to have prevailedin Liverpool, to the establishment of the right of the freeinhabitant householders : and not, as has been the case, of thefreemen of the corporation.The document we have extracted above, is also important,as showing what, in the reign of Henry V., was considered tobe the real intention and effect of the liberties granted toboroughs. Those granted to Liverpool are described as beingthe same as those which other boroughs had ;'' and the beingdifree borough, is connected with having a " free court," orindependent jurisdiction, separate from the county at large :which we have, from the commencement, shown to be theessential characteristic of a borough. And so it appears toSIXTH YEAR BOOK. 831have been considered in this petition from Liverpool. Whilst, Henry V.on the other hand, the usurpation upon its privileges is describedto be by the officers of the county coming within thetown to hold courts there. The remedy sought, is the restorationof the charters of the several kings, under which itacquired its exclusive jurisdiction. And it should not beoverlooked, that the Parliament petitioned the ling uponthese grounds; even in those times, when the commons —proud of their newly-acquired power — often trampled uponthe rights of the king — yet, on this occasion, they displayeda due regard to the prerogative of the crown, by refusing inthis instance, as they did in many others, to interfere withthese matters of executive government which undoubtedly belongedto the crown : — and therefore they properly and constitutionallyreferred it to the decision of the king in council.SIXTH YEAR BOOK.As an additional instance that the law continued at this sera J 420.Folks,m other respects the same as it was in the Saxon and early «P^-.^,Norman periods, we have in this reign a record of a man in- toum.dieted before the sheriff, at his torn in Holbom, in thecounty of Middlesex, for a purpresture in the highway.The doctrine of villainage seems to continue in this reign, 1414.the same as it had been before, and was actually in practice ; Fol.'iOB.for in the Year Book of this period, we find an abbot, who vicinage.was defendant, alleging that the plaintiff was his villainregardant, whose manumission is afterwards mentioned.And again in another case, a defendant averred, that the 1421.plaintiff was his villain regardant ; to which the plaintiff Fol. i B.replied, that he was/ree, and of free estate; and upon this Free,they went to issue. In the course of the argument, manumissionwas referred to ; and the doctrine of villainage generallyconsidered: — and it was argued, that if a man bringsa writ of libertate probanda against another, and upon thisthey are at issue, and the plaintiff finds surety ; if pendingthis issue, he against whom this writ is brought, shall receivehim for his villainy he shall be fined to the king, &c.832 Ireland-DUBLIN.*^^ °nr V« In the first eight years of this reign, we have no mention1423. of" corporations," either in the margin or the text. In theFoi's B. ninth, there is a reference to Brooke's title to corporation intioDi. ' the margin of a case, in which a prior brings a writ of entry,by his name of prior, and in his own right, and had used nosurname. For which, judgment was prayed of the writ.And it was adjourned. But it was said by two of the judges,that if an abbot purchase to him and his heirs, the abbotshall only have an estate for the term of his life, because hepurchases as an abbot to him and his heii-s ; and it cannotdescend to his heirs, nor to his brother, as it could before heentered into religion, by which his blood was corrupted —which therefore does not appear to justify the assumption,that it related at all to corporations, because the case seemsto have been decided solely upon the ground of the claimanthaving entered into religion, and by that means barred theright of inheritance of his heirs.This case appears decisively to show, that the doctrine ofcorporation was not then generally adopted : — or the abbotwould have sued, and would have supported his plea on theground of his being a body corporate : — and that which hehad purchased, would have accrued to the benefit of him andhis successors,IRELAND.Dublin. Henry V. in the second year of his reign, granted a confirmation,by inspeximus, of the charters of King John andEdward II. to Dublin.Cork,&c. And also a confirmation of the charters of Edward II., ofliberties to Cork, Waterford and Drogheda.Dublin. In the 7th year of his reign, the king also granted a charterto Dublin, providing, that the mayor and bailiffs shouldbe justices of the peace, and the mayor clerk of the marketand escheator ; confirming also to the mayor and commonaltyall their lands and tenements : — being the liberties and confirmationsusually granted to the English boroughs.WALKS. ^33As to Wales, we find that Richard de Beauchamp, Earl Henry V.of Worcester, confirmed the charters of Hugh le Despencer 1422.to Cardiff; and further granted to the burgesses their heirs " *and successors residing within the borough, that they should Resiants.be tried by burgesses of the borough, and not by strangers ofthe county of Glamorgan, And if any of them should betried upon account of felony in the county of Glamorgan, itshould be determined by six burgesses of the borough, andsix men* of the vine of the lordship — that the constable ofCardiff should be mayor — and that 12 of the burgessesshould be aldermen. That at Michaelmas the aldermen andburgesses should elect four burgesses, theretofore called port-reeves,out of whom the constable should elect two to bebailiffs, and that they should have two serjeants-at-mace.Provision is also made for filling up the vacancies ofaldermen.The similarity of this charter to those of England is tooapparent to require further comment.Conclusion.The documents of this reign, though few, have given usthe important description of burgesses — as dwelling, resiant,wndfree; — they have shown the general necessity of residence,as established by the provisions of statutes, and thegrants of charters. They have afforded us an instance of theterm " incorporate'' used in its primitive sense ; and theyhave proved, that it was not then generally applied to citiesand boroughs; although many authors have gratuitouslyassumed the contrary.As a contrast to these facts, the actual incorporation ofguilds has been shown : — and that corporate powers weregranted to one officer of a city ; but in the same place withheldfrom the general body of the citizens.The production of the returns for boroughs at the countycourt has been explained ; and the real nature of a boroughThis distinctly shows that the burgesses of the borough were put in oppositionto the men of the lordship — ** the free men" of each of those districts being thepersons intended — but in boroughs they had the appropriate name of" burgesses"3h834 STATUTI-IS.M^^nr V» has been defined by a document of this period, showing itto be founded upon exclusive jurisdiction, as separated fromthe county by charters granted by the Tdng^ in the exerciseof his undoubted prerogative with which the Parliamentwere unwilling to interfere.And, finally, it is proved, from the recorded decisions inthe Year Book, that the early common law of England, withreference to the sherifTs toum, and the important head ofvillainage," were in full exercise at this period.HENRY VI.The next reign exceeds, both in duration and importance,the one we have immediately quitted, and will introduce usto the establishment of those incorporations which we havebefore seen had not existed in any antecedent period of ourhistory. We shall adopt the succession of the records asbefore.STATUTES.The statutes contain the same indications of oppressionsby the purveyors which the former reigns have afforded.Liveries, with provisions respecting the liveries, and alien merchants.Also the abuses of escheators, and the regulation of personsmerchandising with Wales.1432. All persons born in Ireland, repairing to Oxford or Cam-irish,bridge, and living there without the jurisdiction of theuniversity, to the great dread of the persons residing in theneighbourhood, were to depart out of the realm, with theexception, amongst others, of burgesses and other inhabitantsin cities and boroughs, of good fame, who have found goodPledges, surety.1423. The 8th chapter of the second year of this reign, relativeIrishmen, to Irishmen resorting into the realm, and being put inPledges, surety for their good bearing, afler reciting the last act,Statutes. ^35amongst other things, provides, that " as in the said ordinance ^^^-J^L'no mention was made before whom, nor in what manner, thesurety of good bearing should be found, the chancellor ofthe universities of Oxford and Cambridge for the time being,and every of them within his jurisdiction, shall take thesureties of scholars within the same universities, and certifythe same into the king's chancery; and that the justices ofthe peace within the counties, and mayors and bailiffs withincities and boroughs enfranchised, shall have power to takebefore them such manner of surety of good bearing, and todoexecution upon them which shall abide or do againstthe said ordinance from henceforth."Here we have an instance of a part of the municipal Courtjurisdiction of the court leet of the boroughs of Oxford andCambridge given to the universities ; at the same time thatthe ordinary jurisdiction of mayors and bailiffs in cities andboroughs is recognized, and the system of pledges and sure Pledges,tyship is enforced.In the 4th year also, in an act which directs, that " every 1425.sheriff shall return such writs as be directed to him at suchdays as they be returnable, and shall warn those jurorswhich be impannelled ;" it is provided, amongst other things,that the stewards of leets and hundreds have power to Leets.inquire of such misprisions and defaults of the said sheriffs,and to certify their said injuries before the justices of deliverance,so that they may put the said parties to answer,upon which answer, if they be found guilty, they shall makefine and ransom to the king'* &c. &c.In an act of this date, relative to the wages of artificers ^^^^*Cap. 3.and workmen, it is provided, amongst other things, that themayor of the city of London for the time being, and themayors and bailiffs in every city, borough, or town, shallhave power and authority to make proclamation in their fullsessions once a year, as to the wages of servants.A statute of this date, respecting the common balance 1429.° Cap. 6.and weights, directs that the inhabitants shall use the common inhabitantsbalance freely without any payment : but foreigners are to Foreignerspav for the use of it.3 h283fj sTATirrKS.Hen. VI. This statute speaks of every city and borough; but makes1429. no allusion to corporations. It provides, that, in every^^' *** city, borough, and town, every " inheritance" of the city,borough, or town, may use them gratis ; but e\ try foreigneris to pay for the use of them. The word " inheritance" isin the English translation rendered " inhabitant." And thecities are by that statute fined for defaults los. ; boroughs5L ; and towns, where a constable is, 40*.*j^^P* '^' It is in this reign that an alteration was made in the qua-cheshire.limitation of those who were to vote for the knights of theshire ; and in an act, the title to which is, " What sort of"one shall be choosers, and who shall be chosen knightsof the Parliament;" it is recited, "that the elections ofknights of shires to come to Parliament, in many counties ofthe realm of England, had of late been made by very great,outrageous, and excessive number o{ people dwelling within thesame counties, of the which most part was of people of smallsubstance, and of no value, whereof every of them pretendeda voice equivalent, as to such elections to be made, with themost worthy knights and esquires dwelling within the samecounties ; whereby manslaughters, riots, batteries, and divisionsamong the gentlemen and other people of the samecounties, were likely to arise and be, unless convenient anddue remedy was provided." In consequence of which, " theking ordained, by authority of Parliament, that the knights ofthe shires should be chosen, in every county, by people dwellingand resident in the same counties ; whereof every one ofthem should have free land or tenement to the value of 405.by the year, at the least, above all charges ; and that theywhich should be so chosen, should be dwelling and residentwithin the same counties; and such as had the greatestnumber of them that might expend 40*. by the year andabove, as afore is said, should be returned by the sheriffsof every county, knights for the Parliament."This restrictive qualification of electors for members forThis passage marks the distinction atween boroughs and other towns; — theformer were under the government of the king's officer — mayor — bailiff, or port-reeve— the latter had only the ordinary conservator of the peace under the commonlaw— the constable.STATUTES. «37the county, which seems to have been introduced at this *^®°' ^^•period for the first time, was probably borrowed from thestatutes to which we have before referred with respect to j jurors,and the 13th of Richard II. chap. 13, prohibiting all from ^^^*hunting who had not 40s. yearly. It will be remembered,that, in the ordinances issued by the king in council, andafterwards confirmed in Parliament, respecting the electionsin the boroughs of Leicester and Northampton, that provisionsborrowed from this statute and the same sources, wereapplied to those places.The 1 0th chapter of the same year, relative to process ^*p- *^-against persons indicted, complains that indictments hadbeen found in foreign counties in which the parties were notconversant or dwelling : — so that it is obvious, from this andthe preceding statute, that all rights and duties, as well asresponsibility for offences, were confined to the places wherethe parties actually dwelt, or in the language of the laws,were conversant''In an act relative to the cognizance, and jurisdiction of ^*p-^-franchises, the mayors, bailiffs, citizens, burgesses and com- Common-penalties,are mentioned ; but there is no reference to corporations,nor to any corporate bodies or name, unless,contrary to the position which we have already establishedby so many authorities, it should be still insisted that theword " commonalty" ought to be so applied.But it seems hardly possible to find a stronger instance to ^*P- 27.establish, that this " term'' had not a corporate signification ;but that the inhabitants were the persons intended to bedescribed — than in a statute relative to Tewkesbury, (a placegenerally considered to be a corporation,) in which a remedyis provided for the inhabitants against the people in theForest of Dean ; who, although they never were incorporated,nor is there any pretence for supposing that they had everbeen so, are described under the word " commonalty" — andare spoken of in conjunction with the hundreds. And hi asubsequent part of the statute, it is expressly said, that they arenot incorporated commonalties (commonalties corporate)*• RufThead's Statutes at Large, vol.ix. App. p. 64.838 STATUTES.^^^°- ^'^' The burgesses of Dorchester have their right of weighing1430. within 12 miles reserved to them, notwithstanding the 8th ofHenry VI. chap. 6.Sheriff's In the ninth year of Henry VI.* there is a statute relativeto the extortion of the sheriff o{ Hereford in his tiara whichcomplains that the sheriff had taken indictments and inquestsin his toum, and fines against persons for not comingto it, to the oppression of the people ; and he is prohibitedfrom doing those acts for the future.This statute clearly proves that the sheriffs' toums were infull practice at this period; and the act was revived twoyears afterwards.1431. The choosers of knights for Parliament, by the secondChoottn chapter of the 10th Henry VI., are required to be peopleof the shire dwelling and resiant in the same counties, whereof every oneshould have freehold to the value of 40^. by the year at theleast, above all charges.The origin of the freehold qualification we have beforestated ; but the general class of voters is here distinctly definedto be *' people dwelling and resiant within the county.*^And the same would have been the description of the votersif they had been living in a borough : — namely, the resiants,in each of the cases ; owing suit to the king's court in theToum. county f i. e. the sheriffs toum — ^and in the borough to theLeet. leet,1432. The statutes with respect to weights and measures wereconfirmed in the 11th of Henry VI. ; and cities and boroughs,with their liberties and franchises, are there mentioned ; butno allusion is made to corporations or corporate bodies.1436. The statute relative to jurors in this year, limits them toinhabitanu persons inhabiting within the bailiwick, unless there are notsufficient persons inhabiting within the counties; repeatingalso the freehold qualification, and increasing it to the extentof 20Z.Cap. 6. In this year a statute was enacted, for the purpose ofplacing a restraint upon the unlawful orders made by mastersG uiids. of guilds, fraternities, and other companies, which confirms theRuff bead's Statutes at Large, vol. ix. App. p. 69.STATUTES. 839view we have already taken of those bodies; and strongly ^^^^' supportsthe inference that they were distinct from the mu Guilds,municipal government of the place — and had, in fact, nothingto do with the right of burgess-ship, although it oftenhappened that the burgesses were also members of the guildor fraternity established within their burgh.This statute speaks of them as incorporated companies indifferentparts of the realm ; and recites, that they had, bycolour of rule and government, and other terms, in generalwords granted to them by the charters of former kings, madeamongst themselves many disloyal and unreasonable ordinancesrespecting those things — the cognizance, punishment,and correction of which belonged solely to the king, the lordsof franchises, and other persons, to their disherison, and tothe common damage of the people. It then enacts, thatthe masters, guardians, and men of every such guild, fraternity,or incorporate company, should record their chartersbefore the justices of the peace in counties, or before thechief governor of cities, boroughs, or towns where suchguilds are. And prohibits them from making any ordinancesunless they are approved of by such justices of the peaceor chief governors, and recorded before them — under painof forfeiture of all powers in their charters to make ordinances,and also of a fine.These latter provisions are decisive to show, that theseguilds formed no part of the municipal government of theplaces in which they were — because they were in fact putunder their surveillance, which is of course inconsistent withtheir identity.We have stated above, that these guilds and fraternitieswere incorporated ; but this assertion should be taken withsome qualification, or at least with due regard to the gradualmanner by which they acquired corporate powers —first, by the grants of perpetual succession — and subsequently,by express charters of incorporation. And thesuccessive periods at which these several grants were made,840 PATENT Rolls.Hen^Vl. are worthy of observation. This will be best established bythe following concise enumeration : —Com- In the I7th of Richard II., the mercers of London had agrant, that they should be one perpetual community.*In the 22nd of Richard II., a community is mentioned forthe management of the new bridge at Rochester'sThe first of Henry IV., the warden and 12 minor canonsof St. Paul's have a grant of lands made to them in :In the 11th of Henry IV., the proctors and vicars ofthe church of the blessed Mary, of Salisbury, have also agrantsAnd in the 13th of Henry IV., there is a charter withextensive liberties to the college of Foderinghey, in Northamptonshire.||In none of these does any term of incorporation appear,either in the grant itself, or in the main, although they areentered as incorporations in the index.In the first year of Henry V., the college of the vicars ofthe blessed Peter, of York, have a grant, which expresslyincorporates them, but there is no entry of the incorporationin the marginsIn the 8th of Henry VI., the men of the mystery of themercers of York obtained a charter, but it does not incorporatethem**In the same year, the warden or dean of the college ofSt. George, in the castle of Windsor, and the wardens ofthe mystery of grocers, in London, have similar grants,but without any words of incorporation ; although, in eachof these instances, they are entered in the index as incogIn the 11th of Henry VL, only seven years before thecharter of incorporation to Hull, we find a grant ofliberties to the fishmongers of London, which is stated in• Rot. Pat. 17 Uic. II. p. 2, in. 4. || Rot. Pat. 13 Hen. IV. m. 14.t Rot. Pat. 22 Ric. H. Par. 2, m. 31. f Rot. Pat. 1 Hen. V. m. 16.t Rot. Pat. 1 Hen. IV. p. 5, m. 26. •• Rot. Pat. 8 Hen. VI. p. I, m. 30.^ Rot. Pat. 11 Hen. IV. p. l,m. 13. ft Rot. Pat. 8 Hen. VI. p. 2, m. 24.STATUTES. 841the margin, for the first time on these rolls, to be a cor ^*c»- VI.poration, but the grant itself does not contain that termalthough they are made one body and a perpetual commonalty.*In the 15th of Henry VL, the vintners of London andin the 16th of Henry VL, the brewers also of the same ^^^*place obtained grants, that they should be bodies, andhave one perpetual community; J but there are no wordsof incorporation, either in the body of the instruments orthe margin.Thus, previous to the 18th of Henry VL, in which thefirst charter of incorporation to a municipal body wasgranted to Kingstrni-upon-Hully there is only one instanceof words of incorporation introduced, even into the grants tocolleges, guilds, or fraternities: and only one where that termis introduced into the margin of the Patent Rolls ; but thecompilers of the indexes, misled by the modem notions ofincorporations, have generally inserted them all in the index,as coming under that denomination.It was but two years after this period, that the charter of Incorporations.incorporation to Kings ton-upon-Hu 11 was granted ; and even Hull,at that time, the use of this word in its artificial sensewas not general. We find it also used at the same period inits natural sense : — at least as we had it so applied in thestatutes of the last reign, in the case of Lincoln. In thestatute of the 18th year of this same reign, respecting a disqualificationfor a justice of the peace, there is a provision,that the statute shall not extend to cities, towns, or boroughs,which shall be incorporate of themselves. And in the caseof Plymouth in the same year, it is applied in its directnatural sense, as descriptive of the local incorporation oftwo decennas with a borough.The next chapter in this reign authorizes all religious and Ecclwia*-secular persons to make their attorneys — the religious per- dies,sons under the common seal, and the secular persons under• Rot. Pat. U Hen. VI. p. 2, m. 2. t Rot. Pat. 15 Hen. VI. m. 2.X Rot. Pat. 16 Hen. VI. m. 1. $ Rot. Pari. 18 Hen. VI.842 STATUTES.^'^p- ^^' their seals of their house — and to plead in all pleas in everyhundred and wapentake.Cap. 4. The 4th chapter in the 18th of Henry VI., relative tomerchant aliens, speaks of mayors of cities and towns, butmentions nothing of corporations. The next chapter, relativeto the collection of quinine and dismes, is to the sameeffect,Ci^^s ^^ ^^^ ®*^ chapter of the 20th of Henry VI., respectingCfaef purveyors, the constable, tithing-men, and chief pledge, arementioned. So that those officers, whose existence we haveseen in the instances of Yarmouth and Lynn, were clearlycontinued to this time.Cap!%. "^^^ observations we have before made respecting guilds.Guilds, fere again confirmed by a statute of this date; and thedistinction between them and the municipal government ofthe place, brought down to this period ; this statute makingprovisions for the appointment of guardians or wardens ofthe worsted weavers of Norwich, for the purpose of correctingabuses in their trade, directs that they shall appearbefore the mayor of the city, and be sworn before him, tomake due search for worsted within the city and the county ;and all acts contrary to that statute within the city were tobe heard before the mayor; and those within the countybefore the justices.*Cap!*iO. ^^ ^® statute of the 23d of Henry VI., relative to themen ^^^^^S ^^ wages of knights of Parliament, they are directedto be assessed by the constables of the counties, and thebailiffs of the hundreds or wapentakes, in villages andtowns within the hundreds : — but there is no mention, as thereought not to have been, of the cities or boroughs : — ^becausethey paid their own members, and were of course most reasonablyexempted from those of the county. And by virtueof their separate and exclusive jurisdiction, they were privilegedfor this purpose from the interference of the officersof the counties, as we have shown to be the case from theSee also 23 Hen. VI. c. 3* The separate jurisdictions of the city and county,are here distinctly marked.STATUTES. }iJ3earliest periods of our history, as the result of the very nature ^^^^' ^'^'of the institution of boroughs.In the act relative to the qualification of knights for theshirCy which recites the statute of the first of Henry V,, requiringthe members for cities and boroughs to be chosen frommen, citizens and burgesses, residing — abiding — and free — ^'ap. H.it is stated, that the citizens and burgesses had always, in citiesand boroughs, been chosen by citizens and burgesses, and noother, and to the sheriffs of the counties returned ; but that thesheriffs, for their singular avail and lucre, had not madedue elections of the knights, and sometimes no return ofthem, or the citizens and burgesses ; and provides, thitt theformer statutes should be kept in all points, and that everysheriff should deliver, without fraud, a sufficient preceptto every mayor and bailiff, to make their due electionsand return of the persons really elected, under a severepenalty.In the 25th of Henry VI., the statute respecting Welsh ^^^'men provides, amongst other things, that the king's villainsin North Wales should be constrained to such labour as theyhave done before — establishing, that the same doctrine ofvillainage, as practised in England, prevailed in the principalityof Wales.In the 29th year of this reign, a statute was passed for catf^athe purpose of declaring void all letters patent granted tocertain citizens of York, to exempt them from the offices ofmayor, sheriff, chamberlain, collectors of dismes and quin-times,and citizens to Parliament'* And it ordained, thatany citizen who should purchase any such letters patent,should forfeit a penalty of 40/.This statute, speaking of charters of exemption from certainoffices which had been obtained by some of the citizensof York from the king, but which were thereby declared tobe void, affords a strong reason for thinking, that the beinga citizen or burgess was not at this time considered a privilegealtogether profitable to the possessor of it, for the situa-herethe attending as a representative in Parliament is properly treated as anoffice or duty.844 STATUTES.Hen. VI. tioii was charged with many duties, and subject to manyliabilities.It appears also, that about this time the king had grantedmany letters patent, which were afterwards annulled byParliament.Thus the statute 31 Henry VI. chap. 6, declares, thecharters for certain offices of the aulnage for term of lifeand years, should be void.The probability is, that in these disturbed times, the kinggranted these charters to secure the favour of those whowere the objects of his bounty; but that upon the inconveniencesresulting from them being manifest. Parliamentrequired the repeal of them.1465« From the language used in a statute of this date, it appearsthat the same expressions which we have found in the earlycharters, were continued in use even in the most solent acts,for the purpose of describing those persons who were to betheobjects of a grant, or were the subjects of legislation.Inhi- Thus this statute, speaking of the people of the county palatineof Lancaster, describes them as '' the humble and faithful'^ lieges and subjects of the king, inhabiting within thecounty palatine'' and of the people generally, " as those'' lieges inhabiting in the realm of England, and of the samecounty."Sec. 2. By the second section, persons not inhabiting within thecounty are described by the name (so commonly occurringin ancient charters, and in the records of boroughs aboutForeigners this time) o{ 'foreigners ;*' and afterwards the act speaksgenerally of " the liege people, as well within the said countyas without," in the same manner as we have before seen wasoften done in the ancient charters, without any further descriptionof them, as inhabitants or otherwise.Sherirs From the same statute it appears, that the sheriff's tournswere then in the full exercise of all their powers ; and thepersons over whom they had jurisdiction are referred to bythe words, "inhabiting or conversant within the county;" thelatter word being probably borrowed from some of theprevious statutes.STATUTES. 845Having now gone through the statutes of this reign, it Hen. VI.should be observed, that although some corporations werethen well known — as those of the ecclesiastics — and somementioned in the acts observed upon, as guilds, fraternitiesand other incorporated companies : — no word of incorporation, ^or of that import (except the word " commonalty" may still ^^'be thought to have that effect), has been found to be appliedto the body of the people in any city, borough or town.It has, indeed, been shown, from one of the statutes relativeto Tewkesbury, that the word " commonalty *' was notused with reference to the burgesses of that place, who arenow clearly incorporated ; — but was so used with respect tothe commonalty of the Forest of Dean, though never incorporated.As far therefore as the statutes explain the subject of ourinquiry, it seems, that in this reign there is no reason forthinking that the cities, boroughs, or towns were generallyincorporated; but from the observations made above, astrong inference arises to the contrary : particularly as KingHenry VI. granted charters of incorporation towards theclose of his reign to some boroughs, clearly as a novelty :and therefore the speaking of them as corporations had notbecome so general as to have been at that time introducedinto the language of the legislature; though it will be seen,that in the next reign of Edward IV., statutes passed byhim speak of charters of incorporation granted to townsand boroughs; of which we shall have occasion to speakin our next chapter.In our observations upon the statutes at this period, we London,have already cursorily remarked upon some of the documentsrelative to London — as the grant to the mystery of the grocers Mysteryof London. We should, however, observe, that the grant Grocers,is made to the " freemen of that mystery," in conformity Freemen,with the position we before adopted, that freemen only couldbelong to trading bodies ; for they alone, and not villains,were capable of trading. The being free was the necessaryprecedent qualification for a person belonging to such a84G STATUTE8.-L0ND0N.Hen. VI. company; but the admission to it did not, as is generallyassumed, make a person free : but the admission of the partyis evidence that he was before a free man. This is the properview to be taken of this grant, which describes the granteesas the freemen of the mystery. It gives them those powerswhich in modem times are supposed to be the proper characteristicsof corporations — that of being a body and perpetualcommonalty; and to choose yearly, from amongthemselves, three wardens, to supervise, rule, and governthe mystery and commonalty aforesaid, and all the membersand business thereof; that they might have perpetual succession,and a common seal ; and be capable of holding lands,&c. ; and to plead and be impleaded, by the name of *' theWardens of the Commonalty of the Mystery of Grocersof London ; " that they might acquire lands, &c. withinthe city of London and the suburbs thereof, which wereheld of the king, to the value of twenty marks per annum,towards the support, as well of the poor men of the commonalty,as of a chaplain, &c. — notwithstanding the statuteof mortmain, or that the lands were held of the king in freeburgage as the whole city of London was held.Still there were in this charter no words of incorporation.And it must be remembered, that although cities andboroughs were, for the purpose of municipal government —for the discharge of public duties — ^and with respect to theliability to public charges, entitled to act as aggregatebodies from the earliest periods of our history — which wehave established from the numerous instances we have cited,as well as the clear illustrations of Madox, confirmed byhis many examples — yet such bodies as the grocers, vintners,or goldsmiths of any place, being only a part of the inhabitants,had no such right of acting as aggregate bodies,unless they were authorized by the crown ; and thereforethey were obliged to obtain such charters, enabling them toact as aggregate bodies — giving them perpetual succession —and a general name — which they did not previously possess,but all of which the " commonalties of counties" and the'^ commonalties of cities and boroughs" enjoyed, by theStatutes-LONDON. 847principles of the common law, and as it were by the very ^^°' ^^'necessity of their separate existence.This distinction between the communities existing by thecommon law, and those artificial bodies subsequently createdbeing overlooked, the principles of the latter class of aggregatebodies were inadvertently applied to the former ; andhence arose the imaginary and erroneous necessity for havingcities and boroughs incorporated, which was brought intooperation about the middle of this reign.A statute also of this date* confirms to the citizens of q^^^\^London their custom of taking apprentices according, as Aw>ren-is said, to their immemorial usage f — namely that each personwho was not of villain estate or condition, but of freeestate and condition, might put himself, his son or daughter,an apprentice to any freeman of the same city, to learn his Apparentor mystery. And that every freeman of the said citymight take such person, or his son or daughter, notwithstandingthe statute of the 7th of Henry IV. chap. 17.In this statute, the '' inhabitants' ' are spoken of as thepersons who would be injured, by any restraint upon theancient right of the freemen of the city to take such apprentices; and the persons petitioning Parliament speak of themselvesas the citizens of London.In the 17th section of the first of Edward VL,J it is provided,that if any person adjudged under this statute to beanapprentice, servant, or slave, shall be the ward, bondman or nef of another, they shall be discharged of thatslavery or other servitude.Here we have the free men clearly contradistinguished Freemen,from the villain: — and the term "freeman'* in that sense,expressly applied to the freemen of London ; which, coupledwith what we have before seen upon that subject, and consideringthe date of this statute, leaves no reasonable doubtthat the term always ought to have been so applied.It must also be observed, that the freemen are designatedaccording to the old language, to which we have beforeRuffled's Statutes at Large, vol. ix. App. p. 6. t Rot. Pari. n. 20, p. 354.X Ruff beads Statutes at Large, vol.ix. App. p. 144.848 UNIVERSITY AND CITY OF OXFORD.Hon. VI. frequently referred, as " of the city" of London — that is,belonging to the city of London, and not according to themodern language — the freemen of any particular art ormystery. With reference to these apprentices, the doctrineo( freedonij neiftyj and bondage appears to have been infull force as late as the reign of Edward VL1444. The king, in the 24th year of his reign, also granted acharter to the citizens, giving them all wastes, streets, ways,common soils, purprestures, and improvements in the cityand suburbs, and in the waters of the Thames within thelimits of the city. This grant was confirmed, with theconsent of Parliament, in the 20th of Henry VIL, and bysubsequent charters. And upon the Parliament Roll of the1439. J 8th of Henry VL, there is a document relative to theconservancy of the Thames and Medway.*These latter documents afford nothing material to our presentinquiry, but it was thought proper not to pass themover without notice, which must also be our apology forinserting the following extract from the Parliament Rolls,respecting the hanse merchants, and the appointment of theiraldermen; which it seems the mayor and citizens had• arbitrarily refused to assign.14-25. The hanse merchants resiant in the kingdom of England,merchants Complain, that notwithstanding the charter granting to them,that they should have an alderman of the city of London,assigned them as a judge in all suits ; yet they had beenfor the last seven years without one, because the mayor,aldermen, and sherifFs, would not assign themesAn alderman is then appointed.UNIVERSITY AND CITY OF OXFORD.With respect to the city of Oxford, there is every reasonto believe, that it continued in the same state, as it had inpreceding reigns, excepting as far as the university had obtaineda participation in its privileges, or a concurrency in1423. its jurisdiction ; for there was at this period, a charter of confirmation,containing all the former grants, by inspeximus.• Pet. Pari. p. 34. f Pel. Pari. m. 4, p. 302.OXKOUU AND Cambridge. 819It is clear, however, that the university had at this time Hcn^^.acquired a jurisdiction, which it claimed by prescription ;how justifiably, the former documents will have established :but in the 9th year of Henry VI., it appears, from a returnto a habeas corpus, that the chancellor of the university,claimed to be a guardian of the peace, as well by prescriptionas by charter.* And the mayor and bailiffs of Oxford, assertedtheir right to the cognizance of pleas, in the third year ofthis reignsWe have ascertained from the statutes, the provisions whichwere made with respect to the Irish, who had created disturbancesin the neighbourhood of Oxford.The king, in the 37th year of this reign, granted and i458.confirmed to the chancellor of the University of Cambridge,power to inquire, every year, by the oaths of good men ofthe town and county of Cambridge, what nuisances existed,and to amerce those who were culpable ; and that the chancellorshould have all the amercements.With respect to Bristol, we find, that in the commence iJrisioi.ment of this reign, the king confined its former charters ;and that in this year, there was a petition from the citizensto the Parliament, upon which proceedings were had withreference to its existence as a county of itself, separatefrom those of Somerset and Gloucester. As it is peculiar,as far as regards Bristol, and also as to the effect producedby making a city a corporation of itself, it may bematerial to extract the important parts. It is as follows : —The burgesses of Bristol pray the commons to consider, thatwhereas King Edward III. (by the charter which we havebefore given), in the 47th year of his reign, granted to theburgesses of Bristol, their heirs and successors, that thetown should be a county of itself; and that it should becharged to send to the Parliament only two men, who asknights of the county of Bristol, as well as burgesses of thetown and borough of Bristol, for the same county, town, andborough, hi such Parliaments, should be bound to answer; and• Year Book. 9 Hen. VI., fol. 44. f Year Book, 3 Hen. VT fol. 10.3 1860 BRISTOL.^*^".' ^— which charter, with all the grants and liberties therein contained,in the Parliament of the said King Edward nextafter the granting thereof, was ratified and confirmed byauthority of the same Parliament. After the making ofwhich letters patent, two men have answered by the authorityof the same, both as knights for the county of Bristol,and as burgesses for the town and borough; and so itis, that a writ issues to the sheriff of the county of Bristol,to elect two burgesses, by the name of burgesses only, forthe town of Bristol, against the liberties and franchises aforesaid; by virtue of which writ, the sheriff returned to this presentParliament, two, as burgesses of the town of Bristolonly, so that they could not be received to appear and answeras knights for the county of Bristol, as well as burgessesfor the town and borough, to the disinheriting of all the burgesses,inhabitants within the county of Bristol, of theirliberties and franchises aforesaid. And thereupon the burgessespray the order, by authority of this present Parliament,that the two burgesses should appear and answer for thecounty of Bristol, as knights — and for the town and borough,as burgesses, according to the liberties and franchises aforesaid; and that thenceforth, they should have writs issuedto the sheriff of the county of Bristol, to elect two men,who as knights for the county of Bristol, as well as burgessesfor the town and borough, in such Parliaments, shouldanswer according to the liberties and franchises aforesaid ;notwithstanding the return to this present Parliament, andthe appearance thereon, contrary to such liberties and franchises.To which petition, the king answered, that by theadvice of the lords spiritual and temporal, and the requestof the commons, he willed and granted, that neitherfrom the writ in the petition mentioned, nor the return thereupon,nor the appearance of the burgesses of the town ofBristol in the Parliament, by virtue of such writ, shouldany prejudice happen to the burgesses of the same town,against the form of this charter.From this document, it appears, that notwithstanding thegrant to Bristol to be a county of itself, was as early as theHlilSTOL. 851reign of Edward III., yet the practical effect of such a grant — J^^"- ^'l-being a novelty introduced into the constitution — had not beenfully developed, even after bo long a lapse of time. And thesheriff having acted as it would appear, strictly in conformitywith his duty, in making a return to Parliament, in accordancewith the former practice, it became necessary to appeal to theexecutive and the Parliament, to relieve the members — thesheriffs — and the citizens from the predicament in which theywere placed ; but the king, in answer to the petition, doesnothing more than declare, in effect, that their privileges,under the charter of Edward III., should not be affected by theprecedent which had been established by the last writ andreturn — leaving the real constitutional difficulty, as to theeffect produced by the charter of Edward III., undefined andwithout a remedy ; in which state, it has continued to thepresent day, both with respect to Bristol and many otherplaces; in none of which has it been defined, whether by sucha change, the statute of Henry VI., as to county elections, to poH^^ywhich we have referred, would apply to such places ; and whetherthe election ought to be by the 405. freeholders, as for acounty : or whether the old borough constituency ought to continue,and the election be by the burgesses. In most of theplaces similarly circumstanced with Bristol, a great confusionand uncertainty in this respect has prevailed; and nothing hasbeen definitively settled : — both the one class of voters and theother having occasionally insisted upon their respective rights.Some attempts have been made to correct or reconcile theseanomalies : — but as none of them have been founded upon acorrect investigation of the cause — progress — and principleof the real difficulty, the suggested remedies were chieflyunsuccessful.As a proof of the strange inconsistency of the burgessesof Bristol, they claimed in their petition, that the burgessesreturned to Parliament should, under the charter of EdwardIII., be considered as knights for the county of Bristol;yet nevertheless their election in the 14th of Henry VI.,was by the unanimous consent of the mayor and com- 143G.nionalty.3 I 2852 NEWCASTLK-i;iH)i\.TYNE.Hen. VI. Some attempt is said to have been made, in the 25th ofHenry VI., to meet the difficulties of the case by considerableadditions to the Parliamentary writ, and the returns ;but, for the reasons we have given before, this effort wasalso abortive, and the matter continued till the Reform Actto be involved in the same obscurity.1455. As to their municipal elections, in the 33d of Henry VI.,the mayor and ten others, with all the notable persons ofthe whole common council of the town of Bristol, assembledin their council house, and by their right, discreet, and sadadvisement, chose Richard Hallow to be mayor of Bristolduring the then next year; three other persons for theelection of sheriffs ; and two persons for the office of bailiffs.NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE.The mayor, sheriffs, and commonalty of Newcasile-upon-1423. Tyne which we have seen in the reign of Henry IV.was made a county of itself, (but not incorporated,) atthis time obtained a grant of certain customs ; and in the1433. 11th of Henry VI., in consideration of the distresses andburdens which had fallen upon the mayor and burgesses^by losses in shipping, — the desolation of the adjacentcountry, — and approaching war with the Scots — and theInhabit great scarcity of the inhabitants occasioned by the pestilence— they obtained a remission of all taxes — talliages —tenths — and fifteenths then granted.Notwithstanding the introduction of the word " successors,"which we have seen in the last five reigns, there is^^^^' in the 22d of Henry VI., a grant to the mayor and burgessesHeirs, of Newcastle and their heirs y that their town should' be freefrom the j urisdiction of the constable, marshal, admiral, andthe warden of the marches; and that all their processesshould be served by their own officers.This grant to the burgesses and their heirs as they hadnever been incorporated, is material to show, that notwithstandingthe use of the term " successors," the doctrine ofmunicipal incorporation had not then taken root.1440. In the 24th of Henry VI. an inquisition appears .SingNewcastle-upon-Tyne: — by which a jury, upon their **«°vr.oaths, found, that from time beyond the memory of man, thetown of Newcastle-upon-Tyne, had held of the king andhis predecessors, as burgesses of the town (when there wasno mayor,) and as mayor and burgesses of the town (whenthere was a mayor,) the town and water of Tyne, and thesoil of the water of Tyne, wherever it was covered, froma place called Sparrow-hawk in the Sea, unto a place calledHed win-Streams : and that the same, with the appurtenances,were parcel of the liberties and free customs of thetown ; and were held under a fee-fanny, saving the king'srents, prises and assessments in the port* of the town.They then find and set forth King's John's charter andconfirmation; and divers other customs and privileges belongingto the town.It appears that this inquisition, notwithstanding the grantsof former charters, liberties, and franchises to the town arespecified in it, does not mention its being a corporation, orrefer to any corporate privileges. And it was not until the corporateof Edward VI. that the note occurs in the Year Book,stating, that it had been decided, " that a grant to burgesses,&c. rendering rent, &c. made them for that purpose onlya corporation, as long as the rent remained."Notwithstanding the observations we have before made Member*,with respect to Bristol, we find that Newcastle also, whichhad been made a county of itself, returned its burgesses toParliament, not as a county under the statute of Henry VI., 1447.but as a borough ; for in the 25th of Henry VI., the indentureof return was made between the sheriff, the mayor, and34 other persons, who are described as the good men — proposhomines — and they return two burgesses to act for the commonaltyof the town ; and the indenture is said to be madein the full county court of the town. A more anomalousinstrument can hardly be conceived.In the 32nd year of this reign, there is an order by Partial 1454.ment to levy 20/. upon the inhabitants of Newcastle-spondeethe great case of the iiannc, Davies' llep. p. 149.854 DORCHESTER.-GRIMESBY.Heo. vx. Tyne, which obviously could only be enforced upon theScot and inhabitant householders paying scot and lotThe last document in this reign relative to ,grants the conservatorship* of the river, betweenthe same bounds as the grant of the 24th of Henry VI.gave them the soil.i>o^J^**'»^- The Rolls of Parliament supply us with a petition fromthe burgesses of 2)orcAe5^er,+ reciting, that they had held theborough at farm for term of years, at an annual rent ; andthe king, in consequence of the return to a writ of ad quoddamnum to the burgesses, granted to them the borough atfee-farm, rendering annually a fee-farm rent.^"nig^'y* The town of GrimeshyX was also granted at fee-farm tothe mayor and good men of Grimsby ; that they might havereturn of writs ; plead and be impleaded ; and that theyshould not be put m foreign juries or assises.Seaman, followed by many other authors, asserts thatBoroughs, boroughs were walled towns — many examples might be citedPoole. to disprove this doctrine — Poole affords a distinct instanceupon the point.It was a borough before the time of legal memory, asappears by the charter granted to the burgesses in the reignof Richard I.; and it returned burgesses to Parliament fromthe 14th of Edward III.; yet it was not till the reign ofHenry VI. that it was fortified, as appears from the followingdocument.14)3. By a charter of this date, the king recites, that in consequenceof the insufficiency and insecurity of the port ofMelcomhy as to the merchants resorting thither with theirmerchandises, from the scarcity of the inhabitants andthe great multitude of people who inhabited the townand port of Poole ; that the port was sufficient and securefor ships to resort there; and that the mayor andburgesses of Poole proposed to wall, embattle, and fortifythe town and port, and parts adjacent. The king, with theSee also Charters of London. t Rot. Pat. m. 4. p. 3. IPct. MS. 168.t Rot. Tat. in. 20, p. 2. 1 Pet. MS. 318.POOLE. 85,;advice of the lords spiritual and temporal, gave licence to Hen. \\.the mayor and burgesses to fortify the town and port ofPoole; and that the port of Welcome, after the feast ofSt. Mary, should not be a port, but a creek ; and then theport of Poole should be one of the king's ports.This licence to wall, intrench, and fortify the town, wasby several statutes rendered necessary before any fortificationscould be erected. It is obvious that this charter inno respects affects the questions, either as to the borough orthe burgesses, but leaves them as they were before. But ismaterial only, as affording an instance to show, that what hasbeen said by Dr. Brady and others, as to boroughs beingtrading and walled towns, is inaccurate ; inasmuch as thathere there is a grant of a free port, which is connected withtrade, and of a licence to wall a town, which had been aborough at least 250 years before. That a market also did Market.not make it a borough, seems to be confirmed by the fact —that in the 27th year of this reign, a market and two fairs were 1448.granted to the mayor, bailiffs, burgesses, and inhabitants ofPoole — which were confirmed in Parliament four years ^452.afterwards, unless they were to the prejudice of the neighbouringmarket and fairs. And it was also granted, that the *^'^^"-mayor, bailiffs, burgesses, and inhabitants, their heirs andsuccessors, might hold pleas during the fairs, &c., in thecourt of the mayor, bailiff's, burgesses, and inhabitants,before the mayor and bailiff's : — so that no county justice,escheator, sheriff*, steward, or marshal, coroner, clerk of themarket, or other bailiff or minister, should interfere. Andthat all persons coming to, remaining there, and returningtherefrom, should be free from arrests and disturbances ofthe said officers.It does not appear why the bailiffs are introduced here,or how they had been created.* " Praepositus*' is the Latinterm for bailiff; and till 1371, it appears that the headofficer of the borough bore that name. It would therefore,in all probability, have been at some subsequent period,In the return, 1st of Mary, the bailiffs deputy is spoken of:— anil from iiidate, there appears foi sometime to have been only one bailiff.i856 POOLE.-WELLS.-UOCHESTER.^^°1^* ^^^ween the charter of that date and this of 1452, that theappellation of " bailiffs" had been introduced. This grant isto the " burgesses and inhabitants" — a mode of expressionwhich has raised so many doubts in the interpretation ofother charters; but it seems here easily capable of theconstruction we have before placed upon that mode ofexpression.*1439. The fee-farm of this borough was granted by Henry VI .to Henry Beaufort, bishop of Winchester From which itappears, that this borough was then in the hands of thecrown. And Browne Willis states, that it became so on thedeath of Thomas de Montacute, the last possessor, who diedwithout heirs.^^*- There was also a confirmation to Wells, at the beginningof this reign, of all its former liberties ; but it is exactlythe same as the former to this place : — and leaves the classand description of burgesses as they were before, withthis addition, that it is a confirmation by Parliament, asthat of Henry IV. is also said to be; and therefore allimplication from any future charters of the crown, that theclass of persons was changed, is excluded. — Because thatwhich has been established by Parliament, can only bealtered by the same authority : — and no future charter bythe crown could change the class of burgesses : and thereis no ground for saying, that any act of Parliament everchanged their description.Rochester. Thcrc is an entry on the Charter Rolls of a grant toRochester of this date ; but none such is mentioned in theinspeximus of the 5th of Charles I. It is however to befound on the roll, and confirms the charter of the 50th ofHenry III. It was probably omitted because Edward IV.denied the title of Henry VI. to the crown, and called him,in his public documents, only king " de facto," and not " dejure;"and, therefore, would not perhaps recite his chartersby inspeximus, except when compelled to do so by anyparticular circumstances.• Rol. Carl. 30 Hen. VI. n. 25. t Rol. Pat. 17 Hen. VitRol. Carl. n. 44.CORPORATIONS. 857Hen. VI.CORPORATIONS.We are now arrived, in our chronological series, at theperiod in which incorporation was first superinduced uponour municipal institutions, in the instance of .Hull.We have previously referred to some documents relative tothat place, and have seen that it had a charter granted to itas early as the reign of Edward I., making it a free borough,and the men free bui^esses — with power, to them and theirheirs, to devise their property — that they should have returnof writs — that no sheriff or other officer should intromit —and the burgesses were not to plead or be impleaded out ofthe borough — they were to elect coroners from among themselves— and to have freedom from toll, and other customs,&c. — (and in the words of the Cinque Port charters,)that all those who wished to enjoy those liberties, shouldbe in guild and scot with the same burgesses." — EdwardIT. confirmed this charter, and Edward III. grantedto the burgesses, their heirs and successors, not only a confirmationof their former privileges, but also that they mighthold their town at fee-farm — might elect yearly, from amongthemselves, one mayor and four bailiffs — and that theyshould not be impleaded out of the borough — with manyother privileges.The same king also again confirmed their charters in asubsequent part of his reign ; as did also Richard II., HenryIV., and Henry V.With respect to these charters, it is clearly obvious, thatthey did not incorporate the place, notwithstanding Mr.Corbett describes that of Nottingham as having that effect.They also afford us the inference, that the grant at fee-farmwas not essential to the creation of a borough ; becauseHull had been recognized as a borough for many yearsbefore it acquired that franchise.That these charters did not incorporate the place, willmost distinctly appear from the contrast, which cannot but858 CORPORATION'S.!.^^1 be remarked, when those to which we have already referred,Hull, and two or three others at the commencement of this reign,are compared with the actual charter of incorporation in the18th year of the same king.14^)0. Thus — in the eighth year, there is a confirmation to the burgessesof Kingston,* containing, by inspeximus, the chartersof Henry V., Henry IV., Richard II., Edward III., EdwardII., and Edward I.1432. Two years afterwards, the mayor, bailiffs, and burgessesof Hulls petitioned Parliament for a confirmation of alltheir prior charters, but say nothing of their being incorporated.In the same year, they accordingly obtained a charter,for the *^ men of the town of Kingston," confirming all theprevious charters we have mentioned, and the acts whichhad been done under them — particularly the power ofmaking wills and holding pleas ; but still nothing is said oftheir being incorporated, or of their having or being entitled toany corporate privileges.It is not until seven years afterwards that the actualcharter of incorporation is granted to Hull.After a careful investigation of the charters of this period,it seems very difficult to account for this change in thelanguage and objects of them, which is so marked andsingular. No trace appears of it upon the Pipe Rolls, whereinthe 17th of Henry VI. there is an entry of 70/. due from thebui^esses of Kingston for their fee-farm. And in a distinctroll, in the 18th of Henry VI., the sheriff of the county, inrendering his account, makes the same entry of 70/. duefrom the burgesses of Hull for their fee-farm ; and the rollof the 19th of Henry VI. is to the same effect — so that thereappears no mention of the incorporation upon the Pipe Rolls,which seems inexplicable ; unless the payment of the fee-farmwas, as we have observed before, entirely distinct fromthe rights of the borough, and the incorporation.Before we proceed to give the incorporating charter to• Rot. Pat. m, 12, p. 2. t Pet. Pari. n. 11, p. 468.CHARTER ROLL. 859Hall, it may be desirable to refer particularly to the Hen. VI.charters and patent rolls at the commencement of thisreign.The entry of the charters of this reign, in the calendarprinted by the record commissioners, has been by somemeans or other involved in apparent confusion.*The first 21 charters are stated to be between the first and20th year of Henry VI., and are not in strict consecutiveorder, as the last is No. 29. And they do not occur uponthe original roll in the order in which they are described tobe in the calendar; but are entered according to theirsuccession of dates.The first charter actually occurring, is one of the 6th ofHenry VI., and is numbered upon the calendar, 62 — beinga grant to Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester, and others, .of amanor and free warren in Devonshire. After which manyothers succeed, not material to our present inquiry.No. 44 is a charter to Rochester, and is entered under the Rochwier.16th of Hen^.VI. f ^ ^ ^It recites the charters before mentioned, of Henry III.,1265, as well as that disputes had arisen, respecting therights and privileges of Rochester — and generally confirmsthe former grants, with other new privileges, establishing anexclusive jurisdiction. But it is not a charter of incorporation:— nor are there any words to that effect, nor relative tocorporate powers.The next municipal charter which occurs, is that of Wind Windsor.sor, No. 39. This also is not a charter of incorporation.It recites the one we have before given of Edward III.,and confirms many privileges, establishing its exclusivejurisdiction — but it gives no corporate powers.The next municipal charter, in regular numerical success Kingston-uponsion, is No. 29. The one granted to Kingston-upon-Hully Hull,in the 18th of Henry VI., which first uses terms of incorporatepublic would derive considerable advantage from having another editionof Calendars to the " Charier" and *' Patent" Rolls— as those which were printedin 1803, make no allusion to a considerable number of important grants to towns andindividuals that arc inserted upon the original Rolls ; and they are, in every respect,replete with i^iaccit dacier.860 PATENT ROLLS.Hen. VI. ration; and there is an entry to tliateflFect, for the first time,in the calendar.^*«"' Such is the history of the Charter Roll to this period.Before we proceed to the charter itself, we will refer alsoto the Patent Rolls.From the reign of Richard II., some few instances haveoccurred of the introduction of the term " incorporation" uponthe Index to the Calendar Roll; but, as we have shown, theyare but rarely justified by the documents themselves — and inthe instances in which they are so, they are cases of ecclesiasticalbodies. But even upon the Patent Rolls the term is neverapplied to municipal corporations, imtil after the grant of theincorporating charter to Hull. The first instance which wecan discover, is one incorporating Tenterden, in the 27thyear of this reign.The charter to Hull does not, like those of former periods,commence with a recital or inspeximus of any former charters,though there had been many previously granted to this place ;but it begins with rather a pompous recital of the king'sgood disposition to the place for services performed to him,^nSon^ immediately after which it incorporates the mayor andburgesses, giving to them the corporate powers subsequentlyso common, of suing and being sued, and of beingcapable in the law to purchase and hold lands by theircorporate name.It then separates Hull from the county of York, andmakes it a county of itself, substituting a sheriff in theplace of four bailiffs; directing that there should be acoroner and an escheator, with the customary powers. Andthat there should be 13 aldermen, one of whom should bemayor. With power to elect the mayor, and other annualofficers and aldermen, from time to time, as any of themshould die or depart from their office.A common seal is mentioned in the charter as then existingand used ; but there is no express grant of it, as hasbeen usual in subsequent charters.That the reader may have a full opportunity of comparingthe frame and language of this charter, we insert it more atHULL INCORPORATION. 861length than the former documents. It is in substance — as far e'en. Viasis necessary to illustrate this point — as follows :It recites, that for the special and inward affection which 1440.the king bore towards the town of Kingston-upon-HuU, andto the mayor and commonalty y and in consideration of thegood behaviour and gratuitous service of the burgesses ofthe town thitherto frequently performed, and of the greatlabours and expences theretofore sustained by the burgessesin their persons, ships and goods ; and heartily desiring toimprove, increase, and relieve the town and burgesses in thebest way he was able ; and being willing to provide for theirfurther advantage, he granted to the burgesses, their heirs ,and successors, burgesses of the town, for ever, the liberties,franchises, acquittance, and immunities following ; that is to vsay, that the town should be for ever incorporated of a mayor Incorporatedburgesses.That the mayor, burgesses, and their successors, mayorsand burgesses of the town so incorporated, should be oneperpetual corporate commonalty in deed and name, by the Perpetualname of " The mayor and burgesses of the said town;" ally.and should have perpetual succession. That the mayor and Perpetualr J successand their successors, by the same name, should «'H"-° ' . ' -^ ' Name.be persons able in the law to sue and defend all manner of Capable.pleas, suits, plaints, demands, and actions, real, personal,and mixed, moved or to be moved, in whatsoever courts ofthe king, his heirs, or of others whomsoever, &c. That inthe same they should be able to plead and be impleaded, piea»i.answer and be answered.And further, that the mayor and burgesses of the townaforesaid so incorporated, and their successors aforesaid,should be persons able and capable in the law to purchaselands, tenements, rents, services and possessions within theirtown, and the liberty and precinct thereof; to have and tohold to them and their successors for ever, the statute of notputting lands and tenements in mortmain, or any other Mortmain,ordinance or statute heretofore made to the contrary notwithstanding; saving always to the king the services therefore dueand accustomed. That the town of Kingston-upon-Hull,862 HULL INCORPORATION.Hen. VI. and precincts thereof, in manner as they are bounded, withinSevered, the body of the county of York, should be severed distinct,and in all things wholly exempt from the said county forever,as well by land as by water. That the town of Kings-countyof ton-upon-HuU, and the precinct thereof, should be a countyitoeif. ^ itself, and not parcel of the county of York. Thatthe town, and the precinct thereof, should be called thetown of Kingston-upon-Hull for ever. That the burgesses,their heirs and successors, burgesses of the town, should foreverhave within the town, and the precinct thereof, inmanner as they are limited by metes and bounds, the liberties,privileges, and franchises following; that is to say, that aswell every burgess of the town aforesaid who should be here-mayor.after elected mayor of the town, should be elected in thesame place, manner, and at the same time, as any burgessof the town hath theretofore been accustomed to be electedmayor.Further, that as well every burgess of the town aforesaidhereafter to be elected mayor of the said town, and sosoon as he should be so elected mayor, as the now mayorEftcheator. of the town aforesaid, should himself henceforth be escheatedof the king and his heirs, in the town and precinctaforesaid, during the time any such burgess should continuein the office of mayor.That the burgesses, their heirs and successors, burgesses,for ever should have, in lieu of the four bailiffs of the townSheriff. aforesaid, one sheriff in the town, precinct, and sherifTwickof the town, which sheriff should be elected and appointedin form following ; that is to say, the said burgesses in lieuof the four bailiffs of the town aforesaid now being, should,on the morrow of the Holy Trinity next coming, elect fromamong themselves one burgess of the town to be sheriff ofthe town, which sheriff should have and occupy the officeof sheriff of the town, until the Feast of St. Michael theArchangel next coming, and until another burgess of thetown should be elected sheriff. That the sheriff shouldthenceforth be yearly elected and appointed in form following;that is to say, the burgesses in every year should, inHULL INCORPORATION. 863lieu of the four bailiffs of the town aforesaid, elect from ^^"- ^^'among themselves one fit person to be sheriff of the townaforesaid, and the precinct thereof, in the same place,and at the same time, as any burgesses of the town havebeen heretofore accustomed to be elected, to be the fourbailiffs. And that every burgess of the town to be yearlyelected sheriff, as well on the said morrow of the HolyTrinity, as after the Feast of St. Michael, should, immediatelyafler the election made of himself, in due form takehis oath before the mayor of the town aforesaid for the time Oath,being, and should not go out of the town to take his oath ;the name of which sheriff should be sent into chancery,yearly for ever, under the common seal of the town ofKingston-upon-Hull. That at no future time should therebe in anywise any other escheator or sheriff in the townand precinct, unless from among the burgesses. And thatthe escheator and sheriff of the town, and their successorsfor ever, should have the same power, jurisdiction, authority,and liberty, and all other things whatsoever appurtenant tothe offices of escheator and sheriff in the town and precinct,as other escheators and sheriffs may and should have elsewherewithin the realm of England.That all writs and mandates which have been heretofore Writs,accustomed to be served by the sheriff of Yorkshire, immediately;or by the bailiffs of the town, by the return ofthe sheriff of Yorkshire, as directed by the said bailiffs onbehalf of the king: — and all those writs and mandates whichought to be served by the sheriff of the county of York immediately,or by the bailiffs of the town, by the return of thesheriff of the county of York, as directed by the bailiffs onbehalf of the king, if the sheriff of the town aforesaid hadnot been so made, should for ever after the morrow of theHoly Trinity, be demanded by and delivered to the sheriffof the town of Kingston-upon-Hull.That the sheriff of the town should continually in future Countyhold his county court there on Monday monthly, in the samemanner and form as other sheriffs elsewhere within therealm do hold their county courts: — or as other sheriffss.864 HULL INCORPORATION.^^"- ^'^' elsewhere in the said realm should hold their county courts ;that the mayor and sheriff of the town, and their successorsfor ever, should in like manner hold their court daily ;and the sheriff of the town, and his successors, sheriffs ofProfits, the town, should have and receive the profits thereof, atall future times for ever, in manner as the bailiffs of thesaid town had theretofore been accustomed to hold theircourts there, and to have and receive the profits thereof.And that the burgesses, their heirs and successors, shouldFlew. not plead or be impleaded out of the town concerninglands or tenements which they hold within the townand the liberty of the town ; nor concerning any trespass,covenant, contract, or other thing whatsoever done withinthe town, or the liberty and precinct thereof; and if anyof the burgesses, or other person, be willing to sue for anyland or tenement, being within the town, and the libertyand precinct thereof, or to complain of any trespass donewithin the town, or the liberty and precinct thereof, heshould prosecute his action, right or plaint, before the mayorand sheriff of the town. And if the suit cannot be determinedbefore them, it should be determined at the suit ofthe plaintiff before the next justices in Eyre, and not outof the town; or before some other justices, to be especiallyappointed thereto. That the mayor and sheriff of thetown for the time being should hold forever in the guildhallPleas, of the town all manner of pleas, suits, plaints and demands,and action, real, personal, and mixed whatsoever, moved,or to be moved, within the town and the liberty andprecinct thereof; and should have cognizance of all pleasof trespasses, covenants, and contracts whatsoever, howsoevermade, happening, or arising within the town, andProfits, the liberty and precinct thereof, with all manner of profits,howsoever arising, from such pleas, as fully, wholly, freely,and quietly, and in the same manner and form as themayor and bailiffs of the town for the time being beforethe making of this charter, by virtue of divers chartersand letters patent of the king's progenitors, late kings ofEngland, thereof made and by him confirmed, had such coi^-HULL INCuHPOUAllON. ^65nuisance, or at any time had been accustomed to have such '^«"- recognizance,without the let or hindrance of the king, or hisheirs, or of his justices, or of the steward or marshal of thehousehold, or of the escheators, sheriff's, or other bailiffsor ministers of the king, or his heirs, so that neither thesaid steward nor marshal should in anywise intermeddlethemselves concerning the cognizance of pleas, of such trespassesand covenants, or contracts, arising within the town,and the liberty and precinct thereof, unless only concerningthe trespasses, covenants, and contracts done in the king'shousehold. And further, that the mayor and burgesses, Cogni-their heirs and successors, mayors and burgesses of the town,should ever have cognizance of all manner of pleas of assises,novel disseisin, and mort d 'ancestor, concerning all mannerof lands and tenements within the town, and the liberty andprecinct thereof, as well before the justices of either bench,justices assigned to take the assises, and justices in Eyre, asbefore whatsoever other justices and ministers of the king,and taken before the mayor and sheriff' of the town for thetime being, in the guildhall of the town aforesaid, in manneras the mayor and burgesses have heretofore had and holdenthe same before the mayor and bailiffs of the town. Andthat no escheator, nor sheriff" of the county of York, should None'• 1 intromit.in anywise enter, or presume to enter the town aforesaid, orthe liberty or precinct thereof, to do or exercise their offices.And that the escheator and sheriff' of the town of Kingston escheator^ anushenn.upon-Hull for the time being, might severally, in every year,make their prefers and account before the treasurer andbarons of the Exchequer, by their sufficient attorneys, theretoseverally deputed, by letters patent signified under the commonseal of the town, concerning whatsoever affairs touchingthe offices of escheator and sheriff' of the town, whereof theyshould be accountable ; so that the aforesaid escheator andsheriff* should not in any manner be personally compelled tocome out of the town to account for any thing belonging totheir offices.The charter then provides for the oath of the escheator, escheator.II nd for his being certified every year to the Exchequer.3k866 HULL Incorporation.Hen. VL Also, that the keepers of the peace, and the justices assignedto hear and determine felonies, trespasses, and other misdemeanours;and justices of labourers, servants, and artificersin the three ridings within the county of York, should not inanywise intermeddle themselves or himself, within the town,nor the liberty or precinct thereof. And that from time totime the burgesses should be able to elect from among them-aldermen.selves 13 aldermen, one of which said aldermen should alwaysbe elected to be mayor of the town ; which aldermen so electedshould continually be in such offices of aldermen of the townduring their lives, unless they, or any of them, at their ownspecial request, to be made to the residue of the burgesses ofthe town for the time being, or on account of any reasonablecause, should be removed from the office of alderman by themayor of the town aforesaid, and the residue of the bui^essesof the town for the time being ; and that any such aldermandying, or in any manner departing or being removed from hisoffice of alderman, the residue of the burgesses of the townfor the time being, and their heirs and successors for ever,should have full power and authority to elect one other burgessfrom among themselves to be alderman of the town, inthe room of him the alderman so dying, departing, or beingremoved ; and so from time to time for ever, upon any suchalderman of the town aforesaid dying, departing, or beingremoved in form aforesaid. And that they the mayor, and-the12 remaining aldermen of the town aforesaid, should becalled the aldermen of the town for ever, and their heirs andsuccessors aldermen of the town, to be elected in form aforesaid,for ever, so long as they should continue in such officeAldermen of alderman, should be justices of the king, and his heirs,justices. ^^ keep the peace within the town. That the alderman ofthe town, or three or two of them, together with themayor of the town, should have the full correction, punishment,power and authority, to recognize, inquire, hear anddetermine all matters and things, as well of all manner oftrespasses, misprisions, and extortions, as of all manner ofother causes, suits, and misdemeanors whatsoever happeningor arising within the town, liberty and precinct thereof, asHULL INCORPORATION. 867fully and entirely as the keepers of the peace, and justices Heu. vi.assigned and to be assigned to hear and determine felonies,trespasses and other misdemeanours; and justices of servants,labourers, and artificers in the three ridings, or anyparcel thereof, might or should thereafter have in any mannerhowsoever out of the town and liberty. And that theburgesses, their heirs and successors for ever, should haveall manner of fines, issues, forfeitures and amerciaments to ^vaes.the justiciary of the peace, within the town, liberty, and precinctbelonging, to be levied and received by their own properministers, in aid of the payment of their fanii, and in supportof the great charges daily incumbent on the said town, orhappening and arising in the same. And that the aforesaid Forfeituremayor, sheriff, and burgesses of the town of Kingston-upon victuals.Hull, and their heirs and successors aforesaid, for ever,should have the forfeiture of victuals, by the law of Englandhowsoever to be forfeited: that is to say, of bread, wine, andale, and of other things which do not belong to merchandise.And moreover, that the steward and marshal of the house Clerk ofhold of the king, and his heirs, and the clerk of the market ket.of the household, should not, either in the presence or inthe absence of the king, or his heirs, enter nor abide withinthe town aforesaid, or the liberty and precinct of the town,nor exercise their offices there, nor on any pretence inquire,or cause to be inquired of, any matters done or to be done,or happening or arising within the town aforesaid, or theliberty and precinct thereof; nor in any manner intermeddlethemselves there, nor draw into plea any burgesses of thetown aforesaid, or any persons residing within the town, orthe liberty and precinct of the town, out of the town, forany matters hereafter in any manner happening or arisingwithin the town, or the liberty and precinct of the same.And further, that the coroner of the town, and his successors. Coroner.for the time being, should be able to exercise his office, aswell in the presence of the king as in his absence, in allthings as any coroner within the town aforesaid hath at anytime,before the date of these presents, been accustomed toexercise his office there. And also in all other matters herc-3k2868 HULL Incorporation."^"' ^^ - after chancing, happening or arising within the town, andthe liberty and precinct thereof, which in any manner appertainand belong to the office of coroner, and which, if theyhad chanced, happened, or arisen with any other countyof England, ought to have been exercised, or done by thecoroner of the county, as fully and freely as the samecoroner of any other county of England exercises such officeof coroner, and all other things touching the said office,without the let, impeachment, or hinderance of the king orhis heirs, or other officers or ministers whatsoever; providedalways, that both the escheator and sheriff of the town forthe time being should render before the treasurer andbarons, a true account of every thing within the town, andthe liberty and precinct thereof, which they or he ought toaccount for to the king and his heirs, if the said town hadnot been incorporated, of such escheator and sheriff, andjustices of the peace, to be elected and appointed from amongthe burgesses as aforesaid ; except all manner of fines, issues,forfeitures, and amercements belonging to the justiciary of thepeace, within the town, and the liberty and precinct thereof.Wherefore the king commanded, that the burgesses of thetown aforesaid, their heirs and successors, might have, hold,and exercise all and singular such cognizance, franchises,liberties and immunities, and all other the premises, as theyare above especially expressed, and may fully and freelyenjoy and use the same for ever, without the impeachment,disturbance, or hinderance of the king, or his officers orministers.With respect to this charter it should be observed, thatthe term " commonalty** is not treated by itself as a corporateterm, but that adjectives are joined with it, to give it thatapplication ; for the mayor and burgesses are declared to beone perpetual corporate commonalty : *' so that it wouldappear, that this term alone would not bear that import,without these additional words.The great object of the charter appears to have been, inconformitywith the doctrine we have before urged, to■♦pHULL Incorporation. 869exempt the borough from the jurisdiction of the county ; and ^^"- ^^'to separate it from the rest of Yorkshire, of which it is declaredto be no longer a parcel. But having a sheriff, escheated,and coroner of its own, it was to be exempted from theinterference of those officers of the county — which was theobject at that time of most earnest anxiety.It should be remarked, that although Hull is incorporated,the former charters, which we have before quoted, are confirmed; and many of the acts to be done, and the duties tobe executed, by the officers of the town and the burgesses,are directed to be performed in the manner theretofore accustomed: and consequently it cannot be assumed, that thischarter made any essential difference in the constitution ofthe borough — though it gave additional capacities to theburgesses.There is also another charter stated to have been granted ^^^^'to Hull of this date,* reciting that it had been incorporatedof 13 aldermen, (as we have before seen it was,) and adds tothe county of the town some other places in the neighbourhood,which it also expressly separates from the county ofYork. It grants two coroners instead of one, and also thepower of electing an admiral and finally, gives s'onr6' wellsin the neighbourhood to the burgesses ; with power to bringthe water to Hull.The next municipal charter upon the rolls, is one to the Kingston^^freemeiC^ of King ston-upon- Thames, their heirs and sue Thames.cessors,t reciting all their previous charters, and granting afew additional but unimportant franchises — it is not howevera charter of incorporation.No. 15 is a charter of confirmation to Dublin; and No. 8 Dublin.is one of a similar nature to the city of York, York.The next municipal charter is to Bridgeport, which is Bridge-enteredupon the roll, from the 21st to the 24th of HenryVI., No. 2 — but it is not one of incorporation.The 6th charter on the same roll, is a grant to Rochester — Uociu'stcr.to which the same observation applies.• Tickle's Hist. p. 103, in note.t This charter is partially recited in the grant by Edward IV. to Kingston ; butthe corporation have not the original in their possession.872 PLYMOUTH INCORPORATION.Hen. VI. mouth, OF his steward, if they should come before 11 o'clockotherwise, before the commonalty.* And that the mayorand commonalty might be able, for the public good of theborough, to make and create burgesses.That the mayor and commonalty might have and hold, tothem, their heirs, and successors, all lands, tenements, mills,possessions, fairs, markets, courts, franchises, liberties, viewsof frankpledge and all other profits and emoluments, temporaland secular, within the borough of Plymouth.A reservation then occurs, that some tenements and landsbelonging to the prior and convent, be excepted from thejurisdiction of the mayor and commonalty ; and the petitionproceeds at great length, for the purpose of securing theconvent against any aggression upon the part of the mayorand commonalty. It provides also, that the prior and conventshould not be liable to be burdened, with the burgessesand inhabitants, with any taxes, &c.And in a subsequent part of the document it is stated,that the town of Sutton Pryour, the decenna, and parcel,were part of the hundred of Roxburgh.Liberties. That the mayor and commonalty, their heirs and successors,should for ever have all laws, liberties, franchises, jurisdictions,powers, hereditaments, and other profits, which theabbot had, or ought to have, within the precincts of the borough,as in right of his church ; that the mayor and com-Court. monalty, their heirs, and successors, should have a courtheld monthly, before the mayor, in the guildhall of the borough.And that, in that court, all defects, excesses, trans-viewof sessions, articles, view of frankpledge, and every otherpledge, thing that should happen within the precincts of the borough,should be amended, corrected, or punished. And that all,who by reason of their lands, tenements, or possessions, withinResidence, the precincts, or by reason of their residence within theprecincts, ought to do suit and service at the said court ofthe abbot, should for the future do that suit at the court of the• This is the practice to the present day ; and the mayor and commonalty waittill after the specified time for the animal of the prior :— so Long will ancient customscontinue ; and inveterate habit prevail more effectually than positive institutions.PLYMOUTH INCORPORATION. 873mayor and commonalty. The king answered, " Let it be as H^"- Desiredby this petition ; — provided it does not interfere withthe property, courts, &c. of Sir John Comewaill."In this striking incorporation of a town decenna, and partof a hamlet, for the purpose of incorporating them together,and separating the latter from the hundred of Roxburgh, towhich it before belonged, we see first — the distinction betweenthe town or borough of Plymouth, and the decenna,whichwas a part of the county at large. We also find that thedecennas were then preserved and kept in full force. Thepersons who were to derive the benefit from this grant, were theinhabitants of the places enumerated ; and those resident, aswell as those who had lands and tenements, within the district,were, as we have had occasion frequently to point out,all to transfer the suit which they before owed at the courtof the abbot and of the hundred, to the court of the mayor andcommonalty ; so that, from this charter, the doctrine we havebefore asserted, both with respect to boroughs and corporations,is established.The essential character of the former is the separation ofthe borough from the county — and the establishment of an ex Boroughs.elusive jurisdiction — with courts belonging to the district : —and the sole effect of the latter is, to recognize in the aggregatebody of the inhabitants that capacity which in point offact they possessed before, but which we have observed, inthe last preceding reigns, had begun to be disputed in law —namely — the power of perpetual succession — the having acommon name — the power of pleading and being impleadedby that name ; — and the capacity of purchasing and possessingproperty.It should be observed, that neither this charter nor thatof Hull, define who the burgesses were. Both these placeshad burgesses before — as we have seen from former charters.And they could be none other, but the free inhabitant house Inhabitantholders of the place — as we have irresistibly proved ; from holders,the earliest laws — the ancient text writers — the statutes. —From records public and local : — and from the solemn decisionsof judges, aj? reported in the Year Books.874 PLYMOUTH INCORPORATION.Hen. VI. So, in the same manner the persons who would be burgessesfrom the added decenna and hamlet, could only be thefree inhabitants described by the word " habitations :" andfor the reasons previously adduced, they would owe theirsuit at the borough leet, and would be sworn and enrolledthere ; would be liable, as householders, to pay scot and lot ;and in that manner — not by the provision of the charter ofincorporation — but by the operation of the common law —become burgesses of Plymouth.Making This also explains a clause which occurs in the petition.Burgesses. *■ *as to making burgesses. We have seen some reference tothis power in the charter of Dublin by King John ; where itappeared that the burgesses had authority given to them togrant certain lands to be built upon, and by that means tocreate burgesses. This clause of the petition, though inmodem times so much misunderstood, has in truth the sameeffect as that in the charter of Dublin. For inasmuch aspersons might come to reside as householders, either in Sutton,or the decenna or hamlet ; so the burgesses would havea right, in their court leet and frankpledge, to exercise asound discretion, whether they were fit persons to be received,upon the usual fines or contribution, within theirliberty. If so, they would receive them; and the consequencewould be, they would be made burgesses : and theswearing and enrolling them as such, would, under the commonlaw, have the effect, to which we have before referred,of making them free, although they might have been themen or villains of. the king or of other lords. And as newdistricts were included within the borough, it became essentiallynecessary that the king should by this charter recognizethis power in the burgesses; they therefore prayedthis privilege, and the king granted it, amongst the otherconsequences of the united places becoming a borough.But it would be absurd to consider that this clause gaveto the burgesses the power which is insisted upon in modemtimes, of admitting indiscriminately whom they thought fit —including non-residents as well as residents ; — and (consideringthe time in which it was granted) including inmates asPLYMOUTH INCORPORATION. 875well as householders ; and villains or bondmen as well as H^"- ^'^ 'those who were free ; this would be to have given them apower totally inconsistent with the general law as it thenstood. For instance; — how could a person not living in theplace, or not being a householder, be liable to scot and lot fwhich all the documents show Was a precedent qualification.How could such a person be, in the early language,of the place'' Or how could an inmate be subject to thesame obligation ? How could they admit a villain who hadnot been resident a year and a day in the place ?This power therefore must be taken with reference to thelaw as it then stood ; and be considered as only enabling theburgesses to receive as inhabitants of the town, and swearand enrol as burgesses persons, who not being villains orfugitives, but of free condition ; against whom there was nocharge, and who were desirous of coming to live as householderswithin the borough, in consequence of which theywould be liable to scot and lot. All these immunities, qualifications,and circumstances were, under the law as it thenstood, necessary to place the party in such a position, thateither he could be a burgess, if he desired it ; — or the burgessescould compel him to be so, if he declined it; accordingto the instances we have shown in the boroughs of Lynn andYarmouth.The next charter of incorporation which we meet with is ^pJJJS**'Ipswich,* by which the king, after reciting that his belovedburgesses of his town of Gippewich were very much burdenedwith the payment of the annual farm, which they and theirsuccessors were obliged to pay him for the town, and thatthey were grievously impoverished, did, for the relief of thetown, grant to the burgesses and their successors, the liberties,franchises, acquittance, and immunities under-written —viz., that the town should be for ever a free borough corps Corporate.rate, in deed, and in name of the burgesses of the town ;and that they, for the time being, should be for ever a perpetualcommunity corporate, in deed and in name; andRot. Cart, ab a® 21 usque 24 Hen. VI. n. 15.876 IPSWICH INCORPORATION.Hen. VT . might have perpetual succession, and a common seal, todispatch the business of the town. And that in every year,at the accustomed time and place, they might choose out ofBailiffs, themselves, two burgesses of the town, to be bailiffs thereof,who should exercise that office for one entire year, for thesafe and wholesome government of the town. That the bailiffsand their successors, and four such other burgesses ofthe same town, as the said bailiffs should be pleased to takeTwelve to them, out of the 12 portmen of that town and their successors,should elect and nominate, for this purpose, five, four,three, or two of them, who might be from henceforth for everJustices, keepers of the peace, and justices to keep the peace withinthe town, kc. ; and also to hear and determine all felonies,trespasses, and offences within the town and the liberty, &c.,and all other matters and things whatsoever, &c. That theburgesses, their heirs and successors, burgesses of the town.Fines, might for ever have all manner of fines, issues, forfeitures,and amercements, belonging to the justiciary of the peacewithin the town and liberty, suburbs, &c., and from the justiciaryforthcoming in any manner, to be recovered and leviedby their own proper officers, as fully and wholly as the kingor his progenitors, in any manner, had and received suchfines, issues, forfeitures, and amercements, before the justicesof the peace, in the county of Suffolk, within the town, andthe liberty, suburbs, &c., of the same, theretofore happeningand arising, in aid of the payment of the farm, and in supportof the great burdens daily incumbering the town. That thebailiffs and burgesses of the town of Ipswich, and theirheirs and successors for ever, might have the forfeiture ofAssise of victuals, by the law of England, viz., the assise and corrected.^ ^^^^ ^^ bread, wine, and ale, and other things which do notbelong to merchandise; that the burgesses and their successorsmight have either of those two burgesses who shouldescheator. be chosen bailiffs of the town, to be the escheator, who shouldhave the same power, jurisdiction, &c., in the town, liberty,&c., as other escheators have or should have elsewhere,Non within the kingdom of England. That no other escheatedshould introduce himself into the town," liberty, &c., toIPSWICH INCORPORATION. 877execute any thing relating to the office of escheator, within Hen. VI.the town, &c. That every burgess elected bailiff of the town,after such election of him made to the office of escheator,should take his oath, faithfully to execute the office of ^***'*escheator within the town, before the burgesses of the town :so that such escheator should by no means be obliged orcompelled to take his oath elsewhere, or before any otherthan the burgesses of the town, and that within the townonly. 4And the king further granted, that the burgesses and theirsuccessors might be persons able and capable in law, to purchaselands, tenements,. &c., within the town and liberty, &c.,to have and to hold the same to them and their successors,the statute of not putting lands and tenements in mortmain, Mortmain,notwithstanding. That the admiral of England, or his lieut Admiral,nant, or deputy, or the steward, mareschal, or clerk of the Clerk ofmarket, the household, or any of them, or the deputy of any ket.one or more of them, should not enter or sit within the town,nor the liberty, suburbs. Sec, thereof, to inquire concerningany matters or things relating to their offices, nor concerningany things done, or hereafter to be done, within the town, orthe liberty, &c., nor should any inquiry be made concerningthem, nor should any one or more of them intrude him, orthemselves, nor prosecute any burgesses of the town, nor anypersons residing within the town, liberty, suburbs, &c., onany pretence, without the town, for any things happening orarising within the town, liberty, &c., for the future in anymanner. That the burgesses, their heirs and successors forever,might have all issues, forfeitures, fines, and amercements Fines, &r.whatsoever, before the escheator so chosen as aforesaidhappening or arising; and also all goods and chattels ofpersons outlawed, within the town, &c., now resident andcommorant, or hereafter to be resident and commorant,within the town, liberty, &c. ; to be received and leviedby their own proper officers, in aid of the payment ofthe farm, and in support of the great burdens daily falling onthe town, or in the same happening or arising, as fully andwholly as had been accustomed.a878 IPSWICH INCORPORATION.Hen. VI. This charter is added at some length, because it was notprinted with the Ipswich charters; and it is said, that few knewany thing of it, till it was some time since found thrown intoa hole in the treasury. An historian of Ipswich says, " Wewill only add an observation or two upon the style of thiscorporation. In ancient times, the gentlemen of the lawwere not so curious in This matter, as they have been oflater years. It appears from Mr. Bacon's MS., that in thereign of King Richard II., A. D. 1393, on an exchangeof a piece of ground with the prior and convent of the HolyTrinity, the bailiffs, coroners, chamberlains, and burgesses,were the contracting parties on the behalf of the corporation.This charter, now recited in A. D. 1446, incorporates thetown by style of ' the burgesses of Ipswich,' and declaresthem to be a perpetual community, corporate by that name.'' The charter of King Edward IV., A. D. 1464, altered thestyle, and made it ' the bailiffs, burgesses, and communityof the town of Ipswich ;' or as it is now commonly called inEnglish, the bailiffs, burgesses, and commonalty of the townof Ipswich. The charter of the 17th King Charles II., A. D.1665, made no alteration in the style ; but that of the 36thof Charles II., A. D. 1685, made an addition to it, andcalled them, ' the bailiffs, burgesses, and community [or*' commonalty] of the town or borough of Ipswich, in thecounty of Suffolk.' However, as the corporation hath notacted under this last charter, since the revolution in 1688,the proper style of the corporation now is, * the bailiffs,burgesses, and commonalty of the town of Ipswich,' withoutany further addition."Tenby. The next municipal charter upon the roll is that of Tenby;however, it is not a grant of incorporation, but merely aconfirmation of previous liberties.*^'"ton"™^" After Tenby, the next succeeding charter to a borough isthat of Southampton, incorporating that place. In theearly part of the same reign, there is a document whichseems clearly to import it had not been incorporated uptothat period; for in a plea it is alleged, "that Soiith-• Not. Cart. n. 16.PATENT ROLLS.-TENBV.-SOUTHAMPTON. 879upton was an ancient borough"* but nothing is said Hen. VI.of its having been incorporated. And from the samedocument it will be seen, that although it was not incorporated,it had the usual powers of the election of its ownmunicipal officers, and the usual grant of liberties from theking, with a distinct reference to the privileges obtained underthe common law by residence for a year and a day within Evidence.the town, and the consequent necessity of paying scot and Scot andlot under the same system of municipal government. Itseems also incontrovertible from this record, that living for ayear and a day in a place, and paying scot and lot, was heldto be such decisive evidence of a person being a burgess of thetown, that the mayor, upon the allegation, claimed to havethe felon's goods, as a burgess of the town. The documentis as follows : —Peter Janie8,+ late mayor of the town of Southampton, wasimpleaded in the Court of Exchequer for 20/., the price ofdivers goods of a felon convict. He comes and pleads, thatthe town of Southampton is, and time out of mind was, anancient burgh ; that the burgesses there used to chooseyearly de seisin, a mayor and bailiff's ; that King Johngranted the town to the burgesses in perpetual farm, to holdto the said burgesses, their heirs and successors, renderingyearly 200/. sterling ; that King Henry VI., by his letterspatent, confirmed the grant of King John, and also concededto them, that they, their heirs and successors, shouldhave ibr ever the goods of felons and fugitives, which goodsthey or their ministers might seize and retain. And lastly,that these grants were confirmed by King Henry V. andKing Heniy VI. And the defendant further saith, that thefelon was a tenant and resident (that is, an inhabitant householder)in the said town at the time the felony committed,and long before, to wit, a year and a day, and was assessed ^^^f ^"'^to scot and lot, with the men of the town. And thus, he Scot & lot.being then mayor of the town, did, as minister of the townsmen,seize the goods to the use of the townsmen, accordingto their grants and liberties. The Court adjudged, that the• Rot. Cart. n. 22. f Mad. Fir. Bur. 206.880 SOUTHAMPTON Incorporation.Hen. VI. said Peter James should be charged to the king with thesaid 20/.Southampton being thus circumstanced ^ and the realnature of its burgesses being thus defined upon the principles'**^* of the common law, the king, in the 22nd year of his reign,granted a charter, reciting, that, as Southampton was upon thecoast of the sea, he had granted to the burgesses, their heirsand successors, for ever, the liberties and franchises followsingr : — that the town should be for ever incorporated of onerated. ^ ^ ^mayor, two bailiffs, and the burgesses; and that they and theirsuccessors should be a perpetual community, incorporatedin deed, fact, and name, by the name of '^ the mayor, bailiffs,and bui^esses of the town ;" and that they might have perpetualsuccession; and be capable in law to maintain allPlead. actions, real and personal, &c. ; plead and be impleaded ;Mortmain, and that they might be capable to purchase and hold landswithin the borough, notwithstanding the statute of mortmain.It should be observed, that, with respect to this charterof Southampton, as well as that to Plymouth, the expressiondescriptive of the corporation, is in these, as well as in thatof Hull, not simply the " commonalty'* but " a perpetualcommonalty incorporated ;*' and likewise, as a convincingproof that all the privileges granted were intended to belocal, the power of holding lands is confined to possessionswithin the borough.After this charter, there are grants to the abbey of Evesham;*another to the town of Tenby ,+ granting, that theburgesses should be released from toll, murage, &c. goingto the port of Bristol.Another to Shrewsbury J — to Northampton § — and Longwhich latter we have already quoted ; and none ofthese are charters of incorporation.Newcastle There is also one to JYewcastle-upon'Tyne,% which *firmed all previous charters ; and another, subsequently, in• Rot. Cart. n.27. $ Rot. Cart. n. 32.t Rot. Cart. n. 29. || Rot. Cart. n. 34.t Rot. Cart. n. 31. f Hot. Cart. n. 39.COVENTRY. 881the same reign, which we have stated before; but neither "of Hen. VI.them are grants of incorporation.The next is a charter to Coventry,* reciting those of Coventry.Edward II. and Edward III., giving to them the sameprivileges as the mayor and citizens of Lincoln enjoyed; andto remove the obscurities of former charter's, it was grantedto the mayor, bailiffs, and commonalty, their heirs and successors,that all inquisitions should be taken by men dwellingand belonging conversant and resiant within the town, andnot hy foreigners ; and giving them power to correct anycustoms used in the town which were in anywise useless ordefective, for the common benefit of the town ; with a confirmationof their fairs.The same king, afterwards, in the 30th year of his reigns 1451.by reason, as he states, of the special affection whichhe bore to the city of Coventry, and the mayor and bailiffsthereof; and for the quiet of the town ; granted to themayor, bailiff, and commonalty their heirs and successors,that the city, with several hamlets vfhich were then withinthe county of Warwick, should be one entire county ofitself, corporated in deed and fn name, unfl wholly separated Corpsthe county of Warwick, for ever ; and that they shouldnot be parcel of the county of Warwick, but should for everdistinctly and separately be called the county of the city ofCoventry. But that the mayor and bailiffs should be electedat the same time, place, and hi manner and form, as theyhad been accustomed to be elected in the time of King EdwardIII., or in the time of any other of the progenitors ofthe king ; also that the bailiffs should be thenceforth electedin manner and form aforesaid, and should exercise andexecute the office of bailiffs there, according to the effect ofthe accustomed franchises and liberties used in the city ;that the sheriffs should hold a county court within the city .from month to month, and have and exercise all suchjurisdiction and liberties in all other things pertaining tothe office or town and hamlets which any other sheriff'swithin the kingdom of England have in their bailiwicks;Rot. Cart. n. 42. f Rot. Cart. n. 29.3l882 COVENTRY.Hen. VI. and that all writs, &c., from whatsoever cause or matter,Writs, arising within the city, hamlets, &c. — which would have beendirected to the sheriff of the county of Warwick, and byhim to be served and executed, if the city, hamlets, &c.,had not been made an entire county of itself — should bemade and directed to the sheriffs of the city of Coventry.No other And that none other sheriff of the kingdom, except thesheriff to , .iDtromit. sheriffs of the city aforesaid, and their bailiffs, &c. should inanywise enter the same city or hamlets, to exercise any thingwhich should pertain to the office of sheriff there, or in anymanner intermeddle therein. And that no sheriff of the cityshould in anywise be compelled or bound personally to comeout of the county to account for any thing belonging to theiroffices.Coroner. Also that the coroner of the city of Coventry should becoroner of the county of the city ; and should have all hisformer power and jurisdiction within the county of the city;and that the said coroner of the city should be for ever clerkfor recognizances of debts.Clerk of That the mayor should be clerk of the market, and of thethe market,household : together with all things to the same office ofclerk of the market in anywise pertaining ; with all fines andredemptions therefrom coming, to be levied and taken tothe use and profit of the mayor, bailiffs, and commonalty,and their successors, for ever.Quit of That the mayor, bailiffs, commonalty, burgesses, merchants,and the inhabitants within the city or town ofCoventry, and their successors, should for ever be quit ofConfirma toll, &c. throughout the whole land of Ireland. And thatthey should hold and use all other franchises, liberties, immunities,quittances, and customs, which the mayor, bailiffs,and commonalty, or their ancestors or predecessors, bywhatsoever names, have had and used ; or according to thecustom there ; or by tenor of any former gift and grant to themayor, bailiffs, and commonalty," or to the " burgessesof Coventry," or to the " merchants of the town of Coventry,"or to the " burgesses, honest men of the town ofCoventry," or to the " men of Coventry, tenants of theNORTHAMPTON.-WOODSTOCK. 883manor of Cheilesmore," to the " bailiffs, and men, and Hen. VI.tenants of the manor of Cheilesmore/' or to the " mayor,bailiffs, and men of the town of Coventry," or to the " mayor,bailiffs, and commonalty of the town of Coventry," or tothe " burgesses of the town of Coventry," or to the " mayor,bailiffs, citizens, and honest men of the city of Coventry,"by the king or his progenitors heretofore made.It should be observed, that in this instance also, the termincorporated is used in its primitive sense; for it is hereapplied to the actual local incorporation of the city, withseveral adjoining hamlets.The next municipal charters are to Bath,* Derby, f and Col Bath, &c.Chester which are not incorporated. to 'Shortly after which, follows a charter to Northampton North".incorporating that place — whereby the king, after reciting — hampton.that various privileges had been granted by his progenitorsto the burgesses of Northampton, and from the servicesthey had rendered to him, and from the love and affectionhe bore to them — granted that the mayor, bailiffs, burgesses,and their successors, should be one perpetual communityand body corporate, in name and deed ; to have perpetual Corporate,succession; and by the name of mayor, bailiffs, and burgessesshould plead and be impleaded. Then follow privileges, insubstancethe same as those of Kingston and Ipswich.There is also another charter to Derby, ^ but it is not one Derby,/. . ^. &c.of incorporation.After which follows a charter to Woodstock in which the Woodstockking, reciting that the tenants, inhabitants and residents ofWoodstock, had petitioned him to be incorporated, and tobe persons capable to have perpetual succession, — granted,that New Woodstock should thenceforth be a free borough; and the tenants, residents and inhabitants, theirheirs and successors, should be free burgesses. That theymight have a mercatorial guild, and the same liberties andfree customs which the burgesses of New Woodstock had —• Rot. Cart. 25 to 26 Hen. VI. n. 10. $ Rot. Cart. 27 to 29 Hen. VI. n. 5.t Rot Cart. 25 to 26 Hen. VI. n. 33. || Rot. Cart. 25 to 26 Hen. VI. n. 8.t Rot. Cart. 25 to 26 Hen. VI. n. 24. % Rot. Cart. 25 to 26 Hen. VI. n. 22,3 l2884 CANTKUBIJUY.Hen^^^ That from thenceforth, in name and deed, they should be oneCorporate, body, and one perpetual community corporate : That theymight yearly elect from themselves a mayor: — ^Tliat themayor and commonalty might have perpetual succession ;and by the name of " the mayor and commonalty of theborough of New Woodstock," plead and be impleaded —answer and be answered — in all suits, &c. : That the mayor,commonalty, and their successors, should be released fromtolls, &c. Powers are then given to the mayor and commonalty,to hear and determine suits. A grant of fairs, andother liberties, also follows.*^"l^T'^ There is likewise a charter of this date, to the city ofCanterbury, contained in an inspeximus charter of the 1st ofEdward IV., which describes it as a charter of Henry, late,in fact," but not " in right," king of England ; andrecites that it was one of the most ancient cities of thekingdom, and from time whereof the memory of man then wasIncorporate had been, and then was incorporated of two bailiffs, andrated. * ,one perpetual commonalty of the city aforesaid. The kinggrants to the then citizens of the city, and the commonaltyof the same, that their heirs and successors, born in England,and inhabiting in the same city, in the place of the bailiffs ofMayor, the city, might elect some person from themselves, of the morefit, discreet, sufficient, and honourable, to be mayor, for thegood and wholesome governance of the city, and so fromyear to year ; and that the city should be incorporated of onemayor and one perpetual commonalty of the said city forever;and that the mayor ;aid commonalty of the city aforesaid,for the time being, and their successors, should haveand hold the city and suburbs, with all the liberties, franchises,privileges, &c., and all other things, to the same cityand suburbs pertaining, as fully and entirely as the thenbailiffs and citizens of the said city, or they or any their predecessors,theretofore more beneficially and fully had and held,or they or any of them theretofore used and enjoyed. Thatevery mayor should make serjeants-at-mace for executing proclamations,and other executions, within the city and suburbs.• Rot. Cart. 27 to 39 Hen. VI. n. 22.ICanterbury. 885That they should have the return of all writs and warrants *J«»- VI.arising, or to arise, within the city, suburbs, and liberty, by Return ofwrits*their bailifl's ; so that no sheriff', bailifl, or other minister whomsoever,should in anywise enter the city, &c. : — Tliat thecitizens, mayor, and commonalty, and their successors, bythe name of the " mayor, commonalty, and citizens," shouldbe persons capable in law to purchase lands, &c., and shouldhave perpetual succession, and might implead and be impleaded: That the mayor should have cognizance of allmanner of pleas personal, and other things whatsoeverarising, or to arise, within the city, suburbs, and liberty, inthe same manner and form as the bailiffs had ; and shouldmake executions of the same, by the Serjeants ; and alsocognizance of all pleas of lands or tenements within the city,suburbs, liberty, and precinct thereof ; and also of assises ofnovel disseisin, mort d 'ancestor, and of certificates arrayed,and to be arrayed, and of attaints, debts, trespasses, andall other plaints and pleas, real and personal, arising or toarise ; so that no justice, sheriff, bailiff, coroner, or any otherminister, should in any wise intromit themselves or himself, V^^ Disconcertingany juries or pannels within the city, but onlythe mayor : That the mayor and his successors should bejustices and keepers of the peace within the city, and should Justices.hear and determine all felonies, trespasses, &c., and otherthugs arising within the city; that no other justices, orkeepers of the peace, should thenceforth intromit themselvesto inquire by citizens, burgesses, or resiants, within thecity, suburbs, and liberties aforesaid, or the precinct of thesame, concerning any felons, &c. ; neither should they, norany of them, inquire by any foreigners within the city,suburbs, and liberty, or the precinct of the same, nor elsewherein the county aforesaid, of any felonies, &c., arisingwithin the city, &c., but only before the mayor.And if it should peradventure happen, that any one ormore of the citizens or resiants, within the city, suburbs, &c.,should be indicted or presented for any matter within thesame, before the keepers of the peace, and the justices in the886 CANTERBURY.^^°' ^^^' county aforesaid, such indictments, or presentments, shouldbe of no force, and void.Attach That the mayor should have power of attaching by thements. "^ . . '^ . ~& Jbody, all persons of insufficient means, in all pleas, &c.Cognizance ^j when any original writ between any parties, concerningany lands, tenements, rents, and other tenures, beingwithin the same city and suburbs, for a fine to be thereoflevied, should be thereafter sued out of the chancery, themayor should have cognizance thereof; so that a reasonablesum of money by the parties, according to the custom, forlicence to agree, might be levied to the king's use.That the mayor and commonalty should not be compelledto come out of the city, suburb or liberty before the justicesof assise, keepers of the peace, justices of labourers, artificers,and such others, and other the justices or commissionersof the king, sheriffs, escheators, or coroners, justicesto hear and determine, and other officers and ministers whomsoeverof the king; nor that they, or any of them, shouldStrangers, be impannelled, constrained or compelled; or that any strangerof the body of the county of Kent should be impannelledwith citizens of the said city in assises, or other juries whatsoever.Bye-laws. That the mayor, together with all the aldermen for thetime being, or only the mayor, might frame and make reasonableordinances and constitutions for the public good ofthe city, and the sound and wholesome government of thesame ; and also to change the same, as it should seem mostexpedient to them, for ever. And that the mayor and aldermen,for the necessities and profits of the city and suburbs,with their common assent, might assess talliage upon thegoods of all the men of the city and suburbs, of every oneaccording to his estate, as well upon their rents, mysteries,merchandises, and otherwise, as might seem best to be made,and to levy the same without impediment of the king, hisheirs and successors, justices, or other ministers whomsoever.And if it should happen that the mayor should give ordersfor any citizens or resiants of the city, for the public goodCANTERBURY. 887and advantage of the city, or for their counsel had in the J^t^"- VI.premises, or for other things, or reasonable causes, to cometo him, and the same citizens and resiants, or any of them,should refuse to appear, or to obey the same, without reasonablecause, then the mayor for the time being might arrest,imprison, and amerce them, and every of them by occasionthereof, from time to time, according to the exigence of thecase ; which amerciaments of the mayor and commonalty ofthe city should thenceforth be to the use, behoof, and profitof the city for ever. And that the mayor and commonaltyshould thenceforth for ever have one coroner within the city Coroner.and the precinct thereof: and that the coroners of the countyof Kent should not in any manner intromit themselves withinthe city, suburbs, and liberty, &c.The reader will instantly perceive, upon a comparison ofthe words of this charter with those to Canterbury whichpreceded it, that it commences with a direct misstatement ofwhat had been the previous state of Canterbury, when itaffirms that it had been, from time immemorial, incorporated.This is obviously untrue, for no charter of incorporation hadever before been granted ; nor is there any trace of its havingbeen so considered. This recital is, therefore, /a&e ; and asit is the first of the kind we have met with, it may be consideredas the prototype of those recitals which became socommon in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, and which wereequally contrary to the truth. It should also be observed,that the doctrine of incorporation was at this time so littleunderstood, that although Canterbury is stated to have beenimmemorially incorporated, yet the grant is to the mayorand commonalty, and their heirs.The same king, in the 31st year of his reign, grantedanother charter to Canterbury, which appears by inspeximus,in a charter of Edward IV., and which commences by reciting,that the mayor and commonalty had had divers franchisesgranted to them, until by force of an act of Parliament theyhad been seized ; and further reciting, that certain obscuritiesand ambiguities had arisen, whether the mayor and burgesses888 Southampton-YORK. &c.Hen. VI. could enjoy those liberties by reason of the same act ofresumption ; and the king declared to the mayor and commonalty,that the act should not extend to take away anythingconfirmed by the king ; and that the citizens for thetime being, and then inhabiting, might make election of amayor, in the same manner as the citizens of London ; providedthey elected one of their fellow citizens. Directionsare then given as to the election of the bailiff, the cognizanceof pleas ; and that no sheriff, coroner or bailiff should intromit;and that they should have cognizance of pleasarising also within the precinct of the hamlet of StableGrate, in the same city, parcel of the will of Estate, withoutthe same city. The charter also appoints justices of thepeace — puts restraints upon the use of liveries — gives to thecitizens the custody of the gaols — and authorizes the justicesto deliver the same.South The next charter on the roll to that of Canterbury, is one tohampton. "^&c. Poole,* Then follow charters to Southampton — Coventry, —Norwich — Winchesters — Stratford — and York** none ofthem being charters of incorporation. That to York recites,that it was a county of itself, separate from the county of York ;and the charter grants, towards the enclosing of the town,certain customs, specifying the tolls that were to be taken,and provides, that the hundred of Ansty should be annexed tothe city, and be parcel of the same, and included within thewalls, except the castle of York, And that the bailiffs of thefranchise should be obedient to the precept of the sheriff ofthe county of the city of York, and not to any other sheriff;and that the citizens should have the hundred, as they havewithin the county of York, with the goods of felons, fugitives,&c.This charter affords another instance of a hundred beingtaken away from a county, and annexed to the exclusivejurisdiction of a city.♦ Rot. Cart, ab anno 27, usque 39 Hen. VI. n. 25.t Ibid. n.27. % Ibid. n.29.Ibid. n. 31. || Ibid. n. 36.5 Ibid. n.51. •• Ibid. n.54.Nottingham. 889There was also, in the twenty-seventh year of this reign, ^^°* ^^-a charter of incorporation to the town of Nottingham. Theburgesses of that place had obtained, in the commencement Nothingthe reign, a grant of confirmation of their liberties to them, 1449.their heirs and successors, burgesses of the town, with cognizanceof pleas, and the chattels of felons and fugitives, andof the tenants and resiants, with the return of writs — ^that nosheriff, bailiff or other minister of the crown, should intromit —that they should have all forfeitures — and that the mayorand recorder, and four other good and lawful men of thetown should be justices of the peace — ^that they should haveall fines and amercements, as the mayor, bailiffs, and burgessesof the town of Coventry had. That the mayor shouldbe joined in the array of arms, with a confirmation of alltheir former rights. But there is no mention in any part ofthis charter of any corporate privileges.However the charter of incorporation of this year, likethat to Canterbury, falsely recites, in the commencement,that it had been for a long time a town corporate ; though it ^*^*modestly qualifies that expression by adding, that it hadbeen so " under a certain form." It then proceeds to grantto the burgesses of Nottingham, that they, their heirs andsuccessors, burgesses of the town, for ever should be incorporatedof a mayor and burgesses ; and that the mayor andburgesses, and their successors, mayors and burgesses ofthe same town so incorporated should be a perpetual community,corporate in deed and name, by the name of " Themayor and burgesses of the town of Nottingham." That they ^°^^°'should have perpetual succession — be capable in law to prosecuteand defend all manner of pleas, &c., and to plead andbe impleaded. That the mayor and burgesses, and theirsuccessors, by the same name, might be able to acquire andhold to them and their successors, for ever, all lands, tenements,possessions, and hereditaments whatsoever.That the town of Nottingham and the precincts, &c. whichthen were within the body of the county of Nottingham, shouldbe from the 15th day of the month of September next coming,separated, distinct, divided, and in all things wholly exempt890 NOTTINGHAM.Hen. VI. from the same county y for ever, as well by land as by water,Exempt (the castle of Nottingham, and the messuage called thecounty. King's Hall, in which is the gaol of the counties of Nottinghamand Derby, only excepted.) That the town of Nottingham,and the precincts as they extend themselves, befrom the same day a county of itself, and not parcel ofthe county of Nottingham; and that the town of Nottingham,and the precincts of the same, as they extend themselves orare used (except as before excepted) be for ever named,holden, and esteemed the county of the town of Nottinghamby itself. That the burgesses of the town, and their successors,might for ever have, in the place of two bailiffs ofSberi£Bi. the town, two sheriffs in the town and precincts, to be chosenfrom themselves by the mayor and burgesses out of the burgesses,in the same manner as the burgesses of the townhave been accustomed to be elected to be bailiffs, to executethe office of sheriff of the county ; and that they should notgo out of the town to take their oaths. That the mayorEtcheator. should be the escheator. And that no other escheator orsheriff in or of the same town of Nottingham should in anywisehowsoever be made, except from the burgesses of the sametown as aforesaid ; and that the escheator and sheriffs of thetown, and their successors, might have the same power, jurisdiction,and authority, as other escheators and sheriffs. AndWrits, that all writs, &c. which by the bailiffs of the town heretofore,in anywise howsoever had been accustomed or oughtto be served from the 15th day of September, should foreverbe directed, sent, and delivered to the sheriffs of thetown. And that the sheriffs of the same, from month to month,County continually hereafter, might hold county courts of the countyof the town of Nottingham within the same. That they mighthold a court for the determination of all pleas, real and personal,with all the profits of the same. That they shouldhave all chattels of felons, &c.&c., with all amerciaments, &c.Fines, &c. and fines for licence of agreement of the men, or any tenantsor inhabitants of the same town. And also, all issues, fines,and amerciaments of whatsoever pledges and manufactoryof any persons inhabiting within the town, or there beingNOTTINGHAM. 891entirely or not entirely a tenant; although the persons or the ^^°- ^^'pledges or manufactory should hold of the king ; and also ofall and singular the burgesses of the town, as well resident asnon-resident, although they should not be entire tenantsthere or elsewhere. That the burgesses, their heirs and successors,might from time to time elect out of themselvesseven aldermen, of which one should always be elected mayor Aldermen,of the same town ; which aldermen, so elected, during theirlives, should remain and be, unless they or any of them, bytheir special request to the residue of the burgesses of thesame town for the time being, or by reason of any notablecause, from their alderman ships, by the mayor and burgessesof that town for the time being, should be removed ; andthat any such alderman dying, or in any manner howsoeverdeparting* or being removed from his office of alderman,the mayor and burgesses of the same town for the timebeing, and their heirs and successors for ever, should havefull power and authority by the tenor of these presents, toelect one other burgess out of themselves into the aldermanshipof the same town, in the place of the alderman so dying,departing, or being removed : — that the same seven aldermen,or six, five, four or three of them, of whom the mayor of thesame town for the time being was to be one, should have fullpower to inquire of, hear and determine, all felonies, murders,trespasses and misprisions, &c. and other things, which to justicesof the peace belong. That the burgesses might for everhave all manner of fines, issues, forfeitures and amerciamentsbefore any of the aldermen and mayor, and the keepers ofthe peace, or by reason of the j justiciary of the peace, theremade or to be made, forfeited, &c. in aid and support of thegreat charges of the town, daily incumbent ; and forfeiture ofall victuals within the town and precincts, by the law ofEngland in anywise forfeited, that is to say, of bread, wineand ale, and other victuals whatsoever which to merchandisedo not appertain. And that the steward and marshal ofthe household, and the clerk of the market of the house-departingfrom the office must mean, that departing from the town shouldvacate the office.892 TENTEUDKN.-TEWKESBUKY.^^"- ^^' hold of the king, should not enter within the town orNon liberty, &c. &c. &c.intromit. « ,We find upon the Patent Rolls of this period, that theTenterdcn town of Tenterden received a charter of incorporation ofthe inhabitants, by the name of " the bailiffs and com-monastic of the town and hundred of Tenterden ;" and thetown was annexed as a member to the town and port ofRye*In consequence of our having already made so many extractsfrom charters of more important towns, we shallrefrain from trespassing upon the reader's patience, furtherthan by noticing this grant thus briefly, as its provisionsbear the strictest analogy to those we have already quoted.PARLIAMENT ROLLS.We proceed now to the Parliament Rolls of this reign ;the more important enactments are contained in the statutes,from which we have previously made considerableextracts. Some few other entries may however be worthyof observation ; particularly as confirmatory of the doctrinewe have before urged, that there were many commonlyties recognized hy the law which were not incorporated. Wetherefore insert the following petition respecting Tewkesbury.Tewkes- Petition to the king, and lords spiritual and temporal, in1429. Parliament assembled, by the bailiffs, burgesses and commonaltyof the town of Tewkesbury, f complaining of theseizure of their com and goods on the river Severn by thecommons of the Forest of Dean, notwithstanding the king'sproclamation to the contrary. And they pray for relief; andthat penalties might be imposed to protect them. Also thatthe commonalties of the forest and hundreds might be chargedfor the same, as actions are by the statute of Westminstergiven against the hundred. And that the parties wrongedmight have their action of debt against the said commonaltiesof the forest and hundreds, notwithstanding they were notcorporate, and that the goods and chattels of any person of» Rot. Pat. 27 Hen. VI. p. 3, ni. 9. f Ptl. Pari. 8 Hen. VI. m.n,p.345.PARLIAMENT Rolls-CORNWALL. 893the commonalties for the time being, be taken* in law as Hen. VI.the goods of the same commonalties ; and that such partiesmight have an action of debt, &c. against the trespassers,to recover the costs and damascus of such actions.To which the answer was, that it should be as it wasdesired.That the system of tythings and decennae, borrowed from Cornwall,the Saxon laws, was in full force in the county of Cornwall ;and that its administration was corrected by reference tothe common law, is proved by the following extract from theParliament Rolls.The commons of the shire of Cornwall prays that as it is 1432.contained in the statute of the Great Charter, confirmed bydivers other statutes, that no man should be amerced butafter the quantity of his trespass ; and that no amercementsshould be set nor put upon any person but by the oaths ofworthy and lawful persons, — as in the said statute moreplainly appeareth, — and within the said shire, because thedecency otherwise called the tythings, coming not wholeand full into the sheriff's tourn, they were amerced, and theamercement afeared before the sheriff, and among otherissues and profits of the said shire, in estreats written anddelivered unto the bailiffs of every hundred within the shire,to make levy thereof, and to account therefore in dischargeof the sheriff for the time being, before the auditors of theDuchy of Cornwall at the Exchequer, then at Lostwytheyell,for the time being, there to be charged upon their account,after the same estates written and delivered unto them, andnotwithstanding any statute thereof made, now late theauditors of the said duchy, have put, and are for putting,such manner of defaults upon the said decennae or tythyngs,great fines and sums at their own will, and charging the saidbailiffs therewith upon their accounts, and committing themto prison till levy be made, with outrageous and grievous distresses,in great vexation and trouble of all the poor commons• See cate of Ipswich, Seventh Year Book, 8 Hen. VitPet. Pari. 10 Jlcn. VI. m. 6, p. 403.894 PARLIAMENT Rolls-LINCOLN.^^°- ^'^' of the said shire, and undoing of the said bailiffs. Whereuponthey pray, that the said statute, and all others thereof made,should stand in their strength ; and that it be declared and ordained,by authority of this present Parliament, that all suchdefaults for not coming unto the sheriff s toum, of any com"monaltyy or of decennae or tythyngs, or any like thereto withinthe said shire, be in case (en cas) of the said statute; and that itbe punished by a common amercement, to be offered by twoor four worthy and lawful persons of the same hundred of thewhich the defence, tithing, or commonalty is, before thesheriff; and the amercements so offered to be levied, andno other amercements, fines or sums for that cause. And ifany other amercement, fine, or sum, be put upon anydefence, tithing, or commonalty, that it be for nought andvoid, and not leviable ; and if any person be grieved by imprisonmentor by distress, or in anywise against the form ofthis ordinance, that the party grieved have his action, &c.Another. — Let the common law be preserved and kept.The following document is also taken from the samerecords : —Lincoln. The mayor, and all the commonalty of the city of Lincoln,pray the king to grant them licence, by his letters patent,that they may be able to purchase lands, tenements andrents, to have and hold them for themselves and successorsfor ever.*And licence is granted to the mayor and commonalty ofthe city of Lincoln, to hold lands to the extent of 120Z* perannum, to them and their successors.This document affords a strong confirmation of our formerassertion, that Lincoln was not incorporated; for had itbeen this licence would have been unnecessary. It thereforeestablishes, that the term used in the statute of Henry V.was applied, as we have stated, in its primitive sense ofactual local incorporation, and not as descriptive of a bodycorporate or politic.Guilds. On the contrary, we may learn from the same documents,that guilds and fraternities were at this time treated as• Pet. Pari. 10 Hen. VI. n. 9. p. 417.PARLIAMENT Rolls-GUILDS. 896incorporated ; for the following entry appears upon the Par ^^°' ^^'liament Rolls ; from which it will be seen to what extent theabuses exercised by them had, even at this time, arrived,and called for the correction, which was afforded by Parliament,with a view to the common profit of the people.The masters, wardens, and men of many guilds, fraternities, ^^'and other companies incorporate, dwelling in divers parts ofthe kingdom, under the colour of general words, granted tothem, and confirmed by charters and letters patent,* makemany disloyal and unreasonable ordinances, by which many aredeprived of their franchises and profits, for their private profitand common damage of the people. The king commands, thatthe master, wardens, and men of each such guild, fraternity,or company incorporate may carry and make a registry ofrecord before the justices of the peace in the counties, orbefore the chief governors of cities, boroughs and towns,where such guilds, fraternities, and companies are, of all theirletters patent and charters ; and that no such masters, wardens,or men, shall make any ordinance which shall be indisherison or diminution of the franchises of the king, or ofothers, or against the common profit of the people ; nor tomake any ordinance, if it be not first discussed and approvedas good and reasonable by the justices of the peace or thegovernors aforesaid, and being before them of record, tobe revoked and repealed by them as they shall deem reasonable.In the 23rd of Henry VI., we find upon the Parliament 1444.Rolls, a petition, that indictments should not be put in suitin foreign counties, but that the writs should be awarded intothe county where the party was supposed to be " conversant*and " currant — terms which tend to explain many of thedocuments to which we have before referred, and show howmuch the administration of the law at that time related tothe local residence of the parties who were subjected to itsjurisdiction.In the same manner, we find it provided in Parliament, 1450.that an act then made should not be prejudicial to the grant• Pet. Pari. 15 Hen. VI. n. 16, p. 507.896 PARLIAMENT Rolls-EXETER.^^''' ^'^' made by the king to the mayor and barons of Rye, annexingfor the support of the great chaises of the town, the townshipand hundred of Tenterden to that place, and that itshould not be prejudicial to the " dwellers " of the sametownship and hundred.The following extract from the Parliament Rolls, is alsoof sufficient importance to justify the insertion of an abridgmentof it : —Exeter. To the king, &c. : — Showed, your faithful subjects the(Annie in- .ceitis.) mayor, bailiffs, and commonalty of the city of Exeter thatthe city is, and time out of mind hath been, an old cityMayor, corporate of mayor, bailiffs, and commonalty; and the mayorthereof, for the time being, by all the said time, hath had,and used to have, the entire rule, oversight, and governanceof all merchants, mercers, drapers, grocers, tailors, and allother artificers, inhabitants within the same, and the correctionand punishment of all offences within the said city,by them, or any other person, there committed againstthe laws, the common weal, politic rule, and good guiding'of the same city : which city, during all the said time, hathbeen well and quietly guided, in good tranquillity, peace, andquiet of the same, unto now of late ; that the men of the craftof tailors, within the same, by supplication made unto yourhighness, opened your letters patent, bearing date the 17thof November, in the 6th year of your most noble reign ; thatthey in the same city a guild, or fraternity, in the honour ofSaint John the Baptist, of the men of the said craft and other,might make and stablish, and the guild or fraternity to holdto them and to their successors for ever ; and that they, thesame guild, or fraternity, might augment and enlarge, as oftand when it should seem to them necessary and behoveful ;and that the men of that guild, or fraternity, every year mighthave and increase the said guild, or fraternity, and otherpersons that they should receive into the fraternity; andhave and make a master and four wardens of themselves, asoft as it shall please them, for the governance of the fraternityfor ever ; and to make ordinances among themselves, asto them might seem most necessary for the fraternity ; andPARLIAMENT ROLI^.— EXETER. 897that the master and wardens, and the successors, should be Heii^M.perpetual, and have capacity ; and that they, the fraternityor master, within the city and in the suburbs, might ordainand rule, and the defaults of them and of their servants, bythe right of men of the same ministry, correct and amend, asshall by them seem best to be done. And that no manwithin the liberty of the city, any shop of the said ministryshould hold, but if he were of the liberty of the city ; nor anyman to the liberty or freedom of the same city, for the ministryshould be admitted, but by the master and wardens, ortheir successors, it being witnessed that he was good, true, andbehoveful for them. And that the masters and wardens of thefraternity, for the time being, for ever, should have and makeplain search in and of the ministry, of all persons that with tailorswithin the city and suburbs were or should be privileged,and of such mysteries that they or any of them use, or beforehad used ; by force of which letters patent, the said men ofthe said craft have made a gild and fraternity of Saint Johnthe Baptist, within the same city ; and of themselves a masterand nil. wardens, and have taken into the said guild, anddaily done, many inhabitants of the same city, and diverscrafts, other than of themselves, and divers other not inhabitantswithin the city, by which they be in such great number,and many of the guild and fraternity been of such wild disposition,and peaceable, that the mayor of the city maynot guide and rule your subjects of the same, nor correctsuch defaults as ought by him to be corrected, according tohis other duty and charge. And over this they ofttimes havemade divers conventicles, commotions, and great divisionamong your people there, contrary to your laws and peace, inevil example, and likely to grow to the subversion and destructionof the city, and of the good, sad, and politic rule of thesame, without due remedy be had by yoirr good grace in this behalf.Please it your highness, considering the premises, by theadvice of your lords spiritual and temporal, and the commonsin this present Parliament assembled, to ordain and enact,that the said letters patent, and every thing contained in thesanie, and the same guild and fraternity, and all things per-3 M898 PARLIAMENT ROLLS-EX ETER.-PLYMPTON.Hen. VL training to the same guild and fraternity, be recalled, annulled,void, and of no force nor effect, any act, ordinance, or provision,by Parliament or otherwise made or had, in anywisenotwithstanding.It is recited in the beginning of this document, thatCorporate. Exeter was "an old city corporate:" — But the charters relativeto this place have been before faithfully extracted in theseveral reigns of Henry II., Richard I. and John : — and thosecharters were confirmed by subsequent kings. Upon carefullyinvestigating them, it will be seen, that, in point of fact,Exeter had never before been incorporated, nor had such aterm been applied to it : this recital, therefore, is also manifestlyuntrue.Again we should observe, as to this document, that thedent " evils and illegality of admitting non-residents, even into theguilds, is here distinctly pointed out ; and the charter appearsto have been declared void, in consequence of the guildhaving admitted such persons, to the disturbance and injuryof the citizens.piympton. Plympton continued in the same situation, respecting itsmunicipal rights, as it was in the earlier periods of our .tory; for in the 19th year of this reign, the king, with theassent of the lords temporal and spiritual, in Parliamentassembled, confirmed to the burgesses of Plympton, by in-specious, the charters of the 13th of Edward I., 2nd ofHenry IV., 9th Richard II. and 1st Henry V., with theliberties which their ancestors had enjoyed. And in the1447. 26th year of this reign, the king again confirmed, by in-specious, the former charters.* So that it is obvious, theprivileges of the borough must have continued the sameto this period ; excepting that this king also adds, that theyshould have all the free customs which the citizens of Exeterenjoyed.But there is an exception in the charter, that the na-natives.times of the king should not, by reason of their remainingwithin the borough, claim any freedom without the assent ofthe king: — a provision unnecessary to have been introRot. Pat. p. 1, m. 7. 2 Pet. MS. 206.PARLIAMENT ROLLS.-PLYMPTON. 899duce, because in the Regiamm Majestatis, it is justly laid Hen. VI.down, " that although a mesne lord might be barred of hisclaim of villainage, by residence for a year and a day in aborough, the king could not be so estopped :*' — and nodoubt this is so by the general principles of the law ; becausesuch a ground of emancipation is founded upon the supposedallies of the lord ; and no such laches can be attributed tothe king ; because he is protected by the doctrine of" nullumtempus occurrit regi."A fee-farm rent is reserved by the charter, which concludeswith the ordinary exemptions from tolls, &c.COLCHESTER.Having concluded our extracts from the Parliament Rolls,we proceed to insert some miscellaneous documents, referableto different boroughs. Colchester — respecting which wehave before inserted some documents — supplies us withimportant information.Ordinances were made for that place, subsequently to ordinancesthose of Richard II. and Henry IV. They are withoutdate : — but from the preamble, which much resembles thatof the statute of Henry VI., as to county elections, it maybereasonably inferred, that they were made in this reign.It seems to be clear that they were prior to the ordinancesof the 29th of Elizabeth.They are highly important in the consideration of ourpresent subject; for they seem to define, with the utmostpossible precision and distinctness, who were the burgesses at Burgesses,that period ; and the reader will readily observe, how entirelythey correspond with the doctrine before elicited from thedocuments as they have successively occurred in their chronologicalorder, before this time, and which will still furtherbe illustrated by those subsequently succeeding.These ordinances provide, " that all who are freemen of theborough — sworn to the king and the town — living by theirlivelihood, merchandise, or crafts — hoiischolding in theirown persons and names — bearing also tax and talliage,where they fall for their parts — lot and shot to all reasonsM 2900 COLCHESTER.^^°' ^^' " able aids in the borough — that they and each of them shallBurgesses. " use and enjoy their liberties as commons of the borough."This description prevents any possibility of doubt, as tothe persons who were the burgesses or commons of the town.It may be material to consider, in succession, the variousqualifications, which were necessary to entitle a person to beaburgess.1. — "He must be a freeman'' that is, as has been shownbefore, a man of " free condition *' — a liber homo of the commonlaw.2. — He must be a " freeman of the borough," — that is —being of free condition, — he must also be of — or belongingto — the borough.3. — " He must be sworn to the king, and the town'' that is,every man of free condition, belonging to the borough ortown, must be sworn at the court leet to the king, taking theoath of allegiance ; and he must be sworn also to be true tothe town.4. — " He must be inhabiting in the borough or town ; " becauseeven if he were of free condition, and had been inhabitingin the borough, and had been sworn as such, upon those preexistingqualifications : — yet if he should leave the town, hewould cease to be a freeman or burgess " of" that particularplace ; and therefore it was necessary to specify this requisiteof " inhabitancy," as an indispensable continuing qualification.5. — " Living by their livelihood, merchandise, or crafts,"was, as demonstrated before, further evidence of their beingof free condition, and of their having goods within the town,from which any fines or payments due from them could belevied, and by which they might be summoned to attend atthe courts and elections. And it is obvious from this qualification,that practically J the persons who shared and regulatedthe privileges of the place, were those, who by their avocationsand property, were the most essentially interested in itswelfare,6. " They must be householders in their own persons ornames : " that is, no person who had only a shop or warehouse,COLCHESTER. 901was entitled to be a burgess ; nor any person who did not ^^^°- ^^'actually live and reside there — as partners living at a distance Burgesses.but the house must be held in their own person, andtheir own name, not as inmates or lodgers, or in the nameof any other person.7. " They must be bearing tax and talliage where they fallto their parts : '* — that is, they must pay their share of allpublic taxes.8. " They must bear lot and shot to all reasonable aids inthe borough :" — that is, they must perform, according totheir own lot or turn, all public functions — as watch andward — all public offices — constables, jurymen, &c. Theymust pay their scot or share of all public burdens. Muragefor the repair of the walls — pontage for the repair of thebridges — chemynage for the repairs of the highways. Andalso for the repair of the church ; and the support of thesick, poor, and impotent, who, before the statute of Elizabeth,were provided for in their respective towns out of thecommon stock.Having all these important qualifications — belonging thussubstantially to the town — as living and pursuing their avocationsthere, sworn to maintain the king's peace, and abideby the law when called upon : — having their domicile therewiththe numerous ties connected with their families : —bearing all the burdens of the place, both public and local ;and discharging all public duties; they were properly treatedas the real inhabitants and burgesses of the borough.How can the ingenuity of man place upon the waywardwills of his fellow creatures such strong, effective, and practicalrestraints as by this ancient, plain and simple systemof our ancestors ? Why should it be superseded by theintricate, anomalous, and inexplicable mysteries of the corporationsystem, or by any new system, which the pruriencyof modem innovation may suggest ?The persons thus described in these ordinances are to havetheir voices in the election of headmen and bailiffs ; and thepersons who arc excluded are as clearly defined as thosewho are adopted as burgesses, viz. " children — apprentices —902 SHAFTESBURY.Hen. VI. « law journeymen — chamber-holders, not keeping craft inBurgesses. " their persons — nor householders by themselves — nor payingtax, talliage, lot, shot, nor taxes within the borough."1454. The return to Parliament for Colchester in this year, wasReturn.made by certain persons described as " burgesses of Colchester;" and they are stated to have elected, with the assentof all the burgesses of the town." Coupling this documentwith the description we have before had in the ordinances ofthis reign, and those of Queen Elizabeth, which will be seenhereafter, it is impossible to doubt who were the burgessesthat returned the members to Parliament for Colchester atthat time.These ordinances also fully explain the meaning of theForeigner, term '^ foreigner ;'^ which is applied in the records of the boroughto many persons living within it ; they were, no doubt,those who were excepted from burgess-ship by these ordinancesand the common law: — as peers' inmates — newcomers— aliens — villains — ecclesiastics, &c.1447. A charter of Henry VI., in the 25th year of his reign,recites the charters of Richard II. and Edward III.; andgrants to the burgesses, bailiffs, and their successors, thatthey should hold before them in the mote-hall of the town,all pleas, real, personal and mixed ; and all suits and demandsmoved within the town and liberties. That the bailiffsand burgesses might receive all profits, rents, &c. That fourof the most honest men should be, with the bailiff of thetown, justices of the peace; and with jurors to hear and determinefelonies, trespasses, &c. And that no seneschal,marshal or admiral should exercise their respective officeswithin the borough.As the records of Colchester so decisively negative, thatthe rights of burgess-ship in that borough rested upon anycorporate grounds ; and upon the contrary show distinctly,that they were founded upon the common law : — so, in thebury!* same manner, will the documents of Shaftesbury establishthe same point, and also that the rights were not foundedupon burgage tenure. For, although that place had longbeen incorporated, yet the burgesses who voted for mem-shaftesbury.903hers of Parliament, were the inhabitants paying scot and Hen. VI.lot ; and it appears from a document of this date, that the 1427.borough was held by burgage tenure : — for Sir John Berkeley,knight, held by courtesy, after the death of his wife,a moiety of 335. lOd. yearly issuing out of 10 burgages in theborough.At the same period, notwithstanding it is said to havebeen a corporation, it will be found, that all the municipalofficers were appointed under the common law at the courtheel For in the 25th of Henry VI. there is a record of thatcourt in the 5th year of E. Bonham, abbess, speaking ofWilliam Covent, who is called the king's seneschal (orsteward) and also of the jury there. The court was held afterMichaelmas and Hock tide, and the title was, " Curia LegalisDomini Regis'' And at the Michaelmas court, themayor, coroners, constables, and the king's bailiff, were appointedand sworn into their offices. The jurors being calledquestorSf^ and their presentments being of those thingswhich were inquirable at the court leet — consequently atthat period no essential alteration had been made in theconstitution of the borough, which is corroborated by thefact, that the king in this reign granted a confirmation of thecharter of the 37th of Henry III.CHESTER.The following extracts among the Harleian MSS., from an I430.old Latin book relative to the city of Chester y seem also material,as descriptive of the manner of entering freemen at theport-mote court.*Mem. That Miles Newton, goldsmith, by William Davis Addition.son, mayor of the city of Chester, was admitted to the libertiesand franchises of the aforesaid city, and gave a fine of2Qs, 8d, ; viz. in hand 6s. 8rf., and the remainder annually,at the feast of St. Michael the Archangel, 6s. 8d,, by equalportions, by the sureties of Robert Mercer Capper, of RichardElderly Capper, of George Stock Capper, and of John Grif-foley Mercer.Harl. MSS. 2020, p. 390 b.904 CHESTER.Hen. VI. Many other persons were admitted in this and the followingyear, in the same manner, with three or four sureties.1442. Again — It is ordered, by the assent of Thomas Thornton,mayor of the city of Chester,* and his coadjutors, with alltheir whole council, that the stewards of every occupationwithin this city be bounden, in the name of all their whole occupation,in the sum of 40*., that no manner of foreign personshall be received or reputed as a master of any occupation,unless he or they be first franchised. And also all suchforeign persons as now do or . . . any occupation, asmasters being able and of power to be franchised, they to. . constrained to come into the said franchises. Andalso such persons as do occupy, buying and selling anymanner of merchandise, to be constrained to come into thesaid franchise, according to the ordinance thereupon madeSons of ^^^ ordered ; that is, to wit, every person being a freeman* 8Freemen. ^^^ ^^ ^^y f^j. ^jjg wine and fees, after the whole use andApparent custom. And also every foreign person that hath been pren-'*^^* tired within this city, and truly served his apprenticeship, andhis indenture thereof recorded afore the mayor for the timebeing, for his franchises 265. 8d. and the wine and fees dueForeigners, and of custom. And also that every foreign person thathath not been prenticed, to pay four marks, with wine andfees due and of custom. And also that no manner of person,plants, not born and bred within the realm of England andWales, nor under the obeysance of the king's grace, in nowiseto be taken or received into the franchise under thesum of 10/. or at the discretion of the mayor and his council.And also that no manner of person, being within the libertiesof the Bowery in nowise be taken or received into the franchises,nor have any manner of liberties within the said city.It will be observed, that these admissions of persons asfreemen at Chester are made in the " Port Mote " court ; — aterm which we have before found in use in other boroughs, —particularly Ipswich.Admission. Jig form of the entry is, that the party is admitted intothe liberties and franchises — he pays a fine for the reasons• Harl. MSS. 2105. p. 270.Chester. 906yse have before explained — and he finds sureties j as the ^^^' ^'''Saxon laws required. The ordinance prohibiting the admissionof foreigners, unless they are franchised, is also in Foreigner.perfect accordance with the Saxon law, which prohibitedthe reception of any person unless they were free fromcharge : — and in accordance with the common law, whichprohibited the reception of any fugitive villain ; — or in other villains,words, of any person who was not of free condition. And personsof that description are by this ordinance constrained tobecome free ; because, as we have shown from the Saxonlaws, as well as the early practice, every freeman wasobliged to be admitted and sworn ; and therefore every freeman'sson, when he arrived at the proper age, was (as un Som.questionably free) bound to be sworn and enrolled, payinghis proper contribution to the common stock. So also aforeigner, who had come into the place, and had been ap Foreigner,prentice there, and lived more than a year and a dayin the place, was therefore probably free, under the authorityof the law in Glanville; and the other early text writers: — and was consequently also obliged to come in, and besworn and enrolled; paying his usual fine or contributionto the common stock.And so generally all other persons coming permanently toreside in the town, and received there, were in the samemanner, after a year and a day, bound to be sworn andenrolled:— the evidence of free condition as to the sons offreemen being only more clear and distinct than of personsaltogether foreigners ; but still the general law was the. sameas to all — that after the residence of a year and a day theycere bound to be admitted and enrolled.We cannot illustrate the municipal state of Chester by theexercise of parliamentary privileges at this time, as it did mentalnot then return members to Parliament, and it appears from "^* ^^**'the following document, that the inhabitants, upon thatground, claimed exemption from subsidies.A supplication exhibited to King Henry VI., by the in- 1450.habitants of the county palatine of Chester :* that as they• Harl. MSS. 1006, 127.906 CHESTER.-W INCH ESTER.^^°' ^ ^' have no knights citizens, or burgesses, nor ever had fromtheir county, whereby they might in any reason be bounden,pray a release from a subsidy voted by the then Parliament,and that the commissioners of levy be withdrawn from theircounty, as being against their liberties and franchises.WINCHESTER.1437. We find at this period,* from a MS. formerly in the possessionof the corporation of Winchester an important entryrelative to that city, establishing that the same anxietyas to the antiquity of the 24, prevailed in that place as inColchester, from the fact of a similar wilful interlineationappearing upon their records : — ^no doubt made for the purposeof giving the semblance of usage as a justification forperpetuating the usurpations which were introduced.In the oath which was prescribed to be taken by themayor, we find part of the original writing has been erased,and ** xxjF of the citie" inserted; and if any additional proofwas requisite to establish that the interpolation was made ata subsequent period, the spelling of the word " citie" wouldsuffice : for at the commencement of the oath it is spelt, asit had been in all the previous entries in this MS., and asthe word was then generally used " cite :" — and not as in theinterpolation " citie."The MS. seems to have been perused by some personwho was particularly anxious to draw attention to everyentry relative to the mercatorial guild; and wheneverthe words " Gives Wanton de gilds forum mercatoria"occur, they are scored under, and a representation of thehuman hand is made in the margin, to direct attention to thepassage. The oath is as follows : —Additional MSS. British Museum, 6096, p. 19.t This is a vellum manuscript of entries, relating to the principal events thatoccurred in Winchester, chiefly in Latin and Norman French, commencing fromthe reign of Richard II. to that of Henry VI., formerly belonging to the corporationof that city, but now in the British Museum. The public are indebted forthe possession of this MS. to the learned discrimination of Sir Henry Ellis, whopurchased it at the sale of the late Rev. John Price, the principal librarian of theBodleian — but our attention was, in the first instance directed to its contents by SirFrederick Madden.itWINCHESTER. 907I shal observe and kepe alle statutes and usages of our **«°- VI.dtCy and alle ordinances confirmed of our predecessors Oath.mad by fore this tyme ne now offis discharge ne ministrene officer change ne non make new wyth thought sent** of the XXIV of the citie bute by my power trwelich putthem in excursion. So God help me at the holy dom, &c."The records of Winchester at this period, afford us another 1445,very important fact, similar to those which we have alreadypresented to the attention of the reader respecting Northamptonand Leicester;* from whence we have been enabledindisputably to prove the illegal encroachment of aselect body upon the constitutional rights of the free, permanent,and responsible inhabitants; for in the valuableMS.f to which we have so recently alluded, we find an ordinancein Latin to the following effect, which commenceswith a recital, that, " By a common and general meeting,had and held at Winchester, upon the 24th day of January,in the 34th year of the reign of Henry VL, at which WilliamSmith, mayor, his compeers, and the commonalty of the city,found many mischiefs had happened in past times, and diddaily arise, so that the citizens of the city were daily compelledto have convocations of the citizens, to their greatdetrinien: — therefore it is provided by this convocation,and by the unanimous consent of all who were interested; and by their assent, concord, and agreement, that inall future times the mayor, with 16 of the 24 (ex parte 24),by him elected, and hereafter by his successors, mayors, to beelected, whose names for the present election are hereunderwritten, to wit, (here follow 16 names), with other 18 citizens,upon the part of the commonalty to be elected, and at futuretimes to be elected, the names of which 18 for the presentelection are likewise hereunder written, to wit (here follow thenames of 18 persons), should have full and entire authorityand power to counsel, treat, order, enact and determine, for thecommon utility and profit of divers persons cominffy and forthe honesty of all, and of the whole commonalty dwellingVide ante, p. 22J) el fteq.t 28 B. Additional MSS. British Museum, 6096.908 HYTHE.^^°' ^'^' ill the said city this year, and in future times, by the aid ofGod, strictly and firmly to be made.HYTHE.Uniformity As the entries in the different boroughs were made byof Records. . . ^ . . "^different persons, without any communication, and at a distancefrom each other, it is not to be expected but thatthere will be some slight variety in the form and immaterialparts of their records; but the important point which shouldalways be regarded is, that in whatever part of the kingdom,however remote from each other, and under whatever differingcircumstances the several boroughs might be placed,the substantial nature of all their records will be found to bethesame.Thus Chester, an exempt county palatine, in the north —Hythe, a cinque port, in the south — Wells, a place of ecclesiasticalorigin in the west — and a variety of other instanceswhich might be enumerated, will be found by the reader toproduce records substantially similar.*With this view we insert the following extracts from thedocuments of the borough of Hythe : —E f^27 "^^ '^ remembered, that on Sunday, the day of the translationof St came Thomas Erpelon and WilliamBirth. Tory, Q,s freemen by birth; and they were stoorn to the lordthe king, and to the town.And Dennis Frances, born at Selling, appeared as aMarriage, freeman, by the marriage of a daughter of John Walvyn, andhe was sworn.And Thomas Screen came on the eve of St. John theBaptist as free and he was sworn to the lordthe king, and to the town. And Stephen Marshall appearedBirth, on the Feast of the Reliques, as free by birth, and he wassworn to the lord the king, and to the toum.And John Sharp, born at Godmersham, appeared on the24th day of January, as free by the marriage of the daughterof William Breche, a freeman; and he was sworn to the lordthe king, and to the toum,See also Yarmouth and Lynn.IIYTHE. 909And Thomas Metcalf came, and was swom to maintain ^*«"- ^l.the franchise, although not free (scilicet — non liber.)And Thomas Vigorous, and Thomas Mariner, appearedand were swom, although not free (scilicet — non liber.)And William Rode, appeared on the last day of January, 1460.a® 29, as free by the marriage of Jane, the daughter ofHenry Bother ; and he was swom to the lord the king, andto the town.And John Coleman appeared on the 26th day of January 1452.a° 31, as free by the marriage of Alice, the daughter of JohnAre ; and he was sworn to the lord the king, and to thetown.And Henry Warner appeared on the 19th day of Jas 1453.nary, a° 32, as free by birth ; and he was swom to thelord the king, and to the town.And John Downe, the younger, appeared on the 2nd day 1454.of November, a° 33, as free by birth ; and he was swom tothe lord the king, and to the town.And Ralph Canoes appeared on the 26th day of Feb, a**33, as free as he can be (ut liber quantum protest esse,) becausehe was born in Normandy, by John, the daughter of WilliamLonge ; and he was sworn to the lord the king, and tothe town.And John Chere, alias Dokene, appeared as free by marriage; and he was sworn to the lord the king, and to thetown.And Robert Gybbe came into the common hall on the 1460.21st day of January, a® 39, before i\ifi jurats, as free by thebirth of his wife, the daughter of Ramon Hampton, and bornin the town ; and he was sworn to the lord the king, and tothe town.And John Baydyll, alias Cavern, the younger, came intothe common hall on the 26th day of January, a° 39, beforethe jurats, as free by birth ; and he was sworn to the lordthe king, and to the town.And John Colle, the son of Martin Colle, came into thecommon hall on the 30th of January, a® 39, before the jurats,as free by birth ; and ho was sworn to the lord the king, and910 HYTHE.Hen VI. ^Q ^jjg iQy^Yi, And there are several other entries of the samedescription, from which the above have been selected asspecimens.Here the same grounds for the recognition of freemenMarriage ^^^^ ^^ account of birth and marriage as we have met withbefore in several boroughs scattered over every part of thecountry, and deducible from our earliest usages and laws ;and these qualifications are connected with the being swornto the king and to the town as practised in the court leet.One or two individuals appear to have been sworn on theground we suggested in our observations upon the Chesterdocuments ; although they were not proved to be free eitherby birth or marriage : — and one is expressly described to beas free as he could be," because he was born in Normandy :but still if he had resided a year and a day in the place, hewas hound to be sworn and enrolled, unless he set up hisalienage as an excuse, or it was objected to him.It must be observed, that at the commencement, the admissionsare made in the public court, and the parties weresworn to the king ; from which it may be inferred, that it wasat the court leet. Afterwards they were at the common hall ;and subsequently the jurats seem, as the jury, to have exercisedthe right of having the parties sworn before them. Thesesuccessive alterations occur also in other places — and graduallyintroduced the usurpations upon which the exclusivesystem was in after-times so unconstitutionally established.1455. In this reign there is a record, in which the Archbishop ofCanterbury, upon the surrender of Henry Fitz-john of theoffice of bailiff* of the bailiwick of the town of Hythe, grantedthat office to the jurats and barons of the town during thelife of Fitz-john ; with power annually to elect from amongstthe barons one fit baron dwelling within the town to bebailiff*.And as illustrative of the assertion we have before made,Jurats, that the jurats were the jury or sworn men ; and that thebarons or burgesses were the denizens and resiants withinthe place ; — who were often called, as in other boroughs, byHYTHE.-TRURO.-PASTON LETTERS. 91 ]the name of commonalty — we insert the following document. ^^"' ^^•Memorandum at a Brothel, holden at Romene the Tews- A.foi.i3b.day next after the were of Easter, the yere of the reignof King Any the Vlth the 30th. It is ordered by all thebrother matt the said Brodehil being, that ther shall nobaron of the five ports from henceforth be elected into theParliament or to Yarmouth ; but if he be mayor, bailiff orswordsman of the towne, that he is chosen by denizen and re-slant within the said town; and that no mayor, bailiff, juratsand commonalty make otherwise their election nor returnupon payne los., to be had and payed, and had of everytowne of the five ports the contrary doing, to the use andcommon profit of all the remnant of the towns. This saidact concerning moreover, that, if any other be chosen in contraryof these premises, that the election of him to be voice.And if any also in other form be chosen, that he or they shallhave no fees nor wages of the said towne so unduly chosen."TRURO.The return to Parliament for Truro was at this time " pro Truro,communitate burgi."There is no pretence whatever for saying that Truro wasthen a corporation ; these words therefore must be intendedto be applied to the commonalty , or whole body of the borough: that is, the burgesses who were to enjoy the privilegesunder the charter of Reginald de Fitzroy, and who are describedin the recital of Queen Elizabeth's charter as the*' inhabitants ;'' for they are said by her to have enjoyedthose privileges, and they are by her incorporated, and directedby her to enjoy their franchises for the future.PASTON Letters.The return of members to Parliament having become at 1465.«, ,. Membersthis period of our history a matter of political importance to Parliamentof public interest — as indicated by the number of peopleattending the elections, which is noticed in the preamble tothe statute of the 8th of Henry VI., limiting the right of electionto the 40.V. freeholders — the great men of the nation912 PASTON LETTERS.*^^"- ^^' appear to have interfered in the election, and to have interestedthemselves as to the persons who were to be returnedas members.Thus we find in the Pastor Letters,* one from John de Vere,Earl of Oxford, to Mr. Pastor, who was a gentleman of propertyin Norfolk, dated 18th of October, 1455, informing himthat Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York, and John Mowbraythe Duke of Norfolk, had met at Bury, and that agentleman of the Duke of York had taken to a yeomanof Mr. Pastor's, a schedule of the duke's intent whom hewould have knights of the shire for the county of Norfolk,and the names were Sir William Chamberlain and HenryGrey.1460. From another letter in the Pastor collection, of thisdate, from Richard Call to John Pastor, the writer states,that " on Childermas-day there were much people at Norwichat the shire (the county court,) because it was noisedin the shire, that the under-sheriff had a writ to make anew election ; wherefore the people were grieved, becausethey had laboured so often ; saying to the sheriff, that hehad the writ, and plainly he should not away unto thetime the writ were read.The sheriff answered and said, ' he had no writ, nor wist' he had it.' Hereupon the people peace and stilled untothe time the shire was done ; and after that done, thepeople called, * Upon him ! kill him ! head him !' And stJohn Damme, with help of others, got him out of the shirehouse," &c.From which we may infer the great interest which thepeople at large at this time took in the election of membersto Parliament ; as appears also by another letter from WilliamPrice, the under-sheriff of Norfolk, to John Pastor, in thesame reign, in which he informs him, that, " as for the electionof the knights of the shire in Norfolk, in good faiththere had been much to do ; nevertheless, to let you have"knowledge of the demeaning — my Master Berne, myMaster Grey, and ye had greatest voice ; and I purpose• Vol. i. p. 98.ifuPASTON LETTERS. 913me, as I will answer God, to return the due election, that ^'*^"- ^'^-^* is, after the sufficient you and Master Grey — nevertheless,I have a master''Before we finally close the miscellaneous documents relay ^^BoX'i"time to this period, we should observe, that the ecclesiasticalbodies had, from the earliest periods, under the civil law,been considered as incorporated, and enjoyed their rightsand privileges by succession ; but it does not appear that thelanguage of incorporation, which was borrowed from theancient guilds and fraternities, had been applied to ecclesiasticalbodies.About this period, however, and subsequent to the charterof Hull, and the incorporation of Plymouth, terms of incorporationare used in grants, to ecclesiastical and eleemosynarybodies.*A grant to the priory of Chester, in the 33rd of Henry I. — ^^'^•to Dunstable in the same reign — to Colchester in Richard I.to the prior and canons of Bodmin, in the 67th of ^^^^•Henry III. — and to an hospital at Nottingham — and also tothe Holy Trinity at Salisbury — and to an hospital at Oakham,in Rutlandshire — contain no words of incorporation. Butinthe 23rd year of this reign, there is a grant to Saint Paul's, 124-1.that they might plead by i\ie\T corporate name, purchase lands,and have a corporate seal.In the 16th of Henry VI., there is a licence to found an ^'*^7.hospital at Ewelme, in Oxfordshire, and that it should be abody corporate; and in the 21st of Henry VI., an hospital 1443.at Haddington, in Bedfordshire, is made a perpetual communityand body corporate. This system then becameprevalent.YEAR BOOKS.We proceed now to the Year Books of this reign, whichbeing the period when municipal corporations were firstintroduced, will require rather a minute investigation ; andwe shall give considerable extracts, in their chronological• Vide Dugdale's Monastic, passim. 7th Year Book, fol. 12 B.3n914 Seventh YEAR BOOK.Hen. VI. succession, in order that the reader may have a clear anddistinct view of the manner in which the subject unfoldeditself: and by seeing the records in the order in which theyactually succeeded each other, may rely, with certainty andconfidence, upon the inferences legitimately drawn fromthem.The King. The nature and extent of the king's prerogative, withreference to the subject matter of our inquiry, may be in somedegree collected from the following extract.H?« " Every franchise commences by the grant of the king tothe lord of the franchise. If in any return, the bailiffof a liberty is mentioned, and it is not said whose franchiseit is, he shall be intended to be the bailiff of the king, andthe franchise to be in the hands of the king."Fo/^^A '^ afterwards appears, that the king can only grant bypi. 11. record; for it is laid down, thiit *^ nothing passes from theking without matter of Record."We next find a case, in which there is a reference in theCorpora margin, to Brooke's Abridgment, title " Corporation ; " but theword does not occur in the text : and that the reader may befully acquainted with the nature of the case, we shall give asomewhat lengthened statement of it.Koi?9. " '^ scire facias in the King's Bench, by the abbot of West-abbot,bury, against the commonalty of the town of Shrewsburythe count was upon a composition, by deed indented, be-commonstween the predecessor of the abbot, and the commonalty, forthe reparation of certain mills, which the commonalty oughtto repair when necessary ; and it was shown how upon thePretences Composition, the predecessor of the abbot, had brought a writ8orof covenant against the commonalty, for non-repair of themills ; and the record was produced upon which this scirefacias was brought. Mole said, The writ is brought againstthe commonalty of S— , but on the day the writ wasBailiff. brought, there were two bailiffs of the town, therefore thewrit ought to be against the bailiff and the commonalty.Strange, — It does not appear that they had bailiffs at thetime of the composition made; nor at the time of therecord; but it seems the writ is rateable; for notwith-SEVENTH YEAR BOOK. 915standing there was no bailiff at the time of the compo "en. VI.siphon made, nor at the time of the writ of covenant brought,nevertheless, the king having made bailiffs who are the chiefof the town, and the commonalty under them, the commonaltycannot be impleaded without their bailiffs, any morethan without a mayor ; as at London, the commonalty cannot Mayor.be impleaded without their mayor, and where there are bailiffsof a city, ^^They are as mayor. Chine. — ^^The commonalty ofa town, when there are neither bailiffs nor mayor, grantto me an annuity of 20/. ; and then the king makes bailiffsof the same town ; I shall bring my writ of annuity againstthe commonalty, omitting the bailiffs or the mayor; thatthe writ may agree with the specialty ; otherwise it wouldbe rateable. So here, the action is brought upon a writ ofcovenant, against the commonalty only. It is a judicialwrit, founded upon a record, and should be in accordancewith it. Sandford, — ^^The writ is rateable, for we willput a common case : a feme sole grants to me an annuity,and then takes a husband ; shall the writ for this annuitybe against the woman, omitting the man? I say not: —a feme covert can in no case be impleaded in our law, withouther husband. Let us suppose that a chapter, when theyhave no dean, grants to me an annuity ; and then the king Dean,makes a dean; the writ of annuity shall not be broughtagainst the chapter, omitting the dean : for the dean is sovereignof all the chapter; and the chapter, in law, iscovert by Ie dean, as a woman is covert by her husband.Thus here the commonalty of a town is under the bailiffs,or the mayor. Strange, — Supposing one makes an acknowledgmentto me of 10/., by the name of squire or knight;and after he is made a duke ; I should have scire faciasagainst him of this recognizance, by the name of duke,and not by the name of knight, in accordance with therecognizance. So here, notwithstanding, the bailiffs werenot parties to the record in the writ of annuity, forasmuchas that the commonalty could not be impleaded withoutthem, it is necessary that they should be named. Trowel. —Suppose in the time of vacation of an abbot or of a prior. Abbot.3n29J6 SEVENTH Weak BOOK.H en. VI. that the convent is bound to me under the common seal, for100/., which I have lent them for the profit of the house, andthen an abbot or prior is chosen, my writ will be against theabbot and the convent ; notwithstanding the abbot is notnamed in the deed, and so here. Pastor. — Suppose that Irecover debt or damages against a man and feme sole ; thenthey intermarry ; then I sue execution upon this recovery byscire facias ; the writ would be scire facias to such a one, andsuch a one his wife; and not to such a one, and such aone by the strange name, in accordance with the recovery ;by the marriage, the woman lost the name she had at thetime of the recovery; but it is fit that she should bebound in accordance to that name which she had then : — sohere it is fit that the writ should be against them as theywere then ; that is, against the bailiffs and the commonalty,Wesibure. — Suppose the parson of a church, and the patron,and the ordinary, grant to me an annuity out of a church ;Abbot. and then the church is appropriated to an abbot ; notwithstandingthe appropriation, my annuity is not extinct.Suppose the annuity to be in arrear ; my writ of annuity willbe brought against the abbot, although he is not a partyCommon nor privy to the deed. Role. — Suppose the commonalty ofS were now to bring a writ of right of these lands ; andBailiffs. it appeared, that they should have bailiffs in the same town ;would the writ be brought by the commonalty, omitting thebailiffs? I say no. And if the recovery was in such a manner,it is error ; notwithstanding your writ was brought againstthem, of a thing commenced by them before they had anybailiffs. Cost. — It seems to me the contrary, and thatthe writ is good; and that there is a diversity where, atthe time of the grant by the commonalty, they had bailiffs ;and when they had none: — for if they have bailiffs, andthe commonalty grant in that manner, and the bailiffs areno parties to the grant, I say the grant is void ; but ifat the time of the grant, they had no bailiffs, the grant bythe commonalty is good, as in the case at the bar — when atthe commencement, the grant was good by the commonalty ;and the kinij made bailiffs ; then a stood writ can be main-seventhYEAR BOOK. 917gained by the name of dignity ; for in this word commonalty , **«»• ^i.is included the bailiffs, and all the commonalty ; for the bailiffsof a town are not exempt from the commonalty, orseparated : — for during the time of their office they are personsof the commonalty, as every other of the town. Toname them in the writ, would be superfluity ; for then theywould be twice named. Et adjoumatur."We have already seen, that the reference to Brooke, titleCorporation," was frequently made in the margin of theYear Books, during the reigns of Henry IV. and Henry V.,although there was nothing in the text relative to such bodies.So here we have the word " corporation " for the first timeoccurring in the margin in this reign; although in the contextthere is no other reference to that subject than the use of theterm " commonalty;" which has already been explained asnot importing, in our early documents, a corporate body.On the other hand, it was applied to every aggregate body inthe country — the clergy — the laity — the commonalty of therealm — the county — hundreds, and even forests. And here,although mayors, bailiff's and the commonalty, are frequentlyreferred to, there is no allusion whatever to the modem doctrinesof corporations; but on the contrary, the case isthroughout argued with reference to the analogous cases ofindividuals — as men and women, married and unmarried —baron and feme — abbots, priors and deans. And had any of theprinciples now adopted as to corporations been then in use,it is impossible this case could have been discussed, in themanner it was, without reference to them. It affords, therefore,the strongest possible reason for inferring, that even atthis late period, the law of corporations now in use, was notthen adopted, nor even known.In a subsequent case, the mayor (maire) and bailiffs of Oxford.Oxford demanded cognizance of a plea. Fol. 10.The case is discussed at much length, but there is noreference whatever to their being a corporation.In fo. 14 b, the same occurs as to the city of Gloucester, Gloucesterwhore, as in the last case, there is no reference to their being918 SEVENTH YEAR BOOK.Hen. VI. a corporation; the bailiffs only, and ^^ those of the town'are mentioned.Bristol. Ijj foe 30 [j^ ^jjg game occurs as to the maire and burgessesof Bristol.Shortly afterwards, in the same book, we find an entry ofa different description : pointing out distinctly at what periodthe doctrine of corporations was expressly applied to municipalbodies.Commons ^^^ commonalty of the town of N. brought an assise**^y- of novel disseisin against the Abbot of Belmont and Rich.Willes, and others, in the county of D. And the commonaltyAttorney, appear by attorney. And for R. Willes it was said, thathe who appointed the common attorney for the commonalty,was one of the same commonalty; which is a thing corporate,not several; in which case he could not appointa common attorney by himself. And for the abbot it wassaid, that the writ was brought by one of the commonalty ;which is but one body ; for which we pray judgment ; andMayor, they are without a chief mayor or bailiff named with themin this writ. And so the matter was adjourned." ^This case is important to the subject of our present inquiry:— as, notwithstanding there had been many chartersof incorporation, this is the first place in any of the lawwriters or reports in which it is asserted, that a commonaltyis a body corporate ; and the first instance in which there isany allusion to the doctrine of corporations, as applied totowns.It will be important also to remember, that there hadbeen no charter before this time in which the burgesses, orthe commonalty, or any other such body, had been incorporated;and it has been seen, that it is not till nearly16 years after, that any municipal body receives such agrant : Kingston being the first town incorporated, in the18th of Henry VI.1425. In another entry in this Year Book, the charter of KingM. T. * Edward to the maire and burgesses of Oxford — exemptingthem from serving on foreign juries — and that foreignersSEVENTH YEAR BOOK. 919should not be on juries within the town — sis mentioned. ^^<^"' V^-And also the 'amen of the toum" (le persons de la ville). Men of thetownYet nothing is said in the case of their being incorporated,although there is in the margin a reference to Brooke'sAbridgment — title " corporation." It seems, therefore, that Corporisdoctrine of corporations, which was first broached in E.T. 3 Henry VI., had not at this time made any considerableprogress, and was not generally recognized.In a case by the prior of Montague against a defendant, Let.who had been fined as bailiff of a leet, for not impannelling Foi. 12 B.a jury, it is said, " that the court leet is the most ancientcourt in the hnd:'' — and reference is made to its extensivejurisdiction.It is also stated, that '' it is against common right for thebailiff to immanuel persons as well out of the town, as inthe town; for by that means the bailiff would extend hispower,"From this entry the original antiquity and importance ofthe court to which such frequent reference has been made,is clearly established; and the local limits of its jurisdictiondistinctly confined to the precinct in which it exists.A writ, de nativo habendo, occurs in the county of Bucks. i^^^PAnd a latitat being issued thereon to the sheriffs of London, l^'^v,they returned, that " the city of London is the most ancient E. i'.city in the realm, and the chamber of the king ; and that it isthe ancient demesne of the king ; and had the custom fromtime of memory, that if a man remained in the city for a yearand a day,* he should not be taken nor sent forth by tvrit denativo habendo' ^c.And it was said, that '' this custom was against reason andcommon law, for that it was prejudicial to all the realm."It was also denied that london was ancient demesne,because it did not so appear by Domesday Book ; and thetreasurer and barons of the Exchequer certified that it wasnot so."But it was further said, that " the liberties of London hadSec Glanville, llegiani Majestatis, Facta, Britton, and Mirror, et pcbt. 35Hen. VI. Mic.T. fol. 6 B. 37 Hen. VI. T. T. fol.26 B.920 SEVENTH YEAR BOOK.J*g" V^' been confirmed by Parliament." And it was observed, thatthe sheriffs for the time are chiefs of the city, and wardensand protectors of their liberties and customs."Kent. It is also stated, that " in the county of Kent they have sucha custom, that any person born in the county, notwithstandingthat his father was a bondman would he free."And it was said, that " the writ de nativo habendo was ofright."Foi. 3 B. This case is afterwards continued in the 8th of Henry Viandfrom its discussion it appears, that the doctrine ofVillainage, villainage was at this time in full force. And we findthat London claimed as a special custom, that those whoresided for a year and a day should be free, which isstated in Glanville, and the other early text writers, as thegeneral law of the land ; upon which remarks have beforebeen made.London. The importance of the city of London — its antiquity —franchises — extensive jurisdiction — and the dignity of itsofficers, also appear.Want. In folio 35 it is said, that ^' the wards in London are ashundreds in the counties"* — ^which clearly shows, that thetowns were carved out of the counties, and were, like them,subject to analogous subdivisions.Parish. In folio 36 b, the same is repeated, and that " a parish isas a will."Folio 40. In an assise it was stated, " that part of the landswere in ?i franchise which had return of writs, and the otherswere gildahle ; and one pannel was returned by the bailiff ofthe ^rawcAw^ which had the return of writs, and the otherby the sheriff; and one was sworn of \\iQ franchise, and theother of the gildahle."^Here we have the county at large, under the general nameof the " gildable," — or that which paid and contributed altogether: contradistinguished from the towns and franchises —which paid separately by themselves.^ i4iIo *** " ^^ ^ ^^^^ ^^ trespass against the mayor and bailiffs andFol. i".• Vide post. Year Book, temp. Hen. VII.t Vide post. 32 Hen. VI. folks B. Et vide etiam, fol. 14 B.SEVENTH YEAR BOOK. 921the commonalty of Norwich, and one J. Jabe, the plaintiff "«"• VI.claimed to be quit of toll. The mayor and bailiffs, and Jabe,had retained certain beasts of the plaintiff's for toll, to pay tothe mayor; and judgment was prayed of the writ; becauseJ. Jabe was, on the day of the writ purchased, and the day ofthe supposed trespass, one of the commonalty ; and thus heis three times named. Judgment of the writ, &c.Martin. — It seems to me the writ will abate, for he whoby this writ is thus named for one and the same trespass,may be twice charged ; for if he were found guilty, he wouldbe so on a charge for his own wrong ; and if the commonaltywere found guilty, he would be again charged as one of thecommonalty ; which would be inconvenient. And supposethat he was found not guilty, and for so much excused ; andthe commonalty were found guilty, and for so much chargeable; thus, by one inquest he would be found guilty, and bythe other not guilty, which cannot be, &c.Pastor. — It seems to me the writ is good, for perhaps thesame J., who is named by his own name, claims the toll incommon with the commonalty by another title than as oneof the commonalty, and makes the trespass without them inhis own right, and not as one of the commonalty; in whichcase the writ would seem to be brought in form ; for if therewere but ten persons in the commonalty, and they took thegoods by other title than by reason of their corporation,it is proper to bring the writ against them by their ownnames ; and if J. did wrong to us of his own act, and not asone of the commonalty, although together with the commonalty,and he is sued by such a writ, and judgment is obtainedagainst him for damages, if execution could not be had,of the goods of the commonalty, nor of the singular goodsof each, it would be a mischief, when he did the wrong fromhis own act in claiming the toll as his right, &c.Martin, — Your case is not my law ; for, in that case, Ishould have execution of all the goods, as well the separategoods, as those of the commons; otherwise it would beinconvenient, for, if they only had goods in common, Ishould sue without recovery. And it is the common922 SEVENTH YEAR BOOK.Hen. VI. course in the King's Bench, that, if a commonalty beamerced, the amercement will be levied of all the goods, &c.And for another cause, it seems to me the writ is bad. Foragainst the mayor and the commonalty is attachment anddistress infinite, and against J. the process of outlawry ; thusseveral process ; which cannot be joined in one writ."Babingtan. — ^^The case put by Pastor is law, as it seemsto me ; for there is a great diversity between the king andany other person : — for the town, and the land of the town,and the goods on the land, are chargeable to the king : andthe law is the same for the fee-farm of the king. But in ourcase the execution ought to be warranted by the judgment ;and that was given against the commonalty, and no separateperson is charged, nor any several goods.'^ Strange. — As to the suggestion, that perhaps J. may claimthe toll by other title than as commoner, the writ goes tothat. For it supposes that the mayor, &c. and J. took, &c.for toll payable to the mayor, bailiffs, and commonalty,and therefore the supposal of the writ is, that J. claimsnothing. And as to the other collateral case, it seems tome;that the common goods would be taken in execution, andnone other ; for although there are many taken in the writ,and the judgment given against them as against the commonalty,yet they are one and the same body, and thegoods of the body against whom the judgment is given,would be taken in execution, and no others ; for the severalgoods are not the goods of the conmionalty : and no personby himself is the commonalty, but their aggregate body;and these goods are chargeable, and no others, &c. Andit was said, that if a commoner diseases to his own use,and a release is given to the mayor and commonalty, &c.nothing will pass by that release, &c. 20th Henry VI. 9."In the further discussion of this case it was said by theCourt, that '^ the commonalty could not make disseisin nortort if it were not for their own benefit ; nor a feme covert forthe benefit of the husband;" but if such a disseisin wasmade, the writ should be against each by the proper name.Also, in case the bailiffs and commonalty, and one by hisSEVENTH YEAR BOOK. 923proper names who is in fact one of the commonalty, should ^^°* ^^'be bound in an obligation, the party shall have his actionagainst the bailiffs and the commonalty, and against the otherperson by his proper name.*pastor. — If the mayor and commonalty of London disseise 1429.Vnl 14 Kone of the commonalty, he shall have his assise against the m*. T.mayor and commonalty; and recover his seisin and hisdamages against the mayor and the commonalty, notwithstandinghe himself is one of that body.''jRolfe.—The defendant in the brief here, is named by hisproper name, and made the trespass singly, and not as oneof the commonalty ; for as it has been said, in case the tollwas granted to J. and his heirs, and to the bailiff andcommonalty and their successors, and that according toitthey took the beasts by wrong, it is proper that J. shouldbe found guilty in that form ; and then, if the plaintiff recovers,he shall have execution of the separate goods of J.And if a trespass was made by two, the law will not that thewrit should be against one alone. And so is the case here,the trespass is made by the bailiffs and commonalty, and J.,who are two ; but J. is one of them, for he is one ofthe commonalty — for, in a brief brought against the commonalty,a release by the plaintiff to one person of thecommonalty cannot be pleaded, nor to 300 of them: becauseno one of them is the conmionalty. Then, if the conmionaltyand J. make a trespass jointly, or J. in his ownright, and the commonalty in their right, the trespass of J.cannot be called the trespass of the commonalty; nor is thereany reason that the commonalty shall be charged for it.Therefore it is reasonable that he should be named by hisproper name, whereupon his separate goods ought to becharged, together with the goods of the commonalty.^'JRolfe, — In the case of one of the commonalty of Londonbringing an assise against the commonalty, inasmuch asthat he is plaintiff — he is severed from the conmionalty inthat suit : — therefore the case is not like the present.'martin. — In trespass done by two, I shall have a writof trespass against one alone ; and so it seems to me in trespass924 SEVENTH YEAR BOOK.Ucn. VI. the release made to one of the commonalty would be a goodbar."It is obvious from the whole context of this case, as well asthat in the 2nd of Henry VI., fol. 10, that the modern doctrinewith respect to corporations, and their rights and liberties,was not at this time defined or understood ; and it is thereforeimpossible that the charters in the reigns of King John,Henry III. and the Edwards, could have been, as they areoften supposed to be, charters of incorporation : for, hadthey been so, the doctrine of corporations must have been,between that time and the reign of Henry VI., fully establishedand generally known; particularly amongst thelawyers. But it is clear from this case that it was not;and, therefore, the direct inference is, that municipal corporationswere not at this time in existence ; and the subsequentdocuments in this reign have shown, that the rulesof the civil law, borrowed from the ecclesiastical corporationsof priors, abbots, convents, deans, and chapters, wereabout this time applied to aggregate municipal bodies; andthe legal necessity of their being more generally applied tothem, being at this period evolved by the practice of thecourts, and the discussion which then took place, applicationwas made to the crown, as in the instance of Plymouth,to make the municipal bodies corporate; in orderthat they might enjoy their rights, possessions and privilegesby corporate succession : which they had before held withoutbeing incorporated.UniyeraSy. ^^ another case, the charter of Henry IV. to the chancellorFol. 18 B. ^ Oxford, and his successors, granting that they shouldnot be sued, in writs of oyer and terminer, was pleaded —and conusance of the trespass claimed by the chancellor,the defendants being clerks of Oxford, and their servantsresiding there.It was questioned whether such a grant could be goodfor " that the king could not grant that a person shouldnot be impleaded;" but it was answered, "that the kingmight grant that he should not be impleaded, but in a particularplace." It was also said, that all the liberties andSEVENTH YEAR BOOK. 925franchises of England were in the crown, and derived from ^^g"-^^*the crown,Cottesmore, — Suppose that conusance of all manner ofpleas in St. Allan's, was granted to the bailiff of that town ;and a writ was brought against one of the town ; and thebailiff demands cognizance of it, and it was granted him ;and afterwards the same person, against whom the writ wasbrought, was bailiff of the same town — I say that in that case,the plaintiff shall have a re-summons, because the plaintiffcannot be his oicn judge.But this was denied by JRolfe,'* It was also said, if the king grant to a man, that he shallhave all the fines and amercements forfeited to him withina certain county ; and the same person, is residing in the Reticence.same county, and should be amerced in the court of the king,he shall not have his own amercement, because it shall nothe intended that such was the intention of the king ^c, ^c."It must be observed, that in this case, there is a reference Corporationthe margin to Brooke, title " Corporation," although, infact, throughout the case there is no mention of corporationsin general, nor of their peculiar doctrines.The fine referred to is made to depend upon the residence R«id«ico.of the party in the county, where the grant of the forfeituresis given. It must therefore be inferred, that grants madeby the king to a particular place, or to the men of theplace, meant the persons residing or inhabiting within it;the propriety of which inference, has been already shownby the former documents.A writ of account was brought ajj. ain't a man of London. Jf29.*^Rolfe prayed judgment of the writ, because he said that Het.at the day of the writ purchased, the defendant, his wife,children, and household, were conversant and resident inDale, in the county of Middlesex, and not in London."This case is important to show what was at that timeesteemed residence; it depended properly upon the domicile,or the abode of the individual, his wife, children andhousehold.In trespass against two for taking a horse it was pleaded, Het.*926 SEVENTH YEAR BOOK.Hen. VI. that the same plaintiff had sued a replevin for the same,taking against the mayor and commonalty of the town;and that the defendants were residents in the same town,and one was of the commonalty."The remainder of this case is not material, but the aboveallegation goes strongly to show, that being of the commonaltywas the consequence of being resident in the town,according to the doctrine we have asserted, and supportedby our earliest laws and most ancient usages.Common << Trespass against the bailiffs and commonalty of I. and1431 . against A. A. says that he is one of the commonalty for whichM.T. ' he prays judgment of the writ; because he is named twice.*martin. — ^^The writ shall abate, because he might becharged twice ; as well of his proper goods, as of whathe had with the commonalty.** Barrington. — His fine which shall be levied of his propergoods ; and the fine of the commonalty shall be levied of thegoods which are in common, and not of the goods whichin severalty. So he will not be charged of his owngoods twice. And so if one of the commonalty disseise me,and afterwards enfeoff the commonalty I shall have anassise against the mayor and commonalty y and against himwho disseised me by his proper name.** Pastor. — If a man enfeoff the commonalty, and one of thecommonalty, of land to which I have right, I shall have anaction against the commonalty, and the individual, becausein these cases he is a private person.Martin. — Perhaps, it would be good, because they arejoined, and yet their inheritance is several ; and if the commonaltywere attainted, the goods named by special namewould be taken in execution.Pastor. — None but the goods of the commonalty; but ifhe is attaint, and the commonalty also, then the law isotherwise.*^ Martin. — ^^This writ alleges that he took the goods of theplaintiff for toll where he ought to pay; therefore it is in rightof the commonalty ; for which it is not reasonable that heshould be punished twice.SEVENTH YEAR BOOK. 927*^ Pastor. — If the bailiff and the commonalty command one Hen^J|^-of the commonalty to do an act contrary to law, an actionlies against the commonalty ^ and against him who did thetrespass'*The observations made upon the former cases in this reignapply equally to this.A writ of waste assigned amongst other things, that " two foL%2 b.neifs had been manumitted, and were allowed to go out of ^^•^*the town."Barrington said, that " the court of frankpledge was the Frank-mostancient court ;** and mentions the extent of its juris Foi. 44 B.M Tdiction.There is a claim that the defendant, and all those whose Villains,estate he had in the manor, were seised of the plaintiff, and H.' T.'his ancestor, as villains regardant to the same manor.It was also said, that " the steward is a judge of record ; \^'and the court leet the court of the king;" the extensive ^|'%J'powers of which are enumerated. And it is stated, that'' all the tenants who are inhabitants within the leet shouldbe charged to come to that court."The term "tenant" here requires some observation, as itmight otherwise lead to error. Taken with the explanation, House-thatevery householder was bound to attend the leet ; andthat a person holding a house must be a tenant ; the expressionis correct : — because then tenant, householder, and inhabitant,would be synonymous. But " tenant," in a moregeneral sense, — as applicable to all tenants, whether householdersor not, — would be here improperly applied. Becausethat term, although applicable to court barons, where alltenants, whether resident or not, would owe suit and service,would be inapplicable to the court leet, where none but theresiants would owe their suit.The franchise of the citizens of Exeter not to be sworn Exeter.Nol. 1<».with foreigners is recognized; and it was said, that part of Ait.the town of Exeter was in the gildable, out of the franchise.The same is also stated of the city of York. York.In an action of trespass, the prior of Dunstable, as lord ^JJ^'****• Vide ante, 8ih Henry VI. fol. 1.928 SEVENTH YEAR BOOK.Heo. VI. of the town, claimed a market, and it was alleged for theFol. 19. defendant, that all the householders inhabiting within the town&F0I.25. had, tii^^c immemorial, a right to sell upon market days,holders. ^^^^ir merchandises in their own houses, or any where else.In a subsequent part of the same case, it is added, that Dunstablewas an ancient boroughs and that every burgess whois seised of a house in the town may sell in the same house,adjoining the High-street, every market-day.sambre. The mayor and bailiffs of Cambridge claim a fair at Stress'!'• bridge; and it is alleged, that the mayor and bailiffs couldprescribe to hold a fair in the freehold of another: — butnothing is said of their being incorporated.1435. In a case in the Exchequer, as to the priory of St. Bartholomewof London it was said, that ^' the bailiffs had hadfreedoms granted by the charter of the king, and that afterwardsthe king made them sheriffs, and that they shouldplead and be impleaded by that name'* — which appears to bethefirst instance in which this peculiar corporate power ismentioned. But it will be seen, that in the cases immediatelysucceeding, the same doctrine is repeated, and it appearsafterwards to have been gradually adopted for general practiceby the court.1439. In another case, an action of trespass was brought in theFol. 16.T. T. name of the dean and canons oi Windsor ; and the following;argument occurred on that circumstance.^^Gilvertin. — ^^The name, * dean and canons,' is not ^^The nameof the corporation; the name is, the ' dean and chapter.*report, — It seems to me that it is the name of the corporation.'newton. — Perhaps they had that name by their foundation:and so the court will intend; unless you show the contraryupon your part.^'Ayscough. — At Ripon, in my county, there is a college,which by its foundation, has no other name but ' canons ;'and by that name they plead and are impleaded ; — and yet thatis contrary to the common law ; as the dean and canons ofWindsor are : therefore the writ would abate, by their ownshowing that they have brought their action by that name;SEVENTH YEAR BOOK. 929but if it were otherwise, that should come upon the part of Hen. VI.the defendant.'sport. — It appears that the writ should abate, for thename of the ' canons,' unless they gave their christian name ;because they have each capacity to himself: — for that case isnot like canons regular, who have not each capacity.'fortescue. — If your writ is not good, it shall be becausethey are not corporated ; or because they have not capacity :and in both cases, if you will avail yourself of it, it is fit foryou to show such matters upon your part.'newton. — Not if the mayor and commonalty of Londonshall have an action by that name, and each of them havea capacity to himself."Markham. — If you will avail yourself of this point, youshould not demur for our not showing it; — but you shall saythat you were used to plead, and be impleaded by that name,showing by which ; and so you shall compel us to supportour writ."Newton. — Contra."In a case of trespass by the prior of Merton against the mayor Windsor.•r-wr. • • Vol 1 1 Band other burgesses oi New Windsor y claiming a court leet in t. x.the town, and that the mayor and bui^esses disturbed them cou1t?ietin holding it :The defendants plead, that Windsor san ancient borough;and that Edward I. was seised of it in his demesne, as offee ; and had view of frankpledge there of all the inhabitantsand residents in the town, to be held before his bailiff, twicein the year ; and the same king granted, by letters patent,to the burgesses and good men of New Windsor, the town,to hold at fee-farm for ever, paying a fee-farm rent.And they pray aid of the king." And in the course of theargument (which was long), it was said, " no leet was to beheldtwice in the year but leets at common law ; and by thecommon law no man shall be bound to come to two leets."Markham said, that every man by reason of his resiancyis bound to come to the leet within the precincts of whichhe resides ; and there he is bound by reason of his person,3o930 SEVENTH YEAR BOOK.^^"' ^^' and not by reason of his lands so that the resiants are boundby reason of their resiancy."And it was said, "if the prior had a leet there, it was notparcel of the borough."Newton. — If I have a leet of all the resiants within theprecincts of my borough, which is in a hundred, thoseresiants shall not be bound to go to the toum of the sheriff,which is another leet'* It is however added, that " the courtdenied that the sheriff's toum was a leet."^^Ayscough. — It seems, thattrAera the ling grants a borough,with its appurtenances, the leet will pass, as if he had granteda borough and view of frankpledge; and it would not beintended by the court, but that the leet was parcel of theborough.And there are many things in the leet, which are not inthe toum of the sheriff; for example, in a leet, they havecognizance of bread and beer.*Newton. — that which is done in the leet, shall be presentedin the toum of the sheriff: and it is well proved thatthe toum of the sheriff is of a higher nature than the leet ;and that proves it is not a leet."1440. " Pastor. — If a writ is directed to the mayor and society of\ T. ' the city of London; and if all the commonalty should appear,and the mayor not; they cannot plead in abatement of thewrit, that they had no such corporation.' 'Corpora Here the term " corporation" occurs for the second time'^°°- in the text.1440. " In another case, a writ of scire facias was brought for an\uT. ' arrear of an annuity, recovered against the predecessor ofa parson, by the predecessor of a warden of a house ; andthe writ shows, that the arrear was in the time of his predecessor.And the defendant says, that the arrears are givenby the law, to the executor of the preceding warden; becausethe warden is in effect, as the warden of a church ;in which case, the successor shall not have the arrears accruedin the time of his predecessor, but his executor.• See 2ncl Institute, 72.SEVENTH YEAR BOOK. 931Pert — He is a guardian for his brothers; and they have "g"- ^'2*a common seal between them ; in which case, the receipt of Seal.the predecessor shall vest the thing in the successor, notwithstandinghis death; because it is to the advantage ofthe house.Newton, — that case is not like the parson ; because inthat case, the executor of a parson shall have the arrears, inthe time of his predecessor , and not the successor ; becauseit is but a chattel in him ; and the parson can make a will,but not so an abbot — dean — master of an hospital — orwarden of a house — because that all the advantage shouldaccrue to the house."Upon a writ de nativo habendo— the plea was, that the Fol. 32 B.defendant was oi free estate, and not a villain Villain.In proceedings upon the sheriff's pannel, freeholds in the ^^^i^*gildable, and the franchises, are spoken of, as con trad sting Gildabie.gushed from each other."And the jurors from the gildabie, as well as from thefranchise, are also mentioned.A writ of trespass against the commonalty of Great Yarmouth.Yarmouth was thus — Foi. ».M. TPone Johannes B. and William C, late bailiffs of thetown, and the commonalty of the town.yigfoer^ow-judgment of this writ; because the writnames them as late bailiffs ; and not as the bailiffs that arenow.Fulham, — ^^The late bailiffs are of ^^The commonalty ; inwhich case, they are both named in the writ.Pastor. — If a commonalty have done me a trespass, andafterwards two of the commonalty betake themselves fromthat commonalty, and reside in another town, then I shallbring my action, naming those two by name, and also againstthe commonalty; and so, perhaps, it may be those who arenamed the late bailiffs.Newton, — No, Sir : for a commonalty is an entire body,notwithstanding 100 of them should die during my writ,nevertheless my writ shall not abate — for the same bodyagainst whom my action is maintained, continues all the3o2932 SEVENTH YEAR BOOK.^"- V^' time in those who are there; although when two or threeYarmouth, depart from the commonalty they are dead persons to thatbody ; and if I release one of the commonalty it is of noavail.Fortescue. — As to the first argument, that the writ shallabate because the bailiffs which are now, are not named ; Isay the writ is prima facie good : — ^because perhaps the incorporationis by the name of ' the commonalty' without more ;in which case, although there are bailiffs, it is fit to sueagainst them by the name of the corporation ; and perhapsthey are incorporated by the name of the bailiffs and commonalty; in which case, if we have badly conceived our writ inomitting the bailiffs, that shall come on your part to plead; —that is to say, that the said commonalty had pleaded and beenimpleaded by the name of the bailiff and commonalty fromtime immemorial, of which the party shall have his traverse.And as to the other argument, that they are twice named,upon which it will ensue they may be twice charged, whichthe law does not desire, it creates no inconvenience; because,let us suppose, that a commonalty may disseise meof my free tenement, for the benefit of the commonalty ;— orthat two strangers may disseise me for the benefit of the commonalty; — and I bring an action against them by their name,and against the commonalty, and they are found dissenters,then, for that corporal trespass which they have done to me,they shall lose their damages of their proper goods ; and ifthe assise was sued against the commonalty, saying nothingof their names, there shall be no damages levied of any ofthem separately, but only of the goods which they have incommon ; and the same is in our case, because it is inconvenientthat one shall be punished upon such a several trespassof his proper goods ; and also as one of the commonalty,of the goods in common"*This case, like some which we have seen before, establishesthe obscurity and uncertainty of the law of corporationsat this time. It is needless therefore to repeat theobservations, that have been previously made upon that point ;Vide Mic. 41. In a&sirc of nuisance this is adjudged, fol. 45.EIGHTH YEAR BOOK. 933but it should be remarked, it appears clearly in this case, ^^eu. VI.that a person departing from the town, and living in anotherplace, separated him from the commonalty of the placewhich he had left ; and gave him a title to his privileges inthe place to which he went ; consequences which have beenalready illustrated by many of the preceding documents.EIGHTH YEAR BOOK.The prior of St. Ned brings trespass upon the case, as 1443.lord of St. Ned; and claims, that he and all his predecessors, M." T.*lords of the same town, had had in the same town, three freemills from time immemorial, and no other had in the sametown any mills except the prior and his predecessors ; andthat all the tenants of the prior in the same town, and allother resiantSf &c. have from time immemorial had the use ofgrinding at the mills." And it was said in the course of theargument (which was very long), that the suit was uponaccount of resiancy, and not upon account of tenures It wasalso urged in this case, that " the not keeping up of a ferrywas inquirable in the toum."A claim of villainage is made, and allowed. viiuuiiie.Westminster is described as within the franchise of London, ^^Ut-^"being in the suburbs ; and London as a county of itself. FoL^To!A writ of trespass is brought against the commonalty and 1453.the bailiffs of Ipswich For ai^B.Moile objected, that the writ was brought against thebailiffs and the commonalty y which is a private body ; andso the action does not lie against them.Wangff. — The writ is good ; for, if the commonalty andthe mayor disseise me, I shall have assise against the mayorand the commonalty.Moile, — In that case, there is no other person againstwhom the writ can be maintained, if not against those whoare the tenants there : — but in this case the law is otherwise; for, if the mayor takes my goods, claiming them for thecommonalty, I shall have an action of trespass against himby the name of the mayor ; the commonalty being omitted.Vide ante. t Vide ante, 8 Hen. VI. fol. I.M.T.934 EIGHTH YEAR BOOK.Hen. VI. « Davers, — Suppose there be a felon, and he is known toIpswich, the bailiff and commonalty, and they keep him, and sendhim to prison: — and afterwards he is acquitted, and theimprisonment tortious ; he will have an action of false imprisonmentagainst the bailiff and the commonalty.Moile. — Not so ; he will have an action against the personswho took him ; for I or any stranger may as well takehim as the bailiff.Davers. — Suppose that the bailiffs and the commonaltyare bound to me by an obligation, should I not have anaction against them accordingly ?'* Moile. — Perhaps so; but it does not appear so to me.Wangff. — ^^This will happen if the party have not an actionagainst them by that name ; that, if the party recovers, hewill recover his damages, and will have execution for themagainst their own proper goods, if they did that in right ofthe commonalty.Moile. — that would not be so considered by me; for, insuch form as he uses his writ, in such form he will haveexecution.ashton. — ^^The bailiffs can as well inherit goods as lands,according to their custom, or other similar things, of which,if they be taken, they have their action ; and an action in thesame manner can be brought against them.^^ Moile. — You say right; the special matter should be rehearsed.Wanyf. — If the bailiffs command me to contend with aman, or to take his goods, &c. he will have an action againstthe bailift'and the commonalty.'^ Moile. — Not so; for there he is as a private person amongthem ; for supple that the mayor and the commonalty disseisedme to the use of a stranger ; if I bring my action againstthe mayor uiid the commonalty, and the third is not named,my writ will abate.Davers. — If a man brings writ of trespass against me foratrespass done to him, his action is maintainable ; becausehe is personable, and against whom an action can be maintained.As to a town or city, which is corporate of bailiffsEIGHTH YEAR BOOK. 935and commonalty y they are by this name a person corporate Hen. Viandan entire body : — thus an action lies aa well against them Ipswich,as against me.ashton, — If so, it is granted them 'implacitare et impla-citari ' by a name.^'Laicon. — If the bailiffs and commonalty hold of me bycertain services ; and I distrain them ; and the mayor rescuesthem ; I shall have writ of rescous against the commonaltyand the mayor : — or if I have delivered to the mayor andcommonalty certain goods safely to keep, I have an actionagainst them by their name.Wanfff, — Suppose the mayor and the commonalty claimas in severalty, I shall have action of trespass against themby their name.Moile. — Not so ; but in such case you will have it, if themayor and commonalty be seised of an acre by which theyhave been accustomed to cleanse a running stream throughmy land, if by default my land be overflowed, I shall haveagainst them an action by their name; because there areno others against whom my writ could be framed, for itbelongs to them, and to no others. And as to^he case whichhas been put of detinue, the action is not maintainableagainst them by the name, if not by deed indented, whichwould conclude them. And as to the other case which hasbeen put, of forging false deeds, he will not have an actionin that manner ; for, as his title and claim should be to theirdisinheritance, yet this is not cause of action. And, in myopinion, this action in its form is not maintainable ; for, if Ienfeoff the mayor and the commonalty of certain land, peradventurethe commoners are but six, to them and theirheirs, by their names, and they are disseised, they will haveassise in their names ; the name of the mayor and the commonaltybeing omitted : — because this is their own inheritance, forthe survivor shall have the land. But otherwise it would be,if the feoffment was made to the mayor and the commonalty,and to their successors, So here concerning the parties who Successor.are bailiffs, they claim the goods by their custom, counting936 EIGHTH YEAR BOOK.Hen. VI. that the action should be brought against them, rehearsingthe special matter ; but this action is only general.Wangff. — ^^This goes to our action, say what you will.Moile, — ^^This goes to our writ; and if my master thinksthe writ good, we are ready to answer.*ashton. — Concerning the writ, answer, &c."1454^ In a writ of trespass for a horse taken, it was stated, " thatM.'i'. the place where the trespass was alleged was within thehundred of Decorum, in the county of Hertford ; and thatTourn. the king has always had a tourn within the hundred ofDecorum, before the sheriff of the county for the timebeing, in a place called S., twice yearly; and that theking has always been seised of suit at the same tournfor the township of D. within the same tourn, by fourmen, and the reeve of the same town annually to be made,who have always presented all manner of trespasses anddefaults, there presentable in the town of D., and if theymade default they have been amerced. And the kinghas been used to distrain for such amercement every manresiding within the town. And at the tourn of S., held beforethe sheriff, the four men, and the reeve of the town ofD. made default, by which the will was amerced by thecourt. That the defendant was the bailiff of the king, andcollector of fines and amercements. That the plaintiff wasconversant within the town of D. ; and that the defendant,as bailiff and collector, had seized the horse, for which heprayed aid of the king, &c. &c."1456. In a case where a person claimed to be of free estate, it*m' t^' ^^* decided, that the question of his villainage should bedetermined in the place where he resided, and not where thewrit was brought.Fol. 17 B, In a writ of debt against a prior and his convent, therredci-es- plaintiff declared, upon an obligation made by the predecessorof the prior ; and it was said, that the plaintiff couldnot maintain his action upon this obligation, for that theprior, the predecessor of the defendant, took with him sixcanons of the same place, and went to a place in anotherEIGHTH YEAR BOOK. 937county, which six made a convent, and earned with them Hen. VI.their common seal, and then the prior released the convent Seal,from the obligation to the plaintiff: — it was urged that thiswas not a plea ; for it cannot be understood that one of aconvent could make an obligation or release, any more thanacommonalty for they are incorporate, and thus it is no plea.In a case respecting customs, and the prerogative of the London,king, it was said, that it had been the custom of London, M. T.that if a villain remained peaceable in London for a year, Villain.he thereby became enfranchised ; but that this custom washeld void, because it was in opposition to reason, and inprejudice of others ; for a villain is inheritable, and thiscustom was against common right, and in prejudice to theproperty of others ; and therefore it would not avail.This is a strange determination, as the custom alleged inLondon was, in fact, the law of the land, as we have frequentlyshown before in our extracts from Glanville, Fleta,Britton, and the Mirror; and the same custom in Londonwas alleged in the beginning of this reign.* The only groundupon which it could be denied was, that it was pleaded as alocal and not as a general custom.In a case of this date, upon its being stated that a devise u.^?^was made to the men of the parish, it was denied that such T. T.a devise could be good, because they were not corporal.From which, and the discussion which follows, it againappears, that the doctrine of corporations was at that timein its infancy.In a praecipe in capite of lands in Stanteff, it was said, 1458.Station.that the town of S. was an ancient borough of the king — Fol. 26 B,had bailiffs, and had been pleaded by the name of the bailiffs Borough.from time immemorial. That all their lands and tenementswithin the town, had, from time immemorial, been pleadableby writ of right patent ; and that they had been accustomedto make their protestations, and to sue there by such writas they wished, excepting assise of mort ancestor; andthat the lands and tenements within the town were heldof the king each severally, for 3d. yearly in burgage. In Burgage.• See before, 7th Hen. VI. fol. 31 B.938 EIGHTH YEAR BOOK.Hen. VI . the course of the case it was said, that the king could notmake a grant of ancient demesne at this day ; nor a manprescribe for lands devisable. One of the counsel said, thatLondon was ancient demesne ; for the citizens prescribe thata villain should not be taken out or escape by capias.* Towhich it was answered, that London was not in DomesdayBook ; nor was it called ancient demesne formerly. It wasstated, that the reason of ancient demesne was, because itwas in the hands of the king ; and the king, by his prerogative,permitted his tenants to plead and be impleaded by acertain form; and so the prescription arose. But no otherperson could do this against the king, because it would beto his prejudice.1459. An action of trespass upon the case was brought by theM.T.' abbot of Ramsey against the prior of S., stating, that theabbey was seised of the hundred of C, in the same county,in which is the hundred of the town of S.; within whichPretences hundred and town, the abbot, and all his predecessors havesors.Frank had View of frankpledge with all things belonging to thesame, and all fines, amercements, and other profits, as ofhis church of Ramsey ; which view has been held from timeimmemorial, yearly, at Easter, by his steward ; and that thedefendant had disturbed the steward in the execution of hisduty. The defendant states by protestation that the plaintiff'licet. has no such Ice, and that the defendant is lord of the townof S., and that his predecessors have had a leet in the townof S. from time immemorial, and have held it at the feastof Michaelmas, with all amercements; but for plea thedefendant says, that the plaintiff* and his predecessors havehad a leet within the town, to be held at Easter, from timeimmemorial ; but that the plaintiff and his predecessors, ortheir bailiff of the hundred of C, have been accustomedto warn the prior and his predecessors, or their bailiffs,40 days before the leet; and the defendant and their predecessorshave been accustomed to superintend the leetwith the steward of the plaintiff, if they desired it ; and thatthe defendant has had all fines and amercements in the said• See before, 7ih Hen. VI. fol. 31 B ; and 35 Hen. VI. IM.T. folds R.EIGHTH YEAR BOOK. 939leet of their servants and tenants, and of all fines of bakers ^^°'^^'and brewers ; and that the bailiff, by force of the estreats,has been accustomed to collect the fines and amercements >and all this is matter of prescription.And the question was adjourned.In an appeal of robbery sued in the King's Bench, the p^i^fplaintiff was non-suited before the declaration. And iVb^- ^*-'-gingham prayed that the defendant should be arraigned atthe suit of the king, upon an indictment of the same felony,which was taken before the sheriff in his toum ; and it was Tourn.brought by certiorari \ and then the appeal was taken and theindictment was read ; but the toum was held after the monthof Michaelmas ; and the defendant objected that this toumwas void by the statute, and consequently the indictment. Andthey prayed that it be dismissed ; and the statute was read.From which it appeared, that the sheriffs should hold theirtoum twice a year, that is to say, once in the month afterthe feast of St. Michael, and the other within the month afterthe feast of Easter, and if they were held in any othermanner, then they should lose their toums for that time.But it was urged, that although the sheriffs should lose theirprofits, yet the indictment is good for the king; for thisman was legally indicted, and this is the matter for debate.By the advice of all the justices, it was agreed that heshould go without arraignment ; because they had no matterbefore them, upon which they could arraign him. And theindictment was clearly void, and coi*am non judice: — forthe statute says that he shall lose his toum for this time,and then he cannot have his toum, and consequently all isvoid. And it was said by the justices, that if a man had aleety which has been held upon a day certain', and he wishesto change the day, and fix it upon another, it will be voidand without warrant : but otherwise if it is his court baron.It was said in a case of an annuity, brought by the dean • J^.*^-and chapter of Stoke against the master of the hospital of M.T.St. Mary Oves, that a chapter can have neither predecessor Predecessor*.nor successor : for that the chapter is an entire body, which Successalways an entire chapter, and cannot either have940 Scotland-IRELAND.^^' ^'^' predecessor or successor, because thai the chapter is perpetual.The predecessors of deans and chapters have been frequentlymentioned before in the Year Books, and thereforethis appears to be a new principle adopted with respect tothem: — and is another confirmation of the assertion, thatthe doctrine of Corporations was only in its infancy at thisperiod, which is the general conclusion to be drawn from thecases we have quoted in this reign.SCOTLAND.We have but few documents at this period relative toother parts of the kingdom. As to Scotland, it appearsthat the lesser barons were in this year exempted by astatute from personal attendance in Parliament, and werepermitted to elect representatives. The exemption was eagerlyadopted ; but the privilege so little valued, that except uponone or two instances, it was neglected during 160 years: andJames VI. first obliged them to send representatives regularlyto Parliament.*In the same year a law was passed, which provided thatout of the commissioners of all the shires should be chosena wise and expert man, called the common speaker of theParliament, who should propose all causes, pertaining to theCommons, in the Parliament or general council. But nosuch speaker, it would seem, was ever chosen ; and by asubsequent law, the chancellor was declared perpetualpresident of ParliamentsIRELAND.Dublin. With respect to Ireland, Dublin received a charter of confirmationof former privileges.And in the fourth year of this reign, the king granted toAthboy. the provost and commons of Athboy and their successors,confirmation of the charter which had been given to themRobertson's Scotland, vol. i. p. 90; Essays on British Ant. ; Dalrymple s Hist.Feudal Property,t Robertson's Scotland, vol. ii. p. 90.IRELAND-WALES. 941by Henry IV. And likewise granted to the provost burgesses, "c°- elandcommons, all customs and talliages of foreign merchants, Athboy.for 60 years then next ensuing, towards the murage of thetown, &c. That no one who was a resident, or for the time Resident*,being should be resident, conversant, dwelling, or keeping ahouse within the town, should be prosecuted for selling orbuying by the weight, which was called angell orpoundrell.That the customs and talliages paid by the strange merchantsshould be expended by the provost of the town for the timebeing, and that the burgesses should render an account beforethe lord and provosts of the town, and before two burgessesof the town, to be named by themselves. The charterthen concludes with several provisions respecting toll, butwhich are unimportant to our researches.WALES.As to Wales, our documents are also few : —In the first year of this reign, the king, inspecting letters Pwlhelly.patent of Henry V., when he was Prince of Wales, whichrecited by inspeximus a charter of Richard II., inspecting acharter of Edward the Black Prince to the towns of Nevynnand Pwlhelly ;* confirmed them to the men and burgessesof Pwlhelly.The jealousy as to the acquisition of any privileges in Eng- Parliamentland is marked as continuing at this time by the followingextract from the Parliament Rolls.Owen Fits Meredith, a Welshman, is made a denizen, and 1432.enabled to purchase lands in England ; but not to be a citizenor burgess, nor officer or minister of the king in any city, boroughor town mercatorial whatsoever.Isabella, Countess of Worcester, in the first year of Cardiff.. 1422.Henry VI. granted to the burgesses of Cardiff, their heirs,and successors, some additional privileges beyond those whichthey had previously enjoyed, distinguishing the burgessesfrom strangers : — and the fair inference from the charter seemsto be, that it was intended to give these privileges to all theinhabitants of the place.• Vide ante Temp. Edw. 111.942 WALES.Hen. VI. A charter of Richard Neville, Earl of Warwick, appears toCardiff, speak still more decisively upon this point. After re-1450. citing that the burgesses of Cardiff continually had towardshim and his ancestors, given proof and demonstration of theirfidelity and love, by fortifying, walling and repairing the townin the walls, towers, gates and ditches, which otherwisewould have been done very slowly without their great labour,costs and expences, iron whence they had incurred heavyindignation and hatred from those who dwelt without thetown : — and wishing to reward them suitably in consequencethereof, granted to the burgesses and inhabitants of thetown and liberty of Cardiff, their heirs and successors, thatno one of them should be impleaded, disquieted, or aggrievedfor any felony, trespasses, agreements or contractsdone without the town, and the liberties of the same, elsewherethan before the constable and bailiffs of the town, for the timebeing : or in the absence of the aforesaid constable, beforethe said bailiffs, unless it should be that the burgesses or inhabitantsshould have been taken without the liberty for felony,with the manor ; and that the constable and bailiffs, or inthe absence of the constable, the bailiffs for the time being,should have full cognizance of all kind of pleas, as well offelonies, trespasses, debts, agreements and contracts as offreehold and other actions, plaints and rents whatsoeverdone and arising within the town and liberties ; and that allsuch pleas, actions, plaints and demands should be tried andremedied by the constable and bailiffs, or in the absence ofthe constable, by the bailiffs, and not elsewhere.And the charter further granted to the burgesses, resiants,and their successors, that if any person should be willing tocome to the town and liberty, he should in nowise be drawnaway or removed from thence for any trespass, debt, accompt,agreement or any other contract whatsoever; but that if anyonewished to proceed against him in the premises, or suehim before the constable and bailiffs of the to>vn for thetime being, they should there have immediate justice donethem, and not elsewhere.The charter having mentioned in the recital, the loyalty andWales-CARDIFF. 943good conduct of the burgesses, and their having incurred the ^^en. VI.hatred of those living in foreign parts, granted amongst theprivileges enumerated, " that if any person should be willingto come to the town to stay and reside there, they should Residence,enjoy the important privilege of being subject only to thelocal jurisdiction'*The term resiant used in this charter is the appropriate termfor the suitors at the court leet, who are all the inhabitants of Leet.the place ; and none could be exempted from that suit.The clause also lastly referred to, recognizes in the mostunqualified way, the unlimited right which any person hadof coming to reside at the place, and as a consequence to Residence,enjoy the privileges of it.Considering the whole context of this charter, it seemshardly possible for stronger language to be used to show thatall the inhabitants were intended to be participators in the inhabitantsprivileges of Cardiff.And the king himself, reciting in a charter, by way of in-specious, all the former royal charters, confirms them toRichard Neville, Earl of Warwick, and Ann his wife, and theheirs of her body, and also to whatsoever burgesses, men andtenants, resiants in the towns of Cardiff, Cowbridge, Neath,and Kenfig.This royal charter must receive the same construction asthat of the Earl of Warwick. And therefore it seems clear,that the burgesses of Cardiff were at this time properly theinhabitants, resiant householders, paying scot and lot : —according to the ancient laws of England.CONCLUSION.We have now closed this long and important reign ; inwhich we have distinctly traced, by documents that cannotdeceive us, the first introduction of municipal corporationsinto England.This conclusion does not rest alone upon the actualgrant of a charter in that form to Hull, only a few years aftera previous grant not incorporating it — neither upon the fact, ofthe grant to the united decenna, will, and hamlet, which for944 CONCLUSION.Hen. VI. the first time constituted the incorporated borough of Plymouth— but it is the irresistible result from the interpolationof the word " corporation" in the margin of the Year Booksand in the title of the statutes — from the gradual developmentof the doctrine of incorporations, as traced progressively inthe acts of Parliament — and from the successive arguments anddecisions in the courts of law, as reported in the Year Books.The concordance of all these facts — further illustrated by thecontinuance of the doctrine of villeinage preserving thedistinction between freemen and villains — the full practiceof the sheriff's toum and court leet — and the usages at thattime as to the swearing and admission of freemen — all tendto show, that the principles of the Saxon and common lawwere then in full effect, and constantly acted upon : andthat the swearing and enrolling of the resiant householdersin the borough was founded upon those principles — although,for the purposes of perpetual succession, of suing and holdingunder a common name, the doctrine of corporations wassuperinduced upon that system. And, therefore, upon thecoincidence of all these facts — reasons — and principles —we rely with perfect confidence for the position, that thiswas the cera in which municipal corporations were first establishedin England,EDWARD IV.We have now passed the period in the history of ourconstitution, in which municipal bodies were first incorporated.However, a few places only received at this timecharters of that description.The remainder of our inquiry will chiefly consist in tracingthe successive grants by which these incorporations werespread over the country ; and marking the progress of thoseusurpations and abuses which sprang out of the introductionof this new system — the departure from the sims945felicity of the common law — and the misapplication of Edw. IV.the ancient principles and forms to the newly adopteddoctrines.This will necessarily lead us also to an investigation ofthe occasions, in their chronological order, upon which thecourts of lapland the parliamentary tribunals, from timeto time, sanctioned and supported these innovations.In this and the succeeding reigns, we shall adopt thesame division we have before pursued, and give successively,the Statutes — the Charters — the Parliament Rolls — themiscellaneous documents — and the Year Books — addingalso the Scotch, Irish, and Welsh records.STATUTES.The statutes of this reign commence with a declaration ofwhat acts, done by Henry IV., V., and VI., should continuegood ; and what should be annulled. The recital of thisstatute states, that to avoid doubts and diversities of J^^:opinions, which might arise upon judicial acts done in thetime of Henry IV., Henry V., and Henry VI., formerly infact, though not in right, successively kings of England —it was enacted, that all fines, and all judicial acts, shouldbe of as full effect as if made in the time of any kinglawfully reigning.It also provides the same, as to all creations of nobilityand the like ; and then adds, that the heavy charges andcosts which the cities, boroughs, towns, and the five portsof this kingdom had sustained, and the great povertyamongst those people, and considering their ease and relief,it was enacted, that all manner of liberties, privileges,franchises, powers, jurisdictions, profits, immunities, corporations,fortifications, enlargements, annexations, unions,severance from counties, and making of counties by themselves,&c., not revoked, repealed, or annulled by authority ofParliament, or otherwise by process of law, granted in thedays of Henry IV., Henry V., or Henry VI., kings of England,3 p940' siatutf:s.^^- ^^'' to any mayor, bailiffs, sheriffs; mayor and sheriff; sheriff andbailiff; mayor and bailiffs; commonalty; citizens, mayor, andcommonalty ; mayor, commonalty, and citizens ; mayor andcitizens ; mayor and aldermen, and their successors ; mayor andcitizens, their heirs and successors ; mayor and commonalty,their heirs and successors ; citizens and their heirs ; citizens,their heirs and successors ; bailiffs and citizens, their heirsand successors; mayor and aldermen; mayor, aldermen,and burgesses; mayor and burgesses; mayor, alderman,and sheriff, or under-sheriff; mayor, burgesses, and theirsuccessors; mayor, burgesses, their heirs and successors;mayor, sheriffs, and burgesses ; mayor, bailiffs, and commonalty; aldermen and commonalty ; alderman, bailiffs, andcommonalty; alderman and bailiffs, their heirs and successors;bailiffs and commonalty ; bailiffs and burgesses ; citizens,burgesses, and commonalty ; mayor, bailiffs, and burgesses,their heirs and successors ; good meiiy their heirs and successors;portreeves, bailiffs, and commons; stewards, burgesses,and good men ; portreeves, barons, and men ; mayors,barons, and commonalty ; mayor and barons ; barons and commonalty;barons; jurats; barons and jurats; men inhabiting,mayor, constable, and company of merchants, of the staple atCalais; and to each of them ; and to the heirs ^xai. successors ofeach of them ; and of the masters, brothers, and sisters ofguilds and fraternities ; masters, and commonalty, their heirsand successors ; and wardens, and masters of arts ; wardensof the conmionalty of the mystery of mercers of the city ofLondon ; or to any two before named, and the successors ofeither of them, having corporation — by whatsoever name ornames those, or any two of them, might be called or namedin any of the said grants — should be in like force and virtueas if they were granted by kings legally reigning in this kingdom; and in like form, to have confirmation in the chancery,of the said liberties, privileges, franchises, corporations, andother premises, as if their grants were made in the days ofEdward III. nd Richard . II., formerly legal kings ofEngland.STATUTES. 947Other provisions for the same object follow ; but not being ^^ ' ^^'^•immediately connected with the subject of our present inquiry,it is unnecessary to insert them ; excepting that grantsin mortmain are referred to ; and there is a confirmation of Mortmain.all grants of privileges and releases of fee-ferns, &c., to allmayors, bailiffs, and commonalties ; and all ordinances madein Parliament for the conservation of the town of Shrewsbury, Shrews-andthe good government of the inhabitants there.This statute exhibits a proof of the doubts and uncertaintieswhich arise from a disputed succession to the throne ;and throws considerable suspicion upon the grants whichhad been made by the preceding king, during the strugglesbetween the contending houses of York and Lancaster.It seems, however, sufficiently to establish, that whateverquestion might be left as to other acts, the doctrine of corporationswas irrevocably adopted ; for grants of that descriptionare expressly referred to, and confirmed. And the varietyof names which had been used by the aggregate bodies ofdifferent towns, are specified in the statute with a particularitywhich can alone be explained by the cases relative to misnomers,to which we have referred in the Year Books of thetwo or three preceding reigns.It should, however, be observed, that even in these names,the mention of " heirs upon which we have so frequentlyobserved, often occurs ; and the different appellations seemstill to retain traces of the gradual development of the doctrineof incorporation and succession.From this time, however, we shall find, contrary to theformer practice, the terms of incorporation frequently introducedinto the statutes, charters, and legal records.But to proceed with our extracts: —The second chapter of the statutes of Edward IV., enables Cap. 2.the justices of the peace to award process upon indictments Justices,taken in the sheriff's tourn on law-days, . Toum.*^ , Law-days.From which it may be inferred, that those courts were infull exercise at that time — but abuses appearing to havearisen in the administration of the law before those tribus948 Statutes.E<iw. IV. nails — it was ordained , that no fine or merriment upon anyindictment taken before them should be levied by thoseofficers ; but that the indictment should be delivered to thej ustices of the peace at their next sessions ; where processshould be awarded upon them as if they had been takenbefore the justices of the peace in the county: with a proviso,that the statute should not be prejudicial to the sheriffsLondon, of London ; nor to any persons having grants of fines andamercements.1463. The fourth chapter in the 3rd year, relative to the inconvenienciesarising from ready-wrought wares being broughtsums** into th kingdom, recites that many artificers, inhabitant andresident within the city of London, and other cities, boroughs,towns, and villages, were greatly impoverished by the abovemeans ; and by sales made by strangers, being the king'senemies, as well as by merchant strangers and denizens;House whereby many of the artificers, as well householders ashirelings, and other servants and apprentices, were reducedto great poverty ; provides a remedy against these evils, andSec. 4. prohibits such sales for the future. The fourth section ofthat act states, that the masters and wardens of the craftsand mysteries in every city, borough, town, and village,where they were used, and the mayor, bailiff, constable, Serjeant,or other officer, of such city, borough, town, andvillage, should have power to search at all times, at fairs andmarkets for such wares ; and that those which were not lawfulshould be forfeited : — Provided that they should not enterinto any place exempt by privilege, franchise, or custom, tomake any search, but by the oversight of some officer of theplace. And that nothing in the act should be prejudicial toStarting the dean of the free chapel of St. Martin-le-Grand, nor hissuccessors, nor to any persons dwelling or inhabiting withthe sanctuary or precinct of the chapel.Residence. From this Statute it is evident, that the rights and liabilitiesof the several persons described therein, depended upon theirliohlere '^^^' residence. Householders hirelings, servants, and apprentices,are mentioned in it, as well as places exempt byStatutes. 949privilege, franchise, or custom. And it is evident, that the E*lw. iv.privileges of St. Martin-le-Grand were only to be enjoyedby those dwelling or inhabiting within the precinct.Similar provisions with respect to wool are made in the 1464.first chapter of the 4th of Edward IV.In the eighth chapter of the same year, the frosts and Cap. 8.guides of strangers residing in London are mentioned.In the second chapter of the 7th year of this king, relative 1467.to the Devonshire cloths, the terms " inhabitants " andresidents** are used together and separately, apparently assynonymous, and importing actual " inhabitancy."The second chapter of the 8th year, prohibiting under 1468.penalties the taking or giving of liveries, or retaining any Liveries,except as menial servants ; speaks of persons " inhabit inhabiting,ing" within the jurisdiction of the court ; to whom alone thejurisdiction seems to have been limited. At the close ofthe statute there are exceptions as to liveries given at thecoronation of the king or queen ; at the installation of thearchbishop or bishop ; in the creation or marriage of anylord or lady of estate ; or the creation of knights of thebath ; or at the commencement of any clerk in any university;or the creation of any serjeants-at-law; or given byany guild, fraternity, or mystery, incorporated; or by themayor or sheriffs of London ; or any mayor, sheriff, orother chief officer, of any city, borough, town, or port ofthe realm.Upon this exception in favour of the guilds, fraternities,and mysteries, were no doubt founded the liverymen of theseveral companies in London: as well as the gowns and London,liveries worn by the officers in the several boroughs inEngland.The eighth chapter of the 12th year of this reign recites, i472.that the governors — that is to say, the mayors, bailiffs, and ^^'other like governors — of every city, borough, and town ofsubstance, for the most part have courts leet, and vieics o/'counlcci.frankpledge; the surveying of all victuallers there; withthe correction and punishment of offenders and breakers ofthe assise : — but as many persons had procured letters9.J0 ^lAitrfcs.^* • ^ ^ • patent of" the kiii&{ to be surveyors and correctors of victuallers,&1-. : and by such pretence commit divers extortionsupon the kiuir's people; it was therefore enacted, thatall such letters patent should be void.'^"7- In the 17th of Edward IV., in the act relative to thee\cliisii»n of Irish money, in the enumeration of the severalpii-es in which the jurisdiction is to be exercised, thejustices of the peace, the mayors, sheriffs, bailifis, andotIuT ilnef ii^ovemors of cities, boroughs, and " towns corporate*are mentioned : — from the adoption of which latterterm — not to be found in the statutes of the precedingreigns — it seems that it had at this period come into com-mc»n use, being inserted in the first act of this reign, as wellas in this statute.Berwick. An act for the town of Berwick '* speaks of the burgessesand the men enfranchised of the town of Berwick," andgrants them the fishing there at fanny.ClIAHTERS.In the reign of Henry VI., we have only found ten incorporations: — Hull — Plymouth — Ipswich — SouthamptonCoventry — Northampton — Woodstock — Canterbury —Nottingham and Tenterden.We have however traced in the statutes the adoption ofcorporate terms ; and we proceed now to point out the contrast,which this reign will afford to ail the preceding, bythe number of grants of incorporations which it exhibits: —Charters of that description becoming frequent in this period;and many places receiving corporate power in addition to theirancient privileges; but it will be seen, that in the intervalsbetween the charters of incorporation, others frequentlyoccurred which were not of that description.LONDON.Having extracted the few statutes which are material inthis reign, we proceed to the documents relative to the cityof London, We tint from the inspeximus in the charter ofMew. Charles 11., that in the second year of Edward IV., an ampleCharters-LONDON. 951charter was granted by the king, conferring many privileges ^^' ^^'upon this city ; some of which it will be seen are given withreference to the change which had at this time taken placein the law.The statute of the first of Edward IV. having taken fromthe tourney or laid-days, the trial of indictments and presentmentsfound there, and transferred it to the justices inquarter sessions, the city of London was specially exceptedfrom the operation of that statute. And in consequence, wefind that the charter to which we are referring, begins witha recital, that such things as ought to be determined byconservators of the peace in the counties of England, havebeen used to be executed in the city of London — evidentlytreating the city of London as a county.The charter afterwards providing for the conservation ofthe peace in the city, directs that the mayor and recorder,and the aldermen who have been mayors, should be conservatorsof the peace, and justices, to determine all felonies, ^/"^^®* °^&c. That the citizens should be attendant to them in allthings pertaining to their offices as conservators of thepeace ; and that the citizens might record their customs bywordof mouth before any justices by their recorder. Thereis also a special provision, that all merchants, as well denis merchantssens as aliens, abiding within the city, and merchandisingthere, (though they be not of the liberty of the same city,)should be partakers, taxed, and contributors, according totheir faculties, in subsidies, talliages, grants, and other contributionswhatsoever, for the need of the king, or of thecity.The charter further states, that, as it is well known andmanifest, that those of the city which are called, elected, andtaken to the degree of aldermen, as proper, by their condition Aldermen,and merits, to execute those offices, have sustained greatcharges during the time they make their abode and residence Residing,in the city ; being vigilant for the good, and government, ofthe same: — and for that cause oftentimes leave their possessionsand places in the adjoining counties: — In order thatthey may, without fear of unquietness or molestation, Charters-LONDON.Edw.lV. ably abide and tarry in such their country houses, places andpossessions, when they shall return there for recreation, theking granted to them, that they should not be put in anyassises, juries, &c. or made collectors of any taxes.The charter then recites the grant of Edward III. of theSouthwark sown of Southwark, and confirms it ; with waifs, estrays, treatall estreats and goods of felons, and assise ofbread and beer, with the correction and punishment of allinhabiting and exercising any arts ; with all fines and amer-cements,and the return of writs : — excluding the king'sofficers; and granting a fair; with a court of pie powder.Frank and also a view of frankpledge, and whatsoever thereto belonged.From this charter it should be observed, that all theformer privileges of London are in truth confirmed; togetherwith those special provisions which were made necessaryby the statute of Edward IV. ; and the merchants abiding^?^f^^ within the city are in effect directed to pay scot and ht,although they are not of the liberty — that is, although theyare not permanent inhabitants within the liberty of the city ;according to the application of that term so frequently remarkedin the progress of our inquiry.Aldermen. The privileges of the aldermen are also made to dependResidence, upon the fact of their residence within the city; and aregranted upon the reasonable ground of the expences theyincur, and the duties they perform there.In the confirmation of the grant of the borough of South-pledge,wark, especial mention is made of the view of frankpledge,and whatsoever belongeth to it. And in the printed copy ofthe charters, it is stated in a note upon this clause — foundedupon the conmiou law — that it was " a pledge or surety forfreemen of fourteen years of age and upwards — religiouspersons, clerks, knights, and their eldest sons excepted.The freemen were to find security towards the king, or elseto be kept in prison. This custom was so strictly preserved,that the sheriff's even took the oaths of personsunder 14 years of age.''*Luflfman, Charters of London, p. 131.uuLONDON. 963From the Year Books of this period it appears,* that dis E<lw. IV.putes arose between the city of London and the abbot of Yeu BooksWestminster respecting their several jurisdictions; and inother cases, in the same reports, at this time, the hustings of Hustings.London — and the privileges of the city — are repeatedlymentioned. But no reference is made to its being incog Not incorporated;notwithstanding we have seen that several otherplaces had at this time been made corporate ; and the termswere in general use.In the 3rd year of this reign, the king granted another 1463.charter to London, giving to the mayor, commonalty, andcitizens, the patronage, weighing, and measuring of wool,brought to the staple of Westminster — and directed that it Westmin-should be made in Leadenhall, within the city, and in noother place within three miles of the city ; together with allfees, profits, &c.In the 6th year of this reign, there is, among the Har 1466.grave Manuscripts & recognizance upon the admission ofa freeman in London — the condition of which is, that if thesaid A. B., as long as he shall enjoy, or claim to enjoy, theliberty of the said city, shall be continually abiding with hishousehold within the said city, or the suburbs of the same ; Howlandif he be, according to his degree, in lot and scot, sup ^^^^ ^^porter and maintainer of all the charges of the city, with ^*^®*'the conditions of the same ; and also if he specially andprincipally occupy the craft or mystery of L , to thewhich he is admitted, more than any other craft, if any withinthe said city he will occupy ; or it shall happen to him tooccupy ; — then the recognizance to be had for nought ; orelse to stand in full strength and virtue.It will be remembered, how entirely this recognizancecorresponds with the description of a citizen before extractedfrom the Year BooksIn the 9th year of Edward IV., one Peter Pelham, a 1469.resiant in the ward of the Tower of London, having behavedcontemptuously to the alderman of that ward, and havingYear Book, 2 Edvf. IV. fol. 23. t Margrave MSS. 136-226.I See bcforG, pp. 634 and 699.964 Charters-LONDON.^^' ^^' torn up his admission as a freeman, in the presence of themayor, was desirous of surrendering his freedom. Butthe mayor, in a return to a writ of certiorari, states that herefused altogether to receive the surrender, because, if suchsurrenders could be made . at the will of the delinquents,they could never be punished : — nor would there be personsto take upon themselves to sustain the burdens or duties of thecity for the honour of the king, or the good, or government ofthe city.And on the return a procedendo was ordered ; from whichrecord we find the first instance of the refusal of a surrender,founded upon the first principles of our law, that no man isat liberty, without the consent of the mayor, or king's officer,to withdraw himself from the performance of all publicduties and offices; and we may also directly infer, fromthis document, as established by all our former quotations,that the being an admitted freeman was both a right and aduty, to which every inhabitant householder was as wellentitled as bound.147?' ^^ ^^^ ^^^^ ^^^ ^^^^ years of this reign, orders were alsomade by the common council of London, enforcing the confidencetindal residence of the freemen, and calling upon those whoresided out of the city to come with their families and dwellwithin it.1478. In the 18th year of this reign, two charters were grantedto London upon the same day; one giving to the mayor,commonalty, and citizens, licence to purchase lands, &c.,Mortmain, notwithstanding the Statute of Mortmain — although no writof ad quod damnum had issued. The other granting to themayor and commonalty the office of package, savage.Coroner, carriage, portage, and also the office of coroner — with anon-intermittent clause as to other coroners of the king.It should be observed, that sometimes these grants are tothe " mayor, citizens, and commonalty ;" at other times, " thecitizens'' are omitted, and again subsequently introduced — sothat it is obvious, from this instance, as well as from manyothers to which we have referred, and also from the variety ofnames repeated in the statute at the commencement of thisCharters-LONDON. 956reigii, that notwithstanding the change of these appellations, ^dw. IV.they were in substance the same ; and that the citizens ofLondon at that time had no fixed corporate name.But this king also, in the 22nd year of his reign, although ^^^•the citizens of London were not incorporated, expresslygranted that privilege to the mystery of the cooks within Cooks,the city, by letters patent incorporating the freemen ofthat mystery.* He commences the grant by reciting,that the freemen of the mystery of cooks of the city ofLondon, when personally attending upon his business, hadbeen summoned and impannelled upon assises and juries,and other inquests within the city ; and, by reason of theirnon-attendance, they had sustained many hardships andlosses, in great issues and amercements; and at thesupplication of the said freemen, the king granted tothem, that all the men of the same mystery of the city,should be, in substance and name, one body and one commonaltyperpetual. And that two principals of the same tuaTbody.commonalty, by the unanimous assent of 12 or eight of thatcommonalty, might yearly elect out of their body two masters,to direct and govern the mystery and commonalty.And that the masters, or governors, and commonalty, mighthave perpetual succession, and a common seal. And that Seal,they, and their successors for ever, should be persons fitand capable to purchase and possess, in fee and perpetuity, .^'^^lands, tenements, and other possessions. And that they,by the name of masters, or governors, and commonalty,might implead and be impleaded. And that they might law plead.fully have honest assemblies of themselves, and makestatutes and ordinances for their wholesome government. Bye-laws.Powers are then given, that they may admit and receiveto have and enjoy the liberties of the city, according tothe custom, fit and sufficient persons, skilled and informedin the mystery of cooks.• Plow. 521, in Croft v. Howell.956 OXFORD UNIVERSITY AND CITY.Edw. IV.OXFORD UNIVERSITY AND CITY.1461. A charter of the first year of Edward IV., confirms byinspeximus all the former charters granted to the university,and also recites and confirms the last charter of Richard II.And stating that the king had been informed, by the chancellorand scholars of the university, that the precincts ofthe town (not the precinct of the university, as in the charterof Richard II., and in the granting part of this charter) werenot limited by any certain metes and bounds; and thatmany of their liberties were granted by general words, bywhich they were less able to enjoy them — the king, at theinstance of George, Bishop of Exeter, chancellor of theBounds, university y granted that its bounds should, on the east partof the town, extend as far as the Hospital of St. Bartholomew,near Oxford — and on the west part, as far as the willof Bottle — and on the north part of the town, to the gatecalled Godson Brigge — and on the south part of the town,to a certain wood called Bs^ly — which ever afterwardsshould be called the precincts of the university.The charter then gives the most general jurisdiction overallmatters, and all the articles of justices itinerant, notwithstandingthey should even affect the king, (pleas of felonyNod and mayhem, and free tenement only excepted). It promis. jjiiji^g ^jjg interference of all j ustices and j edges, stewards,marshals, clerks of the hundred, sheriffs, mayor, bailiffs, orother officers or ministers.And further grants, that if the chancellor, vice-chancellor,or any master, scholar, officer, or minister of the university,or any person under the privilege of the university, shouldbe indicted before any justices of the King's Bench, judgesof gaol delivery, justices of the peace, or sheriffs, &c., orthe mayor or bailiffs of the town, by any of the laity, andshould be therefore imprisoned ; and if the chancellor or vice-chancellor,should wish to claim him ; the person in whosecustody he is, should, by commission under the great seal,deliver him to the steward of the chancellor or vice-chancellor,before whom and a jury, half of whom should be takenOXFORD UNIVERSITY AND CITY. 967from 18 persons impannelled by the sheriff of Oxford from Edw. IV.the neighbourhood where the offence was committed, andhalf from 18 others impannelled by the bells of the university,from laymen under the privilege and jurisdiction ofthe university, and that the matter should be tried accordingto the custom of the land, and the privileges of the university.And if the accused should allege that he was a clerk, or anythingelse, by means of which he ought to enjoy the privilegeof holy church, he should be sent to the ordinary.The lOOs. to be paid by the university for the assise ofbread and beer, is remitted to them, upon their paying Id.Instead of the power of enforcing the cleansing of thestreets by ecclesiastical censures, the university are enabledto do it by amercements, which they are to entreat anddeliver to the bailiffs of the town for the time being, to levyand receive towards the firm ; but if the bailiff does not levythem within three days after the receipt of the entreat, thenthey may be taken for the benefit of the chancellor.The power of banishing improper persons from the universityand its precinct not having been found effectual, becausesuch persons only withdrew into the neighbouring places,where they remained and carried on the same enormities stillmore — the chancellor was enabled to banish such persons 10miles from the university.And the king adds a general confirmation of all formerprivileges.It should be observed of this charter, that it first speaks Steward,of the steward of the chancellor* — an officer probablyborrowed from the court leet, where such functionaries presided; and the university having, at the time they procuredthe grant of this charter, acquired so many of the powers of theleet, it was probably found necessary that they should havethis officer also ; particularly as by the charter the universityis directed to exercise its jurisdiction, through the medium ofa jury, which it does not appear they had before any powerof impannelling, as their jurisdiction was ecclesiastical.• Vide post. Cart. Hen. VIII. to the University.958 OXFORD UNIVERSITY AND CITY.^^- ^V - Having a jury, it became necessary for them to have asteward, as the ordinary judge in the court leet.The substitution of amercements for ecclesiastical censures(also granted by this charter), seems to complete the changeof the ecclesiastical for the civil jurisdiction ; and from thedate of this charter, if not before, the university must belooked upon as armed, not only with the ecclesiastical, butalso with the fullest temporal power.OXFORD CITY.Parliament It appears, from a return of members of Parliament ofthe 26th of Henry Vi,* that the " mayor, bailiffs, and thewho community of the town'* elected two of their " com-burgenses" — under the seal as well of the mayor, bailiffs, andcommunity, as the seal of oflSce of the sheriff of Oxford.Aldermen. It should be observed, that the " aldermen' who were mentionedbefore the bailiffs in the return of the 2nd of HenryVI., are here altogether omitted — not because they were notelectors, or did not interfere in the election, but becausetheir rank or office of aldermen was unconnected withtheir voting for members of Parliament ; as they did thatduty only as burgesses — although, for distinction sake, theymay be called by their superior title of aldermen. Theresult of all these early returns will hereafter appear, fromthose which follow.1467. Thus, in the 7th of Edward IV., the return for the boroughwas made by the " bailiff ^nA comburgenses ;" who are statedto have elected, by common assent, two burgesses. +As there is no reason for inferring, that the electors hadin any manner been changed, it follows, that the " comnumitasburgensium" in the time of Henry V.; — the *' conimunitas"in the reign of Heniy VI. — and the " comburgenses** in thisreturn, all described the same class of persons. And as it isequally clear, that there was in this interval no change in thepersons to be elected, it also follows, that the " comburgen-ses" returned in the reign of Henry VL, and the " burgesses"• Vide Prynne, Brady, Barnes, 143. t Brady. 143.OXFORD CITY. 959here returned, were also the same class of persons — and con ^'^^' ^^^'frequently, that those words are all synonymous: — the resultof which is, that both the electors and the elected, were theburgesses.Dr. Brady felt the force of this unavoidable inference ; Brady,and therefore states, that the persons mentioned in thesereturns were all the same, " notwithstanding the differentexpressions and clerkship of the returns'* He also correctlystates, that the mayor, bailiffs, and aldermen, were all thesame class as the burgesses, before they were promoted tothose more eminent situations; but he should also haveadded, that when they returned members to Parliament, theyvoted not as mayor, bailiffs, or aldermen — but as burgesses.After drawing so correct an inference from the returns, andso properly describing the real situation of the mayor,bailiffs, and aldermen, Dr. Brady proceeds, in his usualmanner, to insist upon a perfectly gratuitous assumption, andfrom that to draw the conclusion at which he was desirous ofarriving. He says, " the mayor, aldermen, and bailiffs, werechosen out of the fellow-burgesses, and not out of themost ordinary and poor sort of burgesses or freemen, whonever were ordinarily or regularly of the community, orcommon council of the town or burgh'* It would bedifficult to find a sentence in any author containing moreerror, or more unfounded assertion, than this. It firstassumes, that the comburgenses and burgenses were ofa different class — which has already been negatived, bystating that those terms were used synonymously; and noground whatever is surmised, nor can any be shown, for assumingthat there was any such distinction, between theordinary or extraordinary, the poorer or richer burgesses.Next it is assumed, that the community and common council Communthe same, without any ground being stated for suchan assumption, and when it is most notorious that the fact wasnot so. There are abundance of authorities to prove, thatthe community means the whole body of inhabitants of theplace : — as the " community of the realm," — or of the county— so frequently mentioned ; and not any select body, either960 OXFORD CITY.Edw. IV. of the common council, or any other. Again, the nature of thecommon council, as a body selected from the bui^esses atlarge, to counsel and assist the mayor, may be traced in avariety of charters, from the time of Edward L* And as inmany of them they are directed to provide for the good ofthe commonalty of the borough or town, it is clear they werenot that community themselves; indeed their very officeimports otherwise, and there never was a more groundlessassertion.It should also be observed, that Dr. Brady here introducesthe term " freemen," for the purpose of establishing the corporateright he contended for; although there is nothing ineither of the returns to justify his using that term, nor anythingthat refers to it ; but the terms " burgenses" or " com-burgenses" are alone used.It is a matter worthy of remark, that notwithstanding theincorporation of Hull, Plymouth, and other places in thepreceding reign ; and the adoption of that term in the statutesof this; nevertheless there were many charters granted byEdward IV., which were not charters of incorporation.Norwich. Thus this king granted a charter to Nortcichy dividingit from the rest of the county of Norfolk, and making itacounty of itself; and although charters of that descriptionwere usually charters of incorporation, yet this to Norwichwas not of that description.It granted to the citizens and their heirs, that the city ofNorwich and its suburbs should be separated from thecounty of Norfolk, be a county of itself, and called thecounty of the city of Norwich.That the citizens and their successors might for ever electAldermen. 24 fellow citizens to be aldermen, and 60 fellow citizens toCoS be the common council.That the citizens might be able annually to elect fromamong themselves, one mayor who should be the escheator —See before, the charter of Edward 1., where the four aldermen, and the eightwho are to be associated with the mayor and bailiffs, are to be Selected out of theburgeonet.Norwich-BRISTOL. 961and that in the place of their four bailiffs, they should elect *^*'- ^V.two sheriffs from among themselves. That the sheriffs should Norwich,have the same powers to hold courts, &c., as the bailiffswere accustomed to have. That sixty fellow citizens shouldbe elected as the common council by the four wards of the Wards,city. That the mayor should summon all citizens inhabitingand holding houses in each of the wards, to the guildhall,and that the majority might elect 60 persons. The ward ofWarmer to be represented by 20 citizens — Beresford 12 —Bancroft 16 — and the ward over the water 12.Jurisdiction is then given to the mayor, sheriffs, andcommonalty, over all real and personal actions within theborough. The citizens are not to be summoned in assises orjuries without the city, unless it actually concerns the king. J""«s.They are to have the property of places within the city;and the forfeiture of bread and ale. All advantages arisingfrom the fisheries, are to be applied to the use of the citizens,and the mayor and sheriffs, &c. of Norwich are to haveall the ancient liberties without abbreviation.*This is a striking instance, after incorporations had beenintroduced, of a grant of all the usual privileges accompanyingthe exclusive jurisdiction of a borough, without anygrant of incorporation.BRISTOL.The observation which we have made respecting Norwich,will apply to the important city of Bristol; whichwas also left at this period without any general incorporation;although we have before seen that peculiar corporatepowers were given to the chamberlains one of the officersof the city: — marking in a singular manner the eccentricprogress of the doctrine of corporations, at this early periodof our history.The city itself obtained a charter from the crown, inspectingand confirming the former grants, J and extending itsexclusive jurisdiction; — but not incorporating it.• Rot. Cart. p. 1, n. 2. 1 Pet. MS. 127. f Vide ante, p. 827.X Rot. Cart. 1 Edw. IV. p. 1, n. 6,3q9^962 BRISTOL.^^' ^^'- Thus the king granted, in the first year of his reign, to the1461. mayor and commonalty, their heirs and successors, thatAdmiralty. Bristol should be exempted from the admiralty jurisdiction :and that no one of the commonalty, nor any burgess for thetime being, nor any one residing for the time being withinthe town, should be compelled to answer any plea beforethe admiral, for any thing done upon the seas. Thatneither the mayor and commonalty, nor their successors,nor the sheriffs for the county, nor any other person residingfor the time within the same town, should permit the admiral,&c. to exercise jurisdiction within the town, &c. An thatthe king and his heirs would grant commissions for the trialof admiralty causes, to the mayor and recorder for the timebeing, &c. &c.This charter is granted to the mayor and *' commonalty*of Bristol ; which is the most general term, including everyperson in the place ; — as the " commonalty of the realm,"the commonalty of the shire," " hundred," " diocese,"parish," or any other " local division."In a subsequent part of this charter, after mentioning thecommonalty as exempt from the j urisdiction of the admiral,the two classes of burgesses and temporary residents are specificallymentioned, after the general term which included thewhole. But in another part, the mayor, sheriff, and commonalty,and persons temporarily residents, or being there,are alone mentioned, without the burgesses.This king also, in the same year, granted another charter,reciting the letters patent made by Henry VI., in the 24thof his reign, in which he committed and granted to NicholasHill, then the mayor of the town of Bristol, and to thecommonalty, all the lands which Johanna, late Queen ofEngland, held for the term of her life, with all issues andprofits, — the castle of the town, and the ditch of the sameonly excepted, — for the term of 60 years, after the finishingof 20 years specified in the letters patent ; rendering to theking, at the Exchequer, 102/. I5s. 6rf. yearly ; to the abbotof Tewkesbury, for the tithes of the town, 14/. lOs.; to theprior of St. James, and his successors, from the annual rentBRISTOL. 9g3of the mill, 60^. To the constable of the castle and his^ilw^iv.officers, and the forester of Kingswood, 39/. 145. 6rf. yearly.The mayor and commonalty having surrendered thischarter, it is re-granted to the mayor, commonalty ^ and theirsuccessors, and to the burgesses, their heirs and successorsfor ever : — the castle and ditch excepted. But the watercoursegranted to the mayor and commonalty, and their successors,and to the burgesses, their heirs and successors, iswholly reserved to the same burgesses, their heirs and successors.Fines, forfeitures, &c. of all men, as well as ofall tenants, sole tenants and not sole tenants, residing andnot residing in and out of fees, lands, and tenements, withtheir appurtenances, within the precincts of the city andcounty of Bristol, are also granted ; with the year and aday — waste — forfeiture, &c. for murder, in the town andsuburbs of Bristol — commons — waste — fines — forfeitures —view of frankpledge — hundred court — wreck of the sea,&c. &c. &c. — and fines before j ustices of the forest.This charter was given on the surrender of the grant ofHenry VI. by the mayor and commonalty, to the mayor andcommonalty, and also to the burgesses. In the clausereserving the water-course in the ditch of the castle, thegrant is stated to be to the mayor and commonalty, and theburgesses ; but the resumption purports to be to the burgessesonly; as if, according to ordinary parlance, all thosewords were in effect synonymous. In a subsequent clause,relating to the collection of the fines, they are stated to beleviable upon all persons who shall be in and of the town ; andthe officers are described as of the commonalty only, withoutnoticing the burgesses. In the remainder of the charter,the commonalty are mentioned alone, without naming theburgesses. Yet the grant must be intended to be made tothe same persons throughout : — and consequently the " commonalty"and " burgesses" are in effect the same persons.CANTERBURY.After the first grant to Bristol there follows, upon the 1461.charter roll, a confirmation of the previous charters to 964 CANTERBURY.^^* ^V* terburt/f commencing with a recital, that Canterbury hadbeen one of the most ancient cities in England ; and that themayor and citizens their heirs and successors, might enjoymore ample liberties, it grants and confirms all the previousprivileges * It also recites the charters of Henry IV. andHenry VL, and that various ambiguities had arisen respectinga provision contained in his second charter of Henry VI.,Mayor, as to the re-election of the mayor, in case of his death duringhis mayoralty; upon which it grants to the mayor and commonalty,their heirs and successors, that whensoever it shouldhappen that any mayor of their city should die within theyear next ensuing after he should have taken his oath, orAbsence, should absent himself from the city without a deputy, orshould be for any other offence removed; that then the aldermenfor the time being, or the major part of them, mightBorough summon and convene a borough mote ; in which the citizensmote.might elect one other person from themselves to be themayor of the city.Coroner. The king also, after directing the election of a coroner,proceeds to state, that attending to the great and lamentablecomplaint of the mayor and citizens, that the city, and theinhabitants thereof, were in great poverty from the paymentof the fee-farm of 60/. per annum, and other necessary chargesincumbent on the city ; and that from the small number ofinhabitants there, the city was so depopulated and destroyed,that the inhabitants were in want of necessary means — hepardoned and released 16/. 135. 4d. per annum out of thefee-farm of 60/.All manner of fines, issues and amercements before thekeepers of the peace, &c. are given to the citizens ; and thecharter then proceeds to grant (with the exception of certainlands, which are the fee of the Archbishop of Canterbury,and the castle of Canterbury), that the city should beCounty of One entire county of itself, in deed and name, and distinctand wholly separated from the county of Kent, and shouldfor ever be named, called, and entitled, the county of the cityof Canterbury.• Rot. Cart. 1 Edw. IV. p. 1, n. 8.CANTERBURY. 966The bailiffs of the city of Canterbury were in future to be ^^' ^^'the sheriffs, preserving all the liberties and powers which Return ofthe bailiffs hitherto had ; and to have the return of all writswithin the city and precincts, which ought to be directedto the sheriff of the county of Kent, and by him to be servedand executed, as if the same city and precincts had not beenmade an entire county of itself.The sheriffs are directed to account before the barons ofthe Exchequer. The coroner of the city is to be the coroner Coroner,of the county of the city : and the mayor, commonalty, andtheir heirs, are discharged from being collectors of any taxexcept those within the city of Canterbury.The following clause then occurs : —Provided always, that by force of our present grant, noinjury shall in anywise be produced to the mayor and commonaltyof the city aforesaid, as to other the liberties, franchisesand immunities, customs, constitutions and quittances,to them or to their predecessors, by us or ourprogenitors heretofore granted to them, or to the late bailiffsand citizens of the said city, or by them used."The mayor is then appointed escheator, and provisions are escheatormade for the re-election of a bailiff in case of death.The next charter upon the roll is one expressly of incog Romneyporation. However it is not granted to any city, boroughor town: — but gives privileges to the inhabitants livingwithin Romney Marsh ; and commences by reciting, that itwas subject to the invasion of the enemy; but that at thespecial requisition of the whole community and inhabitants,it was granted to the inhabitants and resiants within certainmetes and bounds, that they should be one body in nameand deed, and one perpetual commonalty of one bailiff and24 jurats, of the commonalty of Romney Marsh, and shouldplead and be impleaded, by the name of the " bailiffs, jurats,and commonalty of Romney Marsh :" — after which the usualcorporate powers and liberties are given.*This instance is the more worthy of remark, because it• Rot. Carl. Edw. IV. p. 3, n. 3.gOQ Romney MARSH.Edw. IV. will be remembered, that we have before referred, amongstother aggregate bodies, to the commonalty of Forests, at aperiod when they could not have been incorporated ; andhere we have an instance, at this time, of an aggregate body,coming within the same analogy, expressly made a bodycorporate.'^Ti'S!^' After this, follows a charter of incorporation for the city ofRochester'*The previous charters from time to time have been mentioned,but none of them were charters of incorporation.This grant recites, that the citizens had complained tothe king, that ambiguity, obscurity, and difficulty of certainwords, and general terms, had prevailed in previous chartersto the citizens of Rochester; and therefore the king provides,that the citizens and their successors, should thenceforth for^*bSd^"** ever be of one mayor and citizens, one body perpetual, andone community perpetual in fact and name ; and that theymight have perpetual succession; that the then bailiff of theMayor, city should be the mayor ; that the mayor and citizens andtheir successors, should be for ever so called ; and by thatCapable, name, be persons enabled and capable in the law to purchaselands, tenements, rents, and other possessions whatsoever, tohold for them and their successors for ever. That the mayorPlead. and citizens might plead and be impleaded; and answer,prosecute, and defend by that name ; and that they shouldMayor, have a common seal. That upon the departure of the mayorfrom the city, or his removal, the citizens of the city mightelect some other fit person to be the mayor.Officers. Provisions then follow for the appointment of ,coroner, and constables ; and that the coroner of theNon county should be excluded from jurisdiction in the city.intromit. •' .That the mayor and citizens for the time being, and certaincitizens to be thereunto called by the mayor, might havefor ever, power of searching all manner of merchandiseAssise of shipped within the city, and the assise of bread, wine, ale,&c., and all other things appertaining to the clerk of themarket.• Rot. Cart. n. 4.Rochester. 9g7That all merit residing and abiding in the city, be acquitted ^^'^' IV.throughout England, of toll, talliage, &c. ; and be exempt Exemptfrom suits at county shires, and hundreds, and laths of shires, &c.hundreds. That the mayor and citizens should have all goodsand chattels of men residing within the city, outlawed fortreason, or felony, &c. That the mayor of the city, havingcalled unto him two of his more discreet fellow citizens, shouldhold in the court o{ promote, from 16 days to 16 days, all Portmotc.personal pleas, &c., arising within the city. That the mayorshould have the return of all writs and precepts ; so that no Return ofsheriff, or other minister, should enter within the city. Thatthe mayor and citizens should have all manner of fines for Fines,trespasses, &c. ; and that they and their successors might for View ofever have a view of frankpledge within the city. — ^A fair, and pledge,court of pie powder, are also granted. The mayor, and someman learned in the law, were to be keepers of the peace, with justices,the usual powers attendant upon such offices. And the keepersof the peace in the county of Kent, were not to enter within Non-thecity, &c. ; and the mayor and citizens, &c., residing within *"^°°**'-the city, liberty, and precinct, were not to be placed on juries,attaints, &c., against their wills.Licence is then given to the mayor and citizens, and their Mortmain,successors, to hold lands to the value of 20Z. per annum,notwithstanding the Statute of Mortmain.It will be observed, that this charter of incorporation, andthose which have preceded it, as well as those which willfollow, in effect, grant the same privileges as those containedin the charters, which are not incorporating grants ; and thatthere is no distinction between them, excepting that thosewhich incorporate the burgesses, merely give to them, inaddition to their former privileges, the right of being a bodycorporate, with perpetual succession — of having a corporatename — suing and being sued — and holding lands by thatname — which are the essential characteristics of a corporation;but all the borough rights — the municipal government— the class of burgesses — their privileges — their courtsand customs — are left untouched and unvaried ; which isthe important consideration to be kept in view, in intestinesCOLCHESTER,*^^'^^' gating these charters, and cannot fail to satisfy every dispassionatemind, that " incorporation'* is only an incidental —collateral — circumstance, connected with the borough; whichneither materially alters its nature, constitution, nor privileges;nor the character of its burgesses.Stamford. After the incorporation of Rochester, follow those of Stampford and Ludlow ; the franchises granted being substantiallythe same, we shall refrain from further adverting to them.8o"{Jj^P- Southampton also received a confirmation charter, but thisplace had been incorporated by Henry VI.Colchester There was a confirmation of former charters and .ties to Colchester, without incorporating it. And the grantrecites by inspeximus the charters given by Richard I.,Henry III., and Richard II.; and confirms them.* Andfurther grants to " the bailifis and burgesses," that theyand their successors, burgesses of the borough of twobailiffs and one commonalty thenceforth for ever shouldrcrpeiual be one body and one commonalty perpetual, in nameand deed — that they should have perpetual succession,and be persons fit in law, and capable to receive lands,tenements, rents, and other possessions, to hold for themand their successors for ever ; and that by the same namethey might implead, and be impleaded, answer, prosecute,and defend in all pleas : with the several other usual libertiesand privilegesTHE DRAPERS OF SHREWSBURY.1461 . There is also in this year, a charter of incorporation ofanother aggregate body. — It was granted to the mystery ofDrapers in the town of Shrewsbury, reciting, that they hadpetitioned the king to be established as a fraternity or guildGuild, of themselves. And in consequence thereof, the king hadgranted that there should be erected a fraternity or guild ofthe mystery of Drapers in Shrewsbury ; and that they shouldfind and support a chaplain to perform divine service daily, aslong as the king should live, for the benefit of his soul, andfor those of his progenitors, &c. That they should have♦ Mad. Fir. Bur. p. 28. t Rot. Cart. 1 Edw. IV. n. 1.THE DRAPERS OF SHREWSBURY. 969the name of " the fraternity of persons of the mystery of Dm- Kdw. I v.pers of the town of Shrewsbury." And that the brethren Name,and sisters should be by themselves a perpetual communityincorporate in fact and name, and should have perpetual sue IncorporateProvisions then follow for the election of the mastersand wardens. The charter then directs that by the nameof" the master and wardens, and brethren and sisters of thefraternity or guild of the Holy Trinity of persons of the mysteryof Drapers of Shrewsbury," they should be personsable and capable in law to purchase and receive in fee andperpetuity, lands, tenements, &c. And by that name theymight plead and be impleaded — have a common seal — shavelawful meetings of themselves, and make lawful statutesand ordinances for the governing of the fraternity or guild,without the hindrance of any justice, escheator, sheriff orNon-imro-- J J ' distant.coroner, &c.A clause then follows, at the close of the charter, giving Mortmain,the guild a power to hold lands and tenements to the valueof 40Z. yearly, notwithstanding the Statute of Mortmain.It should be remarked, with respect to this charter,that it seems the Drapers had existed before as a body inShrewsbury, but that it required this grant to make them anincorporation : — and it should also be observed, that the incorporationof these bodies, is precisely the same as those of theburgesses, and consequently, that privilege should alwaysbe considered by itself, without reference to its connexioneither with the boroughs or the guilds, to neither of which isit essentially.POOLE.A grant of this date contains an inspeximus recital and H60.confirmation of the first charter of Henry VI., to the mayorand burgesses of Poole, and their successors. This latterterm is ordinarily appropriated to corporations: who takeby succession, and not by inheritance. But this is thefirst time it is used, and is the first instance in which any termis applied to this place which raises any inference of its beinga corporation. If it should be urged, that this word, by its970 POOLE.^^' ^^* mere legal import, incorporated the bui^esses; still it is clearthat it could not affect the right of election, which had beenpreviously exercised by the burgesses, before they were incorporated.And even if it incorporated the borough, it did notin any respect pretend to alter the qualification for being aburgess, or the mode of election or admission : — but the mereeffect of this charter, taken in its fullest extent, was to incorporatethose who before were burgesses. The term " successors"was generally introduced into the charters of thisreign, probably in consequence of the doubts which had beensuggested by the lawyers, whether the inhabitants could takeby succession if they were not incorporated. The ecclesiasticshad long before taken grants to themselves and theirsuccessors:* — but grants to boroughs in that form are notfound in the earlier reigns ; in which numerous grants are tobe met with to the burgesses and their heirs, as we havebefore shown, and which are commented on by Madox in hisFirma Burgi.f It is well observed by him, that the grant ofMagna Charta by Henry III., was to the freemen of Englandand their heirs — " liberia omnibus regni nostri — habeaset tenendas eis et heretics suis."1472. Tj^g return of members to Parliament for Poole for thisyear was made by the burgesses : and there is no ground forsaying that at that time there was any select body, or thatthe burgesses then differed from those who had returned inthe time of Edward III.Grantham. A charter to Grantham succeeds in the next years grantingto the alderman and the burgesses of the town of Grantham,Corporate, that it should be a free borough, corporate in name and deed,of the alderman and burgesses; that they should be freeGuild, burgesses ; that they should have a mercatorial guild, withthe same liberties as the burgesses or inhabitants have beenaccustomed to have : and that the alderman, burgesses andtheir successors, should be corporate, and one perpetual com-See an instance, Mad. Fir. Bur. p. 40, in note {h),t Mad. Fir. Bur. pp.42, 43.t Hot. Cart. 2 Edw. IV. n. 3.GRANTUAM, ^c. 971monalty, by the name of "Alderman and Burgesses of the Edw.iv.Borough of Grantham," with perpetual succession, and powersto hold and give lands — plead and be impleaded — andto have and use a common seal. That the burgesses mightelect from among themselves, 13 comburgenses ; and nameone of them annually to the office of alderman. That none ofthe burgesses should be placed upon assises or juries, or Juries,bear any office of burden without the borough. Jurisdictionis then given to the alderman and the comburgensesover real and personal actions ; that they should have thefines and forfeitures of all criminals within the borough;and that no steward, marshal, or clerk of the market, is toenter within it. That the alderman and burgesses shouldelect a coroner ; and that no other coroner should intromit.The privileges of exemption from toll, &c., and the retupi R«tun> ofwrits.of all writs, conclude the charter.This grant resembles, even more than the preceding, theancient charters : and is in the same form as those of theearliest date ; excepting only that the additional capacitiesof incorporation are given to the burgesses.The king, after confirming all previous charters, grants to Launcestonburgesses of Launceston that they might have the 1462.election of their greece to answer for the fern of theirborough. That the burgesses should not plead without theborough for anything, unless what belonged to pleas of thecrown, — that no sheriff should buy or take anything of anyperson in the borough, unless with his consent; and that theborough should not be talliaged, except when every otherborough in England talliaged.This, it will be observed, is not a charter of incorporation.In the next year, the king, a second time incorporated the Ipswich,burgesses of Ipswich^-^ with the usual corporate terms ; and Incorpo-also appointed twelve port-men to be keepers of the peace,to hear and determine all felonies, &c. ; giving likewisethe goods and chattels of all persons holding, residing andnot residing, inhabiting and not inhabiting, within the town,who should commit any offence or fly, and not stand to judgeRot. Pat. p. 3. 1 Pet. MS. 171, f 1 Pel. MS. 281, el Rot. Carl. n. 4.972 IPSWICH.Edw. IV. ment; — together with the assise of bread and beer; andgeneral jurisdiction over all pleas real and personal; withan admiralty jurisdiction; excluding all the king's officers,Non-intro escheators, and the admiral ; giving exemption to allthose residing and dwelling within the borough, from servingupon juries, &c., and being collectors of tenths andfifteenths.The peculiar documents we have before extracted relativeto Ipswich, will be in the recollection of the reader, andcompared with this, and the former charter of incorporation,will confirm our observations as to the recent introduction ofthat privilege.As confirmatory also of our former doctrine relative toVillains. villains y we may quote the following passage from Kirby,the industrious Suffolk traveller, who says, — " That afterthe enfranchisement, the burgesses would not admit avillain to be free of Ipswich ; and by an order 23 HenryVII., each one, before admission, was to swear he was aFreemen. *' free man of England;" — and this for good reason, becauseno villain could be a burgess till he had resided a year anda day, without claim from his lord, in the town ; and if theburgesses enrolled him as a burgess before that time, theywould be liable to the lord of the villain, for entertaining himand keeping him from his lord. Nor should this expressionof "free man of England," so consistent with the feudallaw, and with the positions we have maintained, be overlooked;as in truth it explains the whole subject, and placesit upon its proper basis. It should be remarked, that theordinance in the time of Henry VII,, carries the doctrine ofvillainage distinctly down to that period.DARTMOUTH,Pursuing the chronological succession of the documentswhich occur, we arrive at a grant of considerable importanceto the borough of Dartmouth, But we will preface itsintroduction by a concise statement of its early history andprevious charters ; — and for the purpose of illustrating theeffect of the charter of Edward IV., the subsequent par-dartmouth.973alimentary history and municipal documents will be traced ^^' ^^^'until modem times.This place is properly called Clifton — Dartmouth — Hardness: — being in all probability, composed originally of threevillages so named.The first and the last are not mentioned in Domesday Book.Dartmouth is mentioned there, but only slightly, and nothingis stated which refers to its being a borough, — indeed, theentry does not expressly mention Dartmouth, or its ancientname — Delamere ; but it has Perte ; which no doubt refersto this place.In the reign of King John, the quinine for the merchantsdisc of Delamere is accounted for.In the first of Henry III., William de Antelope and Eve hJ^^^'(|his wife, agreed that a market should be held here weekly onWednesday, and on other days; for which a fine was levied.From the Antelopes it came to the Touches : and so bypurchase to the Danes, who conveyed it to the Tewx-burns, who were merchants ;* from whom it eventually cameto the crown.In 1298, Dartmouth first returned members to Parliament. ^^Vr?^' ». . . 2ohtiw.I.From which time it intermitted till after the charter of the- 15th of Edward III. ; and, returning the 24th of Edward III.,it has ever since sent members to Parliament.An inquisition "ad quod damnum" was issued of this toJIS'^'iidate, to Nicholas de Cheyne and Robert de Stoke, tocertify whether it would be to the prejudice of the king orany other, that it should be granted to Nicholas de Newbury,that the town of Clifton — Dartmouth — Hardness,should be a free borough ; and that the men inhabiting andhereafter to inhabit, should for ever be free burgesses.That they should not be placed in assises or juries withoutthe borough by reason of their foreign tenures, as long asthey remained in the town. That all the inhabitants in the inhabitantstown, and all who should thereafter inhabit there, mightdevise their lands and goods to whom they would, butnot in mortmain. And that no person should he convicted• Bro. Willis, vol. 2. p. 364.974 DARTMOUTH.^^- ^^' by foreign men for any transgressions within the town, butMen. by the men of the town, unless such transgressions shouldconcern the king or his heirs, or the community of the town ;and inquisitions as to transgressions without the town, wereto be made by a moiety of the men of the toum, ^lhA foreignmen.And the jurors found, that Dartmouth was a freeborough in the time of Henry I., and " that all persons re-Free siding (* manentes 'J in it were free burgesses ; " and that itwould not be prejudicial to the king, that the said libertiesshould be granted.1327. Nicholas de Newbury, in this year, granted to EdwardIII., the town (villa) of Clifton, Dartmouth, and Hardness,and the port of Dartmouth, with its appurtenances, liberties,&c.1337. Edward III. granted a charter " to the men of the town,their heirs, and successors, men of the town."i:mi. The same king also granted another charter to the burgessesof this borough, in consideration of the losses andhardships they had sustained in the wars, and the expencethey had incurred in fitting out two ships of war, which bythat charter they were to continue to do. It grants the burgessesthe usual freedom from tolls, &c. : and gives themMayor, power to elect from amongst themselves a mayor, who,amongst other things, was, with the bailiffs, to hold pleasconcerning the borough.It also enables the burgesses to dispose of the lands whichthey had, and might have within the borough. From whenceit appears that they had acquired lands before they were acorporation; and that they were, by this charter, (which doesnot incorporate them) enabled to sell those lands, the powerof their acquiring other lands being also recognized.It likewise grants that they should not be impleaded elsewherethan within the borough, for any foreign tenures withinthe borough ; or any contracts or other thing done or happeningwithin the borough, unless those pleas affected thecity. king or the community of the borough. It grants infangthefwrits, and outfangthef, and the return of writs ; with a ,975distant clause, except in default of the mayor. It exempts ^dw. iv.the burgesses from serving on juries; by reason of the tenureof lands out of the borough, or for transgressions or contractsout of the borough, as long as they shall remain withinit — and ihdX foreigners shall not be put with them in assise. Foreigners.It likewise provides against forestalling; and enables theburgesses to dispose of their lands with the borough bywill.In the 24th of Edward III., this borough returned bur 1350.gesses adam to Parliament.Richard II., in the second year of his reign, confirmed the J,^^*„charter of Edward III.And in the 17th year of his reign, that king, in consideratetion of the losses the burgesses had sustained by the war,and their being obliged to find the two ships mentioned inthe charter of Edward III., grants them cognizance of pleasof lands within the borough ; with power annually to electat their will amongst themselves a coronet with a non Coroner,intermittent clause as to other coroners.In the reign of Henry VI. the members for this borough .,g \^yiwere returned in the county court.That, however, was done occasionally by many other boroughs; and notwithstanding the inference which Dr. Bradyis anxious to draw from that circumstance, it appears, infact, to show nothing more than that a few of the burgesseswent to the county court, and there returned the members,instead of sending a written return.Edward IV., at this period, granted a charter to Dart 1463.mouth which, reciting the complaint of the mayor and burgesses,that the village of South town being near their borough,they were obliged to keep watch at night on the confines ofthat village, without any assistance from the inhabitants of inhabitantsthe village ; who are by no means protected by the libertiesof the mayor and burgesses ; and also reciting the serviceswhich the mayor and burgesses had rendered the king; andthat the larger the precincts of the borough should be, themore people would reside within it; and the obligation Reside,which the inhabitants of that village would feel to the king.976 DARTMOUTH.Edw. IV. if they enjoyed the same privileges as the burgesses of theborough. He then proceeds to confirm all former charters, andIncorpo- annexes and incorporates the village of Southtown with therates. ^ ®borough of Dartmouth, making them one borough ; and directsthat the inhabitants of the village should be burgesses ofthe said borough, and enjoy all the privileges, &c., as the otherburgesses ; and grants to the mayor, bailiffs, and bui^csses,the return of writs, with a non-intermittent clause as to allother sheriffs. And that they should hold in their guildhallbefore the mayor and bailiffs all pleas, with all fines and^S"^ amercements, — also a view of frankpledge, and all whichbelongs to it, within the said borough and village, and libertiesthereof. The charter repeats the power to hold all lands,which they did not hold of the crown in capite, freely andquietly, notwithstanding the Statute of Mortmain.With respect to this charter it should be observed, that inannexing the village of Southtown to Dartmouth, it speaksinhabitanu expressly of the inhabitanus of the village, and subsequentlydirects that those inhabitants should have the same privilegesas the burgesses — a stronger inference can hardly be afforded,that the inhabitants of the borough were then the real bur-losses— no previous election out of the inhabitants is directed,nor any. other act required; but by virtue of theirinhabiting they are to enjoy the liberties of the borough. Itis true that the charter, granting a view of frankpledge, extendingover the village, the inhabitants, or to speak tcch-Resiants. finally, the resiants there, would owe suit at that court,and, consequently, would be shorn there : but that wouldbe the only act necessary to complete their title to be burgesses.Indeed it is curious to observe how strongly illustrativethis charter is of the doctrine, that the ancient burgesseswere the inhabitants or resiants of boroughs, doingtheir suit at the borough court leet, or view of frankpledge.Before the village of Southtown was annexed to Dartmouth,in consequence of being without the borough, the inhabitantssheriffs there would have owed suit at the sheriffs tourn ; the charter,tourn. . .therefore, in the first place, lusts, by the non-intermittentclause, the jurisdiction of the sheriff, and then grants a viewDARTMOUTH. 977of frankpledge ; by doing suit at which the inhabitants there E<lw. IV.would be free from all j urisdiction of the sheriff or other leets. 1463.It should also be observed, that this charter is granted notonly to the mayor and burgesses, as the former charterswere, but also to the bailiffs, of whom mention is not madebefore. And to show most clearly that boroughs, at thattime, were not incorporated in the form which became morecommon in the succeeding reigns, it will be seen, that, althoughin annexing the village to the borough, the charteruses the word " incorporate'* it is applied in its primary andsimple meaning; and not used in its technical sense todescribe a corporation, of which there is not any other appearancethroughout the charter. If grants of incorporationhad then been general, it is impossible that thischarter, under the particular circumstances of this case, Incorporatehave omitted the ordinary terms and forms of incorporation,which would have been so perfectly applicable tothese two annexed places.With reference also to the residence of burgesses without Residencethe borough, which is often met with, it should not be overlooked,that this charter, speaking of the pleas which areto be held in the guildhall, describes them thus : " omniaplacenta regalia et personal et juxta infra burgum villatamet libertatem praedicta," — using the word juxta, andspeaking in the usual language of other charters of theliberties of the borough, as if they extended into thesuburbs, beyond the mere local limits of the borough ; inanalogy to the precincts of the forests.This charter also affords a strong inference against thedoctrine, as to boroughs being the towns held of the king,because it expressly speaks of the lands held by the burgesses,which were not held of the king in capite.It is said, that in this same reign the port of Fowey wasremoved to this place.The next document which occurs, relative to this borough, 1485.is an indenture between Henry VII. and the mayor, bailiffs,and burgesses of Dartmouth, by which they covenanted tocomplete the tower and bulwark they were then building,3 R978 DARTMOUTH.^^- ^^' and to keep a chain across the harbour ; in consideration ofwhich, the king thereby grants them 40Z. yearly, out of thecustoms and subsidies of the ports of Exeter and Dartmouth.^^^^- Next follows a charter of Henry VIII., which recites a2 H. VIII. g^j^^^ jjj ^hg firg|. yQ^^ q{ ]sig reign, to William Crane, gent.,^'liff.*"^*' of the office of water bailiff of the town of Dartmouth, pareel of his duchy of Cornwall, to hold by himself or hisdeputy at the king's pleasure ; and that Crane had resignedhis office : which the charter then grants to the mayor, bailiffs,and burgesses ; and the port, liberty, and precinct ofthe same, to hold of the king and his heirs, dukes of Cornwall,at the rent of 12 marks, to be paid at the Exchequer atLostwithiel : — and that the mayor, bailiffs, and burgesses, attheir will, as often as need be, may appoint a bui^ess or otherperson to be deputy water bailiff.An inquisition post mortem of the same reign, states, thatthe Cares possessed the manor and borough of Dartmouthat that time.There is a book of the same period, which shows the('ourtieet transactions of the curia regales, or court leet, which washeld before the recorder, and at which were present themayor, bailiffs, and " all the other burgesses commons, and inhabitantsfranchised'xn the said town;" and they are stated tobe assembled for the common weal of the town ; — ^and themayor, bailiffs and burgesses, commons and inhabitants, ordain,that no mayor should make any freeman that dwelledResidence. Qy^^ qJ ij^^ town : and that if he do, that freeman should notenjoy the liberties and franchises of the town, unless heshould come and dwell within it.Foreigners. And that all fordgu burgesses which be made freemen ofthe town, and dwell out of it, in places not franchised, should,before a day mentioned, come and inhabit within the to\%Ti ;upon pain of losing their liberties ; and not to be taken asfreemen unless they come and dwell there.It will be observed how directly this is in accordance with thecharter of Edward IIL, and the inquisition in the reign of EdwardII., which found that the *' manentes'* ought to be theliberi burgenses; and that the ^^ forinsccV should be excluded.DARTMOUTH. 979At the court leet held at Michaelmas, a person is admitted ^dw. iv.into the liberties and franchise of the town in fill court, 1512.before the recorder and mayor.Many persons are sworn and made free burgesses in the joiLviiicourt leet in the 10th year of this reign and several succeedingyears.Edward VI. and Queen Mary confirmed the charters which , J^y,had been granted by their predecessors to Dartmouth. 1553.We find also from the constitutions of the borough, thatit was agreed by the mayor, his brethren, and the wholecouncil of the town, that no mayor, for the future, shouldmake free any manner of person whatsoever without theconsent of the council of the town.Here the power of making freemen by the mayor, with theassent of the council, as well as the previous exercise of thepower of making them, seems to have been assumed; butinwhat manner that power was acquired, or when it originated,does not any where appear ; neither is there any charterto show how the common council was created ; nor whenthe privilege of making bye-laws was given. It is impossibleto believe, that the two returns prior to the charter ofEdward IV., were by the persons made free by the mayor;nor could the burgesses, to whom the grant of that charter isgiven, be of that description ; because burgesses appear to Burgesses,have existed before that charter, and the mayor is created byit. Neither could such freemen be the burgesses, to whomthe charters were granted in the reigns of Richard II. andEdward IV., as it is clear, by the last charter, for the reasonsmentioned before, that the inhabitants were the burgessesthere referred to: but, however they originated, ifthey were, according to modern language, freemen of thecorporation, they could not be the persons who were entitledto vote for members of Parliament, because that right had,as early as the time of Edward I., been vested in anotherclass, namely, the ancient burgesses. It is true, the mayormight have the right, with the assistance of the jury orcommon council, if there were such a body, to admit, swear,and enroll such inhabitants as appeared to be free ; and as3r2cohabit1559.980 DARTMOUTH.£dw. IV. they seem to have exercised that right, it must be inferred, itwas done under some lawful title. It must therefore beconsidered as the admission of the liber homo, or free burgess,under the common law : which he might lawfully do,and which reconciles the whole with the doctrines we havebefore extracted from the Saxon laws, and confirmed bysubsequent documents. This power of making freemen ofthe corporation, if such a power existed, could not possiblyhave any thing to do with the electing of membersof Parliament. And it should be observed, that thedecision in 1701 was against the party who petitioned ontheir right.5Ma^. '^ ^^^ fi^^ y^^^ ^^ Queen Mary, a person who had beendisfranchised, was ordered to be treated as a *^ foreigner f^showing distinctly the meaning of that term.1 Ella. Queen Elizabeth, in the commencement of her reign, confirmedby inspeximus the charters of the 15th of EdwardIII. and the 3rd of Edward IV.The latter being in fact the governing charter until thereign of James I.4^iV. '" ^^^ fourth year of Queen Elizabeth, the jury at thecourt leet present the misconduct of the mayor, in usingCommons, the condition seal without the consent of the whole commons;and they direct, that the common seal should be deliveredto two commoners and one of the masters.1577. It appears about the same time, from the entries in the books,19 Elisihsit freemen s sons were admitted gratis ; a right founded uponb^b^th* ^^^ common law of freedom by birth, as has been alreadyshown. And although there are many entries of that de-apparentscription, as well as of persons entitled by apprenticeship jduring the whole of this and the following reigns, and theyare stated to be according to the ancient custom ; yet, inmodern times, the select body of the corporation claimed thesole right of electing freemen, and excluding all persons, notexcepting sons and apprentices.16C«. In the first year of King James I., there was a presentment1 Jaracf) I. • o 1 o t 'at the court leet, of a person m Southtown, for having anInmate, inmate who had been recently married.Dartmouth. gyiThat king granted a charter in the second year of his ^"'- IV.reign, directing that the mayor, recorder, and last preceding 1604.mayor, and all last and next preceding mayors, residing"within the borough, should be justices.And that the mayor, and magistrates or councillors, havingcalled together to them 12 of the most honest and discreetburgesses, might make bye-laws.And as a confirmation, that it was not until this periodthat attempts were made to set up the corporate usurpation,it should be observed, that the word " corporation" did notoccur in the early documents relative to this place, (a factwhich there has been occasion to mention before with referenceto many other places.) The term used prior to thisperiod being the " borough," for which " corporation" wasfrom this time substituted in the borough books.In the fifth year of James I., there is an entry of a freeman s 5 jj^jeldest son, admitted gratis ; and a fine is mentioned, whichhad been assessed upon him by the grand jury at the lastlaw court, for keeping open his shop before he was admitted.In 1610, an allowance was made to the member in Par-gj]^J2*jliament for his charges by the general consent of the town.A person who had theretofore been a freeman, but had^j^^-jdwelt out of the town a year and a day, was, upon hisentreaty, and upon paying a fine, re-admitted to his freedom,and sworn again.After this entry follows a description of what seems tohave been treated as the common council ; a person is statedto be sworn to serve as one of the 12 burgesses, who are to Commonhave a voice in the making of constitutions and disposingof the town's revenues. From which it appears clearly,that the persons who are to make the bye-laws, were onlycommon burgesses elected for that purpose ; and constituted,as it were, a committee of representatives for the wholeburgesses, having only a delegated authority. Their numberbeing 12, the probability is, that they originally were, as wehave shown in other places, the jury for the year.There are also other instances about the same time, of personswho had lived out of the town being restored upon their982 DARTMOUTH.^^- ^^'' return, in strict conformity, as has been seen before, with thecommon law.1613. Another example occurs in this reign,* of direct interferenceby a nobleman in the election of the members to Parliament,in a letter from the Earl of Northampton to themayor, burgesses, and commonalty of Dartmouth, requestingleave to nominate one of the members.18 James I ^^ ^^® agreed by the common council, that half the 6/. tobe paid to the members, should be paid by the town stock,and the other half by the commons and inhabitants, by arate and collection.1631. Tie masters or brethren make a bye-law, assuming tothemselves the right of self election.1^. A letter appears from the lord president to the corporation,recommending them to choose his servant, Mr. RobertDickson, to represent the borough in the next Parliament.An answer was returned, saying, that they had ** acquainted*' the commons, who have their free voices in the elections aswell as we, with the contents of the letter, who, presumingupon their freedom in choosing whom they thought fit, had** elected, or would elect, men free of the corporation, well** known unto them'*J^« It appears from this and other entries in the corporationbooks, that the freemen, who we have shown before to bethe"liberi homines" of the common law, were called "thefreemen of the corporation," a term totally unknown to thelaw, and legally speaking, unintelligible — and in one of thecases peculiarly inapplicable, as it is applied to the instanceof an eldest son, whose right was altogether grounded uponthe common law.151^*1. Another change in the entries occurs about this time,showing the gradual progress of the corporate usurpationupon the original rights of the ancient freemen, by the introduction,for the first time, of the word " elected f to givecolour to the supposition, that the corporation had the rightof " electing" according to their will and pleasure, and asthey should think fit : — instead of their being obliged, accord-videante, Pastor Letters, p. 911.DARTMOUTH. 983ing to the common law, to admits enroll and swear all the ^^w- 1 ^^^free inhabitants who had resided a year and a day in theplace.Here the extracts from the books of Dartmouth, so illustrativeof the real ancient state of the borough, must cease ;because the other books were strangely lost, subsequentto an election petition in 1793, when they were producedbefore a committee.It however appears, that about this period, certain lands 22'^' i.were conveyed, by a Mr. Plunge, to the use of all theinhabitants of the town.Mr. Serjeant Wallis reported from the committee of elect gcha. ii.tions and privileges,* the case as to the double return uponthe election of burgesses for Dartmouth. Wherein the questionbeing, whether the election ought to be by the mayor,bailiffs, and freemen only of the said borough — or by the t'l^n^e^-mayor, bailiffs, freemen, and other inhabitants of the said inhabitant*borough, though not free — and that the opinion of thecommittee was, ' That the inhabitants of the said boroughhave not voices together with the freemen of the saidborough.*The question being put, that this House doth agree withthe committee in this report : —"The House was divided. The noes went forth : —Sir John Northcote, > Tellers for the Noes,Mr. Reynell, > with the Noes.Sir Walter St. John, > Tellers for the Yeas,Mr. Wiggins, S with the Yeas.So the question passed with the negative."From this period to 1737, an interval of 71 years, there is jgnS^na considerable chasm in the history of the transactions ofthis borough, in consequence of the loss of a book, whichcontained the transactions of that period ; and which hasonly recently been missing, for it was produced in 1822, by7th Journal, p. 618.984 DARTMOUTH.^^•^^ • an alderman, who then acted as town clerk, before the commissionersfor inquiry into public charities.25 0^11. ^^ appears, however, that about this time a constitutionwas made, that no person should be mede free withoutthe consent of seven magistrates. This order isopen to precisely the same observations, with respect tothe authority by which it was made, as that of thereign of Queen Mary : — and also with respect to the impossibilityof its referring to the same class of persons bywhom the earliest returns were made, and to whom theearly charters were granted. This constitution differingfrom the former, in requiring the assent of the magistratesinstead of the common council or jury, is in effectdestructive of the legal authority of both, — for it showsthat there was no ancient accustomed course for thismatter ; and if so, it could not affect the ancient right ofrepresentation : — the practice could only be changed by thecorporation, if it was something immediately within theircontroul : and if it was so, then it could have nothing to dowith the parliamentary right, which clearly existed beforethe corporation, and independently of it.34(Su 11 ^" ^ bye-law shortly subsequent to this period, the burgessesare called the " populace," or " common free burgesses:" a term so general, that one would conceive it impossiblethat they could have ever been applied to anyselected body of a corporation.^1686. The constitutions of the borough of the reign of James II.,signed by the judges of assise, are not now to be found;and in one of the books of the corporation relative to thisperiod, 16 pages or more appear to have been taken out.24 nh^'ii There was a petition against the return for this borough,but nothing appears to have been done upon it : — it was twiceput off, and probably was not presented again.1685. There were about this period two petitions against the1S72. returns for this borough, but there is no report upon eitherof them ; — however the petitioner in the latter appears bysome means or other, to have obtained a seat for this place,DARTMOUTH. 985his death as a member for it appearing four years afterwards, ^dw. iv.and a new election takes place in consequence.In the first year of William III., a petition is presented, ^ uncomplainingthat the petitioner had been elected by a greatmajority of the legal freemen and was accordingly returned Freemen,by the bailiff* and burgesses ; but one Mr. Whitrow, asmayor of the town, though not legally chosen, took uponhimself illegally to make 26 new freemen after the date ofthe writ, and by those new pretended freemen, and someof the former freemen's election, returned Mr. Booth in presdice of the petitioner.On the 28th of November, the report of the committeewas made, in which it was stated that the right of electionwas in \h^freemerv\ of the borough ; and that the election de ^l^!^!^lpended upon the allowing or disallowing of 24 votes, whichhad been given for Mr. Booth, by freemen who were madeon the 17th of August, not on a court day ; the writ for theelection in the place of the deceased member, being orderedby the House on the 13th of August, and tested on the 16th,on which day it was discussed at Dartmouth. — It was admitted,the mayor might call a court on any day : — that formerly J Makingthe freemen were made by the consent of the mayor, andthe greater part of the magistrates of the borough — thatwhen these frees were made, there were only five magistrates,besides the mayor, two of whom were unqualifiedfor not taking the oaths : — and at the meeting at which thesefreemen were made, there were only present three magistratesand the mayor : — Mr. Mudd and Mr. Wordsworth protestedagainst their being made, but Saunders agreeing with themayor, (Mr. Whitrow,) and Mr. Cato claiming a casting vote,Here, and again also in the same year, only one bailiff is spoken of, thoughthe bailiffs are mentioned in the plural number throughout the charter of £edwardIV. In the Ludlow case, 1597, it was made a serious ground of complaint againstthe bailiffs, that they had not demanded the precept in the plural, but in the singularnumber— 6ai/i^.t The term ** freemen'* properly means the liberi homines : — that is, the burgessesof the borough.X It does not appear to how long a period this word *' formerly " is applicable : —no doubt the introduction of the practice was long after the charter of EdwardIV. :— in all probability during the reign of Henry VIII. or Queen Mary.986 DARTMOUTH.Edw^V. he ordered the town clerk to swear them. It appeared thatit was usual when there were not sufficient freemen for theservice of the town, to make new freemen : — and that onlyttcwiuUon. freemen were returned on juries. The committee resolved,that " these freemen were not duly and legally made ;" seatedthe petitioner : — and ordered the mayor into the custody ofthe serjeant-alarms.*With respect to these extracts from the Journals, it shouldBurgesses. be observed, that as the charters only speak of burgessesand the early returns were no doubt by them, if the rightFreemen. was truly found to be in the freemen as here stated, thosefreemen must have been the burgesses: which indeed appearsto have been the fact ; as there is a petition in 1699,of the ^^free burgesses' a term affording a ready explanationto both the appellations, by showing them to be synonymous,and to be both included in the word 'free burgess*' Andthis is altogether consistent with the early history of otherboroughs, by which it has been seen, that anciently the bur-liberiho gesses were called 'liberi homines'' who, however, were totallydifferent from the class of persons now elected in most corporationsby the magistrates or common council, and improperlycoed freemen. The ancient " liberi homines " or " burgesses"Court lee. were presented at the court leet. And as the general j jurisdictionof that court was taken away by the statute of EdwardIV., perhaps the magistrates, (who were in many boroughsenabled to hold the sessions,) might in this gradually haveassumed to themselves the right of electing the freemen. Thishowever was a manifest usurpation : and cannot be placedin a more objectionable view than by considering the unconstitutionalanomaly, that the jury should be returned outof the freemen, whom the magistrates are said to have hadthe power of electing ; and so might confine the number toany the smallest above 12. The effect of which would be,that there might be only 12 freemen :f — all of whom mustconsequently be upon the pannel, producing a standing juryThis seems to have produced some sensation in the country, as the Mayor ofChester appears to have been deterred from making freemen, by the dread of thisexample. See Chester case, 1690, 10th Journ. p. 357.t The fact is so at Bossincy, in Cornwall.DARTMOUTH. 987without the possibility of challenge by any person, who ^^^' sunderthe full jurisdiction given to the mayor, bailiffs andburgesses by the charter of Edward IV., might be compelledto sue in their court. An evil nearly approachingto this, seems to have actually arisen afterwards in thisborough. For in the proceedings upon the petition in 1701,it appears that there had been two cases for trial at the sessions;and two juries being wanted, it was said there werenot freemen sufficient to form them. The judge therefore,from necessity, directed some more freemen to be made, athing totally out of his province to order ; but the necessityfor doing so, is sufficient proof of the state into whichthe borough was brought by this absurd and anomalous usage,to say nothing of the obvious want of any legal origin for acustom which confined the juries to such freemen as these, —particularly as at the same time it is impossible not to besatisfied that the juries were originally taken only out of theancient liberi homines, or burgesses for whom these modemfreemen were substituted. Indeed it will be seen, from thesubsequent extracts from the Journals, that the usage contendedfor on this point is placed upon so many differentgrounds, that it carries along with it the clearest marks ofinnovation, and cannot be supposed as a legal custom.Long subsequent to the charter of James I., we find a^wm^iii.disfranchisement by the whole commonalty and not by aselect body.There was, in this year, another petition ; but being resumedin the next session, in a different form, it was dismissed.In the tenth year of William III., upon the death of one jq^^jjjof the members, there was a new election for the borough :and a petition by the sheriff of the county followed upon it,which speaks of the election having been made by theburgesses and freemen ; who these were, whether the same Burgesses.*^ ^ ' Freemen.persons, or two different classes, does not appear.The petition of one of the candidates stated, that he waselected by all the " capital burgesses but one, and most of biig^^i.the rightful freemen ; and that the other candidate wasegg DARTMOUTH.i-klw. IV. elected by the other capital burgess, and other persons whohad no right to vote.There was another petition of all the magistrates but one —all the common council — and the greater number of freeFree bur burgesses — suggesting an ancient usage for the magistrate, orthe first 12 masters, or the greater number of them, with theFreemen, mayor, to make freemen ; and it is there added, that thiswas declared to be the right of the magistrates or masters,by the vote of the House of Commons in 1689, which, amere inspection of the Journal will show to be inaccurate,as no such vote passed. It is true, the right of makingfreemen by somebody seems then not to have been denied.But it should be observed, that in that case it was unnecessaryto deny the right generally, because, in the particularinstance, it was clear at all events, that the righthad been unduly exercised ; and it surely is carrying a negativedecision in a particular case too far to say, that it isan affirmative decision as to cases in which the particularground of that decision did not exist.This very petition shows itself the unworthy purposes forwhich these usurped usages were attempted to be supported ;as it appears that one of the parties to them had done it toget himself, and any person whom he pleased, returned asaparliamentary man.low^in '^^® petition of another candidate stated, that he wasFreemen, elected by the old indispu table /reewe«.Another petition, by the magistrates, common council, andFree bur free burgesses, was also presented.Report. The report of the committee states the election to havebeen made by the burgesses ; and that the election of oneof the candidates was said to be by several of the burgesses,and the other by several of the magistrates mid free burgesses: —and neither candidate was held to be duly elected, but theelection was reported void.1699. In an action for a false return to a mandamus, it was alleged,that King Edward III., granted to the burgesses of Dartmouth,a charter to elect a mayor, de seisin, annually ; andby constitutions made in the reign of Queen Elizabeth andDARTMOUTH. 989King James I., and long usage made in pursuance thereof, Edw.iv.the method was, for the common council to propose two persons,and for the freemen to choose one out of them. Thatthus it continued till 1641, when a bye-law was made forthe repealing all former bye-laws; and ordaining, that forthe future, elections should be made by the freemen at large ; Freemen atand, accordingly, the two succeeding elections were so made.In the year 1684, the old charter was surrendered : but thesurrender was never enrolled : and a new charter wasgranted, under which the town made a bye-law, repealingthe bye-law made in 1681. The court resolved, first, thatthough by the grant of Edward III., the election was to beby the freemen at large ; yet this might be restrained andregulated by usage and bye-laws, to the choice of one out oftwo only. Secondly, that the bye-law in 1681 had wellrestored the ancient and primitive constitution, and repealedthose bye-laws that altered it. Thirdly, that the surrenderof the old charter was void for want of an enrolment, ^y®'**Charter.Fourthly, as to the new charter and bye-laws made under it,the court held, that if those that were members under theold charter happened to be the only persons that acted, theyshould be deemed to act by virtue of their ancient and trueright; but if commit with others that were only membersunder the new charter, though the old members were themajority, yet they must be taken to act by virtue of thenew charter, and then what they did was void.*There was also a mandamus at this time to admit certain 1700.12WUL1II.persons who claimed as apprentices and sons of freemen. Apprehendabout this period the word " elected," upon which we shavebefore commented, was generally applied to the admissionof freemen.For the select body of the common council, whom we haveseen gradually assuming the power to themselves of " electing" the burgesses, at this time openly insisted upon theirright : and, in defiance of the law, charters, and documentswe have before quoted, made an ordinance, stating thatthe ancient and undoubted right of making freemen, was in• Salk. 190, Butler v. Palmer, S. C. 12 Mod. 247.990 DARTMOUTH.Edw. 1 V. the mayor and major part of the masters or magistrates of theborough.isvvmiii. ^^ ^^'^ y^^^ there was another petition against the returnof the members for this borough.* It appears there wasmuch question respecting the returning officer and whowas the proper mayor. As to the poll the petitioner objectedto 14 voters, as made free without a competent number ofthe chamber ; there being only the mayor present and fiveothers, two of whom went away before they were made free,so that there were only the mayor and three magistratespresent, whereas it was generally thought, that the mayorand six magistrates are necessary to make freemen, and theusage was found to be so from 1671. It was said, thatat the same time some eldest sons of freemen demanded theirfreedom, and were denied by the mayor. One person proved,that he had been made free, and should not have been so ifhe had not promised to vote for one of the candidates. Themayor was proved to have said of one of the proposed candidates," that they would make freemen enough to keephim out."The order stated before, of 1558, was read, and also that offreemen ^^^2. Two were objected to ^% honorary freemen, becausethe oath is different from that of a trading freeman the latterobliging them to perform the duties of the corporation, whichis not so in the former.Some were objected to as having been made free on preferment.hence of being 50W* of freemen, or having served apprentices^^^P^> ^^d four as made by several mayors on claim of aright of every mayor of himself to make one freeman in hismayoralty.A mandamus was referred to as suggesting a custom, thatsuch as were eldest sons of freemen, or had served serpentyears apprenticeship to freemen, had right to their freedom,which was denied by several of the chamber. The inconveniencesalluded to before of the juries, being confined to the freemen,whose number were so small, were mentioned : — And it• 13 Journ. 580.t Stated also to be sho at Lyme, on petition in 1689; see loth Journ. p. 140.DARTMOUTH. 991is said that there was a want of freemen to serve on juries at ^^- ^^'certain trials : And that the judge had ordered the mayor toadmit freemen, which was done immediately. One witnessproved that for 40 years the usual custom of making men free,was by the mayor, and major part of the magistrates whoappeared ; and he added, that the practice of the mayor's Mayor'sfreeman was grounded on this, that " the mayoress would choose '^'"*"'an able man, and by the consent of the magistrates, he wasmade free*' A practice so absurd, as to negative all probabilityof its having had a legal commencement — taking awayall weight from the evidence.In answer to the objections which were made to the eldestsons of freemen, and those who had served apprenticeships,the counsel for the petitioners put the matter on a groundwhich shows what the real nature of this supposed rightwas : — they did not found it upon any charter granted to thisplace, or any particular custom or usage applicable to thisborough, but upon the general law of the land, contending,that ** by the law of England, the eldest sons of freemen, andthose who served apprenticeships, were entitled to theirfreedom." How the supposed right of primogeniture wasintroduced, as well as upon what ground the claim of theapprentices was founded, we have elsewhere shown. — Instancesof the admission of both these sorts of freemen,upon the payment of small sums, were proved on the petition,as well as of the mayor's freemen — one for eachmayor: — but none since 1672. — ^^The sitting members were Memberconfirmed m their seats.At this time the select body and the corporation seem 1706.to have carried their usurpations to the greatest and mostopen extent : for the mayor, aldermen, and magistratesmade a bye-law, by which they took to themselves the soleright of making freemen.The account of this place given by Browne Willis ought l^^^-to have been accurate and perfect. For he informs us in wus.his preface to the second volume, that " he had derived greatassistance in his work from Mr. Michael Peach of Dartmouth: — particularly with respect to that borough. And992 DARTMOUTH.^** ' ^Zl ^^^^* '^^ ^'^^ communicated to him much respecting otherboroughs in that county — as well as in Cornwall, — extendingto the better half of the boroughs in Devonshire, andthree or four in the latter county."Willis says,* that " at this time the town and bar of Dartmouthbelonged to the corporation, which consisted of amayor, recorder, 12 masters or magistrates. The mayor,with the majority of masters or magistrates, having powerto make freemen and elect officers, viz., two bailiffs, a townclerk, and high steward. — they keep a court of session, anda water bailiwick court, by virtue of a lease of three livesfrom the duchy of Cornwall, for which they pay a head orchief rent of about 14Z. per annum."The choice of members of Parliament, is," he says, " inthe freemen 78 in number, created by the mayor and magistrates."In the oath of a freeman for this place, it is provided, aswe have seen in many others, that *' he should contribute to*' all rates and payments for the welfare, good, power, and** support of the corporation, the mayor and his brethren."1763. The term " alderman" appears for the first time in the3 Geo. III. .books, in the beginning of the reign of George III., and wastotally unknown to the ancient records and charters of thetown.1793. Ill 1793, a petition was presented by Mr. Scale against thereturn of Mr. Bastard, and the right honourable John CharlesVillicot.t — ^^The committee reported, that ^^The merits of ^^Thesutemonts petition having in part depended upon the right of election,riBhte, they had required from the parties statements of the right.That for the petitioner, was,inhabitanu Tliat the right was in the inhabitanus of the borough,Southtown being a part of it.That for the sitting member, was,Freemen. That the right was in t\iQ freemen of the borough.The committee negatived the right stated by the petitioner,Resolution. and affirmed that stated by the sitting member ; and reportedthe petition frivolous and vexatious.• bro. Willis, 367. f Jour. 48, p. 211. 281.DARTMOUTH. 993The Journal contains no other information as to this peg ^^- ^^''titian.It seems that the statement of the petitioner, that theright was in the ** inhabitants" was too large ; and probablythe committee were correct in deciding against that right sostated. Because in all boroughs the comprehensive wordinhabitants" has some qualification ; and should have hadsome limit in this.The committee, in 1689, having decided that the right wasin the freemen, the petitioner in this case should have endeavouredto have reconciled his statement with that decision,and for that purpose have adopted the term " freemenand have shown that they meant " burgesses" that is, theinhabitants paying scot and lot : and the early history of theborough would have supported that explanation : — it wasclear the word ^^ freeman" was substituted for "burgess," — andit was a fair and cogent observation to contend, that in 1689,both parties stood upon an election by the then freemen, andthat the committee was not called upon at that time to saywho the freemen were, but they took the right, as it wasstated to them on both sides, to be in the freemen.Whether the case, in 1793, was put upon these grounds or 1793.not, can only be ascertained by referring to the minutes of theevidence on that occasion, and the arguments urged by counselIt appears that Mr. Gibbs, who was counsel for the sittingmember, in his summing-up contended, that it was not onlya " borough by prescription," but also a " corporation by pre Corpora-description;" a fact we have most distinctly disproved by the acription.documents before cited. And as the case must have principallyturned upon that position, the committee were probably misledby that uncontradicted assertion: — Mr. Gibbs also relied uponDr. Brady, the merits of whose work have been already canvassed.He also relied upon many of the cases to which wehave before alluded, where, upon the unfounded doctrinesof Dr. Brady, decisions had been made in favour of thecorporate freemen, contrary to the clear evidence adducedbefore the committee, as in the cases of Lyme and Poole.Mr. Gibbs also asserted, in order to support the rights of3s994 DARTMOUTH.Edw. IV. selection in the common council, that the body who had theGoverning power of making bye-laws, was the " governing body ; ** —words which undoubtedly sound largely, but which eithermean little, or are untrue. If, by the governing body, is meantno more than the body which had the power of making bye-laws,then it is a simple truism, and carries it no further thanthe charter itself: — but if it is meant to assert by thosewords, that those who have the power of making bye-laws,have any further special power as the governing body in thecorporation, then it is untrue; for no point in law is moreclear — than that if the king by his charter creates a selectbody with any special power, as that of making bye-laws,or otherwise, their authority is strictly limited to that specialpower, and cannot go beyond it.On the contrary, if the body having the power of makingbye-laws, is not created by the charter, but by the burgessesamongst themselves, then such body has a baredelegated authority, liable at any time to be determined bythose who created it, and the description of the "governingbody of the town" can in no sense be applied to it.Mr. Gibbs cited as an authority for his position, the caseButchers of the Butchers' Company against More, 1 Hen. Black.,Company. gyQ . jj^ which case, the power was expressly granted tothe company, of making bye-laws for the government ofthe trade ; and it certainly is not a case coming within thesame rules as municipal charters ; and the power was theregiven to the whole company, and not to any select part of it.The general result arising from all the documents statedabove, is, that Dartmouth was, in all probability, made amade"a sough Subsequently to the compilation of Domesday, in theborough, reign of William the Conqueror, and before the end of thereign of Edward I.: — because it is not mentioned as a boroughin Domesday, and it returned members in the 26th ofEdward I. There is reason to think it was made so after the6th of King John, because in that year its quinine waspaid : and in the Melbourne Port case, in 1628, it is said, inthe report of the committee, that boroughs paid tenths andnot fifteenths. Any charter, therefore, creating this place aDARTMOUTH. 995borough, must have been in the period between the sixth Edw. IV.year of King John, and the 26th of Edward I.: — an intervalof 93 years. And if this borough was purchased byEdward I., the question would be, whether, at the time ofhis purchase it was called a borough ; if it was not, theprobability would be, that it was made a borough by thatking, shortly after his purchase ; if any charter of that datecould be discovered, it would throw considerable light onthe early constitution of this borough, — but none such is tobe found.The right of voting is reported by the committee, in 1689,to be in the freemen; and the committee of 1793 adopt the Freemen,statement of the sitting members, which states the right preciselyin the same manner. Under the statute of the 2ndGeorge II., the right therefore must, before the reform act,have been taken to be in the freemen, which, according tothe manner we have explained that term, must have meantthe inhabitant householders paying scot and lot. That it iscapable of that explanation is most clear, because the termliberi homines" occurs so frequently in our ancient laws and L»^" ^^statutes, as descriptive of the ^^freemen^^ under the commonlaw, and not, as now supposed, of the members of a corporation.That this is the proper explanation of the word freeman,is shown also by the history of boroughs in general,and of this place in particular. And there can be no doubt,that anciently, the burgesses were the free inhabitants orliberi homines," within the borough, who having done theirsuit at the court leet, by giving their pledges there, andby being sworn to the king and the borough, were thereuponduly enrolled at the court : and consequently, became liableto scot and lot — the wages of the members to Parliament —and all the other burdens of the borough. And such burgesseswere, no doubt, the persons who made the return forthis borough in the 26th Edward I.— the I4th Edward III.—and in the subsequent reigns: — as well as the persons towhom the charters of Edward III. — Richard II., — and EdwardIV. — were granted. It is impossible not to draw theconclusion from the last charles, that the burgesses who thenmines.996 DARTMOUTH.Edw.iv. existed in the old borough, and those who were added toinhabited from the new borough, were the inhabitants; and ofthe description mentioned above, namely, — the sworn andenrolled householders who paid scot and lot; particularly asaview of frankpledge is one of the privileges granted by thatcharter. It was probably in this, or the next succeedingreigns, that the admission of freemen into the privileges ofthe borough, by the head officers of the borough, commenced.It should be remembered also, that it was in thisreign that the statute passed, directing the indictments foundLeets. in the leet, to be referred to the sessions; which, in effect,brought much of the jurisdiction of the leet into disuse, andmust have materially affected the jurisdiction of the boroughs.In the succeeding reigns, therefore, charters toboroughs, incorporating them, and giving the present corporateconstitutions, were frequently granted : — one powerJustices, usually given, being that of having their own justices of thepeace, and sessions. Ordinarily there was added a commoncouncil. As the charter of the 2nd of Henry VIII., in 1511,speaks of the mayor, bailifl's, and burgesses ; and the constitutionmade in the fifth year of the reign of Queen Mary,Common ]q^^ first mentions the common counciL it was, in all pro-council.' ' ' rability, by some charter granted in the interval betweenthese dates — being a period of 47 years — that the commoncouncil was created, who afterwards exercised the risfht ofmaking freemen. Whether any such charter gave themthat power, or they assumed it, is quite indifferent to thisquestion : — because, in neither case could it affect the rightRight of of voting. — For the charter of the crown has no effect onVOtlDfiTthat right, according to the Cheltenham case,* in Glanville'sreports, and the doctrine laid down in the secondInstitute. Nor could the burgesses by any bye-law makeregulations to affect the right of election, as appears by theDover case,* also in Glanville's reports : although such bye-lawsmight be binding as to their own corporate concerns.The conclusion from which is — that although such freemenso made by the common council, might have all the privilegesSee (glanville, pp. 47 and 63.DARTMOUTH. 997of the corporation annexed to their situation of corporate Ji^^« ^^^'freemen, they would not have the right ofelectioriy with respectto which the whole system was a usurpation.Such is the history of Dartmouth, from the full elucidationof which, afforded by the numerous documents we havequoted, the reader will see the gradual progress of perversionand usurpation in the borough; and the confusion, uncertainty,and intricacy, produced by those means.; particularlywith respect to the freemen, and the power of swearing andenrolling them.We have only to hope, that the documents relative to thisplace, and the authorities of all kinds which we have quoted,will serve to enable the reader to unravel this intricate maze,and to arrive at a sound conclusion, not only with respect tothe history of Dartmouth, but also generally of the otherboroughs.Edward IV., in the fourth year of his reign,* gave orders, York,by letters patent under his great seal, touching the mannerof electing the mayor of York yearly ; directing that all the Mayor,searchers of every mystery within the liberty and city should Mysteries,be summoned, and that all artificers of mysteries shouldpersonally appear in the guildhall of the city.But the letters patent neither refer to, nor give, any corporatepowers.Dunwich received at this period a charter of confirmation, Dunwich,1465.with a few additional privileges, but none of incorporationThis kins: also recites in a charters that he had been in- Dop^"^'-^ ^ ^ 1467.formed, on the behalf of the now burgesses, tenants, resiants,and inhabitants of the town of Doncaster, in the county ofYork, that for a long time they had had and enjoyed certainfree liberties and customs; and the burgesses, &c.,fearing that they, of these liberties and free customs, by adefect in a specification of the same, and upon other emergencies,in process of time, might be molested, aggrieved,obstructed, and incommoded, most humbly besought the king• Rym. Feed. torn. xi. p. 529. Mad, Fir. Bur. p. 33. t Rot. Carton. 7.J Rot. Cart, 5 Edw. IV. n. 2.998 CHARTERS.tdw. IV. that he would graciously condescend, the aforesaid libertiesDoncaster. and free customs, in declarative and express terms, to thelurorpn. same burgesses tenants, resiants, and inhabitants, and totheir heirs and successors, to grant ; and to incorporate them,and make them persons fit and capable, with perpetual succession,&c.The king, listening to their supplication, granted, that thetown of Doncaster should be a free borough ; and that theburgesses, tenants, resiants, and inhabitants of the same, andBurgesses, their heirs and successors, should be free burgesses. Thatthey might have a guild-merchant; and might enjoy thesame liberties and free customs in the same borough, as theyand their predecessors had theretofore reasonably used andOne com- endowed. And that they, from thenceforth, should be inreality and name, one body, and one perpetual community.That the same community, every year, in a certain placewithin the borough, might at their pleasure, choose outMayor, of themselves one fit person for mayor, and two others forserjeants-at-mace of the town, and in the town dwelling, torule and govern the community aforesaid for ever.sorts.* The king, after confirming all previous charters and liberos'ties, granted to the mayors, bailiffs, and jurats, of every port,and member of the ports,* by the commons of the sameelected, and for the common profit of the barons, good men,inhabitant inhabitants, that they miofht record their liberties andtan*''- n 1 /- 1 1 •free customs before the kmg's justices and ministers. Thatthe barons, good men of the Cinque Ports, their heirs andResident, successors, and whosoever were resident within the ports, andmembers contributing to the service and shipping, should bequit for ever of toll, murage, and scot — suits of counties andhundreds — and lathes of hundreds — views of frankpledge —and of monies appertaining thereto, &c. And for the maintenanceof the shipping and service, every mayor and jurassicevery port — and member of the ports — and members wherea mayor and jurats are — and every bailiff and jurat in everyport — and member of the same ports — and members wheresuch bailiff, by the commons of such port, is elected — and♦ Rot. Cart. 5 Edw. IV. n. 23.Charters. 999also the jurats in every port and member, where neither i^ciw. iv.mayor nor bailiff, by the commons of such port or member,is elected — and their successors for ever, might have allmanner of fines, &c., of all the barons, and oi\iQX resiants ;and that they, the barons and good men, might for ever haveleets and late-days of residents vnthin their liberty, &c.Jurisdiction is also given them over personal pleas, &c.This charter to the Cinque Ports contains no words ofincorporation, notwithstanding they were places at that timeundoubtedly of great importance.Upon the other hand, the borough of Bridgwater received Bridgwatera charter of incorporation, in the 10th year of this reign;*the provisions of which, and the privileges granted by it, are,in effect, the same as those of the previous charters, and donot require repetition.WEN LOCK.Wenlock received, in this reign, a peculiar charter, containinga clause which, apparently, granted the privilege ofreturning members to Parliament. As introductory to thisdocument, we shall give a few of the early records, illustrativeof the ancient history of this place.In the Saxon aera, Wedlock was celebrated as a religiousestablishment; and the sacred virgin, Milburga, the daughter Abbess,of King Herald, and niece of Wolphere, King of Mercia,presided there as abbess.Wenlock is not mentioned as a borough in Domesday ; it Domesdayis entered as part of the lands of the church of Tilbury, inPatintune hundred ; and there is nothing said of it, which ismaterial to its municipal or parliamentary history.There was a charter in the 20th of Edward I., to the prior 1291.of Wenlock, of free warren in that and 13 other places.In the 21st of Edward III., John Aaron Kensington, clerk, 1347.gave to the prior of Wenlock one messuage and one violateof land in Little Wenlock.• Rot. Cart. 10 Edw. IV. n. 8.t The British njiine of Wenlock was '* Plan Meilien/* or "St. Milburgh'sChurch ;" and in Dugdale's Monastic, it is called " Winnie," or the *' Windyplace."loo WEN LOCK.Edw. IV. From this period to the reign of Edward IV., no other1468. material documents occur with respect to this place, nor isthere any trace of its having been incorporated ; but in theeighth year of this reign, a charter was granted. It islU'sidtnts. expressly a grant to the residents. Wenlock appears notto have been a borough before the grant of this charter,as it is called the town of Wenlock : — and it is clear, from thegeneral wording of this document, that the burgesses, accordingto the ancient mode of expression, were " the men ofthe boroughs' — or the persons ofy or belonging to it: becausethe power to elect the first bailiff, is to elect one fromthemselves, — that is, the burgesses : — and the clause for thefuture election of a bailiff, is to elect one from the morehonest and more sit persons of the borough.The charter itself recites,* that it was granted at therequest of Sir John Wenlock, Kent., Lord Wenlock, and inResident. consideration of the services of the liege men and residentsin the town of Wenlock ; and the king being willing toconfer his grace upon the same men and resiantSy granted toMen. the men and residents, that the town should be incorporate, ofIncorporate bailiff, and the burgesses and commonalty of the borough,and that they, the burgesses, should be called and named,the Burgesses of the borough of Wenlock."The name of incorporation is here only " burgesses,"which shows that the " liege mens " residents and " commonalty,' are only synonymous terms for " burgess andincluded in it.Power is given to the burgesses to elect and choose, fromBailiff, amongst themselves, one bailiff, for the government of thesame town, who is duly to take his oath of office. And theclause describing those who are to be eligible as bailiffs,mentions them as " the most honest and fit persons," —using that as the description of the person who is, accordingto the charter, to be the bailiff elected, " de seisin," — thatis, one of the liege men, residents, or commonalty. In theclause describing the limits, the town or borough are usedas synonymous.• Mad. Fir. Bur. p. 29.Wedlock. 1001A merchant guild is granted and the usual privileges Edw. iv.and exemptions, as before mentioned, particularly as to Merchant,purveyance : from whence an inference has been drawn,that this was a borough by prescription : — but it mighthave had privileges without being a borough or corporation,and those privileges might have been acquiredsubsequent to the first exercise of the parliamentary franchise,in the reigns of John, Henry III., or Edward I.As the burgesses residing in the borough are mentioned,an inference might be suggested, that some of the burgessesmight be non-resident : — but taking the whole chartertogether, it is evident it could not be so ; because thegrant is to the residents ; and the burgesses are throughout Residents,mentioned as synonymous with that term.The charter also grants to the men and residents and burgessestheir heirs, &c., that all the men, inhabiting or toinhabit within the aforesaid town, &c., shall be at scot and Scot andlot with them, the burgesses, in aids, talliages, and taxationswhatsoever.It also provides for a weekly court — and that the bailiffsshould be justices — and that there should be a recorder or Justices,steward. The county justices not intermeddling.To these privileges are added, the assise of bread ; returnof writs, summons, estreats, precepts of the Exchequer, &c. ;and the extracts and precepts of the justices itinerant. Andit is provided that, no sheriff, bailiff, or other minister ofthe king, shall enter the town, the parish, and precinct, to Non-intrudeany thing belonging to his office, unless in default ofthe bailiff.After which follows the important clause, that the bur PwUMnent*gesses may elect, out of themselves or others, one burgessfor the borough, for Parliament, who shall be received andincorporated in Parliament like other burgesses.And that the same burgesses of the town aforesaid, shallnot contribute to the expence of knights for the county ofSalop in any manner.It should in conclusion be observed, that in this charterthere is no grant of a view of frankpledge, as there is in the1002 WEN LOCK.Edw. IV. London charter of the same reign. And the reader cannotfail to note the singular use of the word " incorporated," asapplied to the representative in Parliament : — ^and the expressexemption of the burgesses from the payment of thewages for the knight of the shire : which was probably expresslyintroduced, as it was a newly created parliamentaryborough.1627. Charles I. granted a confirmation of this and other .I. . =*ters, in the third year of his reign, to the two bailiffs, 20aldermen, and 48 common councilmen.1710. In the seventh year of the reign of Queen Anne,* a petitionof several burgesses, residing and inhabiting within the parishof Wenlock, complaining that all the burgesses inhabitingand residing within that parish had the sole right to vote ;but in violence of their rights, many hundreds, who wereNon-resin non-residents were made burgesses, and admitted to poll.Upon this petition there was no report — nor does it appear1722. that the right of election for this place was ever determined,although, in point of fact, it has been exercised by themembers of the corporation, under the general name ofburgesses.Bewdiey. The king also, at the humble supplication of the burgessesand inhabitants of the town of Bewdiey y-^ granted that thetown, with the precincts of the same, for ever should be afree borough ; % and the burgesses of the same town, and precinctsof the same, should for ever be corporate ; and that thesame burgesses, and their successors, burgesses of the town,Corporate, should be Corporate, and be one perpetual community, inName, body, deed, and name, by the name of " the Burgessesof the town of Bewdiey, and precincts of the same ; " thatthey might have perpetual succession, and a common seal ;Capable, and be persons fit and capable in law ; and that they andtheir successors, might be able to take lands, tenements,&c. ; that every one of the aforesaid burgesses for the timebeing, should be released, through all the kingdom of• 3 Willis, p. 42. t Harl. MS. 464. p. 184 B.X Pet. MS. 78.CHARTERS. 1003England, in toll, pontage, &c., and of all other customs, for ^^^' ^^*all their goods and merchandises, in every place within Bentley.the kingdom : — any statute, act, or order to the contrary, orany other thing, notwithstanding.In an inspeximus of a record of the council in the office of Bury.1480.the privy seal,* a judgment appears to have been given by thechancellor and judges upon the part of the abbot of St. Edmund'sagainst Thornton, and others inhabiting the town.The abbot produced charters of Edmund, Canute, Hardicanute,Edward the Confessor, and other kings of England,with other records. The inhabitants produced no records :but alleged a prescriptive custom, that the alderman shoulddepute and ordain the constables, keeper of the market, andwatch. But judgment was awarded, " that the abbot of thesaid monastery is lord of the town of Bury : — that no alderman,constable, gaoler, keeper of markets or fairs, nor anyother officer, could or ought to be in the same town, exceptby the permission of the abbot ; and that the aldermanshould not intromit — and that the men inhabiting the townshould not have an incorporated community — ^nor a commonseal ; and that they had not the powers or rights ofan incorporated community — nor had they any head orcaptain, except the abbot, their lord ; and that the men Not incogwere excluded from the exception of prescriptionof time and use. That the abbot had all pleas of the crown,and every thing belonging to them — and the right of makingthe aldermen and all other officers."Bury has always been treated as a corporation, and has,like other places, been alleged to be so by prescription. Italso had many privileges like other boroughs, particularlyan alderman — probably from the Saxon times, like the boroughof Gales — and yet we have it established by this document,and the decision of the council with the assistance ofthe chancellor and judges, that it was not a corporation: —and it is the more striking that this fact occurs in this reign,when, as we have shown, incorporations were gradually becominggeneral.• Rot. Pat. p. 20, m. 26. 1 Pet. MS. 65 B.1004 evilSHAM.Edw. IV.EVESHAM.1482. A writing indented of this date recites,* that the bailiff ofEvesham had sustained great loss in gathering the rents,amercements, and profits, growing at Michaelmas, in consequenceof the new bailiffs being chosen at Michaelmas,whereby the old bailiffs could not so well gather the profitsat that time due, with which, nevertheless, they were alwaysaccustomed to be charged : for removing of which evils itwas finally concluded for ever, by the assistance as well ofthe abbot of the monastery, the prior, the kichener, thesteward of the courts of the monastery, the two new bailiffs,and the two old bailiffs, and eighteen other persons by name,that the then bailiffs should collect all the rents due at thelast Michaelmas ; and all amercements, pains, forfeits andLaw-day. profits, growing and coming of the last latc-dai/y holden atEvesham, the Friday before Michaelmas-day, as they appearby the extracts thereof, made and delivered to the new bailiffs; and to continue the kichener thereof, and dischargethe old bailiffs therefrom ; and that the new bailiffs, to bechosen at the next Michaelmas, should collect the rents,&c. which would become due at that time — any other use,custom, &c. to the contrary notwithstanding ; the bailiffs ofEvesham yearly paying to the kichener of the monastery 20marks. And that the old bailiffs, yearly for ever, at Michaelmaslaw-days, should find brad, cheese, and ale, competentSteward, and Convenient to the cellerer, steward and curtsy to eat anddrink like as aforetime hath been used, when the old bailiffshad the gathering, levying, receipt, and charge of the saidrents, amercements, pains, forfeitures, and other profits;and in likewise so continue for ever. In witness whereof toone part, remaining with the bailiffs and their successors forever,the said abbot, prior, kichener, and steward, have settheir seals ; and to the other part, remaining with the saidabbot and his successors for ever, the said now bailiffs,in the name of the inhabitants and all others of thesaid town, have set their seal of office of bailiffs, and the♦ Carl. Ant Aug. Off. Y. 43.EVESHAM. 1005bailiffs of the last year, and the 18 other persons before ^^' ^^'mentioned.From this document it appears, beyond all controversy,that there was a law-day or court leet held within Eveshamat this time ; and had been so for many years before : as isshown by the frequent expressions in the deed referring to theformer usage, in terms which evidently import antiquity. —It is also clear, that although the monastery received somepart of the profits of the court, the remainder was received bythe bailiffs for the inhabitants ; and it is singular that Evesham,although an ecclesiastical possession, should not havebeen incorporated, like the many other places we have previouslycited.KINGSTON-UPON-THAMES.Edward IV., in the 20th year of his reign, after inspecting ^480.and confirming all the previous charters which the town ofKing ston-upon- Thames had received — and reciting howmuch the inhabitants had lost by the payment of the fee-fanny,and by the inundations of the waters, and that themen and their successors should enjoy all the premises, Men.without ambiguity as to grants contained in previous charters,granted to the freemen ; that they should be one body Freemen,in deed and name — and one perpetual corporation of two Corpora-bailiffsand freemen ; that they should have perpetual succession— and by the name of" the bailiffs and freemen of thetown of Kingston-upon-Thames, in the county of Surrey,"plead and be impleaded — purchase lands in fee and perpetuity— have a common seal — and make ordinances for thegovernment of the town.That the bailiffs and men, their heirs and successors,should have, within the town, all forfeitures of lands, &c. offelons, &c. ; and all kinds of amercements ; and no escheator,or clerk of the market, should enter within the town.TRURO.The borough of Truro appears, in the reign of Edward IV., U72.to have been in the hands of the crown, as this king:1006 TRURO.Edw.^y. granted this honor, borough, manor, and hundred, after thedecease of Katharine Mowbray, Duchess of Norfolk, to hillbrother George, Duke of Clarence ; and in this same reignReturn, there is a return of members of Parliament for this boroughby the mayor and his co-burgesses.Retiro ^^ ^^^ ^^^^ y^^^ ^' ^^ same reign, the return is by "theCommon mayor and commonalty of the borough for the commonalty ^^' How these and the preceding returns for Truro can, byany possible construction or interpretation, be confined to theselect body, as the elections have been in modem times, it isimpossible to conceive. — The proper construction would obviouslybe, to consider the " co-burgesses and the " commonaltyto mean the same persons ; because there is no reason forassuming that the body, returning the members, had beenaltered ; — nor is there any charter or document to raise anysupposition of that kind. And if co-burgesses and commonaltymeant the same, which is apparent, then these returnsInhabited as we have shown before, made by the inhabitants,who always enjoyed the rights of the place as burgesses.wants.WELLS.Entries in the corporation books for the borough of WellsInhabit establish, that the inhabitants of that place were, like manyothers, described by the general name of " men ; " as in theMen. 41st year of this reign, an honest " man'' is appointed tobe a magistrate of the borough. And in the sixth year,Apprentice is an ordinance, that all apprentices, of either sex, toburgesses, after service of their time, should be admitted(of which there are many instances) burgesses of the town,and pay wine, " pro ingress habendo*' and nothing more,for a fine, in the same manner as the sons of burgesses.And there are many entries of persons being admitted as^ons,&c. jfj^ygggg^g^ because they were the son, or had married thedaughters of burgesses. But there is a restraint put uponthe latter, that they shall not be taken into the liberty of thecity, unless they tender themselves within a year after themarriage ; which establishes, in conformity with the commonlaw, that the admission into the liberty meant actual resin1007hence within the city ; because if the party came to reside Edw. IV.within the city for a year, he would, according to the prin Residence,cipher to which we have before adverted, have been obligedto do his suit royal, by attending and giving his pledges,and being sworn and enrolled, either at the sheriff's toum, Toum.or at the court leet of some other place. Leet.Again, on the other hand, there are instances of personsbeing expelled from the liberty, " expulsion de libertate," formisconduct, and other reasons, which seems, from the formof the entries, clearly to mean an actual expulsion from thecity. And there is an entry of a person received into hisformer state and privilege of burgess ; which seems to bealso an actual reception into the city upon his return to it.And in 1483, there is an ordinance — in conformity with 1483.the writ and the statute of Henry V. — that no one shouldbe elected a burgess to Parliament who was not a swornburgess living within the borough,HYTHE.We find entries nearly resembling those of Wells in thecorporation books of the borough of Hythe.John Mathew accounts in the common hall, on the 22nd 1468.day of January, before the jurats^ on which day he wassworn as a freeman in right of his wife, the daughter of Husband.Martin Cole. And he agreed to pay 3^. 4rf. for his trade ofa carpenter, for four years.Again, William Cole, son of Martin Cole, late of West Son.lethe, accounted, in the common hall, on the day aforesaid,before the jurats ; on which day he was sworn as a freemanin right of the said Martin his father,Clement Otway accounted, in the common hall, on the ^ ]q\^x25th day of the month of January ; on which day he wasbefore the jurats admitted and received into the freedom ofthe town of Hethe, that he might enjoy the privileges thereof,and he was sworn. And he agreed to give for the purchaseof the said freedom 5.v.; and he agreed to pay 13d. for hisscot, Scot.Alexander Yong accounted, in the common hall, on the q /ouctb.1008 HYTHE.^'^ ^' 'V' 18th day of January, and agreed to pay 2d. for 2,000 her-husband.rings bought and sold, &c.; on which day he was swam tothe lord the king and to the towfij as free in right of hiswife,ofoLi93B. William Spruce accounted, in the common hall, on the18th day of January, &c.; on which day he was receivedinto the freedom of the town, that he might enjoy the privilegesthereof in right of his wife, and he was sworn, &c.This last entry appears to refer directly to an actual reception,as an inhabitant within the borough. The paymenttowards the scot in the former entry also indicates thesame ; and the inference from the whole seems to be, thatthe inhabitant householders paying scot and lot, were swornand enrolled before the jury, or " jurati," in conformity withthe principles and practice of the common law.PASTON LETTERS.*1472. We have before observed the interest taken in the reign ofHenry VI., by the great men of that day, in the election ofknights for the county of Norfolk, as shown by the PastorLetters We find indications to a similar effect in the sameletters of this date; in one of which, Mr. J. Pastor informshis brother, Sir John Pastor, that " his desire of knightof the shire was impossible, because John Mowbray, Dukeof Norfolk, and John de la Pole, Earl of Suffolk, wereagreed more than a fortnight before to have Sir RobertWyngfield and Sir Richard Harcourt ;'' and he adds, *' thatwhen he was at Franilingham, where he had warned SirJohn's friends to meet him, upon hearing the appointmentof the two other persons, he sent to desire them to tarry athome ; but still many of them went to Norwich, where theircosts were nine shillings and one penny half-penny, althoughthey only breakfasted there and departed."The letter proceeds to state, that " the writer had also sentto Yarmouth, and they had promised Dr. Aleyn and JohnRusse to be burgesses more than three weeks before. Andthat a letter had been written to the bailiff of Maldon, to have• Vide ante, p. 911. f Vol. 2, pp. lai and 107.PASTON Letters. 1009Sir John a burgess there;" and it is added, that " if he should E<lw. IV.miss to be burgess of Maldon, and the lord chamberlain*' would wish it, he might be in another place : there he a dozentowns in England that choose no burgess, which ought to do*^ it: he may be set in for one of those towns if he be friend."And the winter adds, " that Sir John should in nowise forgetto get some goodly ring at the price of 20^., or some prettyflower of the same price and not under, to give to Jane Ro-don,for she hath been the most special labourer in yourmatter, and hath promised her goodwill in future, and shedoth all with her mistress;* and if my lord chamberlain will,he may cause my Lord of Norfolk to come up sooner to Parliamentthan he should do, and then he may appoint withhim for you, &c."The suggestion in this letter, that there were other decayed Decayedboroughs which ought to send members to Parliament, butdid not, and that the disappointed candidate might takerefuge in one of them, was acted upon in the subsequentreigns, when Henry VIII., Edward VI., Queen Mary andQueen Elizabeth, restored many boroughs to the right ofreturning members, and would probably have continued todoso, had not a partial check been given to this course, bythe inquiry instituted in the House of Commons in the fifthyear of Queen Elizabeth, as we shall hereafter show in ourextract from D'D'Ewes' Journal of that date : — notwithstandingwhich, however, from the reign of Henry VIII., to that ofCharles II., no less than 200 members were added to theHouse of Commons.There is also another letter in the Pastor Collections from ^473.Sir John to his brother, informing him that at the request ofMrs. Jane Assert and himself, the writer had labouredboth the knights of the shire of Norfolk, and the knightsof the shire of Suffolk : — adding that he understood there hadbeen made labour that such a thing should have been as hewrote to him of, but that now it was safe.• Elizabeth, Duchess of Norfolk. t Pastor Letters, vol. ii. p. 122.3tlOU) NINTH Year BOOK.Kdw. IV.NINTH YEAR BOOK.We have seen that in this reign, grants of corporations werefrequent:* — and the doctrine of corporations by implicationbecame general ; thus it was assumed by the Courts in theirCorpora decisions, that a grant of land to the burgesses, citizens andcommonalty of any place, was sufficient to incorporate themby inference ;t the best authorities however appear to be opposedto that assumption : — which was in the earliest abridgmentsconfined also to the mere position that they were to beconsidered as corporations, for the purpose of securing thepayment of the fee-farm rent to the king, and not otherwise.We shall however best ascertain the doctrines prevalent atthis time as to corporations, by the extracts which will followi"n»m the Year Books.But before we proceed, it may not be improper to remark,that the aera in which these charters of incorporationwere so generally introduced, can not be relied upon as thebest period for satisfactory precedents, the times being somarked by turbulence and violence, and the acts of the kingbeing by no means free from the charge of irregularity.The manner in which Edward IV. spoke in his charters ofthe acts of his predecessor Henry IV'^., is one proof of this: —and as another, Lord Coke complains of the grant made by1467. the king of the office of constable of England, in the 7th yearof his reign, to Windmill, Earl of Rivers, and Lord of Graftonand De la Mote, for life, as irregular, and directly against thecommon law, and the statutes concerning the jurisdiction ofthat office. JBut to proceed with the Year Books.1462. In an action of trespass for battery and imprisonment,Fol.lSB, ^ . - . / . .M. T. against the abbot of M westminster, it was urged in justification,iter, that the place where, &c., was within the precincts of the monasteryof Westminster; and that the monastery — and alltheir houses — and the soil within the precincts — was a saneKyd, 62. t 7th Wwanl IV.: eut Edward IV. 56; 21^t Edward IV. 57.♦ 4 Inst. 127.NINTH YEAR BOOK. IQHtuary for all manner of debts, trespasses and other things, ^^' IV-andlikewise for felony and treason ; and that it had been so'from time immemorial. And that every personal action madewithin it, had been sued before the commissioners of theabbot. It was said, in the course of the argument, that if aman be impleaded of land here, for land which he has inthe city of London, he shall not answer, but he shall be im London,pleaded before the hustings.The relative situation of Westminster and London at thistime, appears from this document : the former, preserving stillits original charter of an ecclesiastical establishment, havingecclesiastical jurisdiction; and as incident to it, the privilegeof sanctuary : the latter having temporal jurisdiction, whichis vindicated in the above case, against the claim of sanctuaryset up by the abbot of Westminster.In another case, a question was put to the court on behalf p^?^;of the justices of the peace, whether upon the new statute M.T.made in the then last Parliament, in which it was enactedamongst other things, that all inquisitions taken before thesheriffs in their tourns in the counties, &c., should be delivered tourns.to the justices of the peace at the approaching sessions : for,notwithstanding the statute, the sheriff had taken inquisitionsbefore him, upon the statute of liveries ; which oughtto have been before the justices : — for the sheriff has not thepower to inquire of these liveries given against the statute ;but only to inquire of things by the common law, or by expressstatute : — but of assise of bread and ale, and of othercommon nuisances, the sheriff may inquire in his toum, bythe common law.This case is material, as showing the doubts which soon Sessions,arose relative to the jurisdiction, taken from the tourns andleets, by the statute of the first Edward IV. ; and given to thesessions. Which appear to have produced contentions betweenthese two authorities : — ending in the ascendancy ofthe jurisdiction of the sessions, and the disparagement of thetourns and leets.In an action of trespass, for assault, battery, and false M.T.'3t21012 NINTH Veal HOOK.Edw. IV. imprisonment, the defendant pleaded, in justification of theTower of trespass and assault, " that the Tower of London is in thecity of London : that the king was seised of the same Tower:and from time immemorial a court had been held there. Andthat, by certain liberties and customs, they have holdenpleas in the same court, of debt, trespass, and other actionsfor small or lai^e sums. That the defendant, in thecourt of the Tower, sued a writ of debt against the plaintifffor a certain sum ; and the return was nihil. Upon which acapias was awarded, returnable before the steward of thesame court ; and the defendant went with a bailiff to a parishwithin the liberty and franchises, and showed the plaintiffto the officer — upon which he was arrested, and a cepicorpus was returned, &c.*'The extent and nature of the jurisdiction within the Towerof London, the reader will remember has been before a subjectof remark , in our observations upon the Parliament Rolls ; wherethe Tower was assumed to be without the city of London; andthe mayor, when summoned to attend there, declared, beforehe entered within the precincts of the Tower, that he was nolonger mayor of London — in order to prevent his attendancethere from being drawn into precedent against his successors.In this case, the Tower is described as being inthe city of London, It is difficult to reconcile these apparentdiscrepancies. But the documents are themselvesinteresting ; and the varying statements are probably sufficientto satisfy us, how readily these assertions vary, whenit is necessary, for the interest of those who make them, totake a different view of the subject. The recital to thecharter of Canterbury, in the reign of Henry VL, is a specimenof the inaccuracy of such statements ; and numerousmisrepresentations of the same kind will be seen hereafterin the recitals of the charters of Queen Elizabeth.1466. In another case it was said, that " generally the stewardM. T. of a court is the iuds^e ; but in some cases, as in the hundredSteward. J » » »courts and courts baron, the suitors are the judges, and thebailiff" and the sheriff" are but as ministers. However, at aNINTH YEAR BOOK. 1013fair, in the court of pie powder, the steward is the judge; Edw. iv.for in that court there are no suitors. Where there are any,they are the judges, and not the steward''The distinction between the tourns, courts leet, and thehundred courts, or courts baron, or others of a similardescription, is here distinctly marked ; and the analogybetween the hundred courts and the courts baron, both of HundredCourts.which had civil jurisdiction, as contradistinguished from theroyal and criminal jurisdiction of the tourns and leets, isclearly established.It was held in the Common Pleas, that if the king giveland in fee-farm to the good men of the town of Dale, thatthe corporation is good. And so it is where it is given to theburgesses, citizens, and commonalty. They, by such namesof incorporation, can have an action of things touching their Corpora-farm,&c. ; and the writ shall be to the men of the town ofDale, or the citizens, &c. It was added, that one of acommonalty cannot justify the distraining for rent due tothe commonalty ; for it is a body, and no single person ofthem can justify, but the whole as a commonalty.From this case it appears first, that these grants of incorporationwere given to towns which were not cities or boroughs: and a strong inference arises from the terms of thecase, that boroughs, cities, and communities were not alwaysincorporated.Here we find one of the material effects of incorporation —that the corporators must sue and be sued as aggregatebodies — for the first time distinctly stated. And it appears Incorpo-to be assumed in this case, as the fact was both before andshortly after this decision, that other places, as well as citiesand boroughs, were incorporated — whilst, on the other hand,there were many boroughs which were never made corporations.These circumstances have continued to this day,which conclusively establishes, that there is no necessaryconnexion between cities and boroughs and incorporations — boroughs.and that it is by no means an essential characteristic eitherof citizens or burgesses that they should be incorporated. 1457.Fol 7fiIn an action of trespass, the defendant justified by saying, h. T.'>»>11014 MXl'H YEAR BOOK.^'^^' '^'' " that there is certain land in Dale and Sale, where all theinhabitants within the town have been accustomed to common upon account of vicinage." It was objected, thatthey could not prescribe for such a privilege, unless theyCorpora could show a corporation in them, by the name of theinhabitants and thus make them capable to prescribe : — butL'sase- it was answered, " that it would suffice to plead an usage, forthat was a good plea; for instance, that Dale was anancient borough, and all the lands and tenements within,&c., are and have been devisable and devised from time im-memorials'This case is important to our present inquiry, as showingone of the first instances in which the doctrine of incorporationswas applied to municipal bodies — and as distinctlyestablishing, that the earliest notion of " incorporationswas founded upon the assumption, that the " inhabitantswere incorporated: — and so far from its being allowed, thatincorporation was necessary for the prescription alleged inthis case, it seems with more correctness to have been as-boroughserved, that when there was an ancient borough — that is tobypre . ^scription. say, a borough by prescription, of which we have pointedout numerous instances — then, as the borough had existedfrom time immemorial, so also might there be immemorialUsage, customs within it — to be proved by recent usage, whichis evidence of such usage having existed from time immemorial,unless any thing could be shown to the contrary.And therefore, although in a town, not a borough byInhabitants prescription, the " inhabitants" might not be able to prescribe,unless they were incorporated — yet in a borough byprescription, where the inhabitants had been treated as abody aggregate, separated from the rest of the county, thena custom for the inhabitants to enjoy any right or privilege,might be supported by law, and proved by usage.Fol. 2 B, A case of considerable length occurs in the 11th year ofSerjeants Edward IV., respecting the privileges of serjeants-at-law.It appears, that Sir John Pastor had sued a bill of debtupon an obligation, against a serjeant-at-law; who urged,that he was not bound to answer it, because that all Serjeants-ninthYEAR BOOK. 1015at-law, from time immemorial, have been impleaded by ^^^' iv.original writ, and not by bill : — but it was answered, that theprescription was void, that Serjeants could not prescribe, forthey are not corporate : — and if they are not corporate, theycannot prescribe.The only ground upon which it could be supposed thatserjeants-at-law were incorporated, must have been withreference to the early lawyers having been chiefly ecclesiastics.But there was no pretence for the assertion ; and this case isof no further importance, than as showing the crude notionsof corporations prevalent at that period, and as drawing ourattention to the fact, that the doubt at this time appears tohave been, whether such bodies as the " serjeants-at-law," orthe guilds or mysteries to which we have referred, not havingany direct connexion with local jurisdiction or municipalrights, could in the eye of the law be dealt with as recognizedaggregate bodies : — whereas, on the other hand, the inha- Inljabi-bitants of boroughs as burgesses, being recognized by thelaw as aggregate bodies, separated from the county at large,and directly connected with the local exclusive jurisdiction,and the burdens and privileges of exclusive municipal government,were ever, from the earliest period of our law, recognizedas responsible and chargeable aggregate bodies — liableto common burdens, and entitled to common privileges.In a writ brought by a prior, the defendant pleaded, "that 1472.Ii'11'9Uhe was a professed monk, under obedience to the abbey of m. t. 'S." To which the plaintiff said, " that he and his prides "°'^' ,cessors have pleaded and been impleaded, and have answeredwithout their suffragans, from time immemorial." And itwas held a good plea.This is a clear instance of a prior, as an ecclesiastical person,taking by succession from his predecessors, being held,as we have long before shown them to have been, a corporationsole, enjoying all the usual corporate powers.One being impleaded, said, " that the king had granted ^o^- ^7 B,1 . i .to the burgesses of T., that they should not be impleadedwithout the walls of their borough, but before the mayor andbailiffs of the city, of things within the city; and that at the1016 NINTH YEAR BOOK.Edw. rv. i^ii^jp (jf ^i^g ^.,.jj.^ |.jjg defendant was a burgess of the city.For which he moved, that the writ should be made void ;inasmuch as the kinjj could not take from him his inheritance,nor deal with him in any other court, by bill or plaint.The grant giving authority to hold pleas within the city,for the ease of the parties. For the king cannot take awaythe right of any party by such grant ; but he gives them acourt and a judge, before whom the parties shall have right;which is an easement to the party, so that he shall not go outof the city. And this was the reason, that where any thingwas done, it should there be decided. And the king can•grant cognizance of pleas out of this court ; but the partywill be driven to sue there. The king can grant exemptionfrom juries, and also return of writs ; otherwise, every personis entitled to have writs served by the sheriff. Those of theCinque Ports have such liberty, that they should not be putto answer out of the ports ; but the cognizance is conditional.And the grant of the return of writs is good, for no man isdamaged by it ; because there is an officer in the franchiseto serve writs, which otherwise would be directed to thesheriff:'In anearlypartof our inquiry we asserted, as has been provedby a variety of documents, that all cities were boroughs ; andas far as relates to borough rights, those terms are convertible.This case affords another instance confirmatory of that doctrine.For the grant is stated to be to the burgesses, of privilegeswhich in the first sentence are described as to be enjoyedwithin the borough ; but the next sentence describes them asto be exercised within the city, before the officers of the city,and the defendant speaks of himself as a burgess of the city.The case is also material, as showing the nature and objectsof local exclusive jurisdictions — the manner in whichthey were to be exercised — and the principles upon whichthey were granted and enjoyed. Cognizance is said to beconditional ; that is, it was hinted on the implied condition,that it would be exercised for the ease and benefit ofthe subject ; and if not, it would by the non-user be forfeited.So that an exclusive jurisdiction not used wouldNINTH YEAR BOOK. 1017cease ; and the general jurisdiction would revive; as we have ^^^- ^^''before observed with respect to Old Sarum: — because thesubject ought to know where he should sue or be sued;which can only be shown by the usage under the grant.It is also apparent from this case, as we have oftencontended, that the general jurisdiction belonged to thesheriff; and to his and the superior courts : — whilst the localjurisdiction is the exception, to be proved by the grant ofthe crown in the first instance, and continued subsequentlyby the actual user of the franchise.This is further illustrated by the next case, where it is 1473.Fol 8 Hshown, that a special grant to any body must be speciallypleaded ; and that the courts will not take judicial notice ofsuch grants, unless they are specially shown. Thus, in acase against the men of Nottingham it was held, that, as byAct of Parliament all corporations and licences granted byKing Henry VI. were void, the court was not bound to takecognizance of them any more than of the private act of aprivate person. And it was held that the act was notgeneral, but particular, and confined to corporations: asif an act should be made, that all bishops or lords shouldhave such a thing, it is only a private act ; but when an act is Privategeneral, extending to every man, then it is not necessary Publicto be pleaded ; for it is a general and common law. And *^'*when a patent is made to the mayor, aldermen and com- Mayor,monalty, if a man wishes to plead such a patent, he oughtto show that he was mayor ; but it is not necessary to showwho were the aldermen or the commonalty, for they are thebody, and the mayor the head. And if the grant should bemade to the mayor and citizens, it is not necessary to showwho were citizens, &c. And it was said, that they ought toshow who was mayor at the time of the grant; but it wasanswered, that if a patent to the mayor and commonaltywere pleaded generally, it would be good, for it would betakenthat there was a mayor at the time of the grant ; inwhich case a grant made to the mayor and commonalty isgood ; but if there was not a mayor the grant would be void.From all of which it appears, that these municipal grants1018 NINTH YEAR BOOK.^^' ^V - were considered not as existing under the common law, butoperating as special grants which required to be speciallypleaded and proved, as exceptions from the ordinary courseof the common law.Fo/^i9 ^^ another case, two years afterwards, the proof ofprescriptions by usage is expressly recognized. Thus,a person brought a writ of trespass against another for histrees spoiled by sheep and other beasts. The defendantCoventry, pleaded, that the place in which, &c. was the city of Coventry,an ancient city from time immemorial ; and all thecitizens and inhabitants in the city had, from time immemorial,common in that place for all cattle which were levantand couchant in the same city ; and that the defendant wasan inhabitant in the same city, and put his beasts in theplace in question, as in the common. But it was answered,that the prescription was not good: — for every one cannotprescribe unless he has a certain title ; and the lord shouldact for all his tenants at will. So an inhabitant is in effectnothing but a tenant at will, by which the prescription isnot good. To which it was answered, that the prescriptioncould be made in another manner and form, as that it hasbeen used from time immemorial in the city of Coventry,that the citizens and inhabitants ought to have commontogether in the same place. The effect of which plea wouldUsage, be upon the nse, and depend upon whether such usage hadbeen there or not.1478. And in another case a few years afterwards, it was decidedFol. 3B. ^ .,, , , ^^ nK.T. by the court, "that tenants at will could not prescribe fortheir own right ; but that the inhabitants could prescribe forUsage, a usage."And in a subsequent case (fol. 8), in the same year, it wassaid, that to the churchyard in the Charter-house, there wasa common road, to which the inhabitants of London had aprescriptive right.That the doctrine of villainage was still in full force in thisFol 32T. T.' reign, appears from a case in the same Year Book, in whichVillainage. . • /»a plaintiff brought a writ of trespass, and counted that theFree, plaintiff was /re^, and of free condition, and all his ancestorsNINTH YEAR BOOK. 1019were freemen from time immemorial. And the defendant Edw. IV.claimed the plaintiff for his villain, saying, that he was Villain,seised of him as such, for that one William Browne wasseised of the manor of Dale in his demesne, as of fee,to which the plaintiff was villain regardant ; and the saidWilliam, and all those whose estate he has, have been seisedof the plaintiff, and of all his blood, as neifs and villains regardantto the said manor, &c. That the said Williamleased the said manor to the defendant to hold at his will.That exclusive privileges may be forfeited and lost, asbefore illustrated by the case of Old Sarum, may be collectedfrom the following case : —In error sued against the bailiffs of Reading it was said, 1480.that if the lord of a franchise does a thing or trespass against T. T.'the court of the king, it is a cause to re-seize the franchise. ^'And in a subsequent part of the case it was urged, that if a lordrefuses to do that which is in accordance with his franchise,or does a thing against his franchise, or misuses his franchiseby himself or by his deputy, or does not use his franchise,in any of these cases, the franchise shall be re-seized.In an action brought by the abbot of St. Bennet against ^^*-the mayor and the commonalty of Norwich, they are called a ^, E- J-ij , ii' 1 J-. Norwich.body corporate, and are said to be one person m law ; and it Corporate,is added, that if the mayor should be obliged without the as Mayor,sent of the sheriff and commonalty — or the obligation should Seal,be without the mayor and commonalty, all is void, unless itshould be under their common seal : for the body cannot bebound without the entire act of the body ; therefore the absenceof the mayor defeats all the obligation. And it is said,they can do nothing, unless done by the sheriff and the commonalty.Afterwards, in the same year, the case is further heard ^°j[j ^j®'against the mayor, sheriff, and commonalty ; and it wassaid that they were a body politic ; and that in debt broughtagainst an abbot, when the obligation was made by his predecessor,without the assent of the convent, it is a goodplea to say that it was not the deed of the abbot and theconvent — or not the deed of the abbot — or not the deed of1020 NINTH YEAR BOOK.Kdw. IV. the convent. And it was also urged, that as the mayor andNorwich, commonalty are an entire body, in an action brought againstthem, the mayor can appear in proper person, but the sheriffand commonalty cannot; for they should appear byattorney. For if the city be corporate by the name ofmayor and commonalty, and an action be brought againstthem as mayor and citizens, they cannot make an attorney :MUnomcr. for then the attorney cannot plead the misnomer of the corporationagainst his warrant of attorney, for this, that it iscontrary to his warranty. And it was stated, that it hadbeen well said that the name of the mayor, sheriff', and commonalty,was an entire body and inseparable : for the mayorcannot appear in proper person, or make an attorney forhimself alone, but all the body, mayor, sheriff, and common-name,alty, should make an attorney : for they are but one and thesame person, having one sole name.In a subsequent part of the case, the commonalty of Islingtonare given as an instance of a corporation.It will not be overlooked, that the instance in the precedingpart of this case of an abbot and convent ^ is an ecclesiasticalcorporation, which, undoubtedly appears to have beenrecognized in very early times ; and the doctrine of municipalcorporations was apparently borrowed from those institutions.The conclusion of this case, to another point, occurs inthis year in a subsequent folio, thus : —1481. In an action of debt on bond the parties were at issue onFol. 65 B, , ^ *M. T. this point, whether it should be tried by them of the city ofNorwich? — And on the second distringas the jury appears;and one of them comes to the bar, when he was required to beswoni, and says, that the king had granted to them, by hisletters patent then produced, that none of them should be putupon a jury out of Norwich, &c. ; and prays to be discharged.Incorpo- And the charter was read, and it was that the kins; had inhaled.^ \ . /=*corporated them of Norwich by the name of " citizens andcommonalty ;'* and afterwards in the charter were the words,we have also granted to the citizens aforesaid , that noneJuries, of them should be put on juries*' &c,Trem- — It appears that the jury, by this charter, is notNinth YKAII BOOK. 1021discharged from this inquest; for in every grant which is Edw.iv.made, it is necessary that he, to whom the grant is made, Norwich,should be capable of receiving it ; for if the king grant to themen, or to the inhabitants of L, two acres of land or other suchthing, if they be not incorporated by such name before, thegrant is void, if nothing be reserved to the king. And if theking grant to the men of I., their heirs and successors, amanor, rendering to the king a certain rent, for any thingrelating to this manor, this is no corporation to any otherintent. And if the king grant to the men or inhabitants of I.,that they shall be discharged of toll, if they be not incorporatedbefore, the grant is void.Bridges. — E contra, for by the granting of the charterthey may annually choose one of them to be the mayor ;which mayor shall be coroner and escheator within the city.And they may also choose two sheriffs, who shall havebefore them cognizance of pleas. Now this clause is extendedto the citizens, to wit, that none of them shall be puton juries; and there are divers names in this corporationwhich are effectual, according to the charters ; for the mayorenjoys his office, and the sheriffs their office, by this charter.Why shall not the citizens have advantage also of this clause,which is extended to themselves in the same charter? and noone will deny, but that if the words " concessions etiam"had been out of the charter, that it would have been goodenough ; and it seems that it is now entirely of the sameeffect, for " civibus'^ is to the same effect as " commonalty'Davis, — E contra, every corporate body ought to take Misnomer,advantage, and also to make their grants and releases accordingto their incorporation ; and if they vary from this it isnot good. As in Oxford, the incorporation of a college is by Oxford,the name of " masters and scholars ; '' if they make a releaseunder their common seal by the name of scholars, in an actionbrought by them according to their incorporation, this shallbe no bar ; because it is a variation. The same law is withrespect to a grant made to them. And if each of the scholarsreleases, their several deed is no bar, &c. ; for when they arenot named according to their incorporation, they are strandNINTH YEAR BOOK.EdMNiv. gers to this corporated body, which can give no advantage toNorwich, them. As if I enfeoff a man, upon condition to enfeoff one A.before such a day : if he does not do it, A. cannot enter ; forhe is a stranger to the condition ;* but the entry shall be formeor my heirs, who are privies to the condition; now in thiscase their incorporation is to the citizens and commonalty,which is as properly the name of the body, as the name ofbaptism is the name of any natural person ; wherefore, inasmuchas this clause ^'concessimusetiam civibus"is afterwards,this name is foreign to the name of the corporation ; and theyhave no such name, by which they can take advantage ofthis. And notwithstanding the grant shall be good, it oughtto be demanded, according to the name of the corporation.Suliard, — It seems that they shall have advantage of thegrant ; for the grant is civibus et communicate, that they shallhave such a franchise ; and gives to them divers powers, towit, to elect divers officers, — which officers, by the samecharter, have particular names and powers, as the mayor tobe coroner ; and the sheriffs to hold plea, &c. to have the re-^ - turn of writs, &c. and to be discharged from juries. And itwrits, seems that these words, " concessions civibus pradictis,^*shall be taken as strong as if it had been civibus et communicate; for the word civibus is in the premises, and includescommunicate, wherefore the name of the corporation is expressedand included by this word. And it seems that thisgrant civibus is not foreign to. the name of the corporation.And, as has been well said, they are come in sufficient time;for, before now, they could not have advantage of thiji ; andit is not like the case of cognizance. But if one jurymanwho is exempt be sworn, and the inquest remain for defaultof jurors till the next day, he shall never afterwards haveadvantage of the charter. And it seems that this act ofParliament is special, for it is only made for all cities andboroughs. And if a man will have advantage of this act, heought to plead it; but here it seems that the charter is 2:oodwithout the act.• See the case of Henry v. The Corporation of I^yme, 5 King. p. 91, 3 Barn. &Adolf. 77, in error, and Dom. Proc. 25 June, 1834.Ninth YEAR BOOK. 1023Brian, — To the same intent. — And it seems that this act, Edw. IV.which is recited, is special, and not general ; and we are not Norwich,bound to take notice of it as of a general statute, except theparty show it to us in pleading. And it appears to me,that the king has no power to grant to any man any exemptionfrom juries, for he would have the same power to dis Juries,charge all the people of England ; and then his commons failof their right. For it is just the same as if the king grantedto a man, that he should render to me in any action, whichcannot be ; but the king may grant to a man, that he shallnot he sworn on a jury out of such a town, or of such a precincty &c. And here the juror has come in sufficient time;for he had come in each day. This would have been to nopurpose, for he could not be sworn without his companions ;and the sheriff's return shall not be prejudicial to him, notwithstandinghe will not return the matter ; but this day heshall have advantage, and each individual person, and notthe corporate body ; for, if all the commons are impannelled,they, in a body, could not take the challenge, for this bodycannot appear in propria person, wherefore each individualought to have advantage, &c. And here the grantis good, notwithstanding it is not made according to thename of corporation ; as, if the king grant omnibus deIslington, that they shall be discharged from toll ; this is agood corporation, to this intent ; but not to purchase, &c.And if the king grant inhahitantibus de &c. that they mayelect a mayor ; and after this election, that they may implead Misnomer.and be impleaded by the name of mayor and commonaltyof D., now this word " inhahitantibus'' differs from the name,still it is good. So here, where the king grants civibus praedicti,that they should not be sworn on juries out of, &c. thisnew grant shall not enure to them, as they are no corporationin this respect ; wherefore, &c.*We have given this case at much length, as it so fullyexhibits the doctrines at that time prevalent with respect• 13 Hen. VII. 10. 5. 1 Edw. IV. ca. 1. 38 Hen. VI. 38. 13 Edw. IV. 8.7Edw. IV.14.30.]0:M NINTH VKAH 1U)0K.Kdw. IV. to corporations : — and it also explains, that the prerogativeof the crown in granting exemptions, was confined to thosecases only in which the discharge of public duties in a particularcase was substituted for a more general obligation.r.^i^®,Vti I» another case it was said, that neither the death norFol. 15 B, 'Het. the removal of a rtuiyor would abate a writ, for the mayor andcommonalty are a body which never die.1482. From the following case it will appear, that the sheriff'sxM.T. tourn in the county, and the leets or other franchises, wereLeet. both at this time practically in use. Thus : —Toum. ^ presentment taken before the sheriff in his toumj wasreturned into the King's Bench by a certiorari, of a personwho had feloniously assaulted a female. The chief justicesaid, it appeared to him that the presentment was void ; andthat the sheriff* had no power to take the presentment, for hispower in his tourn, and the reeve of any lord in his leet, are thesame : and that they have not power to inquire in their toum,or leet, of anything but felony and trespass at common law,and nothing else. And the presentment is void, for beforethe statute of William I. there was not at the common law,any punishment for such an offence ; but only an action oftrespass upon the case. And that statute provided fine andimprisonment ; and it was made inquirable by the kingwheresoever ho was. After that came the statute of WilliamII., which provides that this offence should be consideredfelony ; and therefore the sheriff had not the powerof inquiry at common law, and consequently the presentmentis void.T^ , «^ We find at this period, that the masters and the brethrenFol. 34, * 'Wet. of the two orders of angels in Bradford claimed to be incorporated;but their incorporation by that name was denied.And it was pleaded in abatement, that they w ere incorporatedby the name of " the master and brethren of the fraternityof All-saints and the two orders of Angels."^j^^*.^,'^' A prescription was claimed in the same year, and dismissedas beinir an-ain't cannon right and reason.PARLIAMENT ROLLS. 1026Edw. IV.PARLIAMENT ROLLS.We also find in the Parliament Rolls of this reign, that 1463.the term " corporate" became common in those records.Thus :—After providing for the apparel of divers of the superiorranks, an act proceeds to order, that all mayors and sheriffs ofcities, towns and boroughs of this realm, such as be shires ^ Shires'^^ ' Corporate.corporate ; and all mayors and bailiffs of all other cities, andof every of the towns of the five ports, and the barons of thesame ports, that are selected to do their service at the coronationof the king and queen ; and mayors and bailiffs ofboroughs corporate being shire towns, and the mayors andbailiffs of the counties Chester and Lynnee, and the recordersof the said cities, boroughs and towns, being shires corporate,and of cities having recorders, and the aldermen of the same,may wear the array of squires of 40Z. per annum.And again, the statute of Liveries was directed not to ^467.extend to any livery given at the coronation of the king andqueen, &c.; or by any guild, fraternity, or craft corporate;by the mayor or sheriff of London; or other head officerof any city, borough, town, or port of this realm, during thetime of their being in office.The inhabitants and residents of the hundreds of Lufton, inhabitantsTavistoke, and Roxburgh, in the county of Devon, areexcepted from an ordinance respecting cloth.In this entry, the word " inhabitants" means, beyond allquestion, the persons resident within the district: and itwould be difficult to say, why any doubt should be entertainedof its having that application when used in charters ;of which we shall find numerous instances, in the reign ofQueen Elizabeth.In the following entry, the courts leet and view o{ frank ^^^^^pledge, are again distinctly recognized.Whereas the mayors, bailiffs, portreeves, and other likegovernors of every city, borough, and town of substance, forthe most part, have courts leet, or views oi frankpledge, yearly Leets.holden within the same cities, boroughs, and towns, with3 u102G . PAULlAMKxNT ROLLS.^^^' ^V' survey of all victuals there, and correction and punishmentof the breakers and misdoers of assise of the same, to bepresented and amerced, if any default be found : and letterspatent having been issued, appointing surveyors, and correctorsof victuals, to the great hindrance and injury ofthe victuallers, by their extortions and oppressions : thecommons pray that they may be deprived of the offices andjurisdiction so given to them:" — which is granted.1473. The next entry affords another instance, in addition tothose we quote from the Year Books, of the recognition ofVillainage, ^j^^ doctrine of villainage and neifty as then in use, and ofthe frequent grants of manumission.'* Provided also, that neither this act, nor any othermade or to be made in this present Parliament, nor anythingin any of them contained, extend, or be prejudicial toany letters patent, or letters of privy seal of pardon — generalor special — nor making of denizen; nor to any manumissionof villainage or neifty j made or granted, or to be made orgranted, to any person or persons, by the king, or any ofthe late pretended kings, before the feast of St. Thomas theApostle."1482. In this year, there is also another instance of an ecclesiasticalcorporation, with the same powers as were usuallygranted to the municipal a<iixregate bodies.Canons of " For eschewing all ambiguities and doubts which mightWindsor. ,., ^ ,1, I obe taken for any cause, touching the dean and canons ofthe king's free chapel of St. George, within his castle ofWindsor, otherwise called his college of St. George, in theircorporation, nomination, capacity, or any possession orhereditament thereto belonging; which chapel or college wasfirst founded by the king's right noble progenitor. KingEdward III. And for the more surety of the same dean andcanons in all the premises, the king, by the assent, ^'c, grantsand ordains, that the now dean, and the canons of the saidfree chapel, by the name of ^ dean and canons of the king'sfree chapel of St. George, within his castle of Windsor,' beCorporate, one body corporate y in deed and name ; and by that namebe called for evermore ; and that they and their successors,PARLIAMENT Rolls-IRELAND. • 1027by that name, be persons in law capable to purchase, receive, KdwJlv.and take lands, tenements, rents, reversions, services, liberties,franchises, privileges, and immunities, and other possessions,whatsoever they be, to them and to their successors; to behad, held, and possessed, in fee and perpetuity. And thatthey have a common seal to serve for needs and causes, touchingthe said deans and canons, and their successors. Andplead and be impleaded, under the same name. That allletters patent made by the king, or his progenitors, be goodand effectual to the said corporation and their successors.That the said dean and canons may hold, possess, and enjoyall lands, tenements, &c., leets, law-days, &c., theretoforegiven, or granted to them, by any letters patent."IRELAND.We have but few charters in this reign, relative to Ireland,Scotland, or Wales.With respect to Ireland, we find only an entry of a bye ^^^^Ij***law, made in the city of Dublin, which provides, that anyman living in Dublin, who sued another living in Dublin,in any other court than the Those, should forfeit to themayor and bailiffs of Dublin 1 0/., and lose his franchise.The court of Those was no doubt borrowed from the cityof Bristol, where such a court continues in the full exerciseof its functions to the present day. And the same entryrecognizes the power of disfranchisement in the mayor andbailiffs, as it is in the superior officers of the corporationsin England.SCOTLAND.James III., of Scotland, in this year, granted a charter to 1464.the burgh of Inverness,* and the provost (preposition), bailiffs,burgesses, and commonalty of the same — referring toformer charters, by William, Alexander, David, and James I.,and the petition of the provost, bailiffs, burgesses, and community,for their renewal and confirmation. It then recitesat length, the first, second, third, and fourth charters ofWight on Elections, App. 406.3 u21028 Wales-CARDIFF.Edw. IV. King William — two of Alexander— one of David — and oneof James I., of Scotland — and James III.^ in conclusion,confirms all the former charters.The object of this grant evidently was, to preserve andcontinue all the privileges which had been given by formerkings.WALES.That the boroughs in Wales continued to enjoy the sameprivileges which they had before, may be inferred from the^i4«f* confirmations of former charters granted to Cardiff: particularlythat of Henry VI. to the burgesses and other menand tenants of the towns of Cardiff, Usk, Carlton, Newport,Cowbridge, Neath, and Benefit, in these words.Now we, ratifying and approving the aforesaid letters, andall and singular the things therein contained, do accept andapprove, and by the tenor of these presents, do ratify andconfirm them, for ourselves and our heirs, as much as in uslies, to our now beloved burgesses, and to the other men andtenants of the aforesaid towns of Cardiff, Usk, Carlton,Newport, Cowbridge, and Benefit, and their successors, asthe aforesaid letters reasonably testify."1478. Twelve years afterwards, Richard, Duke of Gloucester,Inhabitants directed a charter to the bailiffs;, burgesses, inhabitants,tenants, and residents, of the town of Cardiff; stating thathe had inspected the letters patent of King Edward IV.,made in the fifth year of his reign, confirming all their libertiesanciently enjoyed ; and that, considering the fidelitywhich the burgesses and inhabitants have had towards himand his ancestors ; he ratified and approved the lettersand charters of the king. Provided that the burgesses andinhabitants, in future elections of the bailiffs of the townof Cardiff', elected for bailiffs the more considerable, worthy,and better persons of the aforesaid town. That theyRoyal and should have the power of ordering: the royal and hundredhundred ' '^ *^courts. courts, to be holden on Thursday : And that the bailiffs,burgesses, and inhabitants, might have authority and powerto name and elect in the place of any bailiff who might beCONCLUSION. ]Q2i)infirm in body, or likely to be absent without the town, as ^^^' ^^'•substitute in his place, one of the four provosts.The royal court here mentioned, is the court leet, at which Leet,we have before seen, the suit royal, to the king, was performed,and pleas of the crown adjudged. It is here properlydistinguished from the hundred courts, in which civil pleaswere determined.With such a variety of documents as we have alreadyquoted respecting England, it is unnecessary to accumulatemany relative to Ireland, Scotland, or Wales : — the abovespecimens will be sufficient to convince the reader, that nomaterial alteration was made in either of those parts of thekingdom, with respect to the nature or municipal governmentof the boroughs ; nor with respect to the class or conditionof the burgesses.CONCLUSION.The termination of this reign has brought us to a period,when the grants of incorporation to municipal bodies havingbeen frequent, the doctrine connected with them appears tohave been generally adopted by the Courts, as we have seenin the Year Books.The point having been distinctly established, that the firstcharter of incorporation to a municipal body, was in the 18thof Henry VI., the succeeding charters of the same description,which we have quoted in this reign, have shown howthose grants gradually increased and spread themselves overthe country ; though it must be remembered, that manycities, boroughs, and towns, still continued unincorporated- — the metropolis, and the important city of Bristol, beingstriking instances of that kind.However, the general prevalence of corporations in thisperiod of our history, will for the future render any particularinquiry into this part of our subject unnecessary; exceptingthat the succeeding grants of incorporation will be shortlynoted as they occur.We havecoumientcd upon the Statutes — Charters — decided1030 Conclusion.Edw. IV. eases iii the Year Books — and Parliament Rolls — as theyoccurred in their chronological succession : and therefore nofurther observations are requisite with respect to them. Butthe characteristic feature of this reign, is the increasing im-hour!of portance of the Commons House of Parliament.Luminous. *The recital of the statute in the reign of Henry VI., hasshown that the people at large had begun to take a greatinterest in the election of the knights for the shires ; andthe importance to Edward IV. of obtaining a recognitionof his title to the crown by a subservient Parliament, madehim, upon this one head, sufficiently alive to the expediencyof obtaining an ascendant influence in the Commons ; whilston the other hand, that etibrt on the part of the kingsatisfied the considerable men in the country, of the politicalimportance of a seat and interest in the House, andstimulated them to make efforts for that purpose. Thus wehave seen from the Pastor Letters, that some of the influentialmen of the time — the family of Pastor, and others —took an active interest in the election for the shire of Norfolk.And a fact important to our present inquiry transpiresDecayed about the same time; viz. that one of the family beingdisappointed in his election for Maldon, it is suggested tohim, that there are some decayed boroughs, which had notlately returned members to Parliament, and for one ofwhich he might procure himself to be returned. The suggestionwe shall see was afterwards acted upon in the reignof Henry' VIII., and particularly at the beginning of thereign of Queen Elizabeth ; when the prevalence of thepractice called for the interposition of Parliament, and itwas declared upon the part of the crown that it should notbe again adopted.*Littleton. Littleton, the great lawyer, who had been made a Serjeantin the reign of Henry VI., and a judge in this reign, inthe 14th year of Edward Iv., compiled his treatise upon the1482. law; and died about seen years after: but the work doesnot appear to have been printed till the 24th of Henry VIII.He was therefore actively engaged in the practice of the• See D' Ewes* .journal.CONCLUSION. 1031law for a considerable portion of that period, during which ^^•^^-the doctrine of incorporation had grown into use — whilst Littleton.the statutes to which we have referred were enacted — andthe cases in the courts of law determined ; however there islittle in his work which relates to this head of our law.Indeed his apprehension seems to have been, that the doctrineof taking by succession was chiefly confined toecclesiastical bodies, and others of the same description. —Thus "successors" are expressly mentioned in the 6th chapter Successorsof the 2d book, section 133, which relates to frankalmoigne,or holding in free alms, where he speaks " of an abbotor prior, and their convents, holding lands to them andtheir successors in pure alms'' And in the next sectionthe same is stated of a dean and chapter, or parson ; butthe same terms do not appear to be applied to municipalbodies.In the chapter relative to burgage tenure, Littleton speaks Burgageheureof the ancient boroughs ; and of their being held of the king :which, generally speaking, is a sufficient description of thatspecies of tenure; inasmuch as, although boroughs might beheldof any other lord, spiritual or temporal, yet, in strictness,there could be no free borough, except by grant of theking, directly or indirectly.Littleton, however, seems to have thought, that boroughswere so called from the burgesses sent from them to theParliament ; whereas the converse is true, as we have distinctlyshown : namely, that the burgesses to Parliamentwere so called from the boroughs; the latter having, inpoint of time, preceded the other by some centuries.Littleton also has a long chapter upon the subject of tenure Cap. ll.by villeinage, in which villains and freemen are contradict villains. *extinguished from each other ; and there can be no doubt, but ^®®"®°*that both those classes were at that time fully known andrecognized by the law.*Under all the above circumstances, the reign of Edward IV.appears to have been as important, in the progress of ourresearches, as any that preceded it; — particularly with respect• See Year Books, pauim.1032 CONCLUSION.Edw. IV. to the question, as to the time when municipal incorporationsbegan, which was, beyond all controversy, in thereign of Henry VI.EDWARD V.The few months, which comprised the reign of Edward V.,remarkable only for the court intrigues which characterisedit, and the overwhelming influence of the Protector, affordus no matter to illustrate our present subject — neitherCharter, Statute, entry on the Parliament Rolls, nor in theYear Books, occur in this dark period, to throw any lightupon our inquiries — we therefore pass on to the short interregnumof Richard III.RICHARD III.This reign — brief, cruel, and turbulent — also affords usbut few documents to further our researches. We shallhowever insert them, in the order we have before adopted.STATUTES.1483. The 4th chapter of the first year of this reign, relates toCap. 4.the estate requisite for those who were to be the iniparmelledTourn. jurors in the sheriff* s tourn — which, from the preambleof the statute, appears at that time to have been in fullpractice.Cap. 9. In the 9th chapter — the statute relative to foreign merchantsand aliens, inhabiting and keeping houses in Londonand other cities and boroughs — speaks also of the hosts whoStrangers, entertain foreigners, and of the number of strangers whoresort to London, aid other cities, boroughs, and towns : —but corporate towns are not mentioned.STATUTES. 1033The same omission occurs again in the 12th chapter of the Rich. ill.same year. Cap. 12.CHARTERS.The early charters, which we have before extracted, to theend of the reign of Edward IV., are deposited in the Towerof London : — from the commencement of this reign, they arefound in the Rolls Chapel.*In that depositary there is a charter, of the first year of Hunting-thisreign, to the burgesses of Huntingdon, incorporating 1483.them ; and giving them the usual corporate powers.It appears to be the first grant of that description toHuntingdon ; and there is nothing on the face of it to showthat it had been before treated as a corporation, either byimplication or by express grant. The persons incorporatedare the burgesses — no mode of selecting whom is pointed Burgesses,out. What class of persons therefore were incorporated bythis charter under that name, must be ascertained by someother means. It is however at all events clear, that theburgesses and corporators were the same — ^and that althoughthe burgesses were, by virtue of this charter, incorporated,still their situation or character, as burgesses, was not otherwisealtered than by having the superadded privileges ofcorporators. Burgesses existed in this place before the reignof William the Conqueror, as appears by the extracts fromDomesday. And the consequence is, that the proper questionwith respect to this place is. Who were the burgesses inthe Saxon times, and anterior to the advent of William I.?Can any reasonable person contend that they were ^^free- Freemen,wien," in the modem sense of that word : — admitted by thecorporation at their arbitrary will, as free of the corporation• There are amongst these records in Chancery, the Charter — the Patent— andthe Confirmation Rolls.The '* Charter Rolls" contain charters — creations of honour— and other grants ofthe crown, which conclude " His testis;" beginning in the first year of RichardIII. and ending the eighth year of Henry VIII.The " Patent Rolls" commence with a small roll of Edward V., and are continuedto the present time.The *' Confirmation Rolls" begin with the reign of Richard III., and end withthe 14th year of James 1.; since which period confirmations are enrolled promiscuouslywith other grants upon the Patent Rolls.1034 CHARTERS.Rich. III. for the purposes of trade ? or can any person doubt but thatHunting they were the Uteri homines — residing in the borough —sharing in its burdens, as well personal as pecuniary ? — thatis, paying scot and bearing lot — and being enrolled, andsworn to their allegiance to the king and the laws in thecourt leet of the borough — consequently, became the liberiet legales homines of the place — the burgesses of theborough : — the sworn — free — inhabitant householders — payingscot and bearing lot.The passage relative to the exemptions granted as well tothe bailiffs and burgesses, as to the tenants and residents,seems, on the face of it, to import, that there were tenantsand resiants distinct from the burgesses — at least it imcapable of that construction.Whether, considering the loose manner in which chartersare drawn up, so critical a construction of these words,founded upon an assumption of their precise accuracy, is tobe adopted, has been already discussed. But even takingthem with all that strictness of construction, they are opento this obvious explanation, that there would necessarily besome tenants and resiants who were not burgesses, — aspeers, women, ecclesiastics, minors, and persons who, nothaving held or resided for a year in the place, had not beensworn and enrolled as burgesses at the court leet : — to includeall these persons in the grant of privileges, it was necessarythose words should be introduced. And they are descriptiveof persons who, being resident and holding houses, would,were they not of one of the above excepted classes, have beenincluded under the general name of burgesses.Sandwich. There is also a charter in the same year, to the mayor andbarons of Sandwich granting them a sum out of the customsof the port, for the fortification and preservation of the town ;but it, unlike that of Huntingdon, states nothing of theirbeing; incorporated.Grantham. Wg f^jj^j fi'oni the Harlciau Manuscripts* the aldermen and1483.burgesses of Grantham received from the king a grant, thatthey and their successors should be justices of the peace• Flail. MSS. 433. p. 441).CHARTERS. 1036within their town ; and keep sessions of the peace as oft as it Rich. llshould be necessary, by the warrant of the aldermen. That Grantham,they should have a gaol, and execution of precepts and warrantswithin the town and soke. That the sheriff of Lincolnshireshould have no execution thereof within the same. Thatthey should have weekly a market in the town ; and twofairs yearly, with all liberties appertaining thereto. Thatthe aldermen and burgesses should have the ordinance andassignment of all stalls and places in the fair and market ;and should have for ever all manner of villages, stallage,and profits, without any payment. Also, that neither thealdermen and burgesses, nor any other dwelling within the Dwelling,borough and soke, should from thenceforth be compelledto be impannelled or pass in any attaints without the town,borough, or soke. That they and any other dwelling withinthe borough and soke, should not be chosen or compelledto be sheriff of any county. That they should have a commonseal; with all measures, weights, &c. And that theclerk of the market should not meddle in any point withthem.This charter, like that of Huntingdon, speaks of the burgesses,and "any others dwelling there:" — These termsbeing in substance the same as those of the charter ofHuntingdon, are subject to the same explanation: with theadditional observations also ; that all the persons who areto enjoy the privileges there, as well the burgesses as theothers, are described generally as dwelling within the bo Dwelling,rough. And although many of the usual corporate powersare granted, there is nothing said of this place having beenbefore incorporated, or of any intention of giving it thatprivilege.The bailiff and burgesses of the town of Pontefract re- Pontefractcivet a charter in the same year, granting that they mighthave their merchant guild as theretofore ; and all the liberties Merchantand free customs which the burgesses and inhabitants of thetown or borough of Stamford had thitherto enjoyed.That the borough should be a free borough. And that, bythe name of " the mayor and burgesses of the town and1036 CHARTERS.Rich. III. « borough of Pontefract," they should be corporate, and oneCorporate, perpetual community in name and deed. That they mighthave perpetual succession; and take and receive lands; andplead and be impleaded. That in the mote hall, the mayorand burgesses and their heirs and successors, should electannually from themselves, 13 compresses of the mostworthy men, one of whom should be the mayor: to be electedby the compresses.The charter then, at great length, provides for the electionof a coroner and other oflScers : — giving also cognizance overreal and personal actions within the borough — exclusivejurisdiction — freedom from toll — and other liberties.Oath. The importance of the oath of allegiance, to which wehave so frequently adverted, as taken at the court leet, maybecollected from the following document :* as well as theessential fact, that it was to be taken by all the inhabitants,who had not any of the grounds of exemption, to which wehave before adverted in commenting on the Huntingdoncharters. The regulations as to liveries, will also appear bythis document to be applied to all the inhabitants,Richard III.: To our trusty knight, Sir John Savage; andJohn Annie, sheriff', of our county of Kent : Know ye, thatwe assigned you to call afore you all manner of temporalmen of our subjects, inhabitants within the hundred ofMaideston, Brincheslee,Twyford,Chateham, Bellingham, andthe hundred and city of Rochester, being of the age of between16 years and 60, there to appear, and to be sworn tous,in manner ensuing: — "I shall true and faithful liegemanbe to our sovereign lord King Richard III., by thegrace of God king of England and of France, and lord ofIreland, and to him, his heirs and successors kings of England,my faith and truth shall bear during my life ; and no** treason nor other thing hide that shall be hurtful to hismost royal person ; but that I shall open and disclose it** to his highness, or to some of his noble council, in allthe haste possible that I can; and his part utterly takeagainst all earthly creatures ; and no lyvcrey, bargain nor• Ilarl. MSS. 433, p. 141.OATH OF ALLEGIANCE. 1037cognisance shall take from henceforth of any person l^'^h. ill.contrary to the statutes and ordinances thereof made; norany of his rebels and traitors succour, harbour, nor favour;contrary to the duty of ligeaunce ; but put me in my uttermostdevoir to take them. So help me God and the holyEvangelists."We also find the following document with respect toliveries, oaths, &c.Richard III. : To the mayor and bailiffs of the town of North'shampton.Northampton: — forasmuch as we understand that by re-tenedos, other, giving of lovers, clothing, signes andcognoissances of time passed within our town of Northampton,great divisions, dissensions and debates have grownamongst our subjects, inhabitants of the same, not only tothe great performance of our peace and good will to be hadwithin the town, but in manifest contempt of our laws : We,intending love, peace and unity to be established within ourtown, for the universal weal of the same, command you tomake open proclamation, charging strictly in our behalf, thatfrom henceforth none of the inhabitants within the samereceive any pretenders, lovers, clothing or cognisanceof any persons of what estate, degree or condition soeverthey be.*From an entry in the books of the borough of Hythe of *^y^e«this year, we find an accurate description of the persons whowere the burgesses or barons of that port, under the name ofresiants or indwellers,Memorandum. — That the Tuesday next after the fest A.foLU a.1483.of Sent Margaret, in the first yere of the reign of KyngRichard the III'^-, matt the Brodell,+ holde matt Romene, wasconcluded by all the hole house, &c., that if eny freeman Freemen.recent, or any other indweller of the five ports, or eny of Hessians.their memories, serve eny personal account in eny court outof the liberties of the five ports, agent eny personal indwellerof the same liberties, such person to lose, &c. 10 marks, &c."The said sum to be called "a common fine'* \hsX\% to say of A.foLHb.lands, tenements, or chattels, at the will of the mayors, baitHaiL MSS. 433, p. 111. t I. e. Brother-hall.rais HYTHE.Rich. III. liffsj or their successors; the which sum, called the communForeigners ewe, to be levied as well of the foreigners' lands, tenements,or chattels, as of the lands, tenements, or chattels of theInhabitants inhabitants within the said five ports, or members of thesame. And that every common fine from henceforth, bepaid within 15 days after that it shall happen to be set.It should be observed, that the terms "freemen recent,"or indwellers," are here clearly used as descriptive of thepersons who were as barons or burgesses enjoying theprivileges of the Cinque Ports : — and that those termsundoubtedly meant the liberi homines of the common law,householders in the borough or port.Year Book Tliat the sheriff's tourn was also in practice in this reign,Tourn. may be collected from the following solitary entry in theYear Books, applicable to our subject.w^'J* Upon a presentment taken before the sheriff in his tourn,it was contended (in which the court afterwards acquiesced),that the presentment was not sufficient, for it was taken beforethe sheriff in his tourn ; and the sheriff has not power toinquire of any thing but those things which are of commonlaw ; and as this offence was inequitable by statute, and punishmentis given by statute, therefore the presentment isvoid ; for the sheriff, at his tourn, has only to inquire ofnuisances, as bloodshed and purpresturcs, kc.The following case of this period, relative to an ecclesiasticalperson, and in some degree referring to corporations,is reported in Jenkins' Centuries :*A prior, dative and removable, who has neither conventnor a common seal, and who never was impleaded or impleadable, brings a writ of error upon a fine levied by hispredecessor, and this matter was assigned for error ; thisabates the writ; for it is repugnant that the successor ofsuch a prior should have a writ of error if he could not impleador be impleaded. And such prior, if he has no convent,is but as a monk ; and a fine levied by a monk of the• Case VI. fourth century.WALES. 1039possessions of the abbey is void ; for, partes finis nihil ha R'c^- m*burnt.It is clear, from this case, that the doctrine of corporationswas not even as to ecclesiastical bodies, at this time clearlyestablished or confirmed.CONCLUSION.These few entries close the documents relative to Englandfor this reign ; we proceed now to cite the few which relate toWALES.Richard III. granted to the burgesses and inhabitants ofthe town or borough of Llanymtheneryy* that their borough Llanym-should be a free borough corporate in name and deed of one Corporatebailiff and burgesses — and that the burgesses and inhabitants inhabitantsshould have the same liberties as thitherto in every respect.That the bailifl' and burgesses should be one corporate bodyin name and deed, by the name of " the burgesses of Llan-ymthenery." That they might have perpetual succession —and by that name take and give lands, and plead, and beimpleaded.Provisions then follow for the election of a bailiff, coroner,&c., by the burgesses, with the grant of a fairsAn important document also occurs of this date, relativeto the towns and lordships of Haverfordwest and TenbyA Waterfordreciting, that the king was informed that divers gentlemen, Tenby.not resiant nor dwelling within the towns of Waterford and Xon-re«i.Tynbigh, parcel of the shire of Pembroke, had been received ^*°'*'and admitted to be burgesses, by virtue and colour whereofthey pretend themselves to be discharged of appearance to passupon any jury or inquest within the lordship of Waterford,or the shire of Pembroke, to the subversion of good and substantialrules there aforetime had and continued. The king,eschewing the inconveniences that further might ensue bysuch behaves, charges the burgesses utterly to dismiss and• Harl. MSS. 433, p. 94.t This appears to be one of the first charters of incorporation to any borough inWales.X HarLMSS. 433, p. 300.1040 WALES.-IHELAND.^^^^^'^^^' discharge all those persons of the privilege of burgessesjurerford- there, which be not continually resident and inhabitingTenby. amongst them. And also to forbear to admit any other /breiiwForeigners. J Jto use and enjoy like privileges hereafter.It will be observed, that there is nothing in this documentrelative to any incorporation, or in any manner referring tocorporate powers: but it distinctly appears that the burgesseswho enjoyed, and who ought to have enjoyed, theprivileges of the place, were persons continually abiding andinhabiting in the borough.IRELAND.We proceed next to quote a few charters, as illustrative ofthe history of the Irish boroughs at this period.We have not been enabled to discover from an inspectionof the patent and confirmation rolls of this reign, that morethan five charters were granted by this king to Ireland.^*{^"^ The first confirms to the mayor and commonalty of thecity of Waterford* all their previous liberties and franchises,with a few unimportant additional privileges.^^hm"? ^^^ second is a charter of incorporation of the mayor,bailiffs, burgesses, and commonalty of the town of Youghalyfwhich commences with a recital, that in consequence of thetown of Youghal being surrounded by English rebels, andby violators of the peace belonging to Ireland, thereby causinggreat depopulation and desolation ; the king granted thatall and singular the inhabitants within the town, who shouldbe admitted to the franchises of the town, according to theancient custom thereof, should annually assemble and electfrom themselves one mayor and two bailiffs, to have thegovernance of the burgesses and commonalty for the timebeing ; that by the name of " the mayor, bailiffs, burgesses,and commonalty of the town of Youghal,'* they should pleadand be impleaded, and should be for ever incorporate kc. —that they should have jurisdiction over all personal actions,• Pat. I Ric. III. p. 2, n. 161. t Pat. 2 Ric. III. p. 3. n. 125.t This is one of the first charters of incorporation that we have been enabled tofind, to any borough in Ireland.IRELAND. 1041&c. ; — assise of novel disseisin, &c., arising within the town — ^»c**- ^l^-that they should have all fines, amercements, profits, &c. — Youghal.that no other justice or minister, but the mayor and bailiffs,should have the power of holding any real or personal pleas Non-withinthe town — that they should be free of toll, pontage, ^°^* 'passage, &c. through all England and Ireland — and a generalconfirmation of all their previous liberties concludes thecharter.Although Youghal is thus for the first time incorporated,no alteration whatever is made in the class or nature of theburgesses : — on the contrary, reference is expressly made tothe ancient custom of admitting them : — and it cannot bedoubted that such ancient custom of admission was, as wehave seen in the English boroughs, by swearing and enrolmentat the court leet : — and it is distinctly manifest, bothfrom the general object of the charter, as well as from theexpress words of it, that the persons to be admitted were theinhabitants.Dublin appears to have been the next place which, by the Dublin,third Irish charter on the roll, partook of the royal favour,*as the " mayor, bailiffs, commonalty, and citizens of the 1484.city and chamber of Dublin, or by whatsoever corporationor corporations, or name or names, they may be called inany letters patent," received a grant, that the mayor andrecorder for the time being should be justices of the peace ;that the mayor and sheriffs might have and keep a gaol inany part of the city. See. ; and that the mayor and recordermight make a gaol delivery, with a release of 49Z. 6s. 8d.yearly, part of 200 marks, yearly crown rent, for 60 years,towards walling and paving the city.The general words introduced into this charter, " by whatsoevercorporation or name they may be called," from whichthe inference was intended to be drawn, that Dublin hadbeen previously incorporated, became afterwards very commonin the charters granted to the English boroughs duringthe reigns of Queen Elizabeth, Charles I., Charles II., andJames I. — and they occur in the statute of William III., re-• Pat. 2 Ric. III. p. 3. n. 127.3x1042 IRELAND.^'^^•^^^- versing the judgment on the quo warranto against the citizensof London. They are however so general, and on the face ofthem so suspicious, that even standing alone, they wouldhave but little weight : — but when it is considered that thereare many places, in grants to which they are used, but whichcertainly were never previously incorporated, their weightis altogether destroyed : and from the documents we havebefore seen as to Dublin, we may safely affirm, that notwithstandingthese high sounding words, that city was not incorporated.Galway. From the Confirmation Rolls,* we find that Gcdway receiveda charter of confirmation of its former immunities,with a recital of the charters granted by Richard 11. andother kings. A few additional, but unimportant privileges,were granted by Richard III.; but no corporate powers.The last charter upon the Confirmation Rolls is anotherwaterford. to Waterford, of considerable length — containing, by inspexi-mus, all the previous grants made to that city : — but theking does not give any further extension of their franchises.HENRY VII.The growing importance of Parliament, which we havebefore noted in the reign of Henry VI., continued increasingduring the succeeding reigns ; and the disputed right to thethrone of those kings, made it more important for them toobtain an influence over the House of Commons.Henry VII., who had such strong reasons for courtingthe assistance of Parliament, seems to have succeeded ineffectuallybringing it under his control and influence, whichlasted during his entire reign ; and, as we shall hereafterperceive, during a considerable part of that of his successor ;and which, as one of its fruits, produced the confirmation ofthe powers of the Star Chambers• Rot. Conf. 2 Ric. III. p. 2, n. 12. t Rot, Conf. 2 Ric. III. p. 3, n.lO.t Rot. Pari. 3 Hen. VII. n. 17.STATUTES. 1043The charters of incorporation, and other causes, had also Hen, vil .produced a considerable effect upon the cities and boroughs,by vesting more power in the hands of the heads of thosebodies, and the select portions of them, who have sincebeen called " the governing bodies." This tended to layand confirm the foundations of those usurpations which thencommenced, and which gradually increasing, have continuedto the present day. It often happens, that the period inwhich the commencement of changes is to be traced,affords but slight indications of the insignificant origin ofusurpations. Such is the case with this reign, which is notfruitful of documents to illustrate our subject ; but we shallgive them in the course we have before adopted, commencingwith the statutes.STATUTES.It may not be an unfit introduction to' these records toquote the words of Lord Bacon, who speaking of them, says,that Henry VII. may be considered as the greatest Englishlegislator after Edward I.; and this, because his laws (whosomarks them well) are deep and not vulgar — not madeupon the spur of a particular occasion for the present butout of providence for the future."As a confirmation of the above observation, we find statutes J^^iCap. 2.providing for the regulation of merchant strangers born outof the realm, who being made denizens, enjoyed the samefreedoms and liberties as denizens born within the realm —who being numerous, and carrying on a considerable portionof the trade, were too important a body not to be subjectedto legislative restrictions.Provisions are also made, by the 10th chapter, for the Cap. lO.confirmation of the first of Richard III., chap. 9, respectingthe regulation of the Italian merchants resident in therealm, and not being denizens ; prohibiting strangers fromhosting, or taking to sojourn with them, any merchantstranger.In the eighth chapter of the third of Henry VIL, there are i486,other provisions relative to merchant aliens, and strangers.3x2044 STATUTES.Hen.vil . And the next chapter, relative to the trade of the citizensCap. 9. of London, speaks of the citizens and freemen having, timeimmemorially, traded to all parts: — but that the mayor,aldermen, and citizens (omitting the " term freemen), hadmade an ordinance, that no man who was b. freeman or citizenof the city, should go to any fair or market out of the city :which is complained of for the injury it would do to the fairsand markets of other places, and to the realm generally ; —and therefore it was enacted, that " every freeman and citizenof London, may carry his wares to any fair or market — andthat the ordinance shall be void — and that no person of thesaid city (the generality of which expression cannot escapeattention) be hurt or prejudiced in losing his liberty andfranchise within the city, by reason of the annulling of theordinance, or for not obeying it." The reader will remember,that the same expression of '* persons of the towns latelyoccurred in the charter to Wenlock ;* and the interchangeableuse of the terms, " free men," and " citizens," shows clearlythat they were synonymous ; nor can there be any doubt butCitizen of ^^^ ^* ^'^^ time, the freemen of London here spoken of,London, were, according to the definitions of the yearbook,f ^^ householders,resiant and taxable to scot and lot within the city*'Many provisions will also be found during this reign, asLi^ri^**' in the former, against retainers and their liveries ;;}: the restraintof which was rigidly enforced in one instance, as issaid, at the suggestion of the king himselfe And in several• Vide ante, 1001. t Vide ante, p. 699.X See also 19 Henry VII., cap. 14.§ The Earl of Oxford, the king's favourite general, having entertained him at hiscastle, at Cunningham, was desirous of making a parade of his magnificence at thedeparture of his royal guest; and ordered all his retainers, with their liveries andbadges, to be drawn up in two lines, that their appearance might be the more gallantand splendid. " My lord," said the king, " 1 have heard much of your hospitality,but the truth far exceeds the report ; these handsome gentlemen andyeomen, whom 1 see on both sides of me, are no doubt, your menial servants*'The earl replied, his fortune was too narrow for such magnificence : ** They are most•* of them my retainers, who are come to do me service at this time, when they knowI am honoured with your majesty's presence." To which the king replied, " Bymy faith, my good lord, I thank you for your good cheer, but I must not allowmy laws to be broken in my sight ; my attorney must speak with you." Oxfordis said to have paid no less than 15,000 marks, as a composition for his offence. —Hume, vol. iii. p. 399.STATUTES. 1045of the acts in this reign, in the enumeration of the boroughs, Hen. VI I«cities, and towns, there is no reference to towns corporate,which became usual in subsequent periods. In the fourthchapter of the 11th of Henry VII., relative to weights Cap. 4.and measures, the recital of the former statutes speaks onlyof cities — boroughs — and towns ; — but the enacting partadds also, " towns corporate," which is a strong circumstanceto show, that that term had been introduced into commonuse subsequent to the previous statutes, particularly as itis omitted in the latter part of the act.In the 10th chapter of the fourth of Henry VII., persons i487.inhabited" are spoken of; in contradistinction to merchant *^'strangers.In the fifth chapter of the seventh of Henry VII., which ^^^O.takes away the challenge, on the ground of the juror not London,having anything within the ward, the persons who were describedas subject to be summoned, were ^^ sufficient personsdwelling or having livelihood within the ward."And in the second chapter of the eleventh year of this J'*^^-V/&p. mmreign relative to vagabonds, they are directed to be put outof the town, and if not able to work, to resort to the hundred,where they last dwelled, are best known, or were born.This is in all probability the first legislative recognition ofthe obligation to permanent residence ; which in moderntimes is described by the term " settlements ;" and in themore ancient period of our law was connected with theprovisions against vagrancy ; and is strongly illustrative ofthe extent to which the doctrine of residence and inhabitancywas at that time carried.In the ninth chapter of the same year, we have the dis Cap. 9.tinction between the '* gildable" and the "franchises" clearlymarked with reference to North and South Tindal, all thelands within which are declared to be gildable, and parcelof the county of Northumberland ; and that no franchiseshould be there, but all the king's writs and officers shouldbe obeyed.*Lord Coke, in his commentary on the statute of Bridges, also contradistinctionthe franchise from the gildable, as he speaks of " Bridges within franchises, andthose within the gildable.*' 2 Inst. p. 700. And in the questions submitted to1046 STATUTES.Hen. VI I. From whence it appears, as we have contended before,that the substantial distinction between boroughs or otherfranchises and the county at large, consisted in the latterbeing gildable, or paying all together, in common ; and theformer being taxed by themselves — exempted from thejurisdiction of the sheriff — and having the return of writswithin their exclusive boundaries. A similar distinction asto the gildable we shall find hereafter in the reign ofHenry VIII. with respect to Wales.*The subserviency of the companies to the general jurisdictionof the municipal government of the places in whichthey were situated, is in some degree established by oneof the statutes of this year, which prohibits persons fromNorwich, being worsted-shearers in Norwich unless they have servedseven years' apprenticeship, or are allowed by the mayorand masters of the company ; — and the worsted-shearers arerestrained from making any ordinance but such as themayor and aldermen shall think necessaryCap. 21. In the 21st chapter of the same year, relative to theability of those who were to be impannelled upon juries inLondon; the mayor's court — the sheriff's court — and thehustings, held before the mayor and aldennen, are mentioned ;and the persons to be selected by the aldermen for jurorsare described as " indifferent persons, citizens of the city,dwelling in the ward ;" — and the latter part of the statutespeaks of the inquest by half-tongue, one-half of whom areto be strangers inhabiting within the city — which must referto persons who had not remained there long enough to beliable to do suit at the wardmotes ; and consequently to beenrolled as citizens, and subjected to scot and lot.Cap. 23. In the 23rd chapter, cities, towns, boroughs, and marketsare mentioned, but not coq)oi*ate towns.Cap. 26. In the 26th chapter, the sheriff's tonrn% is expressly men-liejudges in 1633, there is a similar distinction noted between the demesne lands,and the gildable lands. See Dalton's Justice, p. 164.— Vide Jenk. 2 Cent ca. 33.♦ 27 Hen.VlIl. C.26.t See further regulations as to the apprentices, 12 Hen. VII. c. 1.t Vide etiam, 19 Hen. VII. c. 16.STATUTES. 1047toned ; and the lawful men inhabiting within its precinct, Hen.vil .who owe suit there.In the sixth chapter of the 12th of Henry VII., relative to J^^umerchant adventurers, it is recited, amongst other things,that the fellowship of the mercers, and other merchants and Mercers,adventurers, dwelling and being free within the city of Indwellingdon, by confederacy amongst themselves, contrary to everyEnglishman's liberty — to the liberty of the mart — and tolaw, reason, charity, right, and conscience — had made anordinance, that none should sell without their consent, excepthe first compounded and made fine to them, which hadincreased from time to time, by reason whereof the cities,towns, and boroughs had fallen into great poverty ; whereforeit was enacted, that all should freely sell, without anyexaction for their liberty and freedom to buy and sell: — whichseems to be the first legislative recognition of the freedom Freedomto trade, of which we meet so many instances in differentboroughs, at subsequent periods.It is a striking circumstance, that at the same period in 1503.which corporate powers were engrafted upon the ancientpolice of the country, the usurpations of the corporationsthen existing should have called for legislative interference.As early as the 25th of Henry VI., the conduct of themaster, wardens, and the people of guilds, fraternities, and Guilds,other companies corporate, was complained of to Parliament,inasmuch as, by colour of rule and governance grantedand confirmed to them by charters and letters patent, theyhad made amongst themselves many unlawful and unreasonableordinances for their own singular profit, and to thecommon hurt and damage of the people ; and they were, byan act of Parliament, prohibited from doing so for the future,except by the advice of justices of the peace and governorsof cities, &c. And that act having expired, and many ordinanceshaving been since made by divers private bodiescorporate within the cities, boroughs, and towns, contraryto the king's prerogative, it was enacted, that no such personsshould make any ordinances in disinheritance or diis Bye-laws,nation of the prerogative of the king, nor of any other ; nor1048 STATUTES.Hen. VII. against the common profit of the people, unless examined bythe chancellor, treasurer of England, chief justice of eitherbenches, or three of them, or before the justices of assise intheir circuit.It is also a more extraordinary circumstance, that by decisionsof the courts of law, made as it would seem at thetime when the modem practices and usurpations of the corporationswere supported by the courts, on the ground ofusage — that this wise and useful enactment was, in pointof fact, rendered of no effect, by its being decided,* thatthis statute only prohibited the act under a penalty, but didnot make the bye-law void ; and this is the more to be regretted,because it was by the unrestrained power of makingBye-laws, bye-laws, that the greater portion of the abuses and usurpationsof corporations were introduced : and which nodoubt was the cause of the observation made by Hume,which is in no other sense true, that " one check to industryin England, was the creating of corporations : an abusewhich is not yet entirely corrected."Cap. 8. In the eighth chapter of the same year, relative to sewageInhabitants and savage, the merchants and inhabitants of cities, boroughs,and towns are mentioned ; and it is added also, thatdivers tenants of the king (no doubt meaning tenants in ancientdemesne), and of others, who have by grants under certainCorporate, names by which they have been corporate, as also by grantsmade by divers lords, both spiritual and temporal, and byprescription, they, their tenants, resiants, and inhabitants,within their several lordships, boroughs, and towns, are dischargedof tolls, &c., which are demanded by divers mayors,sheriffs, bailiffs, and other officers of cities, boroughs, andtowns, for their singular lucre: — the like is prohibited for thefuture, and all persons are allowed to sell freely.It is worthy of observation, that although in this charter,cities, boroughs, and towns are repeatedly mentioned, yettowns corporate are not alluded to ; notwithstanding thereis a direct reference to other corporate bodies.The grant of a guild merchant, or hanse, has been so• 5 Coke, 63 H ; I Ro. Ab. 363.STATUTES. 1049often supposed to be peculiarly connected with borough Hen.vil.rights, and the maintenance of select bodies, as contended forbyDr. Brady, that it is worth while to mention the 23dchapter of the 19th of Henry VII., as explaining what themerchants of the hanse really were. They are there describedas the merchants of the Hanse of Amain, having ahouse in the city commonly called " Guildhall TeutonicFrom which it is clearly impossible to suppose,that this house, or the guildhall, had any thing to do withthe municipal government of the city; but it was, as we haveso frequently observed before, a matter perfectly distinctfrom the city and borough rights— dependent upon usagespeculiar to such institutions — and altogether distinct fromthe county and borough jurisdictions established under thecommon law.CHARTERS.In collecting the charters of this reign, we find one only London,granted to the city of London, which merely relates to thebuying and selling by strangers within the liberties of the Strange.city.There is also, in the third year of this reign, a confirmation Bristol,to the city of Bristol, of the charter of Edward IV., treatingthe former grants to the commonalty, as if made to theburgesses.The king further granted, in the 15th year of his reign, 1499.to the mayor and commonalty, their heirs and successors,that there should for ever be six aldermen : the recorder be Aldermen,ing one of them ; the five remaining being elected by themayor and common council of the town; the aldermenhaving the same powers and jurisdiction within their libertiesas the aldermen of the city of London. — that the mayor andaldermen might remove any of the five aldermen, or supplyvacancies from the honest burgesses of the town ; and thatthey should be justices of the peace, with the customarypowers ; the mayor and commonalty having all fines without ^account — and no other justices interfering within the liber ^o°"'ties. A chamberlain is then appointed, to have a seal of1050 BRISTOL.Hen. VIT. office, with the same powers, &c. as the chamberlain of1499. London ; and with authority to sue and be sued, receive rents,keep charters, &c., and to make an annual account. That thebailiffs should be elected as formerly, with their accustomedShcnfft. powers ; and to be sheriffs of the city and county as well asCounty bailiffs ; that they might hold county courts, and have theWrits, s&rae power as other sheriffs ; and that all tmrits should bedirected to them. That the mayor and two aldermen shouldCogni- have cognizance of pleas, trespasses, covenants, &c. : and40 Men. be enabled to choose, by the assent of the commonalty, fortymen of the better and honest men of the town, who, withthe mayor and two aldermen, might make ordinances for thecommonalty, with power to levy taxes, and punish refractorypersons. That the mayor and two aldermen shouldhave power to levy fines, &c., and the mayor to receive probatesof wills. That the mayor and aldermen might holdthe same court which the mayor and sheriff used to hold :the mayor and commonalty having all fines without renderingany account. That the mayor and commonalty shouldhave power to appoint a water bailiff: and that the mayorJustices, and aldermen should be justices of gaol delivery, but thatthe fines and forfeitures, before justices of errol delivery,should be reserved to the crown. That no grants theretoforemade to the mayor, commonalty, or their predecessors,should be counteracted by any statute, act, &c. published tothe contrary.This charter, for the first time, creates six aldermen, ofwhom the recorder was to be one : and the remaining fivewere directed to be elected by the mayor and common council;which, as they purport to be new officers, the kingmight legally do : — for if he appoints five new officers, hemay direct by whom they should be elected; and if he doesso by a charter which is accepted, it would be binding, notwithstandingthe previous charter of the 47th Edward III.was confirmed by Parliament.The latter charter is not, in this respect, inconsistent withthe former, but is in furtherance of it, and superadded to it :as for instance, making the aldermen the justices of theBRISTOL. 1061peace ; for which there was no provision in the former char Hen. VII.ter, and which had probably become necessary, in cones 1499.quench of the power of trying indictments having been takenaway from the court leet, by the statute 1 Edward IV.Neither was there any such officer before appointed aschamberlain ;* and therefore the mode of electing him, prescribedin this grant, might stand, notwithstanding the formerparliamentary confirmation. It should be observed, thatthis charter appears to assume the binding effect of theparliamentary confirmation; and that the king had no longerany power to alter the former modes of election, becausewhere there was any previously existing mode of election, asin the case of the bailiffs, the charter does not purport toalter it.It is true, that it appoints the two bailiffs to act as sheriffsin the place of the former single sheriff; and directs that thecourt of pleas should be held before the mayor, and twoaldermen appointed by the mayor, instead of the sheriff, asdirected by the charter 47th Edward III. : and therefore weconceive this to be contrary to that charter; and consequently,upon the principles we have mentioned before,illegal, and not to be supported.So also the election of the 40, by the mayor; and the twoaldermen appointed by the mayor, with the assent of the commonaltyinstead of the mayor and sheriff, with the like consent,is, on the same ground, insupportable; particularly as itappears afterwards, that the ordinances were assumed to bemade by the mayor and aldermen, without saying any thingof the sheriff and 40 men, whose attendance was requiredby the charter of the 47th Edward III. The clause, substitutingone of the aldermen to be appointed by the mayorin the place of the sheriff, for the purpose of holding thecourt with the mayor, is for the same reasons invalid.It is not surprising that this charter should have beengranted, notwithstanding it was inconsistent with the previousparliamentary confirmation, because the dispensingpower was freely exercised by the crown at the time of• Vide ante, p. 827.1062 UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE.Hen. VII. its being granted ; and indeed there is at the end of thecharter a clause of exemption supposed at that time to bevalid.UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE.There are two or three documents relative to the Universityof Cambridge which occur in this reign, and which itmay be material to mention. Thus it was declared by an1501. indenture of the 17th Henry VII., with reference to the disputeswhich had existed between the university and theburgesses respecting their jurisdictions, that, if any doubthappened as to the interpretation of any article of arbitrementmade between the university and the town concerningtheir jurisdictions, liberties and privileges, that it shouldbe declared by the chancellor and treasurer of England,and the chief justices of the King's Bench and CommonPleas for the time being, or three or two of them.It was also awarded, as appears by an instrument of thesame year, that the mayor and bailiffs should have all pleasbefore them of all contracts of victuals, bought to be spentby the buyer, between burgess and burgess, and betweenburgess and foreigner, wherein any burgess is plaintiff.And the chancellor (besides where any scholar, scholar'sservant, common minister, or their servants, is party), shouldhold plea of victuals between all foreigners, and betweenburgess and foreigners, where foreigners should be plaintiffs.And that concerning victual bought and sold by theway of merchandise, the pleas should be holden before themayor, except a privileged person be a party. And thatother personal pleas (other than for victual, where a burgess,or foreigner dwelling within the town, should be party; andno privileged person by the university should be party ), shouldbe holden before the mayor. And if such privileged personbe party, then to be holden before the chancellor. And inall actions personal between foreigner and foreigner, bothparties dwelling out of the town, the parties to be at libertyto sue where he will.The mayor also claimed to have the correction of allLee. nuisances at the leet; if amendment were not had withinUNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE. 1053six weeks after every leet. But if it be in default of a Hen. VII.scholar, then the chancellor should have the punishment,correction, and amercement of them that made such nuisance,and the reformation of the same.It was likewise awarded, that in frays made with the townor university, wherein a scholar, or scholar's servant shouldhappen to be party, the chancellor should have the punishmentand correction thereof, and also the amercements.And, lastly, it was awarded, that scholars' servants dwellingnot within the town, should not be privileged. And if anyscholar, scholar's servants, common minister, commit anymurder or felony, they should be attached and amerced,according to the common law, without disturbance of anyprivileged person in the university.Southward.•In chronological succession, we have arrived at the periodwhen a grant was made by the king, with the consent ofParliament, to the town of Southwold;* which place, from itspeculiar circumstances, particularly with reference to theneighbouring borough of Dunwich, will require our particularattention ; and having given a few charters and factsconnected with it, we shall conclude with some observations,and compare its history with that of Dunwich.Southwold is not mentioned in Domesday as a borough,nor are there any ancient records relative to it, which willenable us to trace its early history. But in the fourth yearof Henry VII. the following entry occurs upon the Partial 1488.ment Rolls reciting, " that many great variances had beenfor a long time between the baillies and commonalty ofDunwich, in the county of Suffolk, the which is a town cor Dunwich.porate on the one partie, and the inhabitants of Southwold,of the same county, which is a town riot corporate, on theother partie. Which town being within the space of elevenmiles, the bailiff's and commonalty claimed of every ship ofthe inhabitants of Southwold coming into the haven of Dun-theancient names of this place were—Suwald, Suwalda, Sudholda, andSouthward.t Rot.Parl.p. 431.1054 SOUTH WOLD.Hgn.viL wich between the same towns, 6s. 8d. yearly ; and of every1488. boat of 12 oars of the inhabitants yearly, 4*.; and of everyboat of 11 oars of the inhabitants yearly, 2s.; and also ofevery ship yearly, for anchorage in the same haven, 4d. AllInhabitants which the inhabitants of Southwold denied, saying, theyought not any such charges to bear. Nevertheless, as wellthe bailiffs and commonalty, as the inhabitants of Southwoldaccorded, that the inhabitants and all their successors, andother inhabitants hereafter to be in the town of Southwold,and every of them, and their ships, &c. should be utterlydischarged of all the said customs. The king our sovereignlord, considering the said accord to be cause of continuedpeace of both, and willing therefore that the same accordshould be put in perfect surety of perpetual continuance, itwas enacted, &c. that the inhabitants of the town of Southwold,then being or thereafter to be, from thenceforth shouldbe one body and one commonalty, and that the same town beCorporate a town corporate of two baillies and commonalty for ever-name.more, and by the name of " baillies and commonalty" shouldPlead. plead and be impleaded, answer and be answered, in allmanner of actions, suits, quarrels and causes ; and by thePurchase. Same name purchase and receive lands, tenements and here-filaments,&c. The charter then names two persons as bailiffs.Elections, and proceeds to grant, that yearly, or at any avoidance of theCommon place of any of the bailiffs, the commonalty of the townaltassembled together, should choose two bailiffs of themselvesfrom year to year and time to time for evermore ; — and thatthe same two bailiffs and commonalty of Southwold, andevery inhabitant then being or thereafter to be of the town,and their successors, and every ship and boat of them, shouldbe from thenceforth for evermore quit and discharged fromthe customs before claimed of any of the inhabitants of thetown of Southwold by the said baillies and commonalty ofDunwich and their successors ; as well against the king oursovereign lord as his heirs kings of England ; as against thebailiffs and commonalty of Dunwich, and their successors;and against every inhabitant of the same town then being orthereafter to be.SOUTHWOLD. 1055And this act was in the next year, at the request of the Hen.vil.inhabitants of Southwold, duly exemplified, approved of, and 1489.confirmed by the king; who considering that the town wasupon the sea coast, and that the shipping of the inhabitants inhabitedexcelled that of the other more ancient privileged townsin the neighbourhood, yet upon account of the want of wholesomeordinances, the inhabitants had suffered many losses ;the king, wishing to supply a remedy, granted to the bailiffsand commonalty, and their successors, the king's manor orlordship of Southwold, and all lands or tenements in thesame town, &c.The same king, in the 20th year of his reign, also 1504.granted another charter to Southwold, which, after confirmingthe previous parliamentary grant and charters ofHenry VIL, commences with a recital, the same in effectas the last, and gives to the bailiffs, commonalty, andtheir successors, the manor, lordship, and town of South Manor.Town.wold, &c. with a court leet and view of frankpledge, to Court leet.the same belonging, upon receiving the annual payment of pledge.141. ; and that they should have and hold twice every yearone leet or view of frankpledge within the town, before thehigh steward of the town, or his deputy ; that they should Highhave the amendment of the assise of bread and beer,and the punishment of the same ; and the whole and whatsoeverbelongs, or ought or can belong to the view of frankpledge,with the profits of the same; together with the goodsof felons, and wrecks of the sea. That they should have twofairs annually, and two weekly markets. That the bailiffsand commonalty might appoint a high steward ; that they Highmight hold a weekly court of record before the chief steward, court ofor his deputy and the bailiff, with cognizance of real and '®^°"^-personal actions arising within the town. That the highsteward with the two bailiffs should be justices of the peace; justices,that they might have a coroner — the return of all writs — and Coroner,a gaol. And that the bailiffs should have an admiralty writs,jurisdiction, and no other minister whatsoever should intro Non-intermit.mit.The grant and charters to Southwold were successively1056 SOUTHWOLD.Hen. VII. confirmed by Henry VIII., Edward VI,, Queen Elizabeth,James I. and Charles I.James II., in the first year of bis reign, made also a grantto the bailiffs, as it is stated, for the improvement of thetown, and for the purpose of enlarging their privileges;professing also to make it a free borough, and to incorporatethe inhabitants ; with the usual corporate powers, and thegrant of 12 aldermen ; (two of whom are to be bailiffs) — arecorder — town clerk, and serjeants-at-mace.The persons who are first to fill those offices, are respectivelynamed ; the power of having a common hall or guild isgiven ; with the annual election of bailiffs ; and a power ofsupplying vacancies in those respective offices; and for therecorder to make a deputy. The inferior officers of thetown, who before were elected by the bailiffs and commonaltyare to be elected and sworn as they had been for the lastseven years.The charter then contains the power, usual in grants ofthat reign; that the bailiffs — recorder — aldermen — town-clerk— and serjeants-at-mace, might, by any order of theking in council, be removed.The objectionable nature of this clause was felt throughoutthe country, and generally rejected at the time. Sincewhich, as we have observed before, it was, by the Court ofKing's Bench, in the case of the King v. Amer,* declared tobe in itself void ; and some doubts suggested, whether sucha provision would not have the effect, upon the ground ofits illegality, of rendering the whole charter invalid. At allevents the inhabitants of Southwold appear to have partakenof the common feelings of the time, and to haverenounced this charter. As no charter of the crown cantake effect unless it is accepted by those to whom it wasgranted, this charter was altogether inoperative; for the inhabitantsnever accepted it ; as is proved by the fact, that noneof the officers given by it have ever been appointed : there areneither aldermen nor recorder. But the town has continuedunder the high steward and bailiffs appointed by the charter• 1 Term Rep. p. 363.SOUTHWOLD. 1057of Henry VII.; and has been subject to the jurisdiction of *^e°^ Vll.the court leet, according to its original jurisdiction. 1504.The non-acceptance, and consequent inoperativeness ofthe charter of James IL, is further proved by the charter inthe next reign by King William and Queen Mai-y, whichcontains by inspeximus, and confirms, all the former charters,excepting that of James 1 1.This closes the documents which we possess with respectto Southwold; it only remains to add the facts which occurafter these grants, and to mention the present state of thetown.Southwold never was a parliamentary borough, and hadnothing to boast of, but its separate jurisdiction from thecounty ; which was given to it by the act of Henry VIL, andunder which it has been most effectively governed to thepresent day : — affording one of the best specimens of thepractical effect of our ancient institutions, whilst pervertedand abused, that is to be met with in the kingdom ;scarcely presenting an instance of a criminal trial, or a civillaw suit, for many years. Property is respected, and protected,by the local administration of the law: and orderand good government preserved in the most exemplarymanner under the local authorities.Other places may perhaps vie with it in this particular,but the observation is material with respect to Southwold,because as there has been no temptation, for parliamentaryor political purposes, to pervert or abuse its exclusive privileges,they have continued in their original, unalteredpurity; and consequently their efficacy can be distinctlyascertained.It was, according to the opinions and fashion of the day,declared, in the reign of Henry VIL, to be a body corporate. Corporate,with the usual corporate powers; but this, as we havefrequently had before occasion to observe, produced no othereffect than to give them the power of legally, and under theauthority of the law, doing that which aggregate bodieshad done from the earliest periods of our history: — althoughthe principles connected with the existence and conduct of3 Y1068 SOUTHWOLD.Hen. VII. aggregate bodies had not been fully developed or defined,viz. that of taking and holding by succession — suing andbeing sued by their aggregate name — and acting under acommon seal.The charters also, in conformity with the early grants ofimmunity and exemption, discharged all the inhabitants ofSouthwold from all customs payable to Dunwich, or tothe king. These were all the privileges given to them bythe first parliamentary grant. But the same king, in the20th year of his reign, gave to them by his charter thatexclusive jurisdiction which they at present enjoy, bygranting to the inhabitants the manor — the town — and acourt leet, and view of frankpledge, with the usual powers;likewise the assise of bread and beer, and the goods of felonsand fugitives, which exempted them from suit at the sheriff'stoum: and thereby in effect excluded the sheriff's jurisdiction; the bailiffs and the commonalty paying to the kingout of the profits of the court leet and town, the yearly sumof 14Z. All of which the king had full power to do ; forinasmuch as the profits of the town belonged to the king,he had the full right to dispose of them: — and as theywere before collected by the sheriff as his officer, so couldthe king direct that for the future they should be receivedby the bailiffs and commonalty — they accounting for themin such manner as the king should direct; which was, thatthey should account for 14Z. out of them, retaining the restfor themselves.So also, as the suit at the sheriff's tourn was suit royal, dueto the crown, the king, as the head of the executive government,had by his prerogative the power of appointing whenand where, and how, it should be done ; subject only to thelegislative regulations which had been from time to time declaredby statute. The king, therefore, in adding to, orsubtracting from any shire, regulated the places over whichthe sheriffs toum should have its jurisdiction. — Or if hethought fit, for the better execution and administration ofthe law, that the suit royal should be done within any morelimited district than the county at large, he appointed aSOUTHWOLD. 1059court leet, and view of frankpledge within that district — as Hen. VII.he did for the town of Southwold ; the wisdom of which isbest proved by the fact, that it has, ever since, been wellandeffectually governed under that jurisdiction — which, asthere was no temptation to abuse, has remained unlimitedand perverted. Whereas, if such an exclusive jurisdictionhad not been given to it, distantly removed as it isfrom the shire town, it would, in all probability, have beenneglected or misgoverned.As a part of the same system, a high steward was alsoappointed, whose duty it was to preside at the court leet; and Leet.who has continued to do so to the present time.That court gave cognizance of criminal matters : and tocomplete the exclusive jurisdiction, it was necessary for thebailiffs and commonalty to have a court for the trial of civil Court ofRecord.causes, which was accordingly granted with full cognizance;and also that it should be a court of record ; to be held bythe chief steward : — which was practised for a long period,to the considerable advantage of the inhabitants.Serjeants-at-mace were also granted, for the execution ofthe process of the court. And that there might be no necessityfor removing the presentments or indictments found atthe court leet, according to the statute of the first of Edward justices.IV., the bailiffs and the high steward are appointed to bejustices of the peace, to hear and determine all matterswithin the lordship, manor, and town; and the justices ofthe county are, by a non-intermittent clause, excluded. n -" t -And that no other oflScers of the crown might interfere swithinthe jurisdiction, power is given to the bailiffs andcommonalty to appoint a coroner, who, to the exclusion of ^all others, was to execute the important functions belongingto that office.With the same view of completing the exclusive jurisdiction,the return of writs is granted to the bailiffs and common ^^^ -alty, and the power of having a gaol ; and though somewhat '^"'s*foreign to our present inquiry, it may be as well to note, thatan admiralty jurisdiction is given to the town ; and all otherjurisdiction of that kind within the precincts is excluded.3y2logo SOUTHWOLD.Hen. VII. So that it is impossible to doubt that this, comparativelyExclusive Speaking, modem charter, had also for its object, that whichtion. we have noted from the earliest periods — the establishmentof a jurisdiction separate from the county, and exclusive ofthe sheriff — the peculiar characteristic of a borough — but notof corporate privileges.Norwich. This latter observation naturally leads us to the comparisonof the case with Dunwich, which is most erroneouslystated in the parliamentary grant to be a town corporate;as contradistinguished from Southwold, which is stated notto be corporate. We have before shown the successivecharters to Dunwich* — three in the reign of King Johns-onein the reign of Henry III. — with confirmations in the reignsof Edward I., Edward III., Richard II., Henry VI. andEdward IV. None of those were charters of incorporation :but in substance the same as that granted to Southwold ;granting exemption from suits at shires and hundreds, andgiving the usual privileges which freemen enjoyed, of holdingtheir lands in free burgage — of devising and selling them —of free marriage — and as a proof that they were not incorporated,it should be noted, that those grants were to themand their heirs: the great object of them being, like that toSouthwold, to give an exclusive jurisdiction within theExclusive place ; and to exempt the burgesses from all jurisdictionjurassic 'tion. Without it.The charter of King John to Dunwich contained the pro-natives,vision, (applicable to those times,) that natives dwellingthere, and being in scot and lot for a year and a day, shouldbe freed from their lords. No such provision is found inthe charter to Southwold : — which might on the first impressioncreate surprise. But it must be recollected atwhat period that charter was granted : and although villainagewas in existence in the reign of Henry VII., it wasthen beginning to be disregarded, the great bulk of thepeople being free ; and there were, after this time, fewVillainage, instances of villainage being enforced. Hence these provisionsrespecting the enfranchisement of villains became• Vide ante, pp. 402—404.SOUTHWOLD. 1061unnecessary ; and a new description of the persons to whom Hen. VII.these privileges were granted was introduced: still, however,confining the objects of the charter to those livingwithin the privileged district. By these means the terminhabitants' gradually crept into use in these documents, inhabitantsas the most general mode of describing; those who were toenjoy the liberties within the local limits.* Instead, therefore,of the terms which had been adopted in the moreancient charters, and the provisions respecting the emancipationof the freemen, the more general term of " inhabitants"was used in the Southwold charter ; and it shouldbe remembered, that the " inhabitants" are, by the expressand unambiguous terms of the charter, incorporated. Accordingly,therefore, we find that the liberties and privilegesof the place have always been enjoyed by them; and theycontinue to this day as the commonalty, to join in the elections; and in that character alone to exercise all the franchisesgiven by the charter, although, in some few instances,in mistaken analogy with the ancient law, which was inapplicableto them, they are in the records of the town, calledfreemen.Besides the above act relative to Southwold, from the MiJ'i.Parliament Rolls, there is a reservation, out of the generalstatute of resumption by this king, of the manumission ofvillainage or neifty granted by him, or any former kings. v niajnage.Amongst the miscellaneous records of different boroughs,we find, in the books of Southampton, mention made of the Southampton.law-day, or court leet, held at Cut-thorn, in the first year of i^^w-day.this reign. i486.In the records of Lyme, a burgage is mentioned, as granted Lyme.by the burgesses, at the rate of one penny and fealty. Andanother is surrendered to the burgesses, with a condition nun?ages.that the tenant should be released from suit and service.Vide etiam, post. temp. Edw. VI.— bill for making the inhabitants in cites,boroughs, and towns, contributory in scot and lot with the citizens and burgesses.1062 YARMOUTH.HeD. VII. Amongst the documents relative to Yarmouth, we find,in the 13th year of this reign, a singular ordinance, describingthe method adopted for the impartial nomination of theJury, leet jury, who were to elect the annual officers. It is asfollows : —1497. 22d August. Ordinance as to the business to be transactedon the 29th of August, called St. John's day.Ordinance, jg^^ ^^ ^hg common assembly yearly to be holden in thecommon house, for the election of bailiffs and other officers,after the old laudable custom of the town, time out of mindused, every of the 24, and every of the 48, being withinthe town, all excuses avoided (sickness and other right specialcauses only excepted) shall be present, without anywarning to them to be made, upon pain that every one of the24 that shall fail there, and be absent at 9 or 10 of clock atfarthest before noon that day, of 20*. ; and every one of the48 that shall fail and be absent in like form upon pain of10*., to be forfeited and received without delay, to the cam-manrise arid profit of the town ; and that none of themabsent nor withdraw themselves that day out of the townpurposely, without great cause, upon the said pains.2d. Also it was ordained, that at the denomination andagreement of the bailiffs, and the 24 for the time being, at^e*' the said assembly, shall yearly be written of every leet, ninenames of the most discreet, well-disposed, and indifferentpersons of the said 48 then present in the house. And fordefault of that number of the 48, then to name other well-disposedpersons then present. That the said nine nameswritten of every leet be put in four caps — every leet by itself;those persons that were on the election the last year precedingexcepted, according to the old ordinances. And allfour caps to be brought before the bailiffs, and then an innocent,or a man not lettered, to be called, and he to takeout of every cap three bills, and lay them down before thebailiffs. And then 11 to be called, charged, and sworn,after the old custom of the town. And the 11 persons soOfficers, charged shall choose the officers for the year next ensuing,that is to say, two bailiffs, two chamberlains, two church-yarmouth,1063wardens, two managers, two collectors for the half doles, Hen. VII.eight discreet and sufficient wardens for awarding of herrings,and four auditors; the which auditors shall be two of the24, and two of the 48 ; and that they be of the most wiseand discreet men, that have best skill to take account. Andif nine of the 12 so sworn be accorded, and the other threebe not agreeable to them, the verdict of the nine so accordedshall be received, and the election shall stand in effect.Before we altogether pass on from this important document,we should call the attention of the reader to the fact,that the penalties which are to be paid for absence from theyearly assemblies, are to be taken for " the common use orprofit of the totmiy* forming, therefore, a part of that commonstock out of which the general pecuniary burdens upon theplace, whether of murage, portage, chiming, the support ofthe sick and impotent, or otherwise, were to be paid.And it must likewise be remarked, as a principle importantto be kept in view, that those who had previously acted asjurymen, were, in consequence of such service, to be exceptedfrom serving again.In the chamberlain's accounts for Yarmouth in the same Yarmouthreign, the fines of many persons admitted into the libertyare mentioned. In the margin of the Roll they are describedas " elected ;" — which term, in modern times, is supposed tomean, election at the mere will of the electors : but in the Electionmore correct and legitimate sense of our ancient laws, andaccording to the purity of our early institutions, it meant,election according to sound discretion, and a conscientiousview, under the sanction of an oath, of the circumstanceswhich should guide the discretion of the electors; — thus thepersons nominated in the manner described in the ordinancesbefore quoted, would not have the unrestrained power ofelecting whom they thought fit, as bailiffs, chamberlains, &c.,but would be bound, under their oaths, to elect those whowere in truth the most fit to be elected, and in the ordinarycourse of rotation ; so that the executing those offices might,in due turn, equally be imposed upon all.The capital pledges at the respective leets are again men Pledges.1064 YARMOUTH.Hen. VIL toned in this reign, as in the former; — ^and many persons areSworn, entered as sworn in the decenna ; — many are presented, ashaving bought and sold as burgesses, who were not so ; andthey are therefore amerced ; — many are also presented, becausethey occupied open shops as burgesses, and werenot so.Apprentice are presented because they kept apprentices, contraryto the liberties of the town.About the same period some are fined because they are notSworn, sworn in the ty thing : and others because they were of theage of 12 years and more, and remained within the precinctsLeet. of the leet for a year and a day, and refused to be swornYear and . •^ "^a day. in the decenna. Forestallers are also amerced : — and someDecent.persons are presented, as being fit to be burgesses. Uponthe general effect of the several classes of these presentmentswe have before made comments, which it is not here necessaryto repeat.*Wells. Amongst the documents of Wells of the ninth year of thisreign, there appear articles by the bishop against the city ;one of which charges them with making burgesses, whichit was alleged belonged to the bishop ; the answer was,that they had made burgesses for 300 years: a circumstancehighly probable, considering the entries we have before given1503. Yvith respect to this borough; and that in this same reignthere are entries of the same description " pro ingress habendoin libertatem," and one person is " discommoned"for refusing to attend at the convocation.Stafford. An ancient document relative to Stafford, contains thefollowing ordinances made in this reign, showing how carefullythe performance of all public duties was at that timesecured, by the oaths of the parties who were obliged toperform them. It also establishes that the burgesses ofStafford were, as we have shown in other boroughs, " theinhabitant householders residing within the place''It is as follows : —• See before, pp. 753, 798, 828.STAFFORD. 1065Hereafter ensued certain ordinances and establishments, Hen.vil.made at Woodstock, the sixth day of February, in the 16th Ordinance,year of the reign of our sovereign lord, King Henry VII.,by our said commons, lords, and great council, for the goodrule of his town of Stafford, the burgesses and inhabitants of Inhabitedsame.First. — That the 25 of the council of the town of Stafford,at the election of the bailiffs, do name four of the said 25 ;and that no burgess of the town abide or remain within thehouse, till the 25 have made the said election and nomination.And that done, the residue of the 25, with the other burgessesof the town, to choose two of the four to be bailiffs for theyear following. And that no burgess have any voice in thesaid election, nor be present in the same, except he be ahouseholder and dweller within the franchise of the same. ho/der^andItem.— That the two bailiffs, and every of the said 25, that '^sian'-now be of the council of the town, on this side the 26th dayof this present month of February, assemble in the commonhouse of the town, and do make this oath following :^' I shall be faithful and true, and faith and truth shall Oath.bear to the king. I shall nothing do, nor attempt, that maybehurtful or prejudicial to his highness, or his heirs ; and ifI shall know any such thing done, or attempted to be done,I shall let it to the best of my power, and in all haste to mepossible, show it to his grace, his heirs, or such of his council,as it may come to his knowledge. I shall be retainedwith no person, of what condition or degree soever he be, byoath, livery, fee, indenture, token, cognizance, promise, word,or by any other manner of ways, and do no service to no mannerof man, but only to our said sovereign lord, and his heirs,except only such service as appertained to my occupationor craft, so help me God, &c."Item. — ^^The said two bailiffs and 25, shall at ^^The same assembleand call before them, all the remnant of their compressesand inhabitants of the same town, and cause them Inhd)>-and every of them to take and make the same oath ; and allsuch as refuse so to do, to be committed to ward, there toremain till the king be advertised of their names and dec1066 STAFFORD.^^iX^' "^c^u^our in that behalf, and until they shall have knowledgeof the king's further pleasure in the same."Item. — Every person chosen bailiff in time to come, shallthe day of his election, before he depart out of the said house,Oath, not only make the said oath himself, but also be expresslysworn, that he shall cause every burgess made in his days,to take the same. And also, that all such as during hisoffice shall, in any manner or wise offend against the saidoath, calling to him the remainder of the council, if he be aBurgess, burgess, he shall be put out and lose his burgess-ship, andbe committed to ward, and suffer imprisonment by theCommoner, space of 20 days ; and if he be a commoner, to forfeit 40*.and like imprisonment, and not to be delivered till theyhave found sufficient sureties by obligation, to be of goodobeisance in time to come.Dwelling. " Item. — that no manner of person dwelling within thesaid town, except the bailiffs and their officers, from henceforthbear any bill, club, pitchfork, spear, sword, buckler,or other unlawful weapon, except he be going out of the sametown for his lawful business, or returning home into thesame, upon pain of forfeiture of the same weapon, and alsoimprisonment of his body by the space of six days, for everytime he shall be so taken.Foreigner. u Item. — That lio foreigner, of what estate, degree, or conditionhe be, resorting to the said town, at any time fromhenceforth, presume or take upon him to bear any unlawfulweapon within the town, after he shall have taken thereLodgings, lodgings ; but the same weapon to leave in his lodgings intosuch time as he shall depart out of the town, upon pain offorfeiture of the weapon, and further imprisonment, after thediscretion of the bailiffs with the council of the same town.Item. — That if it shall hereafter fortune the king's grace,to send to the said town for any of his subjects of the sameto attend upon his grace, and do him service of war, thatthen the same his subjects be ruled and conveyed unto hisgrace, by the bailiffs of the same town, or such another ableman of the said 26 of the council of the said town, as by thebailiffs and the said 26 shall be thought most necessary forSTAFFORD. 1067the same; in witness whereof, our sovereign lord hath signed Hen. Vll.this ordinance with his hand, and commanded his privy sealto be put unto the same."A distinction is expressly taken in this document, betweenthe "burgess" and the "commoner;" and it appearsevidently that it consisted in the former having been dulyadmitted enrolled, and sworn, as a bui^ess ; and the latternot having conformed to those requisite acts, which thebailiff is here distinctly called upon to enforce.And taking the whole document together, it is clear, thatas the inhabitant householders dwelling in the place werethe " burgesses' — so the " foreigners*' were those who wereonly inmates or lodgers, residing merely temporarily, and nothaving houses.In the books of the borough of Marlborough of this reign, Marlowappears that the proceedings at meetings of the burgesses, recalledthe "morrow speech," that the burgesses and denizens .who dwelt within the town, were not to sue without the town.And an ancient document of the same period shows, that theburgesses," " tenants," and householders were all synonymous,and imported the same body — which indeed is clearfrom this, that the householders, could not but be tenants ;and the burgesses as suitors at the court leet, (which itappears from the records, was at that time held in theborough), could not but be resiants, and consequently occupiersof houses in the borough; and therefore, tenants,householders, and burgesses, were in fact all the same.ELEVENTH YEAR BOOK.As the statutes, and charters of this and the precedingreigns have clearly established that municipal corporations*Hume, vol. iii. p. 287. " One check to industry in England, was the erectingof corporations, an abuse which is not yet entirely corrected." It does not appearvery distinctly what Hume exactly intended by this observation : — if by the expressionhe used he meant the erecting of boroughs, he was in error in attributing thatfact to this period. If he meant the giving corporate powers to the burgesses, ithad not the effect to which he alludes. And if he meant that the two united, thatis, that the boroughs having municipal government, being incorporated, had theeffect he suggests, he is altogether inaccurate; for there cannot be a greater1068 ELEVENTH YEAR BOOK.^^°'^^^- were becoming general, (to which in a great measure Humeattributes the check which was then given to industry inEngland), we should naturally expect that the decisions ofthe courts of law would tend to establish the same point;and indicate on the face of their reports, an increasingnumber of cases of that description; and a more particularinquiry into the doctrine of corporations.Accordingly we find in the Year Book of this reign, manycases illustrative of that head of the law.Hunting i^ a^ cj^gg jjj ^}^g second year of this reign, by the prior of^486. Huntingdon against divers men of Huntingdon, for theirTat. entry upon seven acres of land, it was stated, that " the landCommon "^ '^alty, " was held of the bailiffs and commonalty of Godmanchester ;"who alleged in themselves a " corporations by prescription,and that their manor was ancient demesne.tion. Here we find the term " corporation," adopted as if it wasthen in common use ; and that the doctrine of corporations byprescription, was at that time asserted — of which this seemsto be the first instance, as applied to a municipal corporation :although the same doctrine had long before prevailed as toecclesiastical bodies.So also the doctrine of corporations by implication seems,at this time, to have been entertained by the courts : — for inthis year, it appearing that the king by his charter, had givenlicence notwithstanding the statute of mortmain, to a chaplainand his successors, to grant a rent issuing out of certain premises,it was in argument apparently admitted that thiscreated a corporation by implication : — and although the casewas not expressly determined upon that point, but othergrounds, yet, in fact, it involved that admission.*1487. The corporate doctrine, as then received, with respect toM.T.' ecclesiastical persons, and also in some degree as to municipalbodies, may be collected from the following cases.The prior of Bath, whilst he was prior, entered into an ob-bennetto a country than such local jurisdictions, as well for the purpose of thelocal administration of the law, as for the local government of the people. Hisobservation can only be true if directed against the monopolies granted to crasisand mysteries; ^r against the usurpations and abuses which, subsequent to thisperiod, crept gradually into corporations.• See 2 Hen. Vll., 13 a, b, cited at length in Sutton Hosp. case, 10.ELEVENTH YEAR BOOK. 1069ligation without the convent ; and afterwards was elected Hen.Vil.abbot of St. Austin, near Canterbury; and an action was 1487.brought upon the obligation.Vavisoury Justice, said, when an obligation is made by abody politic, the body only should be charged : — as mayorand commonalty. For if the mayor be deposed, or his authorityexpire, then he shall not be charged : for he is severedfrom the body politic, and cannot be charged, except withthe body. And so it is with the dean and chapter; and inthe case at the bar each abbot is a body politic; for he cantake nothing except to the use of the house. And when hewas elected abbot of another place, he was severed from thebody politic of Bath.All the other judges were to the contrary. And Bryanput the diversity between a mayor and commonalty, as a bodypolitic, and a dean and chapter, abbot, and prior. Wheneverit is wished to charge the mayor and commonalty, it is fit forboth to be bound ; for if a man binds himself by the name ofmayor and commonalty, the commonalty are not bound withhim, for none will be charged, but he who makes the obligation.The word " mayor'* is of no effect. And the goods ofa commonalty cannot be taken in execution ; and so also it isas to a dean and chapter. But it is otherwise of an abbot orprior ; for they are bound notwithstanding the convent be notbound : and the house cannot be charged with respect to theprior ; — the charge will follow his person, because he was atall times personable to be sued.A writ of trespass was also brought in the fourth year of 1488.this reign against the mayor and commonalty of York. It T. T.appeared that all the inhabitants had common on the landwhere the trespass was alleged, and therefore they placedtheir cattle upon it. It was said that this was no plea —that this action was brought against the corporation ; andthe defendants justified as private persons, which was notto the purpose. For if an action be brought against a dean,and the fellows of a college, and they say the 12 personsmake the college, and justify in their own right, it is noplea. So here, the trespass is assigned as against one person,1070 ELEVENTH YEAR BOOK.Hen. VII. that is, the body politic ; and they justify as other persons :1488. and it was alleged to be no plea. It was also held, that acommonalty could not give a warrant without writing tocommit a trespass.It should be observed, that in this case the arguments, asto the rights and obligations of municipal corporations, arestill borrowed from principles which had been before appliedto ecclesiastical bodies; and in this and other cases theanalogy and reasoning are usually taken from those institutions.Fol. 17 B, It was likewise again held in another case, in the sameyear, that a body corporate could not make a feoffment lease,or any other thing of inheritance without deed ; but it wasat the same time decided, that as to those things whichbelong to service they could ; as, the appointment andemployment of ploughmen, servants of husbandry, butlers,and cooks, &c.Misnomer. It will be apparent also from these reports, that the casesfounded upon misnomers of corporations, became more frequent;and were decided upon more subtle grounds.1495. Thus — in the 11th year of this reign — an assise was°' * brought by the name of "the master and wardens" ofRunceval ; and it appeared by the replication, that he wasIncorpo- incorporate by the name of " master, wardens, brothers andsisters of Runceval ;" and it was also shown, by the sameCorpora letters patent of corporation that the king had grantedthat they should implead by the name of " master andwardens."Keble, — ^^The writ should abate ; for it appears by ^^The re-Corporate plication, that they are corporate by another name, thanthat by which the action is brought ; that is to say, by thename of " master, wardens, brothers and sisters ; " and eachof those four are persons able to sue : for where one is corporateby the name of " abbot and fellow monks," there noperson is able but the abbot alone.* But here each of thosefour are persons capable — and thus it is of mayor and com-Here we still see that the illustrations of the corporate doctrine are borrowedfrom the cases of ecclesiastical persons.ELEVENTH YEAR BOOK. 1071monalty; for the mayor cannot bring an action without Hen. VII.naming the commonalty. And as to its appearing that theking had granted that they should be impleaded by thename of " master and wardens," those words are void, forthey are contrary to the incorporation. They ought to beimpleaded by the same name by which they purchased.Wood. — It appears that the king has granted that theyought to purchase and be corporate by the name of ** master,'' wardens, brothers, and sisters :" then they should not beimplacable but by that name. For those words render themimplacable ; and they can only be impleaded by such nameas the king gave them. But if the king wishes to grant tobailiffs that they should be impleaded by the name ofmayor*' — or by the name of " good men" — ^that is good.KebU, — If the king did not grant to them that they shouldbe impleaded by the name of " master and wardens," theywould be impleaded by the name of '' master, wardens,brothers, and sisters," according to the first words of incorporation.Brian, — By whatsoever name the king grants, by thatname must they plead and be impleaded, as in the case ofWindsor and other cases.In a case of trespass, brought in the 13th year of this reign, 1496.by the dean and chapter of Poole, it was said, " that a * deanand chapter' — * mayor and commonalty are bodies politic."And it is from this passage, that much of the loose doctrineadopted by Brady and other authors, as well as in modemcaseSjhas been borrowed. It is true chaldeans and chapters"always were incorporated, by the principles applied to ecclesiasticalbodies from the earliest times, as we have abundantlyshown. And it is equally true, that " mayor and commonalty"were always bodies politic : — but they were not always incorporated; as we have likewise distinctly proved by documentsand authorities from the earliest periods. Overlookinghowever these distinctions, it has been erroneously assumed,and supposed to be supported by this passage, that mayorand commonalty always imported a corporation — an error1072 ELEVENTH YEAR BOOK.Hen, vii. which we trust has been removed by the records we haveproduced, and the progress of the history we have traced.Misnomer Other Subtle distinctions upon supposed misnomers, occurin subsequent cases ; where, notwithstanding the suggestedvariances in name, the bodies were clearly in substance thesame. But the misnomers were still insisted upon. And inthe course of one of the arguments," mayor and commonalty"seem to be considered as not necessarily incorporated — butin some instances, importing, as we before pointed out, unincorporatedseparate persons.1497. In an action of trespass, brought by " the mayor andxol* \A B.Oxfonl. bailiffs" of Oxford, it was objected by the defendant, thatIncoroo- they were incorporated by the name of "mayor and burgesses"of Oxford, and not by the name of "mayor andbailiffs."Brian. — ^^The plea is good ; for it is said in ^^The Book ofAssise, that in an action brought in the name of * the mayorand commonalty,' the defendant insisted, That they werepersons separate, and not incorporate by that name.'Wood, — It seems that the plea is not worth any thing,without showing the letters of incorporation.Keble. — Perhaps they have been accustomed, from timeimmemorial, to sue and be sued by that name."Misnomer. Jq the following case there is a similar reference to thedoctrine of misnomer, by which it was said even to extend tomake a confirmation void, where the name of confirmationdiffered from that in the original grant.And in the same case, municipal corporations by prescriptionare assumed to have existed: — but we have alreadyshown to demonstration, that there were none such, in pointof fact.It will likewise be perceived that the doctrine of forfeitureby non-user is also incidentally introduced.\f'r}' In a quare impede against the mayor, bailiffs and burgessesof B., it was said by Saviour, that if a town becorporate by letters patent of the king before time ofNon-user, memory, and those franchises have not been used since timeELEVENTH YEAR BOOK. 1073of memory, they have lost their franchise. And it was also Hen.Vli.said by Brian and Wood, that if a rent-charge be grantedbefore time of memory, and no distress or possession hadbeen taken within time of memory, the grantor and his heirsare without remedy to recover this rent. And also, if a townbe corporate by the name of " mayor and bailiff's," and since Misnomer,they have had a confirmation by the name of " mayor andburgesses," the confirmation is void.It is needless to cite more cases in this reign illustrative ofthe doctrine of corporations — as it is clear, for the reasons wehave already given, that the general doctrine, and the deductionsfrom it, as to misnomers'*^ and other points, hadbecome common in the courts ; and therefore the few specimenswe have given, are sufficient for all the practical purposesof our inquiry.It remains only to add a few decisions upon the otherpoints, which we have endeavoured to illustrate in the progressof our researches.We find, in the 11th year of this reign, one of the fewcases which occur at this period relative to villains)"The question for the consideration of the court was, 1495.whether a man, who being a lord of a villain, grants a re- jyj ^p 'version to him, as tenant for the term of life ; and he atoms villain,upon the grant made to him, thereby enfranchises him ornot ? " It was argued, that where a lord gives a thing tohis villain ; or takes any thing from him, by way of gift, itis a good enfranchisement. But if the lord does not give*' That suits to avoid grants upon the account of misnomer, are odious suits;and a shameful thing it is, when grantees or lessees, who for the roost part are illiteratepersons, have paid great fines — Corporations, who are presumed best to knowtheir name of foundation, should go about to avoid their own grants, under theircommon seal, upon such a slight mistake. And therefore the judges ought, in thecases (as generally they do) to make such constructions, if they may, that thegrants may stand good. — Couldst* 122. Gaudy. — However, it seems in such acase remedy may be had in the Court of Chancery, for the Lord Chancellor saidit was fit to help such lessees there, if for reasonable time, and made upon suchconsideration, otherwise not." Powder, p. 536, in note.t During this reign the lands of the barons were alienated to a great extent; andthe villain, acquiring riches by their industry, which, in these later times, theyhad been allowed to exercise for their own benefit, became the purchasers : andthus was brought about an imperceptible, but considerable change in the constitution,which gave to the commons an increasing influence.3 z1074 ELEVENTH YEAR BOOK.Hen. VII . any thing to his villain, nor take any thing from him, it isnot an enfranchisement. If another makes a feoffment toVillain, a villain, upon condition that the lord will free to it,and the lord agrees, it is a good feoilinent — but the villainis not enfranchised. Again, if a feoffment be made to thevillain, on condition that the lord will give to the villain20«., and he gives it, this also is not an enfranchisement —because the lord may give to his villain chattels, or clothing,or money to expend. But if the lord grants him a lease for aterm, it is an enfranchisement — because the villain takes aninterest in the land against the lord. Where the lord doesnot do any thing, but suffers or admits any thing to be givento his villain, it is agreed that the villain shall have suchthing ; but it cannot be said to be an enfranchisement.From this case it is evident that villainage still existed, andthat the doctrine was acted upon ; though, from the paucityof the cases under this head during the reign of Henry VI L,it is obvious, that both the practice and the doctrine werewearing out, and were much mitigated in favour of thevillain.1497. In Railway's Reports,* there is a case two years afterwards,in the 13th year of this reign, in which the plaintiffcomplains that the defendant claiming him as his bondsmanhad seized his goods. The defendant pleads that the plaintiffwas his villain regardant : both parties gave surety : — theplaintiff to appear — and the defendant not to take his goodsor body — and the question was directed to be tried upon awrit " de homines replegiando/*1490. We have some few cases also in the sixth year of thisTourn. .reign, relative to the tourn. From which it appears that itcontinued in practice till this time, as is shown by a case, in1 East. T. which a man was indicted before the sheriff in his tourn.Fol. 2.The presentment, however, was held void, on the specialground, that the court was held some time after Easter, beingin violation of the statute of the 31st Edward III., chap. 14;which, therefore, appears to have been a subsisting statuteapplicable at that time to the tourn,• Railway, 34.ELEVENTH YEAR BOOK. 1075Another case, also, occurs, in which it was held that the ^«^' VII.offence of rape was not inquirable at the sheriffs toum; it Fol. 5.not being punishable at common law. toura.*Another important case also occurs about the same period, 1496.which, even in those comparatively speaking modem times,most accurately defines the object, nature, and respectivejurisdictions of the tourn, leets, and hundred courts; aswell as the nature of the suit due at each of them ; and bywhom it was to be performed. It was a case of replevin :in which it was stated in argument, and admitted, that, at thecommencement, all the administration of justice was in thehands of the crown. That after the multiplication of people. The crownthe administration of justice was divided into counties, thepower being committed to a deputy in each county, namely,the ^^ sheriff :" — who was the bailiff and deputy of the Sheriff,king, to punish offenders — defend the realm — to be inattendance upon the king in the time of war — and to causeall the w^w* within his county to go with the king to defend ^®'**the kingdom ; from which cause his name is derived — thatis, he is " viscount," to whom the governance of the countyis committed ; for which purpose he was to punish alloffenders in two courts which were committed to him,namely, the " shire court'' which is called the " county Countycourt;" and the "tourn of the sheriff;" — by which all thoseof the county f were governed. And the shire court was forone man to have remedy against another: — and the ^owrn was Toum.for each man of a certain age (those of the church onlyexcepted) to come to it, so that no man should be ignorantof the law. Every man, therefore, was compellable to cometo the tourn; so that they should not be ignorant of the thingswhich were shown there, or homo they were governed ; and thisis called " suit royal," on account of the allegiance they Suit royal,swear to the king: for it appears that they are all swornIt is impossible to doubt that the term " men " must here have meant all thefreemen inhabiting in the county— the Uteri lumiines comitatus.t This term, also, must include the inhabitants of the county — and, if so, whyshould not the same terms when applied to boroughs, as—" the men of theborough," " those of the borough," equally mean the inhabitants of the borough 1—always, however, limiting it to the free inhabitants.3 z 21076 ELEVENTH YEAR BOOK.Hen. VII. and charged that they should be loyal and faithful men tothe king. It then became too great for the sheriff alone toHundreds, do, upon which hundreds were ordained and divided, andderived out of the county : — and in each hundred was ordaineda conservator of the peace, who was called theConstable. '^ constable*' Then boroughs also were made and ordained ;and within them a conservator of the peace, who was calledthe petit constable, and in some places " Boroughs," accordingto the diversity of the language. For this land,having been inhabited by different nations, as Britons, Saxons,Danes, and Normans, the diversity of terms is accounted foras derived from the language of those different nations : —but all the terms are of one effect. And all the hundreds orboroughs originally came to the toum or shire, by reason oftheir allegiance, and the constables and the petit constablespresented there the defaults of offenders. But as this viewwas of great trouble to the people, to travel to the toum ofLets. the sheriff, at the special request of lords, leets, and view ofFrank frankpledge (which are all one) were granted within certainp edge, precincts, to redress all manner of defaults. And if the de-dernierfaults were not redressed there, they were to be so at thethe toum. toum of the sheriff. And if a leet was misused, it would beseized into the hands of the king. And if it were upon thatMen. account, or any other, seized into his hands, all the " men "should then go to the toum of the sheriff.It was also stated in a subsequent part of the case, thatLeet. every one should go to the leet : as it is for the king, and forthe common weal to inquire and present common nuisancesand felonies, Sc. And if a man comes to a leet who is notresiant, yet the steward shall (if necessary) compel him tobe sworn although not resiant, to present nuisances, &c. ;and that is called suit service, and not suit royal, which cannotbe performed but where the person is " resiant ;" andneed be done but once.In this case the reader will perceive the most distinct andexplicit recognition of the doctrine to which we have beforeOld referred — upon which Old Sarum, and other places similarly"** circumstanced, ought to have been treated as no longer bo-eleventhYEAR BOOK. 1077roughs, upon the principles of the common law, without any Meg Vll.legislative interference.That the tourn and the leet were in fact the same, except 1494.ing that the former applied to the county at large, and the Lecu°latter only to a borough or smaller district taken out of thecounty, may be collected from another case of replevin,which occurred in the 10th year of Henry VII., where theterm " tourn" is used in the commencement of the case, althoughit is obvious, from the whole tenor of the report,that it in fact related to a court leet ; which term occurs atthe close of it.The defendant avowed the taking as lord of the manor ; Foi. 16.and alleged that from time immemorial, four men, and thereeve of the town of Dale, had been accustomed to come tohis tourn ; and that they inquired of different concealments Toum.within the town of Dale ; and if they did not come they wereamerced. In the present case they had refrained from coming,and were accordingly amerced ; and he and his ancestorshave ever been accustomed to distrain for such amercement.In a subsequent part of the case it was said, that of commonright a man can distrain for an amercement in a leet; I.«ct.but that it was not surplusage to allege the prescription todistrain.That the court leet also continued in existence at this time courtLeetappears fully, from other cases occurring in this reign, a fewof which we shall extract ; premising that a term occurs inthem, which, as we have seen before, has produced mucherror upon the subject of burgage tenure: so also might it,unexplained, lead to a mistake with respect to courts leet.The " tenants" are spoken of as attending upon that court. Tenants.If that term was intended to be applied to the tenant of thefreeholds not residing within the limit of the leet, (as we haveseen it applied in the instance of burgage tenure,) then itwould be inconsistent with the law relative to courts leet : —because at that court, resiancy, and not tenure, is the groundof the obligation to do suit there. But if the word " tenant"is in this instance taken, as we have already contended it1078 ELEVENTH YEAR BOOK.Hep.VIL ought to be in the case of burgage tenure, as confined to theactual tenant or occupier of a house within the jurisdiction ofthe leet, then it is correctly applied to that court, and means,in fact, the proper suitor there, viz., the inhabitant householderpaying scot and lot. With this observation the followingextract may be intelligible : otherwise it would have astrong tendency to create error.l^« It was admitted in the course of argument, in a case, inH. T. the 11th year of this reign, respecting prescription, that theBye-laws. tenants in a leet could make bye-laws ; and an assent amongthem would be binding. And that in a leet, a man couldprescribe that for every affray or bloodshed, the offendershould pay a certain sum of money ; and that the owner ofthe leet could prescribe to distrain for it, and to sell the distress.And the reason is, because it is the court of the king —and derives its authority from him. And a town likewise canmake bye-laws for themselves.This case is also material, as clearly showing that thepower of making bye-laws, which is usually considered aspeculiar to corporations, is not in point of fact confined toleet. those bodies ; for the leet is not a corporation, nor necessarilyconnected with it ; and yet it is, as is also said with respectto parishioners — tenants of a manor — and other aggregatebodies not incorporated — capable of making bye-laws.^^®*» A former case which we have cited,* seems to treat thehundred and leet as the same : which taken generally, andHundred, without explanation, might also lead to error. The hundredcourt, properly speaking, was not the same as the leet ; butwas the court held under the jurisdiction of the sheriff, forthe trial of civil pleas in the different hundreds of the shire.On the other hand it often happened, that a hundred had aleet of its own, co-extensive with the hundred, by which itwas exempted from suit in criminal matters at the sheriff'stourn. Thus there are many instances, as well in boroughsas in manors, where the court leet extends over the wholehundred ; and the same observation may be made with re-Wards, spect to the Ices of the wards, or wardmotes, in the greater• Vide ante, p. 930.ELEVENTH YEAR BOOK. 1079cities, which are said by Lord Coke, as we have seen be Hen. VII.fore, to be " the same as hundreds." And this explanation,as the same learned author often states, " is necessary tounderstand the books" — as well as the former case : — all ofwhich will be further illustrated by the following report.In a case of replevin, in the 13th year of this reign, it was 1497.held, that a hundred and a leet were different in their nature.For a man could have a hundred in his manor (that is, ahundred court), or within a certain precinct, of commonright : to which hundred, the court baron (or court for trialof real and civil pleas) is incident of common right — as acourt of pie powder and toll are to a market or fair. Andwhen a man makes an avowry for the amercements of ahundred, it is a good avowry to allege, that he was seized ofthem by prescription; as well as where a lord makes au Prescribeagainst his tenants, because the lordship and thehundred are things of common right. When a man makesan avowry for an amercement in a leet, he ought to have atitle by prescription ; otherwise the avowry is worth nothingbecause "Me leet is against common right" (that is, it is Leet.against the common right of the sheriff's jurisdiction, fromwhich it is an exception). Thus the hundred and the leet Hundred,vary in their nature, and cannot be parcel the one of theother. But when one manor is held of another, and the oneescheats to the other, then this manor is parcel of theother to which it has escheated ; for both manors are ofthe same nature. But it would not be so with the hundredor with the leet. It was alleged, that King Edward wasseised of the leet by a prescriptive title, as parcel of thehundred, which he could not be by possibility; for he hasnot cognizance of the leet as parcel of the hundred — theleet always remaining in the king. In a subsequent part ofthe case it was said, that at the leet they had the view, at Leet.certain times of the year, of all the lieges of the king residentin the hundred : — which must, by common intendment, beconfined to these cases, where the hundred is co-extensivewith the leet.1080 KEILWAY's REPORTS.Hen. VII.KEILWAY's REPORTS.Having closed our extracts from the Year Books, weproceed to quote a few cases from the Reports of Railway —which, though of an early date, were not, in fact, publisheduntil after many of the early reporters ; as may be seen fromthe list of cases referred to in the commencement of thebook.Westminster city of Westminster was, in the 12th year of this reign,1496*. treated as a distinct franchise, having an exclusive jurisdiction; — as a writ of " habeas corpus cum cause" was atthis time directed to its bailiffs.Church It is often said, as a general proposition, that the churchwardensof a parish are incorporated ; and it seems that theyare so for some purposes — of which an instance is foundFoi in the Reports of Railway in the same year. For it wasstated to be the law, by the chief justice and the otherjudges, that "the wardens of a church are incorporated bythe common law : " and by the favour of the law canmaintain an action of trespass, for damage done against thegoods of their parishioners ; but have not capacity to acceptafeoffment of land — for that cannot be done, without they bemade a corporation by letters patent of the king.* Fromwhich it is obvious, that from the numerous charters ofincorporation which had at that time been granted, thedoctrine was becoming generally understood, and clearlydefined.1504. In another case in the same reporter, in the 20th year ofthis reign, in an action of trespass, it was decided, that anofficer who levies an amercement by process and commandmentof the court, should not be punished — because he actsby authority, and colour of justice. And it was admitted,Leets. that the commencement of all leets in England, was derivedout of the toum of the sheriff, by grant of the ling,1506. In another case, in the 22d year of this reign, it appearsSteward, that a man was indicted, before the steward of the leet, of a®^* felony committed in Dale ; and because the indictment didVide etiam, 1 Inst. 3 a.Neil WAY'S REPORTS. 1081not state that Dale was within the jurisdiction, the party Hen. VII.was dismissed by the opinion of all the judges.Again, on another occasion, in the same year, it was stated y^J^^^*th2XPevensey,in Sussex, was parcel of the duchy of Lancaster;and was made a member of the Cinque Ports, by patents ofthe king, before that grant ; — and after that grant, the Dukeof Lancaster had a leet within the town, and held it before the Leet.steward of the duchy. And the port reeve of the duchy had Steward,been always accustomed, a certain time before the leet, tosummon 18 of the borough* of Pevensey, and 24 knights, toappear before the steward of the duchy. That lately theyappeared on the summons, but that they refused to be swornby the seneschal, or steward, because he had commandedthem, upon the penalty of 40^., to be sworn, and they hadrefused ; and that the seneschal, or steward, had directeda replevin of certain beasts of a stranger; but that thoseof the port had beaten the bailiff and men of the seneschal,or steward. And directions were given to one Gray, tosummon a court to elect a new port reeve. And the formerport reeve was taken by a capias, upon an indictment of Portreeve,riot, before them of the same port of the town of Pevensey,as justices of the peace; and was for a considerable perioddetained in prison. That divers privy seals had been issuedagainst the principal offenders, to make them come beforethe chancellor of the duchy; but they were disobeyed.However, a special command of the under-warden of theports was issued; upon which they came and were committedto prison for their contempt, and a day was awardedthem to answer for it. And for answer, they stated, thatunder the name of " mayor, bailiffs, jurats, and inhabitantsof the Cinque Ports in Kent and Sussex," divers grantshad been made to them by several kings of England;which had been confirmed by the then present king, — Thatthey should not be demanded nor compelled to answer outof the ports, for any cause done or committed within them ;This general description of the persons who were to be summoned, as being"of the borough' is precisely of the same kind as those which we have beforenoted, of " the men of the county and borough* and " those of the county and borough"—all clearly meaning the free inhabitants in those districts.1082 KEILWAY's REPORTS.Hen. VII. ijijt ti^at it should be determined before the mayor, bailiff,1606. and jurats of the ports. And for default of justice, repara-Shepway. tion should be made them at Shepway, before the lieutenantfor the time being. And that the offences that werealleged against them, were committed within the CinquePorts ; and they therefore prayed to be disclaimed.It was said by the justices, that the dispute was betweenthe king as Duke of Lancaster, and those of the ports byreason of their corporation, as " mayor, bailiffs, and jurassicwhich case, no person could demand an answer out of theports for any party, except for matters respecting the king ;but that it would not be reasonable that they shots theirselves be the judges.Brummell said, their charter speaks of inhabitants andyree-holders within the ports, who ought not to be sued out ofthem.This case is material as showing, that the leet was to beheldbefore the steward ; although there was another officer ofthe king in the place, as the port reeve ; whose functions wereanalogous to those of the mayor or the bailiff. The free tn-inhabitantshabitants of this branch of the Cinque Ports, are spoken of inthe same general manner (which we have before noted) asthose of the ports'' And although the town is mentioned,in conformity with the doctrine — practice — and charters ofthat period, as incorporated ; yet it is clear, that the incogporation was of all the inhabitants : — which in truth made noessential alteration in the character of the burgesses, butmerely superadded to their former privileges, the expressright to enjoy corporate powers, as we have so often pointedout.CHESTER.The county palatine of Chester was anciently not subjectto the general laws of the realm, because not being representedin Parliament, they could not be considered ashaving concurred in the making of them. They had, however,their " commune concilium'* as well before the Conquestas after.*Squire, 261, in Note. See also King's Vale Royal of England, 9— U.CHESTER. 1083Lord Coke, distinguishes Chester, Lancaster, and Durham, Hen. VII.from other counties, as counties palatine ; and says, they are 1506.exempted from the jurisdiction of the king's courts, andwithin them are jura regalia, and plenary jurisdiction.*And Lord Hale, chief justice of the King's Bench, in thecase of Fisher v. Batten, describes Chester as a county palatineby prescriptionsIt is also said, in the same reports from which we havecited this case, that " these counties palatine had their originalfrom politic reasons, because they were adjacent toenemies' countries ; so that the inhabitants having administrationof justice at home, and not being obliged to attendother courts, those parts should not be dismissed of inhabitantswho might secure the country from incursions."Which again confirms the assertion, that all these grants,privileges, and franchises, were, in truth, to be enjoyed bythe inhabitants of the respective districts, whether countiespalatine — wapentakes — ridings — hundreds — lathes — citiesboroughs — or towns.Chester, which became in the next reign the subject of Charter.special legislative enactment, obtained, in the 22d year ofthis reign, a charter which, after reciting the great affectionwhich the king bore to the citizens and commonalty of thecity, and in consideration of the great costs and expenseswhich the inhabitants had borne for him, granted and confirmedto the citizens and commonalty, their heirs and sue ^**°iTcessors for ever, that the city, and its then suburbs (with theexception of the castle) should be exempted and separatedfrom the shire of Chester y and should thenceforth be a county County ofby itself, and be called the county of the city of Chester.That the citizens and commonalty, their heirs and successors,might yearly elect 24 fellow citizens to be aldermen, Aldermen,and 40 other citizens for the common council. And that by Commonthe unanimous consent of the mayor, aldermen, sheriffs, and ^°"*^^**'the other citizens of the common council, one of the 24 aldermenshould be chosen recorder ; and that the citizens and Recorder,commonalty might choose from among themselves yearly,• 2 Inst. 666. f 1 Vent. 165.1084 CHESTER.Hen. VII. one person to be mayor, who should also be the escheator,Mayor, and clerk of the market.That the mayor and commonalty, their heirs and cessors, should for ever be one community of themselves,and by the name of the " mayor and citizens of the city ofChester," be capable to plead and be impleaded. That themayor and citizens might choose from among themselvesMayor, yearly one citizen for mayor, and two for sheriffs, which mayorand sheriffs should be chosen in the following manner ; viz. ailthe fellow citizens of the city, suburbs and hamlets, who chooseto be present at the election of the mayor, every year uponFriday next after St. Dennis, might meet together freelyand without hinderance at the common hall of the city,when the greater part of them should name two citizensDwelling. dtvelUng in the city, most sufficient, discreet, and best ableof the number of the 24 aldermen; neither of them theretoforehaving occupied the office of sheriff for the space ofthree years then next preceding, of which two so named,the greater part of the aldermen and sheriffs then and therepresent should, by scrutiny, appoint one as mayor ; and ifit so fall out that in the election or nomination of thisone person for mayor, the discordant voices be in numberequal, then the voice of the mayor for the time being shouldbe taken and accounted for two. But in the choosing of thesheriff of the city this form should be observed, viz. : — thatthe mayor, sheriffs, aldermen, and other citizens dwellingthere, if they choose to be present at the election of suchSheriffs, sheriffs, might, without contradiction, yearly assemble andmeet together, where the mayor, sheriffs, and aldermen forthe time being, or the greater part of them, then and therepersonally being, should choose one able and sufficientperson for one of the sheriffs ; and the other fellow citizens,or the greater part of them, one other able and sufficientperson for the other sheriff, which two so chosen sheriffsshould, for one whole year so be and remain.Provisions are then made, that no other escheator, clerkNon of the market, or sheriff, should enter within the libertyintromit. ^^ ^j^^ ^j^^ Powers are given for the sheriff to hold aCHESTER. 1085county court, and also to determine all personal actions that Hen. vil.might arise within the city. That two coroners should be Countychosen yearly by the mayor. That the mayor, sheriff, andthe 40 fellow citizens, should be authorized to make bye-lawsfor the governance of the citizens, who were not to be impleadedout of the city, but might hold their promote court Ponte.as accustomed. That the citizens should not be summoned,placed, or impannelled upon juries, &c. without the city,unless they concerned the. king. And that the aldermen of Dwelling,the city should be justices of the peace whilst they remainedaldermen. The customs of the city were then generally confirmed,and the city was to be held at fee-farm.WALES.With respect to Wales, we have before seen the arbitrarystatutes in the reign of Henry IV., which excluded the Welshfrom all English privileges.In the 23rd year of this reign, Henry VIL, apparently with 1607.the view of mitigating some of these severities, granted acharter to the tenants and inhabitants of his lordship ofRuthin, otherwise called Defferyncloyd, — reciting the statute Rwthin.of the second of Henry IV., and also that of the fourth yearof the same reign, and the services which the tenants andinhabitants of Ruthin had performed to the king — that theyand their heirs, and the tenants of the Bishop of Bangor, andof all other barons within the lordship, and the wardenof Ruthin, might acquire and hold lands, &c., within theEnglish boroughs and towns, to them and their heirs, andmight hold offices, and become burgesses, as English persons. Burgesses.The charter also puts an end to tenure of gavelkind andWelsh tenure ; and also to the unreasonable exactions callednobler," " arian arthell," or reliefs called " beddour detevedde," " kyllyghstraton" and " kyllyghrethe," "arianpara," and "arian seventy." And that the tenants, inha- ^^^^^^^^bitants, their heirs and successors, should be free of toll,murage, stallage, pannage, picage, pontage, &c. And thecharter makes the town of Ruthin, and half a mile in thecircuit of the town, a free borough. And that all men and1086 WALES.-RUTHIN.Hen. VII. tenants, their heirs and successors, inhabiting in the sameFree bur town, or thereafter to inhabit, should be free burgesses, asthe bui^esses of the town of Tenby — so that no one shouldbe a burgess, or be reputed as a burgess, unless he shouldTown, be so elected or called by the co-burgesses of the town, andshould make fine with them. And that the burgesses mightenjoy all the liberties and privileges which they had theretoforeenjoyed.We have before shown, by a variety of documents, thatthe legal course, founded upon the reciprocity of rightsand duties, was for the burgesses to be presented at thecourt leet as burgesses, in consequence of their beingInhabitant inhabitant householders, paying scot and lot within the^^^Je"- borough — and that properly speaking, there was no arbitrarylot. power of election. In this comparatively modem charter —following in point of time the extracts from some of themunicipal documents which we have already given, in whichElected, the word " elected " had been interpolated — we find that thepower of electing burgesses is expressly given to the co-burgesses.If that term in the charter meant election, inthe sense which we have before explained of the election ofconstables and other officers — who, though they may to oneintent be truly said to be elected ; yet they were, in fact, tobe taken according to their proper turns and their qualifications— the term was then used in its proper legal sense, andconsistently with the principles and usages of our early law.But if, on the contrary, it meant an arbitrary power of election,without reference to previous qualification or right, thenindeed it introduced into Ruthin a new system, which hassince been more generally adopted into corporations in otherplaces, and has led to those abuses of which such justcomplaint has been made; and to point out and correctwhich, is one of the objects of our researches. The pay-fine,ment of a fine was altogether consistent with the earlyprinciples of our municipal institutions, and has been alreadysufficiently explained, so as to render any further observationsupon that point unnecessary.\IRELAND. 1087Hen. VII.IRELAND.To proceed with the documents of this reign relative toIreland. It appears from the Patent and Confirmation Rolls,that Ireland received in this reign six charters — three toWaterford, two to Youghal, and one to Cork.The first charter to Waterford is one of incorporation,* waterford.which commences with a recital of the king's good willtowards the city, precisely similar to the form we have •already given in the reigns of Henry VI. and Edward IV.It then grants to the mayor, bailiffs, and citizens, that theyshould have power to elect from themselves all their officersand ministers within the city, and that they should take theiroaths within the city as accustomed. That the city of onemayor, two bailiffs, and citizens, for ever should be corporate; Corporate,and that by the name of " the mayor, bailiffs, and citizens ofthe city of Waterford," should have power to plead and beimpleaded, and be persons able and capable in law to holdlands, &c.A recital then occurs of that part of the charter of KingJohn, which states, that he had granted and confirmed to thecitizens of the city of Waterford within the walls, and thisking confirms that charter, and grants that the mayor andcommonalty of the city should have all amercements ; thatthe mayor should be the escheator ; that no admiral shouldintromit, &c. ; that no citizen should make duel in the city.That they should have a gaol ; that they should have thereturn of all writs. That no coroner, nor other ministershould intromit ; that the mayor, bailiffs, citizens, and inhor Non-inhabitants,should not be compelled to appear, either in war or inhabitantspeace, upon any writs or precepts whatsoever, without thecity. The goods of felons are then granted : and provisionsare made respecting the fee-farm, with a general confirmationof all previous grants.The mayor, bailiffs, and citizens of Waterford, also received i487.several charters in the second and third years of this reigns• Vide Rot. Conf. 2 Hen. VIll. p. 10, n. 11.t Rot. Conf. 2 Hen. VII. p. 4. n. 4. Rot. Conf. 2 Hen. VII. p. 2.Return ofwrits.1088 IRELAND.-YOUGHAL.Hen. VII. granting them a gaol, with powers to imprison felons, &c. ;*and that the mayor and bailiffs should be justices withJustices, powers to hear and determine all felonies, and that nomit. county justice should intromit. Provisions of great lengthoccur respecting the fee-farm, &c., but as none of themafford any additional information to that which we havealready given, we shall abstain from further quotation.Youghal. Congeal, which had been incorporated by Richard III.,148§. received in the fourth of this reign a charter, confirming someof their previous liberties :f and also another charter in the^°iS?**' ^2^^ year, containing corporate powers, and granting that theburgesses and commonalty might yearly assemble, and electfrom themselves a mayor and two bailiffs, and that theyshould plead, &c. by the name of " the mayor, bailiffs, burgesses,and commonalty of the town of Youghal, &c.," witha confirmation of all their previous franchises : and that they^*ti^**^' should have jurisdiction in all personal pleas arising withinthe town, with all amercements, issues, and profits, &c. ; and^°mU '"^ ^^^^ ^^ other minister should intromit, &c.Cork. Cork, in the fifteenth year of this reign, also received a1499. . . . .charter, but it does not contain any provisions tending furtherto elucidate our inquiry.;}:Besides these charters on the Patent and Confirmation1493.^' Rolls, there seems also to have been one granted to Athboy^by which the king confirmed the previous charters, whichhad been given by Henry IV. and Henry VI. to the provost,commons, and burgesses of Athboy, to have, hold, andoccupy for themselves, their heirs and successors, all customs,&c. towards the repairing of the walls and pavementsof the town. That the provost, burgesses, and commons,Bye-laws, might grant and ordain, by their unanimous consent, laws,acts, and ordinances, in their hundred court, for the commonutility of the town as often as need should be. Thatnf merchants ^^' ^^^^^9^ merchants using the untill or pound rill mightbe arrested for so doing, and imprisoned until they shouldpay a suitable fine. That all foreign merchants should contrivePat. 3 Hen. VII. p. 2, n. 16.t Rot. Conf. 4 Hen. VII. p. I, n. 1. Pat. 12 Hen. VII. p. 1.X Pat. 15 Hen. VII. p. 2, n. 15.IRELAND.-ATHBOY.-DUBLIN. 1089bute to the burdens of the town according to the quantity Hen^VTl.of goods bought and sold. That they should show their waresupon their first arrival to the provost and burgesses, andshould sell those wares to them, before all others, during thespace of ten days* for their money reasonably to be paid ; andif they should not be purchased within that time, it shouldthen be lawful for them to be sold to whomsoever it pleasedthem, &c. That all the free tenants or burgesses who had,or possessed any messuages, tenements, lands, or burgages, burgages,within the town, should be made contributory to all aids, &c.From these charters it is clear, that the boroughs and townsin Ireland were at that time, in substance, upon the samefooting as the boroughs and towns in England and Wales ;and it seems impossible not to be satisfied of that generalidentity which the other documents, both of that country andthis, would no doubt further illustrate, if time and opportunityoccurred for the inspection and insertion of them ; particularlyif we recollect, that it was in this reign that SirEdward Poyning induced the Parliament of Ireland to pass Poyning'shis celebrated law, establishing the authority of the Englishgovernment in Ireland, by enacting, " that all the formerlaws of England should be in force in Ireland."Another document among the records of the Exchequermay suffice to show that the freemen of Dublin, like the Dublin,freemen in England, were required to be actually inhabit „ant and resident within the place, although, for special pur Resident,poses, or during temporary absence, they might be allowedto exercise some of their privileges, though not dwelling atthe time within the place ; probably one of the methods bywhich non-resident freemen were, in subsequent periods,more extensively introduced.In an account in the Exchequer, concerning the customsof the port of Dublin, Richard Bespoke, of Dublin, in answerto a claim of poundage, stated, that in the statute whichgives the poundage to the king, the freemen of the city ofDublin and the town of Drogheda, who then were, and who Drogheda.The provision for selling within a certain number of days is, in principle, thesame as the general English act, of the 14th and 15th of Hen. VIll., eh. 1.4 A1090 Dublin-DROGHEDA.Hen. VII. in future time should be by birth or apprenticeship or othermode, dwelling within the said city or town, should not paypoundage, as appears more plainly by the statute enrolled ofrecord in the first year of the reign of Richard III. He thenalleged, that at an assembly in the city, before the mayorand bailiffs, he was made a freeman, and ever since had beenResided, a freeman, and still resided within the city.In confirmation of which, he produced the certificate ofthe mayor and bailiffs stating, that " Richard Bespoke, ofManchester, in the county of Lancaster, was admitted andaccepted to the liberties of the city as long as he should beresident in the city ; *' and that the liberty should be of forceand effect for the said Richard during the time he should beresident in England — and to all his attomies and servants,as if the said Richard was residing within the city of Dublin,and was a citizen of the city ; and that he was sworn infull assembly of the mayor, jurats, and citizens — so that hemight freely sell and buy, as well in England as in Ireland, asthe citizens of the said city could, which was granted themby Magna Charta.And the king's attorney general said he could not denythe plea, and therefore the barons adjudged that the chargesshould be withdrawn.CONCLUSION.We have now closed the documents of the reign of HenryVII., which are important to our inquiries, as showing theoration** '^^^ confirmation of the doctrine of incorporation ; but at theInhabitant time clearly establishing, that the inhabitants were theobjects of those grants, and that, therefore, properly speaking,such charters made no essential alteration in either theBurgesses, class or character of the burgesses, who were still the freeinhabitant householders paying scot and lot ; all the principlesand usages out of which that particular character arosebeing still in full force to this time, as villainage — manumission— emancipation — the jurisdiction of the tourn and leet —the performance of suit royal — the payment of public bur-scot.dens from a common fund, under the name of scot — and theCONCLUSION. 1091execution of public duties in proper rotation under the name W«°- VII.of lot ; so that, notwithstanding the general introduction of Lot.corporations the pure principles of our early municipal institutions,continued as they had been from the earliesttimes; and the burgesses were still beyond all doubt, the^^ free inhabitant householders paying scot and lot''HENRY VIII.The system of municipal corporations, to the extent at , *^^-« . . Incorporealof giving them corporate powers, was extensively esta rations,blushed, as we have seen, in the two preceding reigns. Uponthat point, therefore, we shall have little to add, except thenoting of a few charters of incorporation, and some stillgranted not of that description.The Statutes also of this reign will be chiefly referred to Statutes,for the purpose of pointing out the same distinction. Butalthough these topics will for the future form no considerablepart of our investigation, the eventful reign of Henry VIII.will open to us fresh matter for inquiry and observation.In some respects the municipal institutions of the countrycontinued unaltered from their original character. But thegreat changes occurring in this reign with respect to religion,and the consequent excitement of the minds of the public,leading them to consider and canvass other subjects, forwhich opportunities were afforded by the extension of theuse of printing, as well as from the many causes of discussionresulting from the violent and varying acts of the king,all tended to bring into effect new opinions and new sentiments;and a scene gradually opens upon us, in which maybeseen the causes — the progress — ^and, in the distance, thefinal effects which had their principal origin in this extraordinaryperiod.Hume justly observes, " that the minds of men, somewhatawakened from a profound sleep of so many centuries,4a21092 BURGESSES.Hep. VIII. u ^rere prepared for every novelty;" still, as we have .served before, the municipal institutions in many respectscontinued the same ; particularly the class of persons whoBurgesses, were the burgesses f not having, at this period, undergone anynient. change. The acquiescence of Parliament in the strongmeasures suggested by the crown, had not made it materialfor either the king, or the leading men in the country, totake any general or decisive steps to influence the elections.And excepting the traces we have already marked in thereign of Henry VI. and Edward IV., of the interest whichthe people began to take in the elections, and the partialinfluence which some great men began to exercise, neitherthe electors nor the elected had interfered in this respectwith such zeal or appetite as to induce them to disfigure orpervert those institutions which it ought to have been theobject of both to have preserved in their purity. Thus, withthe exception of the superinduced privilege of being incorporated,the burgesses continued (as they were before) to betheinhabitant householders paying scot and lot as we shallshow by our extracts from the records of Yarmouth — WellsSeaford — and Hythe.But after Henry VIII. had permitted, if not encouraged,the commencement of the Reformation, and had embarkedfor some time as a consequence of it, in expensive warfare,and little less expensive amusements, his coffers becameempty, and violent acts were resorted to by him for raisingmoney without the consent of Parliament. These thingsled the king on the one hand to make efforts to secure thecompliance of Parliament, and for that purpose to procurethe introduction of persons friendly to him into the House ofCommons : — On the other hand, this conduct of the kingnaturally produced an indisposition in the people at largeto comply with his inclinations in this respect, howeverpopular he might be in others.From the nature of this interference it is obvious that itwould at first be attempted secretly, and few traces of itwould be left. In one or two instances, however, the factcan still be ascertained without any possible doubt, as theyTHE KING'S LETTERS. IQ93are evidenced by entries upon public records of the bo Hen.vi ii.roughs. Particularly in Colchester, there is still extant a Celebes-letterwritten by the king to the burgesses, requesting them 1522.to return to Parliament a member whom he nominated.And in one instance where this effort was made, the burgessesin answer sent a respectful reply, in which they stated theirdevotion to the king, and their inclination, in all mattersallowable, to meet his highnesses pleasure ; but that in thisrespect, as it related to their duty to the country at large, theymust beg to be excused for not complying with his highness'srequest ; though, in fact, they subsequently acquiesced.With these prefatory remarks, we shall proceed to givethose Statutes and Charters of this date, which may illustrateour subject, in the same succession we have previouslyadopted.STATUTES.The fifth chapter of the statutes of the first year of the 1609.reign of Henry VIII., gives further regulations with respectto merchants, denizens, and strangersy as to the accustomingof goods. And in the 7th, 8th, and other chapters, regula Cap. 7, 8.tions are made with respect to the coroners and escheators.The 8th chapter of the 3d of Henry VIII, relative to the ^^511.assise of bread and beer, speaks of cities y boroughs , andtowns corporate ; and of their decay and want of inhabitants ; Corporate,the dwellers and inhabitants being only, as it is stated, personsof small substance.In the 7th chapter of the 4th year of this reign, cities, bo 1512.roughs, and towns are only mentioned ; they are not saidto be corporate.And the same occurs in the 9th chapter of the 6th year. r^^%The 15th chapter contains provisions against subsequent Cap. 15.letters patent granted by the king, annulling previous grants King'swhich are not specifically mentioned; a provision, which ifnot material to cur present inquiry, at all events will explainthe reason why the former charters are so constantly referredto, in successive grants of the crown.The 18th chapter puts the under-sheriff and other officers Cap. 18.of Bristol upon the same footing as those of London. Bristol.1094 STATUTES.^^°- ^"'' In the Parliament of the 14th and 16th years, the second1522. chapter contains regulations as to the persons who may beApprentice as apprentices; the third section directing that allstrangers, dwelling within two miles of London, should beunder the search and reformation of the wardens and fellowshipsof handicrafts within the city — with one substantialhouse ' stranger, being a householder of the same craft.In that act towns corporate are mentioned.Cap. 3. In the third chapter, regulations are made for the worsted-weaversand inhabitants of Yarmouth and Lynn ; and whatapprentices they may take; and although Norwich andLynn are repeatedly spoken of, neither of them are mentionedas corporate.Cap. 6. The fifth chapter, upon the petition of certain physicians,*Coli6ff6 of ,Physicians reciting letters patent of the 10th year of the king, makingthem a body corporate, and giving them the usual corporatepowers, and other privileges, on the ground of such incorporationbeing meritorious and very good for the commonwealthof the town, confirms that grant. An exception,nevertheless, being made of graduates of the University ofOxford.Cap. 10. The 10th chapter, against the illegal killing of hares, di-lee.rests that the stewards of leets, may amongst others, haveauthority to inquire into offences under that act.^ 1529. The 12th chapter of the 21st year of Henry VIII. is foundedupon the petitions of the bailiffs, burgesses, and other in-Bridgeport. habitants of Bridgeport ; complaining of certain persons havingdeserted the town, for which it was enacted, that hemp^rotr-ing within five miles of the town should be sold there.Cap. 16. The 16th chapter, relative to stranger artificers and apprentices,speaks, in the recital, of cities, towns, boroughs,and villages : — but makes no allusion to their being incorporated.The subsequent clauses, however, mention townscorporate.Cap. 18. Ij^ another chapter, the mayor, burgesses, and commonaltyof Newcastle are spoken of.1530. The fourth chapter of the 22d of Henry Vii is made for• El vide etiam, 1 Mary, sess. 2, cap. 9. 'STATUTES. 1096further enforcing the statute of the 19th year, respecting the Hen, viii.bye-laws made by guilds and fraternities ; and for prevent J^^:ing the exactions which were attempted to be levied upon Guilds.apprentices at their first entry into their common hall; which Apprentices.are said to have been enforced by the wardens after theirown sinister minds and pleasures, contrary to that act — andtherefore such fines are limited for the future.The next chapter, which relates to bridges and highways, Cap. 5.speaks, in the first and second sections, of shires, franchises,cities and boroughs, towns and parishes — but says nothingof corporate towns.But the third section expressly speaks of towns corporate Sec. 3.as well as cities — the inhabitants of which are directed to inhabit. 'repair the bridges in their districts, as the shires and ridingsare within their limits; from which it cannot but be inferred,that the framers of that statute (in accordance with all theancient documents) considered, that the persons who werebound to do what was necessary for those respective districts,were, in all, the same class, viz., the taxable inhabittants : — and it seems clear that such persons were treated asthe corporators in the corporate towns.It exhibits a striking variety in these statutes, that theeighth chapter of the same reign, relative to denizen strangersy Cap. 8.speaks again of cities, boroughs, and towns ; but does notdescribe them as corporate.These arbitrary changes in the terms used, cannot by possibilitybe accounted for, except upon the ground we haveso frequently urged, that the being incorporated made noessential difference in the constitution, or general governmentof the places accepting these grants : — and in truth it onlygave them the additional corporate powers.The second section of this last act uses again the same Sec 2.terms at the commencement, without speaking of corporations: but in imposing the penalty at the end of the sameclause, charges upon every city 6/., and every town corporate40^.The third section of the same act contains a proviso in Sec. 3.favour of the merchants of the " Hans of Arraign," having1096 STATUTES.Hen. VIII. the house within the city of London, called " Guild-haldaTheutonicorum/' otherwise the merchants of the Hilyard.1531. It is worthy of remark, that the statute for the building*^* ' of gaols in the 23rd year of this reign, directs generally thatInhabited inhabitants of the county shall be charged for that pur-tarts.Corporate, pose ; making an exception for corporate towns, which havegaols themselves.We have seen throughout the course of our inquiry, thatAwiseof lie assise of bread and beer formed a considerable feature inbread and •'b««r« the articles to be inquired into at the leet ; and generallyforms a particular head in the charters granted during thesuccessive reigns. Pursuing the principle of those inquestsCap. 4. and grants, the fourth chapter of the same year makes specificprovisions for the size of barrels, &c., directing that nobrewer should be of the mystery of coopers, or make anybarrels, &c., but that they should be made and marked bythe common artificers of coopers.Sec. 6. And the fifth section places the brewers under the directionof the justices of the peace of the shire, where such brewersdwell without any city, borough, or town corporate, whereno head officer , as mayor, bailiffs, or sheriffs had authority —clearly marking the distinction between the shires at lai^c,and the cities, boroughs, and towns corporate, having peculiarprivileges and exclusive jurisdictions. But the nextbranch of the same clause, as if intended to show that atown being incorporated was not the reason of its having suchexclusive jurisdiction, expressly speaks of cities, boroughs,and towns, where there be mayors, sheriffs, or other headofficers : — not describing them as corporate.Sec. 7. And the seventh section cives to the warden of the occupationor mystery of coopers, power to gage all manner ofbarrels put for sale, taking with them an officer of the mayor:distinctly showing that the company had not in itself anymunicipal power or authority, but was obliged to call in aidthe assistance of the mayor's officers.The mention of cities, boroughs, and towns, not describedJ>ec. 9. as corporate, occurs again in the ninth section.Scc!'io. W® ^^^^ ^ striking instance of the law relative to resiants\STATUTES. 1097being still enforced during this reign, and of the importance "«"• ^^^^'which was attached to their being sworn in the court leet ; 1531.that in the 10th section of the fifth chapter of this reign, ^^'relative to sewers, persons are prohibited from acting ascommissioners before they are sworn, unless they are resiants Remnants.and free of any city, borough, or town corporate, or havebeen admitted as utter barristers in one of the four inns ofcourt ; in each of which cases the parties would have beensworn to their allegiance — in the former at the court leet ofthe borough : — and in the latter before the court m whichthe party was admitted as a barrister ; and the 10th chapter Barrister,of the 25th Henry VIII. confines the being sworn to thosewho are dwelling within the county.We have already seen that the inhabitants of the boroughof Portsmouth, and places in its neighbourhood, were incorpo- Plymouth,rated; and also, that the inhabitanus of the borough of inhabitanuDartmouth and Southtown adjoining to it were likewise in- Dartmouthcorporated. We also find, in the eighth chapter of the sameyear, that the bill for the preservation of the havens in thewest, is upon the petition amongst others of the inhabitantsof Plymouth and Dartmouth.There is something so cogently reasonable in all localjurisdiction and privileges being confined to the persons whoinhabit and dwell within the district, that had not actualexperience to the contrary long existed in this country, itwould have been thought, a priori, that no person couldhave asserted a different position ; and yet the extension ofsuch jurisdiction and privileges to non-residents — or persons or dwelling out of the district — has become soinveterate a practice, that the converse of the position is nowtrue, and the difficulty at present is rather to combat thedeep-rooted prejudice, that, contrary to all reason and principle,non-residents should be included in the grant of suchprivileges, than to be able to rely with well-founded confidenceon the self-evident presumption, that such privilegeswere intended to have been enjoyed only by persons residingupon the spot.1098 STATUTES.Hen. viiL ^^ j^^y^ however Seen, that, in almost all instances, when1^1' there was no reason for perverting the ordinary nature ofthese things, the provisions were chiefly made referable tothe inhabitants of the district to which they related, as theinhabitants of shires for the repair of bridges — of the inhabitantsof parishes or parishioners for the repair of churchesand highways —and the inhabitants within the forests, withreference to the forest laws.Cap. 9. So again in the ninth chapter of this year, relative toecclesiastical jurisdiction, the whole is by the successiveclauses confined to those inhabiting, dwelling or resident inthe several places to which the jurisdiction applied.If there is any head of the law which would appear to bemore immediately connected with corporations than another.Mortmain, it is that of mortmain ; which, strictly speaking, seems to beacorrelative of perpetual succession ; — because it has its veryessence in the grant of lands to perpetual bodies ; whereby,as there can be no escheat, the land is said to be in theCap. 10. '' deadf^ or unproductive hand. And yet, in the tenth chapterof this year, relative to the uses of lands granted in mortmain,after speaking of guilds, fraternities, commonalties,companies or brotherhoods, they are described as " made ofdevotion, or by common assent of the people, without anycorporation." From whence it appears, in conformity withwhat we have stated before to be the ancient common law,that aggregate bodies did, and could take in perpetual succession,without being incorporated ; that doctrine beingimpliedly asserted by lands being assumed to be held inmortmain, when granted by common assent of the people,without any corporation.Cap. 13. The 13th chapter provides for the trial of murder in cities.Corporate, boroughs and towns corporate and speaks of a person's beingthe king's natural subjects born, which, either by the nameof a citizen, or of a freeman, or any other name, doth enjoyand use the liberties of any city, borough, or town cor-dwelling." porate where he dwelleth and maketh his abode'' And theknights and squires, excepted in the proviso, are describedSTATUTES. 1099as " dwelling, abiding, or resorting in such city, town, or bo "^°-^'"'rough corporate."This statute is material, as showing that the legislaturetreated citizens, freemen, burgesses, and similar names assynonymous ; according to the position we have before made,founded upon the numerous instances we have cited.It also shows that the persons who were described bythose names, were those dwelling, abiding, and making theirabode there.In the important statute for the restraint of appeals, in r^^othe 25th year of this reign, as illustrative of the meaning ofthe term so frequently occurring in charters of the " bodypolitic," we should note, that those terms are used as applicableto the whole body of the kingdom, which of coursecould not be considered as incorporated. Speaking of thosewho owed obedience to the king, the statute describes themas being " a body politic, compact of all sorts and degreesof people, divided in terms and by names of spiritualityand temporality." And in another part of the statute theyare spoken of under the general name of " resiants withinthe realm, of what degree soever they may be."The same general description of persons resiant or ithaca 15.bitant within the realm, occurs in the act respecting printers,in the same year.The sixth chapter of the 26th of Henry VIII. concern qI^ing the councils in Wales, uses the same terms with referenceto the people of that part of the kingdom. Andas confirmatory of the similarity of the usages in the differentparts of the island, traces appear in that statute ofsome customs in Wales analogous to the scale, which wehave seen mentioned so frequently in the early chartersof London and other places ; — thus the levying of anycomfort" — " bydale" — " tenant's ale," or other collectionis prohibited.The eleventh chapter of the same year contains provisions ^^l^.for the punishment of assaults, of persons dwelling in Dwelling.Wales.The statute for regulating the making of worsted in the Cap. 16.1100 STATUTES.^^f it' city of Norwich, and in the towns of Lynn and Yarmouth1534. recites the provisions respecting the craftsmen called worsted-lynn,weavers, inhabiting the town of Great Yarmouth, which au-inhabitingauthorized them to elect yearly one honest man of the mystery,being a householder to be the warden of the craft. And thatholder, no person inhabiting Yarmouth should weave any worsted,except he be an Englishman born, and had been an apprenticeto the occupation. As to the town of Lynn, it wasprovided, that whenever it should be inhabited by ten householdersor more using the craft of worsted weavers, it shouldbe lawful for the inhabitants to elect yearly one wardensthat no person inhabiting within the town of Ljmnshould make worsted, &c. except he were English born, andhad been an apprentice to the occupation. And till ten householdersshould inhabit Lynn, the wardens of Norwich were tosend one of their wardens to that place every 28th day. Andevery craftsman of that mystery, dwelling within Lynn andYarmouth, might, at their own free wills and liberties, fromthenceforth take as apprentice any male at the age of 14and upwards, being the king's natural subject, for the termof seven years, and not under, provided they do not exceedtwo, and notwithstanding the father of the apprentice mightnot expend in lands and tenements the value of 20*.Cap. 16. These provisions are all confirmed by the 16th chapter ofthe 26th Henry VIII.From these enactments, though referable to the particulartrade at Norwich, Yarmouth, and Lynn, we may draw a confirmationof the doctrine we have so frequently asserted, thatall charters and provisions were in truth, intended for theResiding, benefit and the regulation of the persons residing within thedistricts to which they refer. And in these statutes, theinhabitants, who are particularly referred to, are describedHouse as householders; and the apprentices are required to bebound for seven years at the least.cl^27. '^^ statute of the 27th Henry VIII., chapter 27, for themaking of justices of the peace within Chester and Wales,directs that the judges who are appointed shall hear anddetermine all matters presentable before the justices in anySTATUTES. 1101other shire of the realm of England, by force of any statute, Hen.viii.or by the course of the common law of the realm : appal 1636.gently assuming, that the provisions of our common law wereequally applicable to Wales.The seventh chapter of the same year, provides for the Cap. 7.correction of abuses in the forests of Wales.In the 14th chapter, concerning the custom of leather, ^^p* ^^'strangers are spoken of, as contradistinguished from denis Stra'^se™-sens ; and that such strangers should pay 4rf., to be to thecommonalty of the town and port, toward the payment oftheir fee-farm, and other their charges ; and every denizennot being freeman of the port and haven, 2rf., to be to the Freemen.commonalty. But freemen were to pay nothing.In another part of the same statute, where strangers areagain mentioned, they are further named under thesynomymeof "merchant stranger;" to which class of persons theseprovisions were no doubt intended to apply.From these enactments, we may draw the inference — thatthe sums directed to be paid to the commonalty, were tobe added to the common stock, and to be for the generalbenefit of the town, applicable only to public purposes, notwithstandingany modem doctrine to the contrary.The freemen of the port and haven here mentioned, ob ^r**™®"*'piously mean the " liberi homines" of the common law ; orthe persons of free condition inhabiting within the port orhaven.Another instance also occurs in which provisions, relative Cap. 23.to a subject matter altogether differing from any we havebefore noted, are applied to the inhabitants of the districts inhabitantsto which they apply. They are contained in the statutesfor the preservation of havens in Devon and Cornwall, inwhich the inhabitants of the port of Plymouth, and ofother towns and havens in those counties, are charged withneglect in amending and maintaining those ports and towns :from which it seems clear, that the charge of that maintenancewas assumed to be cast upon the inhabitants.The statute for re-continuing liberties in the crown, pro ^e^'|^*1102 STATUTES.Hen. VIII. yideg^ that all cities, boroughs, and towns corporate, shall1535. have and enjoy their liberties and authorities, as they havebeen accustomed, without any alteration by occasion ofthat act.Sec. 7. And in the next clause, all stewards, bailiffs, and otherministers of liberties and franchises, are mentioned.Sec. 8. In the following section it is provided, that neither " thestewards nor bailiffs of any cities, boroughs, or towns corporate,set in any shire in this realm which hath privilege,should be compelled to attend or appear out of such cities,Inhabit, boroughs, or towns, wherein they inhabit ; but that everysuch city, borough, or town corporate, shall use their privilegesand liberties as heretofore they have been accustomed.Sec. 14. By the 14th section, all statutes relative to sheriffs, under-sheriffs,bailiffs, or other ministers, for pannels of juries and^ritT °^ ^"^ execution of writs, and other things concerning theiroffices, should be extended to all stewards, bailiffs, and otherministers and officers of liberties and franchises havingSec. 16. return of writs. And they are specially allowed to holdtheir offices for more than one year.Sec. 16. The holding of the sessions of the peace is provided for.Sec. 19. ^j^j the 19th section expressly provides, that nothing inthat act contained should be prejudicial or hurtful to anycity, borough, or town corporate, or " by what name or namessoever, they, or any of them, be incorporated'*Separate From all these provisions, which are extended to Wales injurisdictions.the same manner as to all other parts of the realm, it is obvious,that the distinction between the shires, and the sheriffsand the justices jurisdiction within them, was kept separateand distinct from that of the cities, boroughs, towns corporate,liberties and franchises; and that the separate jurisdictionReturn of depended chiefly upon the return and execution ofurrits, andthe jurisdiction of the justices in their sessions, and otherwise.And in the last clause which we have quoted, the general• The terms'* by whatsoever name or names they were called," are, in the32 Hen. Vlll. cap. 42, applied to the Barbers' Company, although they were notincorporated.STATUTES. 1103terms are introduced with respect to the names of incorpo- h^"- v"'*ration, to which we have referred, as so frequently occurring l^^-in the modem charters.The 25th chapter directs, in general words, that all governors Cap. 25.(an appellation which seems at that time to have been appliedto all officers of the crown) of shires — cities — towns — hundreds— hamlets — and parishes (2i term only then recently much Parishes,introduced into statutes,* and subsequently into charters),who are directed to keep every aged, poor, and impotentperson, who was born or had dwelt three years within the Bon.same limits, by way of voluntary or charitable alms in everycity, parish, &c., so that none of them should be compelled togo openly in begging. And provisions are added, respectingsturdy vagabonds, and children under 14 years of age andabove five, that live in idleness and be taken begging, maybeput to service by such governors, &c., to husbandry, orother crafts or labours. And birth, or residence for threeyears, is made the foundation upon which the permanentabode of sturdy vagabonds is to be determined. All commondole, or alms, are prohibited, except to the common boxes andcommon gatherings in every parish.This statute, though now obsolete, will answer the pur King'spose of establishing, that all the officers who presided in thedifferent divisions in the country, were treated as the king'sofficers. And it should be observed, that parishes are here Parishes,added to the common law partition of the country into shires,cities, towns, hundreds, and hamlets. From this period aconfusion arose, in thus mixing together the common law ■divisions of the county, and the ecclesiastical, of which theparishes are a part : and which confusion has continued tothe present day, and probably will continue, until some decisivecourse is adopted of again dividing them ; and thusextricating many public acts from the anomalous intricacyin which they have for centuries been involved from thiscause.Videetiam, ante, p. 355. Selden defines a parish as a precinct within a diocese,which comprehended one or more vills, or a lesser territory. — Sel. de Dec.c. 6, sec. 3. See also, 5 Co. 67 A. Fleta, 4, c. 15, sec. 9.1104 STATUTES.Hen. viiL ^liQ Settlement of the poor in the places in which they had1535. been worthy or had resided for a limited period, originally bythe common law, for a year and a day, is by this statutealtered to three years ; and there is an express reference tothe common boxes, and the common gatherings, which wehave before found to exist in many boroughs, and no doubtstocks*" *^®y ^*^ ^" ^^^' under the name of the " common stock ;" fromwhich all the common burdens were paid, as well as thepoor supported. Thus by this statute, amongst others, thedoctrine we have before contended for, with reference toResidence, residence, and the connexion of that doctrine with the earlyVagrancy. Saxon laws against vagrancy, out of which has also sprungthe connecting link with the poor laws, is clearly confirmed;as well as the fact of the support of the poor out of thecommon fund of the borough, which was therefore in everysense a public fund : and it is obvious, that the connexionParishes, with parishes arose out of the ecclesiastical property, whichwas frequently excluded from the borough, being requiredto be included in the common chaise, after it fell into layhands, upon the dissolution of the monasteries. And thereforethe division of the parish, which included the ecclesiasticallands, as well as the other, was introduced about thisperiod of the Reformation.We have throughout our researches contended, that thesame system in principle applied as well to Ireland, Scotland,and Wales, as to England. Many of the statutes which wehave quoted in this reign, have already confirmed that posi-Wales. tion with respect to Wales.Cap. 26. The 26th chapter of the 27th of Henry VIII., is a furtherand decisive confirmation of that assertion, although it appearsthat some usages had been introduced into that principality,which materially differed from the customs inEngland.The preamble of the act, however, will best explain itsobjects, and describe the state of Wales at that time.Albeit the dominion of Wales justly is, and ever hath'* been incorporated, annexed, united, and subject to, andunder the imperial crown of this realm, as a very memberSTATUTES. 1105and joint of the same, wherefore the king's most royal sen. veilmajesty, of mere right, is very head, king, lord, and ruler: 1535.yet notwithstanding, because divers rights, usages, laws,and customs, be far discrepant from the laws and customsof this realm; and also because the people of the samedominion daily use a speech nothing like the naturalmother tongue used within this realm, some rude and*^ ignorant people have made distinction and diversitybetween the king's subjects of this realm, and the subjectsof the dominion and principality of Wales, whereby greatdiscord hath arisen;" and therefore it is enacted, thatWales should be from thenceforth incorporated united, and Incorpo-annexed with England. And that all persons born and tobe born there, should enjoy and inherit all the freedoms,liberties, &c. as other subjects of this realm. And that thelaws and tenures of England should be used in Wales.And by the 3d section, provisions are made for the Lord See. 3.ships Marchers, uniting some to different shires, and dividingothers into particular counties ; and certain townships, parishes,commonest and centres are mentioned, including theprincipal boroughs in Monmouthshire: all of which aredeclared to be gildable, and to be taken as parts and membersof the shire of Monmouth ; the borough of Monmouthbeing the shire town.The 4th section, amongst other things, provides, that Sec. 4.the inhabitants of the county of Monmouth shall be obey inhabitantto the king's officers. *dissimilarprovisions are made in succeeding sections forBrecknockshire, Radnorshire, Montgomeryshire, Denbighshire,Glamorganshire, Carmarthenshire. And as to Pembroke,Cardigan, Merioneth, there are like clauses, thatthe inhabitants of those counties, and all justices, commissioners,sheriffs, coroners, escheators, stewards, theirlieutenants, and all other officers and ministers of the law,should keep the sessions, courts, hundreds, leets, sheriff'scourts, and all other courts, in the English tongue. And allmisruled and suspect persons are to be put by the sheriffunder common main prise, and surety of personal appearance,4b1106 STATUTES.Hen. VIII. j^ ^ijgy ji^j within every of the then shires of North1536. Wales.Wales.Sec. 26. By the 26th section, provision is made for the furtherdivision of Wales into hundreds;* and by subsequent clausesfor the election of two knights for each of the shires, andone burgess for each of the boroughs, as they are chosen in^^^' England. The knights' fees also are to be levied as inEngland; and the burgesses' fees as in the other ancientboroughs in the different shires. And the Lords MarchersCourt are to keep all their liberties, and their courts barons,courts leet, and law-days with wife, strays, infangthef,outfangthef, treasuretrove, deodands, goods and chattels offelons, and of persons condemned or outlawed of felony ofmurder, or put in exigent for felony or murder ; and alsowreck de mer, wharfage and custom of strangers, as they hadin time past.It will be observed in this statute, that the ancient divi-comites.gj^Q ^f Wales into comites and centres is repeatedlymentioned ; the former being a name which frequently occursin the municipal documents of England, as well as in thoseCentres. ^f Wales. The latter being only another term, derivedfrom the Latin, for hundred, with which it is used synonymouslyin some parts of this statute.The distinction between the boroughs and the gildable isinhabits distinctly marked in this law : and the inhabitants aretants. . . .mentioned as the object of its provisions, in the same manneras we have seen in almost every document we havequoted, whether general, or particular — public, or private.The courts Ice and law-days are also mentioned ; not asnovelties, but as the ancient establishments of the country.Sureties. The giving main prise and surety for personal appearance,as was required in England by the law of the court leet andview of frankpledge, is also expressly referred to, as havingpreviously existed in the then shires of North Wales. The1536. • By the 3d chapter of the 28th of Hen. VIII., further authority is given tothe king for three years, to allot newly the towns in the shires and marches inWales, notwithstanding the statutes; and it Mas further continued for three yearsby the 11th chapter of the 31st of Hen. VIII.STATUTES. 1107ancient boroughs " are also distinctly referred to, as well Hen, viii.as the ancient privileges of waif, stray, infangthef, outfang-thief, &c. From all of which it seems obvious, that the institutionsin Wales had originally been the same as thosein England; although they had been somewhat varied byparticular customs, which it was the object of this statute torepress, and to restore both countries again to similar lawsand practice. But it should be remarked, as a proof of thesubserviency of the legislature at that time to the will ofthe king, that this statute closes with the striking clause,that the king might suspend or revoke any part of it.*In the statute giving the small monasteries to the king, q^^^bodies politic and corporate are expressly mentioned.The fifth chapter of the 28th of Henry VIII., relates to ^l^s.apprentices; a subject which had before so frequently been Apprehendedthe consideration of the legislature, and the object ofits enactments.We have already observed upon the 19th of Henry VILchap. 7, relative to the guilds.The 22d of Henry VIII., chap. 4, passed for the prevention q^^\of exactions levied upon apprentices by the masters, wardens Apprehendfellowships of crafts, and rulers of guilds and fraternities, Crafts,under the pretence of ordinances made by them, after thestatute of Henry VII., in diminution of the prerogative of theking, and against the profit of the people, and by whichthey had directed every apprentice to pay at his entry certainsums, according to their own sinister mind and pleasure,contrary to the meaning of that act, and to hurt of the king'ssubjects : — and by that act it was therefore enacted, that nomaster, warden, &c. should take for the entry of any apprenticebeyond a sum specified in the act.But it is recited in the 28th of Henry VIII., that since 1536.those acts, the masters, wardens and fellowship of crafts Crafts,had by cautil and subtil means compassed and practised to• And as a further proof of the servility of Parliament at that time, in the 31styear of Henry VIII., chap. 8, the king is authorized, with the advice of his council, 1539.to issue proclamations, under such penalties and pains as to him should seemnecessary, and which should be observed as though they were made by act oiParliament.4b21108 STATUTES.Hen. VIII. elude those statutes, causing dives 'prentices, before they'Prentices, be made free of their occupation, to be sworn at their firstentry, that they shall not set up any shop, house, or cellar,nor occupy as freemen without the license of the master,warden or fellowship, upon pain of losing their freedom : —to remedy which it was provided, that no master, warden orfellowships of crafts, nor any rulers of fraternities, guilds orbrotherhoods, should from thenceforth compel any apprenticeto take such oath, nor by any means exact from himany sum for his freedom or occupation.Freedom In this statute the freedom of the apprentice is dealt withas previously noted in this reign, in connexion with the rightof trading, with which it anciently had no direct connexion,nor any other link than the one to which we have beforereferred, of villains not being able to trade, which thereforemade freedom a necessary pre-existing qualification for atrader.1640. In the 32nd year of this reign another statute concerning^' ' strangers was passed, reciting those of the first of Richard III.,the 14th, 15th, and the 21st of Henry VIII.Upon the two former we have before observed. As to thelatter, it recited a decree in the Star Chamber, that noStrangers, stranger-artificer, inhabiting in any borough, should keepmore than two servants, being strangers born out of the king'sallegiance ; and that such strangers, if made denizen, and inhabitingin London, and keeping house, or occupying theirtrade, should be contributors with subjects who were artificers,paying, bearing, and sustaining, all charges as othersubjects, otherwise not to occupy any handicraft. And thatHouse such strangers and denizens, householders, should, upon lawfulwarning, present themselves in the common hall, to besworn to their allegiance to the king ; and not being a householder,should not set up any shop ; and should not assemblein any company, fellowship, congregation or conventicle, butonly in the common hall of the crafts as they should bewarned. Which decree was confirmed by that statute.Paten" '^^ ^^^^ ^^ ^^^^y ^^^^' farther recites, that those wholesomeand beneficial acts, had been infringed and frustratedSTATUTES. 1 109by letters patent, providing that every denizen should he "^"- ^'^"'as free as an Englishman naturally born within the king's 1540.dominions, by reason whereof the denizens had refused toobey those statutes. For a reformation of those abuses, itwas enacted, that all strangers made denizens should beobedient to those laws, notwithstanding such letters patent ;unless the king should grant any special liberties or privileges.From the expression which occurs in this statute, that the Freemen,denizens had obtained patents ^' to be as free as any Englishmannaturally born," it is clear, that the freedom then alludedto was that of free condition under the common law : —and therefore, notwithstanding the two or three previouspassages which we have found in the statutes, in which thefreedom appeared to be applied to the right of trading, it isclear that they ought to be explained in the manner we havebefore suggested with reference to the doctrine o{ villainage ;and that the old law relative to the ancient " liberi homines"was still in force : — and therefore those terms in the statutemeant persons free, by condition in life, from villainage ; andnot the freemen of any corporation, as supposed in modemtimes.The 20th chapter of the same year, concerning the privies Cap. 20.leges and franchises which belonged to religious houses,transfers them to the king.And the second section expressly relates to the temporal Sec. 2.liberties and jurisdiction belonging to the sites, circuits,and precincts of monasteries and abbeys, &c. : which arealso placed under the order and governance of the king'sgeneral surveyors.The stewards, bailiffs, and other officers, are directed to ^^* ^'be attendant and obedient to the king's courts. And that nosheriff* should intermeddle with them.And all persons and bodies politic y are authorized to use Sec. 4.all liberties, &c., which they have by the king's letterspatent, or by the authority of Parliament.The 40th chapter of the same year, relates to physicians Cap. 40.and their privileges. The preamble reciting, that the president1110 STATUTES.Hen, viii. Qf ^]jg corporation of the commonalty and fellowship of the1640. science and faculty of physic in the city of London and thetion. commons and fellows of the same, were hindered in attendanceupon their patients, by reason that they are at manytimes compelled — as well within the city of London and itsWatch suburbs, as in other towns and villages — to keep watch andand ward. '-orboard, and to be chosen to the office of constable, and otheroffices. And it was therefore enacted, that they should bedischarged from watch and ward, and the serving of theoffice of constable, or any other office.In this statute, the College of Physicians, not having anyName, municipal jurisdiction, is simply described as a corporation,without which it would have had no existence at all. For itwas not like the aggregate body of a city or borough, wherethe inhabitants were, by the common law, recognized as anaggregate body, subject to common burdens, both pecuniaryand personal ; but merely a congregation of individuals unitedtogether by the act of incorporation — by which name, therefore,it could alone be designated.It is a striking confirmation of the account we have beforeScot and given of the ancient law with respect to scot and lot, and oflot.some of its duties continuing in existence even to this time,that the physicians are thus described by the Legislature, asthen actually performing watch and ward and the office ofconstable, and other offices — part of the important functionsLot. constituting the lot, which it was the duty of every man,high and low, to perform, in the place in which he resided.Cap. 42. By the next chapter but one, reciting that there were twoBarbers. Corporations in London, the one the barbers, the other theSurgeons, surgeons — the first being incorporated, to sue and be suedby their corporate name, by charter of the first of Edward IV.,and the other not being incorporate — it was enacted, thatthose two companies and their successors, from thenceforth,*should immediately be united, and made one entire body corporate,and one commonalty perpetual, by the name of themasters or governors of the mystery and commonalty ofbarbers and surgeons ; that they should have a common seal,• Mad. Fir. 15ur. p. 30.STATUTES. 1111to serve for the business of the company and corporation ^g"- v^'^ -for ever. The ^^ freemen of the corporation, after the custom l^^-of the city of London," are expressly mentioned. freemen.This also, like the physicians', is a mere corporation ; andtherefore the grant to them is not to their heirs and successorssors, as in the case of municipal corporations, where eachindividual would, besides the rights which he took by successionfrom his predecessors, have also privileges as anindividual, which he derived from his ancestors — and whichaccounts for that form of grant to the mayors and common-alliesof cities and boroughs ; but here the grant is solelyto the corporation and their successors, Succewow.It should be remarked, that the ^' freemen* of the surgeonand barbers' company are described as being made " accordingto the custom of the city of London" — from which itis obvious, that their freedom, like the freedom of trade towhich we have before adverted, was, in truth, still to bereferred back to the early law of the country, and was connectedwith the correlative doctrine of villainage: upon which,we venture to assert with confidence, the whole of this systemwas founded.The 43rd chapter in the same year, relates to the shire ^*P' ^'days for the county palatine of Chester, and commences by Chester,reciting, that there had theretofore been eight shire or countydays, at which the gentlemen freeholders and suitors of thecounty were bound, of ancient custom and duty, to appearand give their attendance to serve the king ; which numberof days being found inconvenient, it was enacted, that forthe future they should be holden only twice in the year, atthe Michaelmas and Easter sessions, as used in the countypalatine of Chester.Thus the county court in Chester, which was for the trialof civil pleas, was, according to the provisions of MagnaCharter with respect to the leet and toum, directed to beheldonly twice a year, at Michaelmas and Easter.In the first chapter of the 33d year of Henry Vii, the l^l-justices of the peace within the cities, boroughs, towns, and1112 STATUTES.Hen, viii. franchises, are mentioned ; but nothing is said of townsIMI. corporate.Cap. 4. And nearly a similar description occurs in chapter four ofthe same year ; in which all pewterers are prohibited fromtaking any stranger, born out of the realm, as an apprenticeor journeyman.Cap. 9. The ninth chapter of the same year, relating to themaintenance of archery, recites in the second section, thatmany bowyers, &c. inhabited near the city of London in thesuburbs, being no freemen of the city, nor bearing neitherScot and scot and lot, nor other charges within the city, as other citizensand freemen of the city do, and are bound by their oathsto do. And which citizens and freemen of the city, of theseveral mysteries and crafts have been brought up as apparenttimes from their youths, and dwelling within the freedom ofthe city, are always in readiness to furnish the king's affairswhen they shall be commanded; by reason of which resortand abode of such foreigners and stranger, of such mysteriesand crafts, other cities, towns, villages, and places withinthe realm are unfurnished of artificers and craftsmen, to thegreat decay of archery. And the statute then goes on to providefor the having of bows for themselves and their childrenButts, and servants — and that butts should be made in every city,town, and place, by the inhabitants according to the law ofInhabitants ancient time used — and that the inhabitants and dwellers becompelled to continue such butts, and exercise themselves inlong-bow shooting.Regulations are afterwards made for the bowyers dwellingout of the city and within it.And reference is again made to their not being freemenof the city, or bearing scot and lot. And offences, under thisstatute, committed in any franchise, are to be inquired intoat the leet and law-day,^fi*' Thus we find that the system of the leet was in full exerciseat this time — that the duties of bowyers, like that of allother persons, were defined by the place in which they inhabited; that the support of the butts and other commonSTATUTES. 1113burdens, was to be borne by the inhabitants and dwellers — ^^^' ^'^"•that the freemen and citizens of London were at that time to 1641.bear scot and lot ; and that they were dwelling within the tan andfreedom of the city ; a circumstance and a form of expressionsion by no means to be overlooked. For the reasonableground upon which their residence is required is distinctly Freemen,stated, viz., that " they are always in readiness to furnishthe king's affairs ;" and the nature of their freedom is expresslydefined, because it is called, the " freedom withinthe city," which clearly imports a freedom connected withactual residence within the city — by virtue of which, theywere exempted from all duties personal and pecuniary,within the county at large.In the bill for the household, the terms which are applied ^^p- ^^'to the residence of the king are " currant" or " abiding."And the persons referred to in the bill respecting worsted ^*P' ^^'yams in Norfolk, are the inhabitants and dwellers there.It is a singular circumstance, that the same test which is Reri<i«»ce.applied to the doctrine of settlements, relative to the poor,should also be applied to the judges of the land; for thestatute, in the 24th chapter of this year, which prohibits judges Cap. 24.from being justices of assise in their own county, definesthe county as the place where the judge was ^^bornorin-habiting,'^ But we must remember, that in truth there is noother mode of describing a place to which a person belongs.And when the early charters speak of the men of any particularplace, they must mean those who were born there ;and so in the strictest sense " belong to," or " are of" theplace : — or it must include those persons who had had formore than a year, a permanent residence there ; and, whobeing resiantSy were after that time bound to be sworn andenrolled in the place — and after such ceremonies he alsomight be truly said to be permanently one of the place.And thus it is that the harmony of our institutions, alwaysreferring back to the original principles, was continued forso many centuries ; and the Legislature adopting in manyinstances the language, and in most instances the principlesand practice of the common law, so perpetuated1114 STATUTES.Hen, viii. Qj^g uniform system. And whether it related to the poor or1^1- to the rich — the peasant or the judge — the resiant or thevagrant — the civil or criminal j urisdiction — the duties in thecounty at large, or the particular privileges in cities, boroughs,or franchises — they all had one common origin andobject — local permanent residence.The same statute contains a proviso that it shall not extendto any mayors, sheriffs, recorders, stewards, bailiffs,Bo' sextons, or other officers, being born or dwelling within anycity, borough, or town. And it is a curious instance of perseverancein error, that notwithstanding the Legislature didCorporate, for a considerable length of time omit the term '^ corporatein the enumeration of cities, boroughs, and towns — as if fix>mthe complaints which had been made against corporationsthey had got into discredit ; — yet the editors of the Statuteshave again, in this part of their compilation, introducedinto the margin the word '^ corporate," although it is notjustified by the text,* as we have before pointed out in thereigns of Richard II. and Henry IV.Cap. 27. The 27th chapter of the same year, relative to the leases ofhospitals, colleges, and other corpora tions,t reciting, thatby the common law such leases made by the majority weregood — but that the founders had provided, that if one dissentedthey should not be made — provides for the avoidingthe mischiefs arising therefrom ; and for the due executionof the common law universally within this realms in one conformityof reason to be used ; — that all rules, &c., made bysuch founders, whereby the grant, lease, gift, or election ofthe governor, with the assent of the more part should inanywise be hindered or let by any one or more, being thelesser number of the corporation, contrary to the form, order,and course of the common law, should be void.Notwithstanding municipal corporations had at this timelong existed, yet the Legislature seems still to have clung tothe notion to which we have before so frequently referred,• Vide ante, p. 717—781.t This statute adds to the terms "other corporations' the passage to which wehave referred so frequently, as adopted by Queen Elizabeth and the Stuart in theircharters, ** by whatsoever name they be incorporated."STATUTES. 1115that the early corporations were chiefly confined to the eccles Hen, viii.statical bodies; for the title of this statute refers, generally, 1541.to all corporations, but the preamble relates only to "deans, ticaiTor^'wardens, provosts, masters, presidents, or other governors P^™'*®'"-of any cathedral, church, hospital, college, or other corporation,"all of an ecclesiastical character; and by theordinary rules of construction, the more general term ofother corporations would be limited to those of the samekind which had been enumerated before.In the same manner, the term " corporation" is applied, in ^*,^^'the 29th chapter, to religious persons: as to whom it is pc"o°*'enacted, that when they are removed from one corporationto another, they are enabled to inherit, purchase, sue, and besued.In the 32nd chapter, express provision is made, that the Cap. 32.. Vicar in-vicar of the church of Whitegate, in the county of Chester, corporatedshall have perpetual succession, and be ccdled " vicar of theparish church of our Blessed Lady the Virgin of White-gate,"and by that name shall sue and be sued.In the 33rd chapter, concerning exactions made by the £%"J2d.mayor of Kingston-upon-Hull, a new term is applied to thosewho are to enjoy the privileges of the place, and those whoare not ; and they are contradistinguished from each otherby the terms of " persons privileged ;" and " persons not privileged."The 36th chapter provides for the repairing of Canterbury, Cap. 36.Rochester, Stamford, and divers other towns.The 10th chapter of the 24th and 25th of Henry VIII., i54M.relative to the making of coverlets in York, recites in thecommencement of the second section, that apprentices and Apparentexpert in that occupation, had withdrawn themselvesfrom the city of York, and people inhabiting in the villages inhabiting,and towns had intermeddled with that craft and occupation,having little experience therein, and not bound to their rulesand ordinances, and make imperfect coverlets, hawking* themIf an inhabitant in the country go with wares in the same county from onehouse to another to sell them, and not in open markets, he is a rogue within thestatute of the 39th of Elizabeth, chap. 4.— Jenk. 7 Cent. p. 319.1116 STATUTES.Hen. VIII. abroad in the country to villages and men's houses, putting1542-3. the same naughty ware to sale secretly, to the great im-inhabitantsimpoverishment of the inhabitants and city; for remedy whereofit was enacted, that no persons dwelling and inhabitingwithin the county of York, should make any coverlets forsale, unless he be inhabiting or dwelling within the city ofYork, or the suburbs.This is another instance of the practical application of thisnew law to the persons inhabiting and dwelling ; and statesthe inconveniences resulting from unrestrained hawking, andis probably the commencement of the enactments in restraintof it.c^^3 There is also, in the same year, a statute for making knightsand burgesses within the county and city of Chester, whichinhabitants recites the petition of the inhabitants of the county palatine,that it has been always hitherto exempt and excluded outof the high court of Parliament from having any knights orburgesses there; by reason whereof the inhabitants havehitherto sustained manifold disherisons, losses, and damages,as well in their lands, goods, and bodies, as in the good,civil and politic governance and maintenance of the commonwealthof their county.And forasmuch as the said inhabitants have alwayshitherto been bound by the acts and statutes made andordained by the king's highness and his most noble progenitors,by authority of the said court, as far forth as othercounties, cities, and boroughs have been that have had theirknights and burgesses in the court of Parliament, and yethave had neither knight nor burgess there, the said inhabitants,for lack thereof, have been oftentimes touched andgrieved with acts and statutes made in that court, as werederogatory to the most ancient jurisdictions, liberties, andprivileges of their county, as prejudicial to the commonwealth,quietness, rest, and peace of the inhabitants withinthe same. — For remedy thereof it was enacted, that theKnights, county palatine of Chester should have two knights for theBurgesses, county, and two citizens to be burgesses for the city ofChester; the election to be made under like manner andSTATUTES. 1117form as is used within the county palatine of Lancaster, or Hen.v iii.any other county or city within the realm of England the 1542-3.knights and burgesses having the same liberties, advantages,dignities, privileges, wages, fees, and commodities, as otherknights and burgesses had.Here also the inhabitants are the petitioners, and the personsfor whose benefit the privileges are granted. Theimportance of being represented in Parliament is also distinctlyrecognized. The two citizens who were to representthe city are expressly declared to be the burgesses for thecity — they and the knights were to be elected in the samemanner as in any other county or city in England — showingclearly that the elections were at that time assumed to beall alike — and the members are all directed to receive thesame wages as other members: so it must also be inferred, Wages tothat the wages were at that time paid to the members, asthey had been from the commencement of parliamentary representation.In the act for the discharge of the sherifTs accounts, the Cap. 16.sherifTs county-days, — his tourns, — and the hundreds, — arementioned ; as well as wapentakes, and lathes.In the 18th chapter, all the liberties of the mayor and Cap. 18.aldermen of Canterbury ere confirmed; and it is added that Canterburythe king may remove them upon cause, 'iso foreigner y not foreigner.being free of the city, is to buy or sell (saving victual) toanother foreigner y — nor shall keep any shop, or use anymystery within the liberties thereof, without the license ofthe mayor and aldermen, or the major part of them.The 22nd chapter relates to fines levied by married women. Cap. 22.in the cities, boroughs, and towns, which are directed to betakenbefore the mayor, aldermen, recorder, chamberlain,or other head officer of such city, borough, or town corporate,according to their usages and customs.The 24th chapter contains a singular provision in a bill for Cap. 24.the assurance of certain lands to Serjeant Hide, providing: Cambridge•' * ^ wardens.that the sheriff and two knights of the Parliament for thecounty of Cambridge should be incorporated by the name incorporated.1118 STATUTES.Hen VIII. Qf |.jjg <' wardens of the wages;" who were to have a rent1542-3. payable out of the shire manor.Cap. 26. The 26th chapter, containing ordinances for the prin-wales.capacity of Wales, provides, amongst other things, that allStewards, stewards of any lordships or manors in Wales, should holdLe«t«- their leets^ law-days and courts baron, belonging to them ;and that the sheriffs should hold their toums at Michaelmasand Easter, as well as their county and hundred courts ; andthat the mayors, bailiffs, and head officers of corporate townsmight hold pleas according to their customs. And the 17thsection provides, that inasmuch as there are many smallBorough*, boroughs and towns corporate which have their commence-towns^ .corporate, ment by charters, it is provided that the king should havepower, by his letters patent, at any time within seven years,to dissolve such boroughs and towns corporate and to electany other boroughs or towns corporate which might be convenient;and that suspected persons should be put undercommon mainprise.Sec. 110. The 110th section provides, that all the king's subjectslUsiants. and resiants in Wales, should find at every Parliament knightsfor the shire, and citizens and burgesses for cities and towns.cl^u "^^^ ^^^^ chapter of the 35th of Henry VIII., for the paymentof the fees and wages for the knights and burgesses forInhabitants Wales, provides that they shall be paid by the inhabitants,who are also specially directed to be summoned to come tothe election, and give their voices : and two justices are tolot and tax every city, borough, and town wherein they doinhabit, for the portion and rates belonging to the cities andboroughs, which are to be taxed on the inhabitants by fouror six discreet and substantial burgesses.1545. The fourth chapter of the 37th Henry' VIII. relates to colleges,free chapels, chantry, hospitals, fraternities, brotherhoods,guilds, and stipendiary priests, which are stated tohave perpetuity for ever; some of which had been incorporated,established, founded, erected, or made, by diversnames, surnames, degrees, and corporations, to have perpetualcontinuance for ever, some by the license of the king.STATUTES. 1119and some by feoffment, wills, &c., and the donors having ex Hen, viii.pellet some of them — remedy is prayed for the same.The 14th chapter expressly creates a corporation or body Cap. 14.politic of two persons, to be called for ever the "masters or borough,keepers of the pier or key of Scarborough, in the county ofYork."The 18th chapter authorizes the king to make honors of sap. 18.the city of Westminster, the town of Kingston-upon-Hull,and his castle of Dodington in Berks, and St. Sith inEssex.Cities, towns corporate and bodies corporate, are all men Cap. 21.toned in the bill for the union of churches: — and cities,boroughs, and towns corporate, in the third section of the Cap. 23.23rd chapter.CHARTERS.We now proceed to the charters of this reign, which howeverlessen in importance, as the incorporations are, at thisperiod, clearly established.There are three charters granted to the mayor, commonalty, London,and citizens of London — one in the first year, being a confirmationof that of Henry IV., which gave the tonnage tothe city.The second, in the 10th year, reciting the charter of Ed ^^^^'ward III. respecting St. Martin*s-le-Grand, and granting, atthe petition of the mayor and commonalty, and of the citizens, Common-thatall inquisitions should from thenceforth be of the men Men ofof the city, at the guildhall within the city, or at any other ^° ^"*place thought most expedient by the justices, and not elsewhere.The third, in the 22nd year, relates to the tonnage ; and 1530.recites a grant to Sir William Sydney — a charter of EdwardII. — and also the charter of Henry IV., and confirms them;and also grants the weights and beams for weighing goodsbetween merchant and merchant.We also find, in the 13th year of this reign, an inquisition, 1522.in Latin, before the escheator of London, in which it isstated, that three messuages mentioned in it were held in.••i,1120 CHARTERS.Hen, viii. yy-gg hwrgage^ as all the city of London was held. And itFree bur ^^g further found, that it had been the immemorial customsgage. ' "Liber homo that every freeman of the city (liber homo) should be able toalienate and give his lands within the same city, in freeburgage to be held of the king.It is also stated, that a precedent]: occurred in this reign,where a citizen of London sued another citizen in the commonbench ; that the mayor and aldermen of London weredesirous that the matter should be compromised, which one^hbSd" ^^ them refused, and they disfranchised him. Whereupon awrit was directed to the mayor to restore him to his franchise,and a fine of 100 marks was assessed upon each ofthem who were parties.In the second of these charters we have the expressionMen. again occurring, of " the men of the cxty^^ upon which wehave already commented ; it is only necessary here further toremark, that this is a term so commonly applied to the burgessesof every borough, that it can leave no doubt theywere in effect all the same ; and it is important to observe,that it also establishes, that the freemen of London continuedthe same as they were originally : of which it is a strong confirmatoryproof, that, in the document we have quoted, theLiber homo ancient legal term of " liber homo'' is used for the descriptionoi 2l freeman.We have before observed, that if burgage tenure ought tohave existed any where, it should have prevailed in London,Burgage as that place was held by burgage tenure ,% of which thedocument we have quoted is a confirmation, bringing theproof down to this reign.OXFORD UNIVERSITY AND CITY.1523. If any thing had been wanting to secure the temporalpower of the university, it was amply supplied by a chartergranted by Henry VIII., in the 14th year of his reign, at the• Mad. Fir. Bur. p. 23. Trin. Communia, 13 Hen. VIII. Rot 12.t In a case of hardship, it was stated, that " tenure in burgage is coniraon socage.".Ten. scent. fol.127.X Cro. Eliz. fol. 33.Vide Sir Henry Carthorse's Collection of the Customs of London, p. 103.OXFORD UNIVERSITY AND CITY. 1121pressing instance of Cardinal Wolsey. It commences with ^^°' ^'"-a declaration of the universally acknowledged advantages ^^23.which are derived by the state from having within it wise andlearned men, such as have been produced from the universityof Oxford, and proceeds to grant, that the chancellor, vice-chancellor,and his deputy, should be justices of the peace justices,for the town of Oxford, and the four surrounding hundreds;as well as within the counties of Oxford and Berks; — a veryconsiderable enlargement of their jurisdiction, it having onlyformerly extended over the town, the suburbs, and the hundredadjoining, which was held by Dairy. As the town, inconsequenceof its being a borough, was exempted from thecounty, it was necessary that the jurisdiction over it shouldbe given, as well as over the county ; but why the hundredsare here mentioned, unless for greater caution, it would bedifficult to say.The charter then grants, that the chancellor might appointa steward (an officer mentioned before in the charter of Steward.Edward IV., though not there expressly appointed), andalso a sub-steward, and two or three persons skilled in thelaw, to hear and determine all treasons and felonies, with anon-intermittent clause as to the mayor and bailiffs of the ,and all justices of the peace; and enables the universityto have a gaol within the town, for the custody of allpersons entitled to the privileges of the university. Andthat the sheriffs, and all others, should make returns of allpenalties, &c. to the chancellor, vice-chancellor, or hisdeputy. That all fines and amerciaments should be givento the university, as well as all deodands, goods of felons, &c.within the town of Oxford and its suburbs. That the chancellor,scholars, and their servants, ministers, farmers, andtenants, wherever found, should be exempted from all prises,criminals, &c. for all their goods.A provision so extensive, including all the tenants, whereeverthey are, induces some doubts of its legality, and if notconstantly allowed and confirmed by usage, it would notprobably have been supported. Nor, indeed, could it haveany pretence to legality, except upon the ground that these4c1122 OXFORD UNIVERSITY AND CITY.Hen. VIII . were dues belonging to the king, who could of course abandon1623. his own right.Upon the same ground, the king abandons his right ofprescription and purveyance within 20 miles adjoining theuniversity. And that every indictment of murder and felony,or riotSy&c. within the town, suburbs, hundreds, and counties,against the scholars, or any one enjoying the privileges of theuniversity, should, upon the certificate of the chancellor,vice-chancellor, or his deputy, to the mayor, aldermen,bailiffs, and justices, be delivered to the chancellor, &c. ;and all other process superseded. And for putting an endto all ambiguities and controversies which could arise betweenthe university and the burgesses, so that the studentsmight live in peace, it was directed, that the chancellor — thescholars — their ministers and servants — their families, and allothers who were registered in the university, should enjoy itsliberties and privileges.View of The view of frankpledge within the precinct of the universesityy is spoken of for the first time ; and power is given tothe chancellor to make precepts and writs, and to do all actswhich belong to a view of frankpledge.But what those acts were, or who were to be the suitors,is not mentioned: — and it would be difficult to imaginehow such a body as the university could execute this privilege;or what benefit it could be to any but the housekeepersof the university, who might, by such means, be exemptedfrom suit at the sheriff's toum, or at the leet of theborough. But it could not apply to the whole body of theuniversity, or to the bulk of the students, who were lodgersand inmates y and not householders.It was likewise provided, that if any person having thePrivilege, privilege of the university should be imprisoned in any partof England, he should be delivered up to the chancellor, tobe dealt with according to the law of the land, and the privilegesof the university.That the chancellor, scholars, their servants, minis-buyand ters and families, might be enabled to buy and sell byretail and otherwise ; and to exercise all trades within theOXFORD UNIVERSITY AND CITY. 1123town and suburbs of Oxford, and all liberties and franchises Hen^viii.which others had. And that they should be free from every 1523.contribution, payment, concord, or license, to be paid to themayor, aldermen, bailiffs, or treasurer, or to the communityof the town, for the liberty and franchise.That the chancellor, vice-chancellor, or his deputy, withthe assent of the masters in convocation assembled, shouldhave authority given to them for ordaining, making, andestablishing corporations statutes, and ordinances, with Corpora-penalties,to bind all the inhabitants of the town, merchants,victuallers, and others, vulgarly called glovers, cordwainers,and chandlers, there dwelling (cormorants), and sellingtheir goods exorbitantly, any statute to the contrary notwithstanding: — a direct exercise of the dispensing powerof the crown, since declared by the Bill of Rights to beillegal.The provision for the restitution of stolen goods, firstgranted in the charter of Edward III., is repeated. And thechancellor, vice-chancellor, and deputy, are, by a long clause,protected from any suit for any judicial acts done by them,whether justly or unjustly, as long as they obey the judgmentof the proctors within the precinct of the university. Proctors.The former clauses, as to taxing the scholars, and otherprivileged persons dwelling or inhabiting, are repeated. And Commo-rantssiveif any of them were improperly taxed, the chancellor, vice inhabitor deputy, taking to them the president of MagdalenCollege, and the wardens of St. Mary College, ofWinton, and of All Souls, should properly assess them. Allmurders, felonies, and offences whatsoever were, in the largestwords, remitted to the scholars ; and if any defect shouldbe discovered in the charter, the chancellor of England shouldcorrect it without any further writ; and the charter closeswith the usual non-intermittent clauses, and the provisionsfor securing all the privileges intended to be granted, notwithstandingany defect in the charter, arid although nomention is made of the value.4c21124 OXFORD AND CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITIES.Hen. VIII.CAMBRIDGE.It is said that the university of Cambridge was incorporatedin this reign. We have examined the Patent Rolls,and have not been able to discover a charter of incorporationto that body.1628. A decree was made in the Star Chamber, that no strangerborn should keep in his service any servant being strangerboruy above the number of two, at once ;* but that nothingcontained in that decree should be prejudicial to any strangers,artificers, denizens or not denizens, inhabiting within theuniversity of Oxford or Cambridge.1522. This decree was afterwards confirmed by Act of Parliament,wherein it was established, that no stranger born, beinga householders in any of the said universities, should, fromthenceforth, retain in their service any journeymen or prettiestbeing aliens born, above 10 at once, upon pain, &c. : —1629. ^^^ ^^^^ ^^^ former Act, made in the 14th and 16th of HenryVIII. should endure for ever.1540. Since that time, in another Parliament, it was enacted.Dwelling, that no handicraftsman dwelling in the universities of Oxfordand Cambridge, being a stranger born, denizen or not denizen,should keep any prentice, journeyman, or servant,above two at once, being aliens born, upon pain limited inthe statute.BRISTOL.1511. The mayor, burgesses, and commonalty of the town ofBristol, received, in the third year of this reign, a confirmationof the charters which had been granted to them in the3d and 15th of Henry VII.1542. In this year, Bristol was made a bishop's see, and becamea city.POOLE.This king also granted the fee-farm of the borough ofPoole to his natural son Henry, Duke of Richmond and• See also before, states, Hen. VIII. cap. 16.POOLE. 1125Somerset; and a charter of the third year of this reign, con ^»- viii.training an inspeximus and recital of the charters of 1454 and iii.1460, and confirming the privileges granted by them to themayor, burgesses, and their successors.Arthur Plantagenet, Viscount Wesley, vice-admiral of Eng- ^^^^'land, by a charter, reciting all the former grants — that ofWilliam de Montacute to the mayor, " brethren'' bailiffs,burgesses and inhabitants of Poole — and the confirmation by ^^^^'Henry VIII., by which they were excepted from all kind ofjurisdiction and power of the admiral of England — declaredthat the privileges belonged to the mayor, brethren, burgesses,and inhabitants; and ratified and confirmed the same.It is here recited, that the charter of William de Montacutewas granted to the " brethren," burgesses, and inhabitants;but nothing of that kind is stated in the extracts in LordGlenbervie's Reports ;* and for aught that appears, this isthe first place in which the term " brethren" was used. Indeed,it is not probable that it was so in fact, because,although that term might have become general in this reign,as appears by the statutes passed during it; yet there seemsno reason for thinking, that it was in general use in the reignof Edward III., when the charter of William de Montacutewas granted.NEWCASTLE.In the third year of this reign, articles for the government 1512.of the brethren of the fellowship of drapers in Newcastlewere made ; which speaking of them as a then existing body,and referring to the election of the officers of the borough,under the common charter, as the old use and custom of thetown, provided, that no brother of the society should takeany apprentice for less than seven years, nor more than one Apparentat a time. And no person should be admittedinto the fellowship, without having served that time to a brother,without the assent of the whole fellowship.The apprentices and those who challenged their freedom• Vide 2 Dough. p. 238.1126 NEWCASTLE.Hen. VIII• by patrimony, were ordained, under a penalty, to come for1512. their freedom within a year.These provisions of themselves would seem to import, thatthose who were bound for seven years, and served a brotherfor that time, were entitled to be admitted into the fellowship ;but those who were not so bound, "^or did not so serve, werenot entitled, but were to be admitted by the consent of thefellowship — particularly as the first direction, respecting theswearing of the freeman, seems to import that all apprenticesFree, were to h^ freemen; and the clause, as to the seven yearsand the enrolment, expressly states, '^ that every apprenticeshall he free at the end of his time for 13«. ^d. and a dinner."It should be observed, that this article tends much to confirmthe original nature of these institutions, in the manner wehave previously explained. It requires that the apprentice'sBorrowed. name and his ^* borrowed " should be entered and enrolled.By the common law, every person residing in a place a yearand a day was to be sworn and enrolled, and give " pledges "for his good conduct, and for his forthcoming at all timesto answer the law. " Borhoe" is the Saxon term for apledge," and therefore there can be no doubt that thispassage refers to the ancient law ; and confirms our previousApparent assertion, that the serving as an apprentice for seven yearsentitled a person by the common law to be treated as a freeman,and to be enrolled as such ; which was done by the warden ofthe craft instead of the king's officers for the town at large,for the ease and convenience of the members of that body : —and it was upon that principle the several trades under thesanction of the municipal governor of the place, were admittedand enrolled as freemen amongst themselves, it beingimmaterial where the admission, swearing and enrolmentwas effected, provided it was performed somewhere. It wasless irksome and troublesome for them to do it amongstthemselves, than at the general meetings of the bui^esses ;and the members of the craft were also best acquainted withtheir own members and their apprentices, and of course bestable to see this public duty properly executed.NEWCASTLE. 1127A decree in the Star Chamber, in the seventh of Henry ^^^°- ^^J^-VIII., in effect re-established the manner of election of ^^^6.mayor (or at least nearly so), as it was fixed by the articlesin 1342:* but which it seems probable had been discontinued.The decree not only confirms the inference which arisesfrom all the early charters of Newcastle, that residence was Residence,a necessary qualification for a burgess, but also explains mostclearly what was the real origin of the qualification by Apparentticeship.The free inhabitants ovXy were the burgesses: and consequently,no servant or villain of any gentleman or lord, aswe have before explained, could be a burgess : — but if thelord so far waived his dominion over his villain that he couldnot retain him, such a person thereby became free ; — a yearnsresidence away from his lordy unclaimed, was sufficient tomake him prim facie free. Of course service for seven yearsas an apprentice was more than sufficient to make him so ;particularly as it appears from tha Regiamm Majestatem, thatafter seven years absence from his lordy the villain was foreverirreclaimable by any process — hence it is that in thispassage, in the decree where it is said that no gentleman's orlord's servant (that is, according to the old law terms, servesor villain) shall be a burgess ; the exception is added, " unlesshe had served seven years' apprenticeship."With respect to the necessity of residence upon which we Residence,have before commented, there can be no doubt but thatoriginally, by the whole system of our law, as well as by theparticular usages and customs of each individual place, residencewas an indispensable qualification for enjoying itsprivileges — indeed, it was only by virtue of the person's residencein the place that he was subject to the jurisdictionand burdens of it, and consequently entitled to its privileges.The origin of these rights, before referred to, abundantlyestablish this : as well as many of the charters grantedto the burgesses of Newcastle and the different companieswithin it — particularly that of the first of Edward VI., 1647, 1547.to the merchant adventurers, by which all the privileges are• Vide ante, p. 655.1128 NEWCASTLE.Htn. viiL expressly confined to those " inhabiting" within the town*inhautiiif. And the order for the fellowship of cooks in the 17th ofIMC *Elizabeth, expressly excludes from the enjoyment of theirprivileges any of the brethren who should depart from the1600. town, and dwell elsewhere out of the town. And the charterof the 42d of Elizabeth, speaks of the burgesses and otherlohmbi- ^ inhabitants ;** and requires that all those eligible to offices,should be burgesses conversant and inhabitant within thetown : and as it afterwards speaks of a person being elected,who was absent, it is clear that mere absence did not amountto non-residence.This view of the subject, supported as it is by the historyand principles of our common law, and the history of otherboroughs — and confirmed by this document, clearly bUshes, that apprentices who had duly served their time, wereentitled to be admitted on the same ground as those born offree parents, which was in truth founded upon the commonlaw, and not upon any corporate principle.1644. It should be observed, in concluding our observationsupon this place, that in a grant of this monarch, in the 35thyear of his reign, to the mayor and burgesses of the spite ofburgages, the Blackfriars, burgages in Newcastle were granted amongstother things.YORK.1517^ Henry VIII., by his charter, in the ninth year of his reign,Common granted to the citizens of York, a common council, to assistthe mayor, aldermen, and sheriffs ; with the manner of theirCrafts, election out of the several crafts of the city; that is to say,two out of each of the 13 crafts of merchants, mercers,drapers, grocers, apothecaries, goldsmiths, dyers, skinners,barbers, fishmongers, tailors, vintners, pinners, and glaziers ;and one out of each of the 15 lower crafts — viz. hosiers,landholders, vestment makers, wax-chandlers, bowyers, weavers,walkers, ironmongers, saddlers, masons, bakers,butchers, glovers, pewterers, and armourers.And that at their yearly assembly they should severallychoose discreet and able persons to be searchers of their ownYORK. 1129craft for the year following ; that is to say, merchants and Hen, viimercers, four — tailors, four — weavers, four — bakers, threebarbers, three — and every other of the said 13 and 15 craftsshould name two ; and likewise the next day present thesame persons to the mayor, aldermen, and sheriffs, to besworn to use and exercise all things belonging to their officefor the common weal of the city.And that the common council and the eldest searcher of 1518.every of the crafts should, in a peaceable manner, assemblebefore the mayor, aldermen, and sheriffs, in the guildhall,yearly, and there make solemn oath to choose four of themost able and discreet persons of the city, such as havenot been mayor nor sheriffs ; and that the aldermen andsheriffs, by their oaths and voices, should immediately thesame day, choose and take two of the same four to be sheriffsfor the year next ensuing, and swear them into their officeas in time past.And when any alderman of the city should die, leave, ordepart from his office, that the common council and eldestsearcher of every the 13 and 15 crafts, should assemblethemselves before the mayor, aldermen, and sheriffs, for thetime being, in the guildhall, at a certain day, by the samemayor to be assigned, and then and there make solemn oathto name and choose three of the most grave, discreet, andable citizens, to be aldermen ; and that the mayor, aldermen. Aldermen,and sheriffs, by their oaths and voices, should the same day,ere they departed, choose and take one of the same three tobe alderman.That all the persons of the common council, and theeldest in office of every of the searchers, &c., should assemblethemselves yearly before the mayor, aldermen, andsheriffs, in the guildhall, and make solemn oath to nameand choose three of the most grave and discreet persons ofthe aldermen, such as have not been twice mayor, nor mayorwithin six years next before ; and that the mayor, aldermen,and sheriffs, before they departed, should choose and takeone of the three to be mayor for the year ensuing.And that no other citizens, other than the common council1130 YOl^K.Hw. viii. imp ^[|e gi^jj searchers should be present at any election ofsheriffs, aldermen, or mayor of the city, or should have voiesin the election of any of them.Lynn REGIS.1534. This king, in the 16th year of his reign, granted to theiniMbttHiti mayor, burgesses, and inhabitants of the borough of JBigkoffBCoqionte. Lynnee, that they should for ever be one body ecrporaie, and(me perpetual community in name and deed : that theyshould have perpetual succession, by the name of 'the'' Mayor and Burgesses of the borough of Bishop's Lynne^'' in the county of Norfolk" — and plead and be impleaded —and be persons capable in law, &c.1535. And in the 27th year of this reign, it was enacted by Parliament,that the king should have the manors of LimeEpiscopi and Atwood. And thereupon the king by hisletters patent declared, that the tam of Bishop's Lymeshould be called Lynnee Regis, and the burgesses, by thename of ^ the Mayor and Burgesses of the borough of Lyme** Regis, in the county of Norfolk."KINGSTON-UPON-THAMES.1542. We find, in the 34th year of this reign, amongst the collectionof documents belonging to the corporation of ,and which were edited by Mr. Roots,*an exemplification of a warrant to the Treasury, respectingcertain deductions to be made out of the fee-farm of the town.It recites a charter of Henry V. ; and also that King HenryVI. by his letters patent, in the 19th year of his reign, grantedFreemen, that the freemen of the town should be one body in right andCorporate, name, and one commonalty corporate for ever, of two bailiffsMen of of the town ; and that the men of the town should have per-•***^^' petal succession; and they and their successors, by thenames of " bailiffs and freemen of the town of ,in the county of Surrey," should be calledand nominated, and might plead and be impleaded, &c.We have examined the original Patent Rolls at the Tower,Vide Roots Charters, p. 64.KINGSTON-UPON-THAMES. 1 131and after a careful investigation are unable to find the Hen, viii.slightest authority to warrant the claim of the above privilegesat that period ; which is another instance of the extraordinaryinaccuracy respecting corporate rights. The onlypossible suggestion as to the ground of the error is a suppositionthat the charter of Kingston-upon-HuU might havebeen mistakingly applied to this place.Seaport.Henry Vii, in the 36th year of his reign, granted a 1643.charter to the barons and good men of Hastings, which commencedby reciting, " that his beloved barons, good men,and subjects of the Cinque Ports, in respect of many libereties and franchises which had been granted to them, were'' bound to find, at their own costs and expenses, 67 shipsfor 16 days in every year ;* but that the town of Hastings,the most considerable of the Cinque Ports, by the flux andreflux of the sea, and by conflagrations there, had beenimpoverished, in consequence whereof, neither the town,barons, nor good men, had been able to find their portionof shipping ; and that, in order that they might be morestrongly bound to build ships for the future," granted tothe bailies and barons of the town of Hastings, their heirsand successors, and to the inhabitants tenants, resiants, non inhabitantsresiants, and other resiants in the town, parish, and boroughof Effort, that they should be a perpetual and corporate Seafowl.town, of one bailifl* and commonalty for ever. That the Corporate,bailiff" and commonalty should be of themselves a body corporate— should have perpetual corporate succession — andbe for ever called and named, " the Bailiff* and Commonaltyof the town, parish, and borough of Seaford "capable ofholding and giving lands, that they should have a commonseal, and plead and be impleaded by their corporate name.That the inhabitants tenants, and resiants^ their heirs andsuccessors, dwelling in the town, parish, and borough ofEffort, might be able to elect from among themselves, forever,a fit person to be bailiff*.• See Domesday— Dover, fol. 71~Sandwicb, 85— Romney, Bd.1132 Stafford.Htn. vm. Powers are then given to that officer to hold a court, andto have cognizance of all real and personal actions arisingwithin the borough. Freedom from toll and of all customSvitiof Ax. — and quittance from suits of shires and hundreds arealso granted. And that neither the bailiff nor commonaltyshould be forced or compelled to come out of their boroughnor be impannelled upon any juries, assises, &c. That theborough of Seaford should from thenceforth be a member,annexed, united, and joined with the town of Hastings, andshould contribute, by shipping, its share with the barons ofHastings; and that it should enjoy, in every respect, thesame privileges as those of Hastings.Having now concluded the Charters, it will be necessaryonly to add some extracts from the municipal documents ofthis period, and a few records relative to particular boroughs.CANTERBURY.In this reign an act of Parliament was passed for improvingthe river at Canterbury, which recited the petition of themayor, aldermen, citizens, and inhabitants, and contained afurther recital of the antiquity and importance of the city,similar to that of the chapter of Edward IV. ; and then enablesthe mayor, aldermen, citizens, and inhabitants, with theadvice and assent of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and twoor three knights, being justices of the shire of Kent, todeepen and enlarge the river. But it seems this act wasnever carried into execution.*The controversy also, which appears to have existed solong between the prior of St. Gregory's and the mayor andcommonalty, and which commenced in the reign of HenryIII., and was renewed in that of Henry VI., appears in thisreign to have been finally adjusted between the parties. Thearticles between them, made by the mediation of the prior ofChristchurch, John Hales, one of the barons of the Exchequer,Christopher Hales, attorney-general, and ThomasWood, esq., by the consent of the Archbishop of anteroom.Ant. Cant. 21.CANTERBURY. 1133our, are given by Sooner.* They first state it to be Hen, viii.agreed, that the monastery and all its houses were folly andentirely within the liberties and franchises of the city. Andthen they proceed, — " that tenants inhabiting in the sametenements shall at all times do and owe their obedienceunto the mayor of the city, and to the aldermen andother officers of the city and of the ward of Northgatefor the time being, and shall be contributory to everycharge within the city in likewise as all the other inhabitantsshall be. And that the mayor and aldermen of the city andward, and their successors, should execute their office withinthe monastery as they do in any other parts of the said city,except in the causes and articles following : —It is agreed, for the quietness of the prior and convent,and their successors, that no person shall be arrested byhis body within the monastery for any personal action,to be attempted by way of plaint before the mayor of thecity, but in form following, that is to say, * If any plaintbe entered and affirmed against the prior, or his successors,or any person inhabiting or abiding within the monasteryin such manner that the process and execution, accordingto the plaint, cannot be had and done upon theprior, his successors, or any such foresaid person then inhabitingor abiding within the monastery, that then, if theprior, his successors, or other person inhabiting or abidingwithin the monastery, having knowledge by the mayor, orby any of his officers thereof, by monition, to be given bythe time of two days before the time prefixed for the appearance,he at the time of that monition being within thesaid monastery or elsewhere within the liberties of the city :if then the prior, the next court-day, after the summons,on the knowledge so given, put in pledges of right, accordingto the custom of the city, to answer to the plaints sotaken and affirmed, that then no manner of arrest nor attachmentof any of the bodies shall be put in executionwithin the monastery against the prior, his successors, orany such person inhabiting or abiding within the same.'See Soin. Ant. Cant. AfKp. p. 12,1134 CANTERBURY.He n. VIII. ^j j^ jg condescended, agreed, and determined by this concurposition, that every such monition or warning hereafter tobe given against the priors, or any other person, spiritualor temporal, inhabiting or resident within the monastery,shall be good and effectual to be given to the party to besued, or to any religious man of the same monastery thenbeing a priest.*^ It is agreed, that all the manual and necessary servantsof the prior and convent that hereafter shall be inhalingwithin any of the tenantries shall not hereafter be channelled,summoned, amerced, or distrained for any mannerJury, of jury that shall be sued between party and party."WELLS.We have before observed, with respect to Newcastle, thatevery absence did not amount to non-residence, because itmight only be for a temporary purpose ; thus, in the records152L of Wells, in the 13th of Henry VIII., we find persons mentionedas being in the country — ^^ in sure manentes."1527. And in the 21st of Henry VIII. we find a singular entrywith respect to Wells, in which the term is for the first timeMade bur introduced of their being: ^^ made'' burgesses, the formergesses. ^ 1expressions being, as we have seen before, " that they wereadmitted into the liberty'' The party pays a fine of 20*.for the extraordinary and illegal privilege of being excusedfrom all offices that burgesses were obliged by their oathsto bear. We say illegal privileges, because the king evencould not by his grant excuse persons from such offices ;* butthe special nature of this exemption is accounted for by theMembers, f^^t, that the person was elected member for Wells, and wasadmitted as a burgess only, for the purpose of bringing himwithin the words of the precept, which required that one ofthe burgesses should be elected. It was by irregular ad the mayor and aldermen, or bailiffs, or the head of any corporation, exemptsany of the burgesses from contributing to any public tax, it is a great oppression,for it tends to surcharge the others. The mayor of Lincoln was fined and imprisonedfor this offence by the counsel, i. e. the opinion, of all the judges. Jenkins,2nd century, 79 Ca. 44. — Nor could the king effect it by his charter, for it hasbeen held, that *the king could not by his letters patent alter the laid of the land**Jenkins, 2nd century. Fol. 97.WELLS. 1 136sons of this kind, and for this purpose, that the abuse of h^^v^lnon-resident burgesses, was gradually introduced.*In the same year, a letter appears to have been sent fromthe king, charging the mayor and commonalty to keepwatch till Michaelmas by night and day. Watch.Regulations are also made with respect to the severaltrades in the town, and their dealing with strangers, —Confirmations are obtained of the charters. — A court isdirected to be held once in the year, at which the tenants areto appear before the steward; and there is a special pro Steward,vision, that the seal is not to be put to any deed without the Seal,assent of the whole hall.We have before remarked, that the term " made " was not Made,until this period applied to the burgesses, and the term"elected" was not yet used for their admission into the Elected,liberty, notwithstanding it occurs repeatedly with respect tothe elections of the 24.In analogy to the amercements for non-attendance at thecourt leet, fines appear to have been imposed upon those whoabsented themselves from the common hall ; than which astronger proof cannot be adduced of the nature of the reciprocalduties and privileges which were connected with thecharacter of burgess.YARMOUTH.In the records of this reign relative to Yarmouth, we find 1621.a repetition and continuation of the same system we havebefore pointed out. The leets are held as theretofore — the Leets.jurors are impannelled and sworn — amercements are imposed,some for non-attendance, others, according to thecharters and bye-laws of London and the general statutes,for occupying open shops, not being burgesses. And asillustrative of the corresponding obligation as well as rightto be a burgess, some are presented by the jury as personswho ought to be burgesses, and are not sworn, and thereforethey are in mercy.Again, in conformity with the statutes which we have• Vide ante, pp. 152, 181—185, 196, 246.1 136 YARMOUTH.^ll"!.' quoted in this reign, some persons are presented as StrangersStnuDgtn born (alienigeni nati,) and occupy as freemen of the king'sborn*Liberi ho realm (Liberi Aomtnef ,) against the customs of the town. Andmiami. 1 ^ •some are presented 2A foreigners.Similar entries occur in the other leets — the middle —north — and southern leets. And the entries of the sessions—of writs — and of the gaol-delivery follow.HYTHE.We have only a few extracts from Hythe, but they areimportant, as showing most distinctly the description of aBnrseti. burgess.The following entry is found in the brotherhood andnestling book of the 17th of Henry VIII.ifiSS. After proclamation made, the mayor, bailiff, or headofficer, shall, by the assent and consent of his brethren,name so many as the said town be assigned to, of the mostwisest and discreetly persons there present, and that everyoneof them be a freeman householder and ind wetter withinthe same town : which persons then so named, shall be bythe recorder of the same town registered in the town book.Fol.164 A. The same to be sworn '* to elect, choose, and name one juratof this town, which shall be inhabitants and shall be one ofthe mayor or bailiff's brethren and associates, &c."And yet, as a strong instance of the usurpations whichwere introduced into boroughs, and often sanctioned byParliament, non-residents of all descriptions have beenadmitted into this borough, and have been confirmed bydecisions of the House of Commons.The different names under which the " burgesses,'^ (in orderto speak accurately and consistently with the real constitutionof England,) were described, may be collected fromthe following extract.1539. In an indenture between the then Archbishop of Canterbury,of the one part, and the " barons," " good men* andinhabitants** of the town of Hythe, of the other part; thearchbishop demises the bailiwick and office of bailiff of thetown of Hythe, with certain lands and tenements, to the saidHYTHE. 1137barons;' " good men;' and " inhabitants;' and their sue "*^ ^"^ -cessors, for 99 years. ^^^*Hythe was not then incorporated — at least, if so, the inhabitantswere at all events part of the corporation.And that the barons of the Cinque Ports ought clearly tohave been inhabiting within the port, is also clearly establishedby the following extract.Henry, &c. : To our beloved and trusty counsellor, 1^24.George, Lord Rochford, constable of the castle of Dover andwarden of the Cinque Ports, and to our well-beloved andtrusty John Hales, one of the barons of the Exchequer, &c.greeting : Know ye, that we fully trusting in your fidelityand provident circumspection, have assigned you, and by thetenor of these presents do give to you, and to two of you,full power and authority to take and receive the oaths andbeauties of all and singular our lieges and subjects whomsoever(as well spiritual as temporal) inhabiting and residingwithin the town and port of Hythe and the liberties, andmembers thereof, who are of the liberty of the Cinque Ports,of whatsoever degree, estate or condition they may be, accordingto the force, form and effect of a certain statute concerningour security, estate and succession, in this presentParliament made and provided, and according to the tenorof the oath to these presents annexed'*LYME.In the 35th year of this reign, letters patent were granted ^s^-to the borough of Lyme, reciting those of the 22nd EdwardIV., and that the burgesses and inhabitants of the town of Inhabithad intimated the same necessity as appeared in therecited charter; that the same danger of shipwreck wouldhang over and threaten, by the term of 65 years drawing to itsend ; and the king, considering the premises, and the reliefand common good of the town and port, and that the burgessesand inhabitants of the town, and other his subjects,not less than theretofore, since the date of the recited letterspatent, might willingly remain and inhabit within the town,and lend their helping hands towards the reparation or4d1 138 LYME.Hem Yiiu building of the port — granted that the burgesses should havethe town with all the liberties and franchises, to the burgessesof the same in any manner belonging, during theterm of 50 years, to begin immediately after the end of theformer term, under the rent of five marks, and 13«. 4cf. fortenths and fifteenths. Provided always, that the burgessesand inhabitants of the town, their heirs and successors,should, at their own proper costs and charges, well andsufficiently repair, maintain and sustain a certain pier there,called the Cob.YORK.16W. In a case pending in the 26th year of Henry Viii,* itwas alleged, that in the city of York there existed the followingcustom : " That no merchant stranger, who was notacitizen of the same city, and residing out of the liberty,at any time should buy or sell any merchandise withinthe liberties, to any merchant stranger who was not acitizen ; upon pain of forfeiture of such merchandise to themayor, sheriffs and citizens." And the issue taken was, thatno such custom had existed from time immemorial. Thereporter adds, " by which it seems that the custom was good."Tamen quaere, because, by the charter of Richard II., thecity was incorporated by the name of mayor, sheriffs, andcitizens of the same city ; and they were before namedmayor, bailiffs and citizens ; the custom therefore for suchmerchandise to be forfeited to the mayor, sheriffs, andcitizens, must have arisen since the time of Richard II.,and within the time of legal memory ; consequently itcannot be a good custom — for the commencement oughtto be time out of memory, and it is no custom if thetime of commencement is known to be within time ofmemory.Bundle, with the carelessness or error so common inthe reporters of that day, asserts that York was " incorporated"by the charter of Richard II. But the readerwill have already seen, by the general documents which have• W. Bundle, 34,CHESTER. 1139been adduced, that this was highly improbable ; and the Hen, viii.charter itself* positively negatives the fact.CHESTER.That the admission into corporations was an actualadmission into the place to which the person came, for thepurpose of permanent residence, may be collected from the Residencefollowing entries of the 36th year of Henry VIII. respecting 1544.Chester y which are to be found amongst the Harleian MSS.And from the same documents it will be perceived, thatthe ancient doctrine of freedom by birth was continued in Birth,practice; and that the exercise of the privileges, whengranted, was solely and exclusively confined to those whowere resident in the place, as we have already seen in the Resident.instances of Yarmouth and Hythe^ and other boroughs.Mem. — That George Percival, sadler, the son of Robert AdditionPercival, partaker, was admitted to the liberties andfranchises of the city,t to have and enjoy the liberties andfranchises, according to the laws and customs of the city.And he gave no fine, because his father was free, and tothe liberties and franchises was admitted before the nativityof the aforesaid George. Therefore he gave for a fine\^\d.y according to the ancient custom in the city fromancient usage."R. B. Mercer, by Robert Barton, mayor of the city ofChester y was admitted to the liberties and franchises of the Admissioncity, to have and enjoy, &c., according to the custom ofthe city, &c. And gave for a fine 20^., which in hand is paidaccording to the orders, under condition, &c.Proviso, that whensoever it should happen that the sameR. B, should remain or he resident without the franchises of ^°°"^'"the city, that then this present admission be had for nothing."Mem. — that the aforesaid day and year, A. B. Barker,by the mayor, was admitted to the liberties and franchisesof the city, to have and ta use, &o., and gave as a fine26^. 8d, ; viz., in hand 6s, 8d,y and the residue agreed to pay• Vide ante, p. 739. t Harl. MSS. 2016, p. 31.4d21140 CHESTER.Hen. VI II. within the three next following years at the feast of St.'Michael the Archangel ; likewise for his sureties A. B. C.and D. With the same proviso as before."IRELAND.In the charters and documents of this reign, we haveoccasionally seen reference to the inhabitants of the differentplaces, as electing the members of Parliament, andforming the body of the burgesses ; as well as the personsincorporated under the several charters.We find precisely the same course pursued in Ireland.STATUTES.1541. A statute of the 33rd of Henry VIII., describing thevoters for counties, cities, and towns, enacts, that everyknight, citizen, and bui^ess, for any Parliament thereafter« . ,,^ within the realm of Ireland to be summoned, appointed, orGeo. IV. holden, shall be chosen and elected by the greater numberof the inhabitants of the counties, cities, and towns,being present at the election, by virtue of the king's writsfor that intent addressed. And also that every elector ofthe knights shall dispend and have lands and tenementsof estate of freehold within the said counties, at the least tothe yearly value of 40s., over and above all charges.CHARTERS.There are also the following patents and charters of confirmationat the Rolls Chapel, granted to the followingboroughs :Kilkenny. Kilkenny, at this period, received an inspeximus charter,confirming those which had been granted by Henry V. andRichard II., Edward III., William Earl of Pembroke, andIsabelle his wife, in the 7th year of Henry III.*Dublin. Henry VIII. granted to Dublin an inspeximus charter, confirmingthose of King John, Edward II., and Edward lll.fCork. The charters of Edward I., Edward IL, Edward III.,• Roi. Conf. 1 Ilcn. Vlll. p. 4. n. 6. t Rot. Conf. 1 Hen. VIII. p. 5, n. 6.IRELAND. 1141Richard II., Henry VII. to the city of Cork, are recited and Henjmi.confirmed in this same reign.*Limerick also received an inspeximus charter, confirming Limerick,the grants of Edward III., Henry IV., Henry V., andHenry Vl.fThe charters of John, Henry VI., Edward IV., and two Waterfordof Henry VII. to the city of Waterford, were confirmed to themayor, bailifis, citizens, inhabitants, and commonalty of thatcity-tDrogheda at this period received a charter, reciting and ^'?l{!?^**confirming those which had been granted by Henry III.,Edward I., Edward III., Richard II., Henry V., andHenry ViesA confirmatory charter was likewise granted to Dundalk, Dundalk.reciting that of Edward IV., which contains by inspeximusthe charters of Richard II., Henry V., and Henry VI.||From an inspection of the original rolls, we have no hesitationin stating, that not the slightest alteration was madeby any of the charters in the nature or class of the burgesses: but that they continued the same as they had beenfrom the earliest period of our history. And the provisionsin these charters, in every respect, bear the strictest analogyto those we have already collected for England'sWe next proceed to the charters of incorporation granted Chanewto Ireland in this reio'n. poration.Kildare received a charter** which commences with a Kildare.recital, that, in consequence of the king's love and affectionfor Gerard Fitzgerald, Earl of Kildare, he had granted tothe burgesses and commonalty of the town of Kildare, thatthey might surround their town with a ditch and walls of stone;that it should be agree borough, with all the liberties andfree customs to a borough belonging ; — ^that they might be ableto elect from themselves yearly one superior and two reevesto keep the borough and hold the pleas of the same, andRot. Conf. I Hen. VIII. p. 5. n. 7. t Rot. Conf. 2 Hen. VIII. p. 8, n. 4.X Rot. Conf. 2 Hen. Vlll . p. 10, n. II. $ Rot. Conf. 4 Hen. VIII. p. 1, n. 6.Rot. Conf. 7 Hen. VIII. p. 1, n. 13. Y Vide ante, p. 1119.••Pat.7Hen. VIII. p.3.1142 IRELAND.Hau viiL that they should take their oaths before the burgegtet and1515. commonalty ; — ^that the superior, reeves, burgesses, and com-incorporate monalty should be one body corporate and politic, with perpetualsuccession, &c. ; — that the superior and reeves shouldReturn of have the return of all writs. &c. to be executed vnthin thewnU. .borough ; — that they should have cognizance of all actions,real and personal, as fully as the mayor of the town ofDrogheda. Drogheda had : — with infangthef and outfangthef ; — andall issues, profits, and amercements ; — that the superior andJofticet. reeves should be justices of the peace within the borough,and the escheators and coroners ; — ^that no other justices ortrorniu minister should intromit ; — ^that the superior, reeves, burgesses,and commonalty should be released from toll; —that they should not plead or be impleaded elsewhere butwithin the borough. The charter then concludes by grantingto the superior, &c. all the customs, &c. which the bailiffsDundalk. of the town of Dundalk had ; with a special exemption andreservation of all the rents belonging to Gerald, Earl ofKildare.The next charter upon the roll is one to the college ofMayDooth Maynooth, giving them the most ample corporate privileges; but as it does not present any important feature toillustrate our inquiry, we shall abstain from any furtherobservations upon it.Athye. This king granted a charter of incorporation to Athye^which commences by reciting, that for the security of thetown of Athye, in the county of Kildare, he had granted toInhabitants the inhabitants, that they might surround their town, &c.with ditches and walls of stone. That at Michaelmas yearlysleeve. they might select from themselves a reeve, to keep andgovern the same, and to hold the pleas, which to the townand inhabitants there belonged; — that he should take hisAibye. oath before the inhabitants ; — that the reeve and inhabitantsCorporate, should ^^ ^^e body corporate and politic, with perpetualsuccession, &c. ; — that the reeve and his successors shouldReturn of have the return of all writs within the town ; — that no sheriff,wants. •' ,Non-ins or other minister, should intromit ; — that the reeve and histromit.spat. 7IIen.VIIJ.p. 3.IRELAND. 1143successors should have jurisdiction over all pleas personal ^^ ^"' 'and mixed ; — that the reeve and the inhabitants should havejurisdiction of infangthef and outfangthef within the town ; —with all issues rents and profits; — ^that the reeve and hissuccessors should bejie^^ices of the peace; also, that the reeve Justices,should be the escheator and coroner — and that no other ministershould intromit.The last charter that we can discover upon the PatentRolls is one to Galway,* reciting two charters of Richard XL ^fij?^'and Edward IV., and granting a few additional privileges,but none of incorporation.WALES.This principality, we have seen, was repeatedly the objectof legislative interference in the course of this reign ; theintention evidently being to assimilate it as much as possibleto the institutions of England,We have already pointed out the extent to which webelieve that similarity to have originally existed ; althoughit was subsequently much disfigured by abuse and modemusages. At all events, the provisions which were maderespecting it, for the purpose of assimilating it to the institutionsof England, were those which confined the enjoymentof all the privileges, and the performance of all the duties,to those who were resident within the districts to which Resident,the privileges related. And the voting for members to Parliament,and the consequent contribution to their wages,were all granted and imposed upon the inhabitants. inhabitantsTheir comites and centres — analogous to our borotiffh-motes and hundreds, were partly continued — their law-daysand courts leet were established and confirmed ; and, generallyspeaking, their ancient customs preserved.CONCLUSION.We have now arrived at the termination of this reign — inall probability the most important in our history, withreference to our laws, constitution, and religion — marked• Pat. 36 Hen. VIII., p. 9.1144 CONCLUSION.Hen. VIII. ^ j^ jg jjy ^|jg great changes which then occurred. The diffusionof printing had opened channels for knowledge andinformation ; the first effects of which were to direct thepublic attention against the abuses in our ecclesiastical institutions.This gradually led the thoughts of men to theimprovement of our law, and to the correction of those usurpationswith which it was disfigured. Had the times, in otherrespects, been equally favourable for that purpose, nothingcould have withstood the torrent of innovation, and the constitutionmight have been entirely remodelled. But thearbitrary conduct of the king in a great degree checked thatcourse; and the Parliament in no degree aided it; for its invariablesubserviency to the will of the king, and acquiescenceunder his violence, left him altogether in possessionof the government, both executive and legislative.Of the arbitrary nature of his conduct some striking instancesoccurred.* But in the midst of all his power, andthe suspension as it were of the constitution of England,more really useful laws were passed in this reign thanin any which had preceded — and it will ever maintain a conspicuousposition, even in comparison with those subsequentperiods in which the law received its greatest improvement —as may be proved, by the continuance to this day of some ofthe enactments then passed.With respect also to the corporations, although the foundationwas now generally laid for the usurpations whichfollowed in the succeeding reigns — yet to the close of thisdynasty, nothing essential was done to alter the nature of theboroughs or the burgesses.Early in this reign, the Parliament made some show of resistance to the impositionsof the king. And Wolsey was told, when he desired to reason with thosewho refused to comply with the king's request, ** That it was a rule of the Housenever to reason but amongst themselves." But Sir Thomas More, then theSpeaker of the House of Commons, exerted himself to pacify this resistance ; andthe king stated to Montague, one of the members, laying his hand upon his head,** That if the bill which he desired was not 'passed by tomorrow, his head shouldbe off." Anal Wolsey told the citizens of London, ** That they had better desist,for it might fortune to cost some people their heads."By these means the subserviency of the Parliament was partially secured, but theking took care that none should be summoned for two successive periods of sevenyears. Notwithstanding which, during this eventful period, there were oo heirsthan 10 parliaments and 33 sessions.CONCLUSION. 1 145The ancient law still continued in force ; and not with ^ ^"*standing Lord Mansfield has erroneously stated in the caseof Somerset and Stewart,* that the last confession of villainagewas in the 19th of Henry VI., still it is obvious,that villainage continued during this and the preceding reignof Henry VII. ; and is the best proof of the continuance ofthe same doctrine as to the distinction of villains and freemenwhich had existed from the earliest times.The sheriffs' toums and the courts leety at which thosedoctrines were practised, and also the ancient system ofpledges, swearing the allegiance, and enrolling those whowere sworn, were practised in their full force ; and all privilegesand burdens were expressly confined to the inhabitants inhabitantsand resiants within their respective districts. Great havebeen the mischiefs, which have since arisen in consequenceof departing from this ancient, simple, and practical course.But we may close this reign, as we have done the former, withthe positive assertion — that the burgesses continued in allthe boroughs to be the same as they ever had been — viz.the free inhabitant householders paying scot and lot, swornand giving their pledges at the court leet to the king, andenrolled according to the ancient usages and customs of thecountry.EDWARD VI.This reign, short in its duration, is also unimportant in itsresults : at least as far as relates to the subject of our inquiry.And as the incorporations were at this time fully established,that point will require no further illustration. The municipalusurpations, the progress of which we have now totrace, did not assume so decisive a character at this time asto require particular remark. It will, therefore, only benecessary shortly to note a few of the statutes and charters• Lom'sRep. p. 1.1 146 STATUTES.^^' VI' which occur in this brief reign; and one or two documentsto confirm the doctrine we have already asserted, will completeour collection for this period.STATUTES.1547. The third chapter of the first year of this reign provides,in analogy with our early laws, for the punishment of vagabondsand for the relief of poor and impotent persons ; andthe same occurs in the 16th chapter of the third and fourthyears ; and also in the second chapter of the fifth and sixthyears of this reign.Cap. 8. The eighth chapter relates to the confirmation of letterspatent: and recites that the king, since the 28th of January,had granted by several letters patent, as well to bodies politicand corporate as to sundry other of his loving subjects,divers franchises, privileges, liberties, &c.: in avoiding which,many ambiguities, doubts, and questions have, and mighthereafter happen, as well for mis-naming, mis-recital, or non-recitalof the objects of the grant — or for lack of inquisition,finding the king's title before the making of the letters patent,and similar grounds — and reciting all their grants —a general confirmation is given of these letters patent, notwithstandingthese recited defects ; and it is repeated in theeighth chapter of the fifth year of this reign.Cap. 10. The tenth chapter relates to the principality of Wales, andthe county palatine of Chester ; and the persons that sub-dwelling,mitted to its provisions are described as dwelling therein.Cap. 14. The 14th chapter, relative to chartres collegiate, recitesthe 37th of Henry Vii, chap. 4, and gives all lands assignedfor finding priests to the king — and also all moneyCorpora given for such purposes by any corporations, guilds, fraternities,companies, or fellowships *of mysteries or crafts,together with all their lands, tenements, as well as the fraternitiesand guilds, with the exception of the corporationsabove-mentioned.But the 21st section saves to all persons, bodies politic andcorporate, not intended to be affected by that act, theirrights — and the 34th section provides that the act shall notSTATUTES. 1147be prejudicial to the general corporation of any borough, Edw.vi.city, or town. Which seems clearly to establish the distinct Generaltion we have before pointed out, between the corporations of sons.guilds, crafts, fraternities, and other companies — and thegeneral corporation of the burgesses and officers of theplace, who were employed in its municipal government.The third chapter of the second and third of Edward VI., J^^gcontains provisions with reference to purveyance for theking's household and his sisters.And the fifth chapter relates to the fee-farms, payable by Cap. 6.cities, boroughs, and towns corporate, or by the bodies cor Corporate,porate or politic, officers or ministers of the same, which itis directed shall cease for three years, and not be paid to theking, but be bestowed about repairing of walls, bridges,setting the poor to work, or other good deeds in such cities,&c.; which was afterwards extended for three years.The 25th chapter is a bill for keeping county courts, which Cap. 25.it recites had been usually kept from month to month ; andin some, though not many counties, from six weeks to sixweeks, whereby certain errors have arisen respecting the returnsof the process, causing to the plaintiffs double cost andcharge, to the great ignominy and slander of the law, andtherefore it was directed that the courts for the future shouldbe kept monthly.In the second chapter of the third and fourth of Edward 1549.VI., provisions are made respecting woollen cloths, in which *^'a distinction is drawn between towns, villages, and hamlets,being not corporate — ^and cities, boroughs, and towns corporate; the head officers of which are also mentioned.The 16th chapter of the second and third of Edward VI., cap. 15.having amongst other things provided, that no one shouldinterrupt any mason, carpenter, &c., born within this realm,or made denizen herein, working in any craft within anyborough, city, or town corporate, with any person who wouldretain him, although such person should not inhabit or dwellin such place, nor he free of the same.The 20th chapter of the third and fourth of Edward VI. Cap. 20.recites, that in the city of London, being the king's chamber1148 STATUTES.£dw. VI. and most ancient city of this realm, the artificers and craftsmenof the trades, arts, and mysteries, were at great costsand charges, as well in bearing and paying of taxes, talliages,^LoL subsidies, scot and lot, and other charges ; and that if fih-Foreigners y^yj^^ should come and work among them within theliberties of the city, contrary to their ancient privileges, thesame would be a great decay of cunning, and an impoverishmentand drawing away of the freemen, to the great hurt ofthe city ; for reformation thereof it was enacted that the formeract should be repealed.It is obvious from this statute, that the experiment of allowingpersons to be employed in places where they did notpermanently reside had been found not to answer, and wastherefore prevented, after experience of the inconveniencesFreemen, resulting from it ; and it also appears that the freemen areDwelling, here treated as dwelling in the place ; and, as in many of theancient records, are contradistinguished from foreigners.Casa. ^^ *^^ sixth chapter of the fifth and sixth of Edward VI.,relative to the true making of woollen cloths, the mayor, .liss, port reeve, or other head officer of cities, boroughs, townscorporate, and port towns are mentioned, as well as the mayorand commonalty, or bailiffs and commonalty, or other corporationof the township, by whatever name or names they shallbe incorporated.It will be observed that these terms are used with referenceto municipal jurisdiction.Cap. 14. On the other hand, in the 14th chapter of the same year,in an act relative to trade, against registers, forestallers,and engrossers, the terms used are — city, port, haven,market, fair, &c.: excepting in those clauses of that actwhich relate to local j urisdiction, where the terms, city, borough,and town corporate are again adopted — thus establishing,even at this late period, the same distinction betweenthe provisions, as to trade and municipal government,which we originally noted in the early charters with respectCap. 21. to the guilds and boroughs. The 21st chapter prohibitstinkers and pedlars from wandering from the towns wherethey dwell, or exercising their trade unless licensed.STATUTES. 1149The fifth chapter of the seventh of Edward VI., relative Edw. vitothe excessive prices of wine, besides the jurisdiction 1553.Pan **given to the head officers of cities, boroughs, and towns cor ^'porate — the steward in his leet and the sheriff in his toum, leet.have the power of inquiry and presentment by 12 lawful menexpressly given to them : — which recognition of the continuanceof their jurisdiction, will close our extracts from thestatutes of this aera.We proceed to mention the few charters that occur duringthe same period.LONDON.Nothing material occurs in this reign with respect to Long ^^^•don, excepting the charter we shall extract, granting certainpossessions in Southwark to the city. In the first year, thereis a grant* to the master and brethren of the Salters Com- Company,of certain lands, to find a priest to sing within the °*^church of Shallows.Similar grants are made to 32 other companies, but whichdid not include all those then existing, but only thosewhich had grants made to them. And although not immediatelyconnected with London, it may be worth while to mention,as showing that the doctrine of villainage was still in viiumage.practice, and court leets still in existence, that Edward VI. Leet.granted, in the fourth year of his reign, to Lord Wentworth 1551.the lordships and manors of Stebunhuth, otherwise Stemand Hackney, &c., part of the possessions of theBishop of London. After the usual general words, areadded, " all courts, leets, profits and perquisites of courts and Lee*^-leets, view of frankpledge and all things which to view of Frankpledge,frankpledge appertain, or hereafter may or ought to belong ;bondmen, bondwomen, and villains with their sequels, Villains.knights' fees, wards, marriages, escheats, reliefs, heriot,goods and chattels waived, goods and chattels of felons andfugitives, persons outlawed, and put in exigent, deodands,]profits, liberties, emoluments, and hereditaments whatsoever,with every of their appurtenances, as well spiritual as tempFir. Bur. 31. f Pat. p. 8.1160 LONDON.^^' v^- portly of whatsoever kind, nature, or sort they may be,1551. by whatsoever names they are known, esteemed or named,situate, lying, being, commencing, giving, or receiving, inthe towns, fields, parishes or hamlets aforesaid, or any ofthem, or elsewhere wheresoever within the kingdom ofEngland, to the said manors, and other the premises, orto any of them in anywise belonging or appertaining, oras member, part, or parcel of the same manors, or of eitherof them'And afterwards, in the same grant, is contained a specialLeet. power to hold, within the same manors, similar courts leet,views o{ frankpledge, and all things which to view of frankpledgeappertain, or hereafter may or can appertain orbelong, assise and assay of bread, wine, and all chattelswaived, strayed goods and chattels of felons, fugitives, outlaws,and persons put in exigent or otherwise, in whatsoevermanner condemned or convicted, felons of themselves, demands,fairs, marts, markets, liberties, franchises, and juristdictions whatsoever.In the same year also, a charter was granted to the mayorand commonalty, and citizens of London, giving certainlands, premises, and rent-charges, late the property of theDuke of Suffolk, in Southwark,* Lambeth, Lexington, andother places in the county of Surrey, (excepting the mansioncalled South wark Palace, and the gardens belonging to theSouth same, and the park of South wark, and all the buildingscalled the Antelope, and the King's Bench, and the Marshalsea,)together with the lordship and manor of Southwark,lately pertaining to the monastery of Bermondsey ; with theCourt court leet, view of frankpledge, chattels of felons, fugitivesand outlaws, waifs, estrays, &c. ; and all escheats; and allBorough, the manor and borough of Southwark, late parcel of thepossessions of the Archbishop of Canterbury ; and amongstother rents, one arising out of a messuage belonging to theFishmongers' Company; and out of other tenements, lateSouthwark, like London itself and all other boroughs, was held in free burgage,as appears by a grant of Henry Vlll., of some houses in Southwark. See Cro.Eliz. 120, where it is said also, that land out of the borough could not be held infree burgage ; and see Moor, 257 ; and Lit. sec. 162, 163.LONDON. 1161or now of the master of the Bridge-house. The charter also Edw. vi.gave the assise of bread and beer, and all that belonged to 1551.the office of clerk of the market, and a fair, market, andcourt of pie poudre ; and that the inhabitants of the town, ini»*bitanuborough, parishes and precincts mentioned in the chartermight be impleaded in the city; that the mayor, commonaltyand citizens might have cognizance of all pleas,&c.; and that the issues should be tried by the men of the Men of the•^ . . borough.borough or town; that the mayor, commonalty, and citizensmight choose two coroners, and that no other coroners of the Coroners,king should intromit; and that the mayor should be the Intromit,escheator, with a similar clause; and also clerk of the market;and that no sheriff, or any other officer or minister ofthe king, should in any way intermeddle in the town,borough, parish or precincts; and that all persons fromtime to time inhabiting or resident within the town, borough, inhabiting,parishes or places, should be under the government of themayor and officers of the city of London, as the citizens andinhabitants of the city of London are. That the mayor, recorder,and the aldermen, who had borne the charges of thecity, should be justices of the peace. The ancient fee-farmof the town of Southwark, of los., is also mentioned.It will be observed, that in this charter the boroughof Southwark is mentioned as then existing, and as being theproperty of the Archbishop of Canterbury; and it appearsfrom the parliamentary writs, that it returned from theearliest period of any parliamentary election.Parishes which were not mentioned in any early secular Parishes,documents, occur repeatedly in this charter, as they dolikewise in the charter of Maidstone in the same reign.The inhabitanus also, it appears, were the principal objects inhabitanuof the charter ; as well for the purposes of government asof privilege: — and the general term which we have so frequentlynoted before, of " men of the borough," occurs ^° of [Unfrequentlyin this document, and the juries are directed tobe taken from them : therefore it is clear, that the nonresidenceof the persons impannelled on the jury would havebeen a good ground of challenge ; and, if so, it is equallyJ 152 London.Edw. VI. clear, that it would have been a ground of objection to any1551. person claiming privileges under this charter as a mem ofthe borough, that he was non-resident; an observation whichwill be material to be borne in mind in those cases, of whichinhabitants there are many, where the inhabitants are, to the present day,exempted from juries under similar terms, although they arenot permitted to participate in the other privileges of theborough; and the clause which subjects the persons inhabitingand residing within the town, borough, parishes, and placesmentioned in the charter, to the jurisdiction of the mayorand his officers, clearly shows, both that the persons submittedto that jurisdiction were to be residents, as well asthat the citizens and inhabitants of the city of London wereassumed to be the same.The general result of this charter was, to give the city ajurisdiction both civil and criminal, over the borough ofI^^ Southwark, where it was enabled to appoint leet officers,who have, to the present time, exercised their functionsSteward. there ; the high steward presiding both at the court leet andborough court.BRISTOL.1547. This king also, in the first year of his reign, confirmed thecharters of Henry VIII. to the mayor, burgesses, and commonaltyof Bristol, and their successors.1653. And it may not be beside our inquiry to note, that uponthe summoning: of a Parliament, in the seventh year of hisreign, a special writ was directed to the citizens of Bristolto elect and return two citizens to serve in that Parliament,and the sheriffs returned two persons to serve, both asknights and citizens for the county and city of Bristol.Lichfield.As an instance of the form and nature of the charterswhich were granted ui this reign, we shall insert that of the1547. city of Lichfield, in the first of Edward VI., by which theking recited, that for the love he bore towards his belovedand faithful subjects, the men, inhabitants and resiants inLITCHFIELD. 1153the city of Lichfield, in the county of Stafford, and towards ^^' ^^'that city, desiring that tranquillity might be from time 1547.to time increased in it, and he granted to them, thatLichfield, from thenceforth, should be a city, incorporatedof two bailiffs, and the citizens within the city, for ever.And that the bailiffs and citizens within the same city,should and might be one body incorporated and one city, Incorpo-perpetual in deed and in name, and should have perpetualsuccession. And be capable in the law to purchase, re- Perpetual^ succession.clive, give and grant lands, tenements, &c. as fully as other capablebodies politic.That two persons should from thenceforth be electedfrom amongst the citizens inhabiting within the city, in TwoBailiffs.every year, to be the bailiffs of the city for one whole year.And that 24 persons should be elected by the bailiffs and 24burgesses, or the major part of them, from amongst the '^citizens inhabiting within the city, over and above thetwo bailiffs, to be burgesses of the city, from time to time,as necessity should require, for the rule of the city. Andif it should happen that any of the bailiffs or burgesses die,or for any reasonable cause, by the mandate of the king orby the bailiffs and burgesses, or the major part of them,should be removed or discharged from their offices, then itwas ordained, that another bailiff or burgess, in the placeof the bailiff or burgess so dying or being removed, shouldbe elected, made, and appointed by the bailiffs and burgesses,or the major part of them, to perform and exercise theoffice so vacant.Two persons were by the charter then named as modem Twobailiffs.And twenty-four persons, described as citizens of the city. Twenty-werenamed to be jointly and severally the 24 burgessesduring life, so that they should well behave themselves inthat office.That the body should be called by the name of " the Name,bailiffs and citizens of the city of Lichfield," and by thatname might plead and be impleaded.And that they should have a common seal. ^^^^*4£1}54 LITCHFIELD.^^« V^- That the bailiffs should have and hold by themselves, or1547. one of them, and their steward weekly, on ThursdayCourt, within the city, one court, which should be a court of record: — and should have authority to hold pleas, concerningall actions, suits or plaints, as well real and personal asmixed, for any matter arising within the same city, &c., withCoventry. the like judgments as in the city of Coventry.That the bailiffs and citizens, and their successors, for tieimprovement of the city and the relief of their burdens, shouldFines, have all manner of fines and amercements of the court atfee-farm, rendering 20^. a year at the Exchequer, by thehands of the sheriff of the county of Stafford.That they should be able to receive and hold, to themand their successors for ever, lands and tenements of theyearly value of 20/. — so that they be not held of the kii^in capite, nor by knight's service ; the statute against puttingMortmain, jjmjg Qp tenements in mortmain, or any other statute or actheretofore made or published to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.That /or the improvement of the city and the common wealof the same, and to the end that the bailiffs and citizens mightattend more quietly to their affairs, they, their heirs, and suchbiding, cessors, as long as they should be abiding in the city or thesuburbs thereof, should not be put with foreign men in anyNot on assises, juries, or inquisitions, which, by reason of the generic.nients or trespasses, or other foreign business to be transacted,happening out of the city, before whatsoever justicesor other of the king's ministers, should have arisen, exceptLets. the suit of courts and leets of the lords of them, or any ofthem, of whom they, or any of them, hold their lands ortenements, or at whose leets they, or any of them, owe suit,by reason of their residence.ForHgnort. And that foreign men should not be put with them, theinhabit inhabitants, in any assises, juries, or inquisitions, to be takenby reason of lands or tenements being in the city or thesuburbs thereof, or of trespasses, contracts, or other internalbusiness whatsoever, which should have arisen in the samecity, or the suburbs thereof; nor should they sustain anyLITCHFIELD. II55merriment, fine, issue, or other loss thereby, for disappears vi.once with foreigners or in foreign courts about such suits, 1547.actions, or prosecutions ; but those assises, juries, and inquisitions,concerning those things which should be arising inthe city, or the suburbs thereof, should be done by the menof and in the same ' city, or the suburbs thereof, only :unless those things touch the king, or his ministers, or thecommonalty of the city, or any other reasonable cause shouldintervene wherefore it ought to be done otherwise.That the bailiffs, and their successors for the time being, Justices,during the pleasure of the king and his heirs, should be thejustices to keep the peace within the city ; and should executeevery thing concerning whatsoever offences and other matters,happening within the liberty of the city, as any justices ofthe peace in any county in England might lawfully do, bythe statutes and laws of the kingdom of England.And to the end that the limits of the city, and the suburbs Perambu-and precincts thereof, might be better and more trulyknown, they might, from time to time, on the 1st day ofMay, yearly, make a perambulation, by the view of the sheriff ^^^^^'^of the county of Stafford for the time being, or his undersheriff,as necessity should require. And that the limitsof the same city and the suburbs thereof, should be as ample,as in times past they were reputed and known to extendthemselves, &c.It will be remembered, that Lichfield* is not mentionedas a borough in Domesday, nor have we any document Domesday,relative to it till this time: at least as far as regards its municipalprivileges. It would seem, therefore, that this wasthe first charter which gave it municipal rights and an exclusivejurisdiction — particularly as no charter is recited, jurisdictioncontained by inspeximus, in this of Edward VI.^ Lichfield originally belonged to the church, and therefore was no doubt underecclesiastical jurisdiction. It Was a considerable place, before and during the SaxonHeptarchy ; and the only bishop's see in Mercia. It had a bishop in 658, and wasfor a time an archbishoprick — but when the see was transferred by William theConqueror to Chester, Lichfield dwindled into comparative insignificance, whichmay account for the absence of all documents relative to its municipal rights, withinthe periods material to our inquiry.4e21156 LITCHFIELD.^^' V^' We have before observed upon the unfounded assumption1647. that this was an ancient borough,* as the ground for theburgage tenure right being adopted in it. From this charterit will appear also, that there is less reason for applying thatright to Lichfield than almost any other place.The subsequent charter of Queen Mary, making Litch-County of field a county of itself y seems to have been granted, likeIlSClI.other charters of the same description, for the purpose ofexempting the city from the interference of the sheriff ofthe county, with respect to the ordinary purposes of hisoffice, and amongst others, for the collection of the fee-farm:and probably also with a view of excluding him from interferingat the perambulation, which the former charter recognizedhis power of doing.It might at first sight be thought, that the terms, " meninhabitants, and resiants," imported different classes of persons; but if they are considered, with reference to the languagewe have seen used in ancient charters, and the tautologoushabit of composition of the period in which thischarter was granted — of which it appears to be a fair specimen— such a construction of these words will be readilyabandoned. The ancient charters, as has been shown, wereordinarily granted to " the men of the place ;" which in theearly periods of our history could not have produced anyambiguity. But when population increased — when the boundariesof the boroughs became partly intermixed with thesurrounding suburbs — and the facilities of moving from townto town began to raise questions, as to the place of birth orresidence of individuals — it was necessary to make to sogeneral a term as " homines" some addition, which shouldexpressly connect them with habitation ; the qualifying ex-inhabitpression therefore of " inhabitants," is here subjoined tohomines," which would include every inhabitant householderin the place, contributing to its burdens, by pairingscot and bearing lot ; for whose benefit the charter was in-Resiants. tended. The word " resiants," is no more than the peculiarLeet. appropriate expression for the suitors at the court leet — in-• Vide ante, p. 258.LITCHFIELD. 1167eluding, in fact, the same class of persons ; who, after they ^^' ^^'had been duly sworn and enrolled at that court, were, strictly 1547.speaking, the burgesses of the place.The passage in Lord Coke, already quoted,* stating thatall cities were anciently boroughs," is strongly confirmedby this charter, in which the term " burgess" is used, as Burgesses,convertible with " citizen. "f Citizens.And so generally is the term " burgess" applied, that thereare some cities in which the term citizen has never beenused in the charters. Thus the charters to Bristol, even tothe reign of Queen Anne, are grants to " the mayor, burgesses,and commonalty."It is too obvious, that " the men of the city" must be ^^®°j °^***®synonymous with citizens, to require a word of furtherexplanation.The expression, " citizens inhabiting within the city," has Inhabitingbeen taken as raising an inference, that there might becitizens who were not inhabiting there. But as the charteris expressly granted to the " inhabitants" and " resiants," itseems too strained a construction, to draw from this expression,a deduction so much at variance with the intention ofthe charter : particularly as they are capable of the sameexplanation which has been given above to the former terms :and with reference to the general object of the grant, itwould appear to be much more consistent with its otherprovisions, to construe the words as implying that inhabitancywas necessary for every citizen, before he was entitledto enjoy any of the privileges of the city, or executeany functions within it.The term " burgess," which is introduced into this charter. Burgess,from the particular manner in which it is used, as applied tothe 24, might, by a strict literal construction, be made tointroduce some confusion ; but taken, as we have suggestedbefore, with reference to the general intent of the charter,it seems capable of this plain construction — that it isused as synonymous with " citizens ; " and that, therefore,the clause for the election of the 24, gives to the wholeSee also the West Love Case, pres. p. 8. t See before, p. 48.1168 LITCHFIELD.^i)lL* body of citizens power to elect 24 out of themselves, who are1M7. to be the burgesses for the rule of the city : not that theyalone are to be the burgesses of the city — but that they areto be the 24 burgesses selected for its government.It is no slight proof of the extensive power of the crown atRemoval this period, that the bailiffs and the 24 bui^esses are assumedin the charter to be removable at the mandate of the king —stronger measures than would now be considered constitutional.For we have already seen, that a clause to thateffect in a charter, has been decided to be illegal; andit may be doubted, whether at law an appointment to suchan office, under a charter which contains these or similarwords, would not be treated as an appointment quamdiu sebene gesserit.*The clause relative to the Statute of Mortmain, seemsalso, strictly speaking, to be founded upon the dispensingpower then claimed by the crown, and acquiesced in by thepeople ; although, after the Revolution, when the principlesof our constitution were canvassed and better understoodthat power was justly disputed.The express limitation of the exemption from foreignAbiding, juries, to those only who should be " abiding' in the city,is another decisive passage to show the intention of the crownto grant the privileges of the charter solely to the " inhabitants"and resiants: — the term abiding, being in fact, atranslation of the Latin term, " manentes," used in the chartersfrom the earliest time to denote inhabitancy. It maydoubtless be said, that even this passage raises an inferencethat there might be citizens who were not abiding within thecity. But were such a construction adopted, hypercriticalas it is, still it would not militate against the general necessityof residence ; because, a citizen might absent himselffor a short time from the city, for some necessary andtemporary purpose, keeping nevertheless his domicile withinthe city, and intending to return there, who would still continuea citizen, and be entitled to some, though not to all, ofthe privileges. So that the words may be explained even by• 2 Sid. 49 ; Rolle's Ab. 456, p. 4 ; 3 Dyer, 333, in notes ; 1 Vent. 82; 1 Sid. 462.LITCHFIELD. 1159this construction, without justifying the general doctrine of ^^^ VI.non-residence. This partial and temporary absence from a Absence,place where the person was enrolled as a resiant, was admittedby the common law, without the party being obliged togive pledges in the new place to which he went ; unless heactually removed his domicile from the one place to another,or remained in the new place of his residence a year anda day.With respect to that part of this clause which refers to thesuit due from the citizens to the lords under whom theyhold, strictly speaking, the holding of another lord in adifferent place, though it made the individual subject to hisjurisdiction at his court-baron; and for the purposes ofhomage, fealty, and service ; did not make him subject to theleet there : — that suit he owed only where he resided. This is Leet.imported by the latter part of this clause. But if that isthe law, it will be said, this part of the clause shows thatthe reliance of the citizens might be within the leet of thelord of whom they held; and it will therefore be inferredthat they might reside out of the city. It must be admitted,that this passage appears to create some difficulty in thatrespect. But still, probably, not sufficient to induce theconsiderate reader to adopt the inference of non-residence, soinconsistent with the general nature of this, and all othergrants. The passage may perhaps be explained, by supposingthat the leet here referred to, was the leet of somelord within the city; a supposition strengthened by thefact, that this exemption is not to be met with in othercharters, and therefore, is probably to be accounted for, bythe peculiar circumstances of this particular place.As Coventry is repeatedly referred to in this charter to Coventry.Lichfield, it may be material to observe, that that city hadbefore this time an extensive jurisdiction, which was in the6th year of this reign confirmed by a charter of Edward VL, ^^2.which contained a non-intermittent clause, as to all otherofficers and ministers of the crown.1 160 NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE.Edw. VI.NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE.*^^" A charter of the first year of this reign to the merchantadventurers of NewccLsth-upon^Tyne, gives them the powerAdmission. ^f admission in distinct terms ; and grants to those of thatJdven^"* body, inhabiting within the town, that they might be aturners. society and body corporate ; and appointing also a governor,12 assistants, and two guardians, all of whom are describedas inhabiting within the town ; — which expression is repeatedthroughout the whole charter, with reference to the fraternity.The annual election of the governor and guardians is alsoprovided for, as well as the election of those officers, and theassistants, on any vacancies.Admission. Afterwards the power to which we have referred, is givento the governor, the assistants, and the society, who arepresent, or the major part of them, to admit, make, andordain, into their society, whomsoever, and as many as theythink fit of the king's subjects, inhabiting or to inhabitwithin the town, for their lives ; unless for reasonable causethey are removed.Other officers are provided ; and the usual corporatepowers, and particularly that of making bye-laws, are alsogiven.But it appears a singular circumstance connected with thischarter, that although it is an express grant of incorporation,in other respects resembling the usual charters of thisdescription, it does not contain the customary clause givingName, a Corporate name.However as the body is undoubtedly created a corporation,and the having a corporate name is essential to it, althoughnone is expressly given, such a grant must be implied.As the charter in the commencement of the recital, speaksof the body, as called " the merchant adventurers, inhabitingwithin the town and the county of the town of Newcastle" — this being the name they had before the incorporation,and here so distinctly referred to, may be assumedNEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE. 1 161to be that, by which the crown intended the new corporation ^^' ^'^'should be called.The town of Gateshead was, in the seventh year of this Gaw^headreign, by an act of Parliament, severed from the bishoprickof Durham, and annexed to Newcastle-upon-Tyne. But itwas provided, that the inhabitants should continue their inhabitscommon in that bishoprick, and have wood in Gatesheadpark for their reparations. And that the bishop's libertiesshould continue in Newcastle.*This act speaks in express terms of the corporation andbody politic of the town of Newcastle, and the jurisdictionwhich they have over the inhabitants.STAFFORD.We have already seen in our extracts from Domesday ,tthat Stafford was undoubtedly a borough long before thetime of legal memory, and therefore, may properly claim tobe a borough by prescription. But it was not incorporatedtill this reign, when in the third year, it received a charter 1649.giving it that additional privilege, which it is unnecessary ^teJ.to state at greater length.In this reign also there is a record of an arrangement madeunder the common seal, between the twenty-fivety J and theburgesses, in consequence of the twenty-fivety havingusurped some privileges and functions, in which the burgessesclaimed to participate : one of which was, that someof the burgesses should be upon the inquiry at the greatsessions or leet ; and that a burgess should be one of the Leet.chamberlains. Regulations were also made as to foreignersbuying and selling within the town : the inhabitants andcommoners being likewise mentioned in the document.This king also, in the fourth year of his reign, granted a '550.charter to this boroughs which after reciting that the burgessesand their successors had anciently been incorporated,in order to prevent any future ambiguity respecting it, grantedThis statute was repealed, by the first of Mary, sess. 3, chap. 3.t Vide ante, p. 255.t Twenty-fivety, the body consisting of 25— see before, p. 1065.Rot. Pat. p. 9.116-2 STAFFORD.Kdw.vi. that the burgesses and their successors by the name of1550. " Burgesses of the town of Stafford, in the county ofStafford," should be incorporate and one body corporatein name and deed — and giving the usual corporate powers.The charter afterwards proceeds, at considerable length, togrant lands to the burgesses; but it does not make any allusionto the selection of the municipal officers.It is certain that Stafford was a borough by prescription,as we have seen it mentioned as a borough in Domesday.*It is also clear, that it was not incorporated in the reign ofKing Johns for a charter of immunities is then granted tothe burgesses and their heirs. And the ordinances, in thereign of Richard 11. J and Henry VII.,^ support the inference,that Stafford was not then incorporated: — which is alsomuch strengthened by the fact, that a charter of confirmationappears upon the Patent Rolls, in the second year of thisking's reign, which recites the charters of Henry VIII. andthe other preceding kings, but in none of them are there anywords of incorporation : they only repeating and confirmingthe exemptions from suits of shires and hundreds, and theother usual provisions of the early charters.The above charter of Edward VI., therefore, clearly appearsto be the first charter of incorporation : and uponwhat pretence the king could recite that Stafford had beenanciently incorporated, it is impossible to conjecture. Evenstronger terms than these, equally unfounded in fact, will beseen in the subsequent charters of Queen Elizabeth, uponwhich we shall have occasion further to remark.MAIDSTONE.1548. A charter was also granted by Edward VI., in the thirdyear of his reign, to MaidstonCf^^ which commences with arecital, that for many years past the government of the townwas thought to pertain to certain inhabitants , commonly calledthe " Portreeve and brethren of the town of Maidstone," butthat the principles of such government being found insuffi-• Ante, p. 256. t Ante, p. 408. t Ante, p. 751. i Ante, p. lucanPat. 3 Edward VI. p. 1.MAIDSTONE. 1 163cent in law, the king was desirous to incorporate and erect ^^^- ^^-into a body politic the inhabitants of the town for their com- 1548.mon advantage. [i.hSuThe king then creates one Thomas Hiley, described as anhonest man and an inhabitant y to be mayor — who with 12 Mayor,other inhabitants are to be jurats for their lives, if it should Jura.seem good to the mayor, jurats, and commonalty.The charter further directs that the inhabitants should beincorporated and created a body politic, by the name of the"mayor, jurats, and commonalty of the town of Maidstone,in the county of Kent." That the jurats should yearly Annualassemble and nominate two men there, being jurats, to theother persons, inhabitants in the town and parish, having landsand tenements of freeholds in the same town and parish intheir own proper right, for term of their life at least, so thatthey might elect one of the two jurats to be mayor, and that of Mayor,the mayor, when elected, should take his oath in the sameform as the mayor of Canterbury. That in case of the death Canterburyor removal of any jurat, the mayor and remaining jurats Vacanciesmight elect another person, then inhabiting within the town,to be a jurat, for the term of his life ; and that if any one ofthe jurats should commit any notorious offence, &c. then Removal,the mayor and the other jurats and commonalty mightexpel him.The usual corporate powers are also given to the mayor,jurats, and commonalty, of purchasing lands : that theyshould have view of frankpledge o( b\1 and singular the inha- ^!^^'bitants and residents within the town and parish of Maidstone,to be held before the mayor twice in every year ; thatthey should have assise of bread: and jurisdiction in realand personal actions as is used in the city of Canterbury, canterburyThat they should have all fines — a weekly market — fouryearly fairs — ^and a court of pie powder.Certain lands and tenements are also granted, and thatthe mayor should be clerk of the market.That the mayor, jurats, and their successors, and thegreater part of the persons dwelling in the same town, hav Dwelling.1164 MAIDSTONE.^^' ^'^* ing lands or tenements of freehold as aforesaid, might1548. have power and authority to make laws, statutes, and ordi-Bye-laws. dances for the common utility and wholesome government ofthe persons being in the town, and to change the same whento them it should seem necessary, in as ample a manner asCanterbury the mayor, aldermen, and commonalty of the city of Canterburymight lawfully do, Ice, tec.Upon this charter it should be observed, that the firstofficers who are appointed are all described as *' inhabitants*'and that they are all expressly incorporated, under thename of '' commonalty ; " and as nothing has since occurredmaterially to change the nature of that incorporation, theinhauunts inhabitants must be considered as the persons really formingthe corporate body. As no means are pointed out bythe charter of selecting any portion of the inhabitants fromthe rest as burgesses, it is clear that there could not be anyright of selecting any portion ; but the king by his grant leftit to the common law to define who of the inhabitants shouldenjoy the privileges, which it readily does, by ascertaining^^^ in the court leet who are the free resiants, as householderspaying scot and bearing lot, and consequently entitled to beenrolled and sworn.The annual election of mayor, as well as the elections onvacancies, are all to be made by the inhabitants ; and thepersons who are declared to be eligible are likewise describedby that term.Upon this charter it should also be further observed, thatit expressly grants a view of frankpledge ; and that a courtFrank ^f /^^^ ^^^ view of frankpledge is still held in the borough,at which the list of the householders, according to the clearlaw of the leet, which we have so fully explained, is calledover; and the householders ought, as resiants, undoubtedlyto be enrolled and sworn there ; although the Court ofKing's Bench, in the recent case of Rex v. Mayor andCorporation of Maidstone,* held, that the law in this respecthad become obsolete; and therefore refused a mans6 Dowling and Ryl. 354.maidstone-CHESTER. 1165camus to administer the oath to certain householders who E«lw. VI.had attended the court and tendered themselves to be swornand enrolled.It is a clear principle of law, that no part of it which is forthe public good can become obsolete by disuse. And as we obsolete,have shown how important a branch of it this practice ofthe court leet was ever esteemed, having been repeatedlythe direct object of legal provision, from the earliest periodof the Saxon laws, through all the succeeding reigns ; andnot only the subject of general enactments but also ofspecial charters — it seems difficult upon principle to accountfor this decision of the Court ; upon which however we arenot desirous of making further comment, but leave the readerto form his own opinion.In the fifth year of this same reign, two years after the 1^51.granting of this charter, there are entries in the corporationbook of the admission of freemen ; some of them are entered as belonging to particular compares, the latter apparentlyfor the purpose of trading. •Two years afterwards, the return of members for this «,^^-borough was disputed on the question, whether Maidstonewas entitled to have burgesses or not ; and the charter wasdirected to be perused, and the burgesses to absent themselvesfrom the House. What was the final result of theinquiry does not appear, but it was obvious that the chartercould not afford any information on the subject, as in factthe return of members is not adverted to in it : — but Maidstonedid not return a member either during this or thefollowing reign.CHESTER.In the first year of Edward VI., there appears in the 1^7.journals of the House of Commons* of the 16th of November,an entry of the great Bill of Chester for divers libertieswhich was read a second time on the 12th of November,and a third time on the 21st of the same month.This no doubt carried into further effect the provisions1 Journ. p. 2.1 1(53 STRATFORD-UPON-AVON.^"^^ which we have seen in the reign of Henry VIIl.,* for theregulation and direction of that important place.STRATFORD-UPON-AVON.Before we close our few extracts from the charters of thisreign, it may be desirable, as a specimen of a grant, to a placewhich was intended to have an exclusive jurisdiction, thoughit does not appear to have ever arrived at the dignity of aparliamentary borough, to insert an extract from a charter1653. of the seventh year of this reign to StratfordruponrAvonrY —which recites that the borough was an ancient borough, inwhich a guild was theretofore founded, and endowed withdivers lands and tenements, out of the rents, revenues, andSchool, profits whereof, a certain free grammar-school for the educationof boys there was maintained and supported; andAlms also a certain alms-house, consisting of 24 poor people thereintobe kept, was likewise maintained and supported ; and aBridge, certain great stone bridge called '' Stratford bridge," builtover the Avon, was from time to time kept up and repaired : —(f uiui db which guild was then dissolved, and the lands and tenementssolved.thereof had lately come into the king's hands,inhabitants That the inhabitants of the borough of Stratford, fromtime immemorial, have had and enjoyed divers franchises,liberties, &c., by reason and pretence of the guild, and bycharters, grants, and confirmations of ancient time made bythe kings of England to the masters and brethren of theguild and otherwise ; which the inhabitants of the boroughcould not then hold and enjoy, because the guild was dissolved: — ^by means whereof it was likely that the borough,and the government thereof, would fall into a worse state,from time to time, if a remedy thereto was not speedily provided: — whereupon the inhabitants of the borough hadhumbly besought the king, that he would extend his graceand favour to them for the bettering of the borough, and ofthe government thereof; and for the supporting of the greatcharges which they from time to time were bound and oughtto sustain and perform ; and that he would esteem them,• Vide ante, p. 1139. t Vide U East's Reports, 348.MUNICIPAL DOCUMENTS. 1167the inhabitants, worthy to be made, reduced, and erected ^-^^' v^*into a body corporate. 1553.The king then proceeds to grant to the inhabitants of the lu^abitanuborough of Stratford-upon-Avon, that it should be a freeborough for ever hereafter, &c., and incorporates them by thename of the " bailiff and bui^esses of the borough," &c.The king afterwards grants that the circuit, precincts, and Bounds.jurisdiction of the borough should extend to the like boundsas they had done from time immemorial, or at any timeafterwards, or before.MUNICIPAL DOCUMENTS.We now proceed to extract a few documents from the Boroughs,records of some of the boroughs at this period, which mayserve in some degree to illustrate our present inquiry.There are rolls extant relative to Stockbridge from the Stock-endof Edward VI. to the 33rd of Elizabeth, throughout \^which there is frequent reference made to the rents of the 1590.free tenants ;" — and numerous instances of the mentionof the "burgages" and their rents — and some houses burgages,and lands are stated to be held freely ; — whilst others havenot that addition. Some tenants are described as holdingthe premises themselves; — and others as holding premisesin the occupation of other persons.There is also a list of persons holding lands which are notcalled burgages.There are also the following entries of a later date, from Presentsit will be collected, that as they are presentments jurors,made by the jurors for the town, they were clearly proceed Courtkings at the court leet: and they mention at that courtstrangers who come into the borough upon petition :" — whichserves further to illustrate the term " stranger," as one notborn, nor permanently residing before in the place; butallowed to come there upon his petition to that effect : — entirelycorresponding with the bye-laws we have before seenof the Cinque Ports ; and with the doctrine relative to thispoint, which we have throughout our remarks enforced aswell by principle, as by precedent.1168 Stourbridge.^^' ^^' At a court of the borough of this date, the Juror* for our1702. lady the queen are mentioned with the homage: (uponwhich 36 are named ; and at the bottom is added ** sworn')Strangers. The jurors, upon their oath present that no stranger ordenizen who shall come into this borough upon petition, orby sufferance, shall give any vote in the choice of bailiff,constable, or burgess. And if any bailiff shall return anyperson so voted for by such stranger, he shall forfeit of hisgoods and chattels, 50/.1703-4. Two years afterwards, there are the following presentments: —The jurors aforesaid, upon their oath present, that noStrangers, stranger who shall come into this borough upon petition,shall give any vote in the choice of bailiff, constable, orburgess. And if any bailiff shall return any person so votedfor by such stranger, he shall forfeit 50Z.Freedom Also, that Robert Tarrant hath taken up his freedom bytide. servitude ; whence happened to the bailiff for a relief, 6d. ; —and he is admitted.Also, that W. Searle hath taken up his freedom by servitude; whence happened to the bailiff for a relief, 4d. ; — he isadmitted.After which, the items of the rents of assise, and of theburgages, free tenants, and the tenants of the several burgages, arealso entered.And there are presentments of many concealments.These presentments at the court leet, of persons as havingApprentice up their freedom by servitude, are very striking. And'*^^* although similar entries are not found, it is not improbable,that had other presentments been preserved, whichthey seldom were, they would have contained similar findingsby the juries.Court That such a fact should be presented at the court leet isLeet.altogether consistent with the Saxon laws, and those of ourearly kings after the Norman Conquest ; and is also consistentwith the grounds upon which we have placed thefreedom by apprenticeship:* but it is unconnected, if not• Videante, p. 722et762.Stourbridge.altogether inconsistent with any notion of corporate rights ^^^' Visorprivileges.It must be remembered, that the burgesses of Stockbridgewere mentioned in Domesday; — that it has never been incog Domesdayported — that it has still a court leet — and that the election Not incogmembers of Parliament has ever been exercised by theinhabitant householders paying scot and lot. The result of ^^?i^"**which is — that although this place was never incorporated,still apprentices became burgesses by servitude; — and thatthey were presented for that purpose at the court leet, whichthey would not have been had they not been resiants. Andconsidering how the right of election has been exercised, itseems clear, that the burgesses of Stockbridge, whose existencewas recognized at so early a period, were the freeinhabitant householders:— paying scot and lot — presented —enrolled — and sworn — cw resiants — at the court leet.1553.SANDWICH.The same doctrine is also established with respect toSandwich by the following entry from the books of thatborough, in the sixth year of Edward VL: —No man to have a voice in the election, nor to enterinto the election among the free barons, but if he be agree Baronsbaron — indweller — householder — of the same town; on painof 40s. y to be levied to the use of the said town. All mannerof elections and common assemblies in this town to be madeby the barons y indweller Sy and householders of the same town,and by none other."This entry also most clearly confirms the doctrine we havebefore contended for, that the^we^, and all payments of thatdescriptions went into a common purse, which belonged generallyto the public, and was properly to be accounted for to the wholebody of the burgesses.WELLS.In the books of Wells, in the course of this reign, two i546.persons are disfranchised ; the entry being ** sunt a societe Disfran-** exonerate'*4 PPublicstock.chased.1170 WELLS.Edw. VI. And in the third year of Edward VI., it was agreed, by1548. the assent of the burgesses, that no burgess do hereafter dwellDwelling, jm J abide out of the city above the space of one whole year,Scot and bearing no scot or lot \ or to lose the freedom and liberty ofthe city, unless licensed by the master.This regulation was in entire accordance with the commonlaw — allowing for temporary absence, provided scot and lotwas still paid, the domicile of the party continuing in Wells ;or even a residence elsewhere, if it was for a reasonablecause, allowed by the governing officer of the place, who wasto give his license for it.In similar accordance with the common law, no person wasStrangers, to entertain strangers without license, nor with license, butsuch as they would be accountable for : — for by that meansthey might, after a year and a day, become permanent inha-bitants—or the borough might be made responsible for theiracts; and therefore the persons entertaining them, are requiredto be accountable for them.Sons. Sans of burgesses are also admitted in the same manner,as appeared in the former entries. And there is to be agathering amongst the burgesses and inhabitants beinghouseholders, amongst other public charges, for the supportof the conduit and the shambles.Notwithstanding the common law, and these agreementsand ordinances in confirmation of it, yet non-resident burgesseswere for a long time admitted and sanctioned inWells.1662. The Duke of Somerset had so entire a control over theHouse of members returned to the House of Commons, that it wasCommons. . /• i - ^ • • n ■»not necessary for him to exercise any influence over theelections; but when the Duke of Northumberland hadremoved his rival, the influence of the deceased Somersetstill prevailed in the House ; and Northumberland, findingthem disinclined to further his measures, was constrainedto summon a new Parliament ; and in order to secure theelection of persons more compliant with his views, sentletters directly to the electors, commanding them to returnWELLS. 1171the persons nominated to them; this, being the most general ^^' ^'J-and extensive interference with elections which had as yet 1552.occurred, requires to be marked by the insertion of one ortwo of those letters, which may suffice to show their generalnature.CECIL PAPERS.In the fifth year of this reign, in the Cecil papers, amongstthe Lansdowne MSS., we find the following letters :* —Trusty and well beloved, we greet you well, forasmuch aswe have, for divers good considerations, caused a suppositionof a Parliament to be made, as we doubt not but yeunderstand the same by our writs sent in that behalf to you,we have thought it meet, for the furtherance of such causes asare to be propounded in the said Parliament, for the commonwealof our realm, that in the election of such persons asshall be sent to the Parliament, either from our counties asknights thereof, or from our cities and boroughs, there begood regard had that the choice be made of men of gravityand knowledge in their own counties and towns, fit for theirunderstanding and qualities to be in such a great council.And, therefore, since some part of the proceeding thereinshall rest in you, by virtue of your office, we do, for thegreat desire we have that this our Parliament may beassembled with personages out of every county of wisdomand experience at this present, recommend two gentlemen ofthe same county, being well furnished with all good qualitiesto be the knights of that shire ; that is to say. Sir WilliamDrury, and Sir Henry Bedingfeld, knights to whomwe would ye should signify this our meaning, to the intentthey may prepare themselves to enter this office, beingfor the weal of their country. And likewise our pleasure,will, and command to you is, that ye shall give notice, aswell to the freeholders of your county, as to the citizens andburgesses of any city or borough, which shall have any ofour writs by your direction, for the election of citizens andburgesses, that our pleasure and commandment is, that• Cecil Papers, 1552—1559, MS. Lands. No. 3, p. 19.4f21172 CECIL PAPERS.Edw. VI. they shall choose and appoint, as nigh as they possibly may,1562. men of knowledge and experience within the counties,cities, or boroughs ; so as by the assembly of such we may,by God's goodness, provide, through the advice and knowledgeof the said Parliament, for the redress of the lacks inour common weal ; and that ye shall, at or before the day ofthe election, communicate this our purpose to the gentlemen,and such other our subjects of the same, being freeholdersof that county, as shall seem requisite, so as that they mayboth see our consideration and care for the weal of the sameshire, and our good memory of these too persons wkam wehave jutted unto you.Your's," &c.The like letter for Sir Richard Cotton, knight, to be knightof Hampshire ; mutatis mutandis ut sequitur.'' At this present we recommend to you, and to the gentlemen,and all other our freeholders of the same county, ourright trusty and well-beloved counsellor. Sir Richard Cotton,knight, comptroller of our house, one who we need not tocontend, being for his place with us, of no less knowledgethan authority, and in that county having also such experience,as is requisite for one that shall in our said Parliamenthave always consideration to the weal of the same shire ;and therefore our pleasure is, that ye shall, at or before theday of the election, communicate this our purpose to, &c.of so fit a person for this office. And for the rest we doubtnot, but ye will, seeing our consideration herein, order thatthe place'may be furnished laudably, and as it becometh."Letter to Sir Wm, Cecil,*"Our humble duties premised, your mastership's letter,sentby your servant, Mr. Williams, we have received, perceivingthereby your good will of long time borne, and now per-Grantham, formed to the town of Cfranthaniy that even as in all otheryour worthiness ye have won unto yourself an immortalfame, so in this ye have deserved a perpetual memory, and• Cecil Papers. 1552—1559, MS. Ends. No. 3, p. 38.CECIL PAPERS. 1173such thanks at our hands that we must needs accompt our ^^* v^*selves so much bound unto your mastership that we can 1552.never be able to deserve your goodness, but evermore to wishsome occasion that your mastership might have some trialand taste of our good wills. Your desire in your said letter,touching the appointing of one of our burgesses, we havemost gladly accepted and granted, and have requested thesheriff to repair unto you for the nomination of the person.For the other, before the receipt of any of your letters, atthe special suit of the Earl of Rutland, we have agreed tocontinue our ancient burgess, Sir Edward Warner, knight ;from which agreement, made at the instance of so noble aman, we cannot with our honesties digress ; so that we be notableto perform your request made in the behalf of Mr. hussy.It may further please you, sir, that we know the conveyancefor the assurance of the school will ask a charge,we would be glad to know the same, that we might provide 'and send up money therefore. Thus, as we are bound dailyto pray for the continuance of your health, so we do mostheartily wish the increase of your honour.From Grantham, the 8th day of February, anno 1552.** By your mastership's own assured to command, thealdermen and his brethren of Ghrantham."*In the seventh year of this reign, there was an assise of 1653.fresh force in the hustings at the Guildhall of London beforethe sheriffs, who were the judges there in a case betweenPanel plaintiff, and Moore and the corporation of mercer'sdefendants — wherein the plaintiff, as parson of the churchof Honey Lane, claimed a cellar under the same church : —Moore appeared in person, and the corporation by bailiff,whose warrant was demanded ; he had none ; and it wasobjected that they could not appear by bailiff without alicense. This is in the present day considered as clear law :although in this case the point seems to have been muchdiscussed on divers days, authorities being cited on both sides,and the opinion of the judges asked : — as if the doctrine ofVide etiam, Hume, chap. 35. f Plod. p. 89, 91.1174 CORPORATIONS.Edw. VI. corporations was not at that time folly understood, although1563. they had then become very general.IRELAND.It only remains, after the few charters we have extractedin this reign, to add a short minute of those which occur inIreland at this period.DutiiD. Dublin received a grant of incorporation in the secondyear;* and we apprehend that it was the first time thatthese privileges were granted to that city, and engrafted upontheir original constitution.It does not recite the charters previously granted byJohn, Edward I., Edward II., Edward III., and HenryVIII.; for they were confirmed by a separate charter :+but commences by stating, that at the supplication of themayor, bailiffs commonalty , and citizens the king, to extendhis favour towards them, by the advice of his uncle hadgranted, that of one mayoTy two sheriffs commonalty andIncorpo- citizens, they should be one body incorporate, with perpetualsuccession, &c.County of That the then present bounds of the city should be one incorporatecounty of itself: and from the county of Dublinbe exempt. That the sheriffs should be elected, and remainin office as the bailiffs had hitherto been accustomed ; andshould have within the county of the city the powers that allother sheriffs had ; and that no other sheriff should intromit.Liberty is then given to the mayor, sheriffs, commonalty,and citizens, to alienate all the lands or rents which theyBurgage, held in fee, burgage, socage, or by knight's service, fromthe king or any other person.With respect to this charter of Dublin it should be ob-london.served, that it is granted, like that to London which wehave quoted in this reign, *' to the mayor, bailiffs, commonaltyand citizens;" and as their former charters were inprecise conformity with those of Bristol, and in this instancethe peculiar expression adopted for London is re-echoed forDublin, it seems impossible not to infer that the rights,• Pat. p. 6. t Rot. Conf. p. 4, n. 4.IRELAND. 1176privileges, and franchises of the Irish boroughs, were the ^^^' ^^'same as those in England; particularly as the privileges 1548.given by this grant to Dublin correspond so generally withthe many English, Scotch, and Welsh charters we havebefore quoted.The grants of Richard II. and Henry VIII. to Galway Galway.were in the third year of Edward VI. confirmed to the mayor,bailiffs, burgesses and commonalty ;* — and we find also uponthe Patent Rolls of the fifth year of this reigns a grant from 1551the king for the foundation of a college in Galway, which commenceswith a recital, that the mayor, bailiffs, burgesses, andcommonalty of the town of Galway (much in the same languageas the London and Dublin grants) had acquainted him thatthe pope had usurped his kingly authority as head of thechurch — and had appropriated certain rectories, vicarages,and tythes, belonging to the church of St. Nicholas in thetown of Galway, from the profits of which nine priests weremaintained : and that they considering such an act unlawful,in consequence of Henry VIII. having abolished the pope'sauthority, therefore petitioned the king, as head of thechurch, to rectify it.The king then declares these acts of the pope to be unlawful,and changes the church of St. Nicholas into a college,and incorporates the same — giving the property which had incorporealin possession of the nine priests towards its support.In the sixth year of this reign, the king, by a charter ^f^^o^'which recites, that the burgesses, commonalty, and inhabit inhabitantsof the town of Fiddert,% had supplicated him to extendhis favour towards them, proceeds to grant, that the bur Incorpo-gesses and commonalty should be one body incorporate; andthat by the name of one superior, one reeve, bui^esses, andcommonalty," should have perpetual succession, &c. &c.That they might yearly elect from themselves one superiorand one reeve.The charter (which is very concise) expressly grants allthe privileges, profits, amercements, &c., which the superior,• Rot. Conf. Q, 9. t Pat. 5 Edward VI. t Fethart.IRELAND.^^« VI' reeve, burgesses, and commonalty of Kilkenny then enjoyed:*Kilkenny, which place also received a charter at this period, recitingthat of Henry VIII., but as it principally relates to the propertyof the town — and does not contain any provisionmaterial to our purpose, we refrain from extracting it.1-Waterford Waterford likewise had a charter granted to it, confirmingthose which had been previously given by Henry VIII.,Henry VII., Edward IV., Henry VI., and King JohnThe charters of Edward I., Edward II., Edward III., RichardII., and Henry VII., are confirmed to the citizens ofCork. CorksReporte. Response likewise received a confirmation of the charterswhich had been previously granted by Edward III., RichardII., and Henry VIII.||From these charters to Ireland, we find that the doctrineand practice of incorporation extended itself in that countrymuch in the same manner as it had spread in England ; forthe charter to Dublin is one of incorporated whilst that toGalway is merely a confirmation, although a corporation wasabout the same time created in that place. Fiddlers was incorporated,but Corks and Response, merely received chartersof confirmation.CONCLUSION.These documents close the reign of the young, the amiable,and accomplished Edward VI.: — a period which throws butlittle light on the subject of our inquiry. The prerogative ofthe crown was at that time at its greatest undisputed height. —The commissions which were granted at the beginning of thereign, expressly affirmed that all manner of authority andjurisdiction — as well ecclesiastical as civil — was originallyderived from the crown — a doctrine, however unpalatable atthe present day, undoubtedly true in its literal meaning.The authority given to the protector and his council to executewhatever they might deem fit for the public service —• Pal.6Edw. VI. p. 4.t Pal. 6Edw.VI.p.9.t Rot. Conf. 2 Ed. VI. p. 2, n. 2.§ Rot. Conf. 2 Ed. VI. p. 3, n. I.II Rot. Conf. 2 Ed. VI. p. 4.0.5.CONCLUSION. 1177and the license yielded to the king of making laws for the ^^^' ^^'ecclesiastical government of the country — were certainlyconcessions too great for the legislature to make to thecrown ; for in a constitution so balanced and limited as thatof England fortunately is, such legislative powers to be investedin the executive, is a palpable anomaly.The dispensing power also in effect gave the king nearlythe same authority as the legislature, and this was exercisedalmost without control. The complete ascendancy of theexecutive over the Parliament was marked in almost everypart of this short reign ; and prevented, as we have observedbefore, any direct encroachment on the municipal privilegesof the cities and boroughs, which therefore remained nearlyin their original state ; and we may venture with confidenceto conclude our observations on this period by assertingagain, that nothing had occurred up to this time to interferewith the doctrine, that throughout England the burgesseswere the free inhabitant householders paying scot and lot, andsworn and enrolled at the court leet.PHILIP AND MARY.The reign of Philip and Mary, as far as regards the subjectof our inquiry, so much resembles, in a considerableportion of it, that of Edward VI., that but a few prefatoryremarks will be necessary to introduce the short extracts weshall make in this period. The continued acquiescence ofthe House of Commons in the wishes and projects of thecrown, still rendered any interference with them unnecessary; and as it was obvious, from the commencement of thisreign, that a majority of the commons would be obsequiousto Mary's designs, we cannot be much surprised that the beginningof her reign should be marked by the parliamentaryrepeal of a great portion of the statutes of her predecessor,and of several even of those of her father.i1178 STATUTES.Philip and Her disposition, however, to supersede the religions tenetswhich had been so lately introduced, called forth greateropposition than was anticipated, and led to a dissolution ofthe Parliament. But still the acquiescence of the electorsrendered any interference with their rights unnecessary ; andwe shall find, that usurpation and abuse had as yet no commencement,as there was no cause for them.STATUTES.1553. Without further preface, therefore, we would shortlyobserve, that in the first of Mary, after repealing some of theCap. 5. provisions of the last reign, the fifth chapter relates to thelimitation of prescription in certain cases, and in the fourthCap. 9. section mentions bodies politic and corporate ; and the ninthchapter makes further provision for the corporation of physiciansin London.Cap. 7. The seventh chapter of the third session of the first of Mary,relative to the making of cloth, speaks again of corporatetowns and market towns, and enacts, that every personinYiwXnAng inhabiting in any cities, boroughs, or towns corporate, orCorporatemarket towns, where cloth-making had been used, mightmake all manner of broad cloths.1654. The first chapter, 1 & 2 Phil. & Mary, touching letters*^* ' patent, to be signed by the queen, confirms all which wereunder the queen's sign manual.Cap. 7. The seventh chapter of the same year provides, that allpersons who then inhabited and dwelt, or thereafter shouldInhabit, inhabit, or dwell in the country, out of any cities or boroughs.Corporate, towns corporate, or market towns, should not sell any waresin such cities, &c. by retail, except in open fairs.But there is a proviso that this act shall not extend to anyperson then dwelling or inhabiting, or thereafter to dwell orinhabit, who should be free of any of the guilds and libertiesof such cities, boroughs, towns corporate, or market towns ;but that so being free, they might sell the same as otherpersons who are free of the cities, &c. And there is also aproviso for those who sell cloth of their own making, and topreserve the liberties of Cambridge and Oxford.STATUTES. 1179This statute, with reference to the history we have before ^ ^1^^^.™*given, as well as to the confused doctrine of the rights of ~~freemen, which afterwards became general, is of importance.It commences with a recital, that the ancient cities,boroughs, towns corporate, and market towns had beenvery populous, and chiefly inhabited by merchants, artificersand handicraftsmen, but that they were likely to come veryshortly to utter destruction, ruin, and decay, because personsdtoeUing in the country not only occupied the arts and mysterieswhere they dwelt and occupied, but came into thecities, &c. to sell their wares : therefore the above provisionswere made to remedy these mischiefs, by a general prohibition; from which those who had been admitted as freemenwere excepted.This enactment had a strong tenda[icy to confirm the distinctionamongst the freemen to which we have beforealluded; viz. that although the bulk of them were admittedaccording to the ancient form and practice, and the originalprinciples of our constitution, as the freemen, or liberi ho Liberimines of the common law; yet others had of later times been readmittedza freemen for the purpose of trading only, of whichmany instances may be found in different boroughs — as Portsmouth,Huntingdon, &c.Nor was this unreasonable; because, as all these provisionswere enacted for the benefit of the cities and towns, and itis a principle of law, that all persons may renounce anybenefit given for their own advantage; if the cities and townsthought fit to admit any persons as freemen in order to Freemenenable them to trade within their districts, which was iix*°*^"®'diminution of their own privileges, no one could complainof their so doing : — but, on the contrary, it was perfectly consistentwith reason, that they should be thus enabled toconcede a partial abandonment of their own rights for theadvantage of others ; particularly when it was by no meansimpossible, that it might be conducive to the advantage oftheir place, whilst the injury they received, might possiblybe of the slightest importance.These, in all probability, were the grounds of this enactment.1554.1 180 STATUTES.Philip ind which, though not intended to have such an effect, was intruth the cause of introducing that confusion with respect todifferent classes of freemen, which it is now extremely difficultto induce any person to attempt the trouble of unravelling.Cap. 8. In the act repealing the provisions against the see apos-Ecclesiastic of Rome, and for the establishment of ecclesiasticalportions. and civil possessions, the application of corporate terms tothose bodies, as in ancient times, appears again to havebeen adopted; and in the 51st, and subsequent sections,spiritual bodies, politic or corporate, are repeatedly mentioned.Cap. 14. The act for the making of satins and fustians in Norwich,inhabitants speaks of the inhabitants in the same manner as we haveseen in previous statutes relative to that place, as well asFree, of persons being made free of that city, and admitted intothe fellowship of that craft, apparently for the purposes ofTrade, trade, as referred to before in the seventh chapter.And we may generally observe, that the statutes of thisreign, which refer to any particular places, as Bridgwater —Halifax — Cambridge — Oxford — all refer to the privileges.Inhabitants benefit, and profit of the inhabitants of those respectiveplaces.1555. The 18th chapter of the 2d & 3d Philip and Mary, re-*^* * fearing to the grants of commissions of the peace, which hadJustices, been made to the mayors, recorders, and other grave menand inhabitants of certain ancient towns corporate, not beingcounties of themselves, and to others; provides, that suchcommissions shall remain good, notwithstanding the grantof any other commission for the conservation of the peace,for any shire, lathe, rape, riding, or wapentake.These observations will close the extracts which it isnecessary to make from the statutes of this period.CHARTERS.Considering the shortness of this reign, many charterswere granted during it, some of which are important fromthe time in which they were conceded, as well as from theCHARTERS.varying constructions which have been put upon them by PhjUp andthe House of Commons,The following is a list of the municipal grants on the .Patent Rolls, at the Rolls Chapel, in the order in whichthey occur.1553. — Ist Mary.Par. 1. BristolPar. 2. Lichfield*AylesburyPar. 3. CheltenhamBuckinghamDoverPar. 5. SudburyMaldonShefibrdPar. 7. LymeBridgwaterWellsPar. 9. HertfordPar. 10. BanburyDerbyPar. 1 1 . BedfordPar. 15. NicheLeinsterLudlowBack ley1553-4-1st and 2d Mary.Par. 3. LymePar. 5. MaldonPar. 8. BostonOxford CollegeBeverleyPar. 9. NorthamptonPar. 10. SouthamptonPar. 1 1 . WarringtonWinchesterPar. 12. Oxford College1554-5.— 2d and 3d Mary.Par. 6. ThankedPar. 7. LauncestonKingston-upon-Thame.sWincantonDunno.Par. 8. Higham FerretsPar. 9. Great YarmouthOxford College1555-6.— 3d and 4th Mary.Par. 2. NorthamptonNewcastle-upon-TyneNewport, alias Launceston.Par. 3. AbridgePar. 6. AbingdonPar. 8. Baliol College, OxfordPar. 1 1 . WinchesterIpswich1556-7 eth and 5th Mary.Par. 5. SouthamptonPar. 10. Lynnee Regis1557-8.— 5th and 6th Mary.HindooChirping CombeLondon• Vide post, p. 1182.1182 Charters.PhUipaiid The charter to Bristol viva one of confirmation — ^that ta: Lichfield was to the following effect : —Lichfield. After Confirming that of Edward VI. it recites, that fbf the^^^' faithful services performed in the time of the rebellion by thebailiffs, burgesses, and citizens, the queen had granted toSteward, them that they might, with their steward or common clerk,have jurisdiction to hold weekly pleas of assise, Sec, withpowers of attachment. — that they should not be impleadedbefore any justices out of the city, concerning any lands, &c.which they hold within it. — that they should have all thefines for its improvement. And there is also a grant of a prison,as in the previous charter of Edward VI., with powers of perambulation.— that the city being then contained within thecounty of Stafford, should thenceforth " be separated distinct, and, in all things entirely divided and exempt from'^ the same county, and be a city by itself, and not parcel ofCounty of " ^^ county of Stafford — but be called, reputed, holden, and'*»«'f- " considered, the county of the city of Lichfield for ever'That the bailiffs, burgesses and citizens, should have onesheriff, and might annually elect from among themselves oneSheriff, burgess of the city to be sheriff; " and every burgess soelected, shall take an oath," &c.Non-intro That no other sheriff should intromit — and that all writsmil.Writs, and mandates should be directed to him, as had been accustomedto the sheriff of the county. A county court is thengranted — and that all the fines should be for the benefit ofthe town.That the bailiffs, citizens, their heirs mid successors, whilstAbiding, they should be abiding in the city, should not be put withJunes, foreign men — and that foreign men should not be put withtants. them, the said inhabitants, in any assises, &c.The senior bailiff is then appointed escheator — with grantof forfeiture of victuals in aid of the farm.Justices. The bailiffs are to be the justices of the peace — and cognizanceof pleas — a recorder — and coroner are added — and thebailiffs are to serve the office of clerk of the market, &c. —freedom from toll — and a confirmation of all previous libertiesclose the charter.Lichfield. 1183Edward VI. having incorporated Lichfield, it was not ^^^^.^"^'^necessary for this grant to touch upon that point. Its principalobject seems to have been to provide more completelyfor its separate jurisdiction, and altogether to exclude ^^f^^^^sheriff. ^»o°-A steward therefore to preside at the court leet is granted, steward,audit is made a county of itself, having its own sheriff: withthe full return of writs.Neither does this charter affect, or pretend to affect, theright of returning members to Parliament. Members.Lichfield had anciently sent representatives, in the reignof Edward L, Edward IL, and Edward IIL ; after which itintermitted till the reign of Edward VL, when it returnedagain : being one of those ancient boroughs which were allowedto exercise the parliamentary privilege, on theground we have seen partially acted upon in the reign ofHenry ViiAs that principle appears also to have been adopted byQueen Mary, and some peculiar charters, with reference tothe return of members, were granted in this reign; it becomesmaterial now to enter more fully into the parliamentary his Parliamentarytory than heretofore — particularly as, although at the com- history.tenement of this reign. Parliament so readily complied withthe wishes of the crown, that no interference with the rightof election was necessary ; the resistance which the Houseof Commons afterwards made to the queen's views with respectto religion, her marriage, and the restoration of themonasteries, made exertions requisite to obtain a majority inthat House. Hence it appears that even Spanish money wasused for the purpose — and the members for that day areopen to the serious opprobrium of having received foreignbribes to influence their votes.Still it is due to the crown to say, that the unconstitutionalinterference with the right of election was not so directly effectedby the charters of the crown ; or generally speaking,by the acts of the sovereigns who granted charters of thatdescription — for they rarely interfered directly with the rightof election ; but the prevalent usurpations upon that right1184 LITCHFIELD.Philip and ^erc the result of the chicanery and sophistry of those whowere from time to time desirous, for their own interests, of.* perverting the charters of the crown to so improper a pose — and whose efforts for that object were, strange tosay, too often rendered effectual by the decisions of theHouse of Commons, and the courts of law. — As illustrativeof which, after a few prefatory observations, we shall takethis opportunity of giving a parliamentary history of Lichfield.It should, however, be first observed, that thischarter was fully and legally competent for the purposesfor which it was granted — the queen giving nothing butwhat she had the power to dispose of by virtue of herprerogative, and which she could legally and constitutionallygrant.Admitting Jt must not be overlooked, that neither of these chartersprovide any mode of nominating, making, or admitting burgessesor citizens, or by whatever other name they are called.No such power is given to the mayor or common council.Either therefore the burgesses or citizens must be the '^ inhor'bitants*' at large, without any restriction, selection, or previousadmission ; — or they must be the resiantSy presentedadmitted and enrolled at the court leet. The first is surelytoo undefined to be the acknowledged mode of obtaining ; and no trace of such a state of things is to befound any where in our law, or to be deduced from any ofour institutions. The latter mode, of selecting some of theinhabitants — of pointing out a defined and recognized body,Leet. actually existed. There was a court leet, and at that courtany inhabitant householder paying scot and lot ought, as areliant to have been admitted and sworn ; — and there musthave been a suit roll, upon which ail the resiants, who hadbeen presented as such by the jury, ought to have been enrolled.Such a body has been recognized by our laws aslong as they have existed ; and the only question remains,were they the burgesses? — if they were not, who were? —what other legal mode of making burgesses is even suggested? — or what is so consistent with the facts whichactually existed ? As for the claim of the mayor and com-LITCHFIELD. 1185mon council to admit burgesses, it is without the slightest Pip ^^substantial ground of right. Can then any dispassionate persondoubt who the burgesses in this place anciently were? —Nothing has since taken place to alter their nature — ^andtherefore they ought still to remain the same.It might perhaps be said, that the term " burgesses" in this Burgess.charter means the 24 burgesses ; and the beginning of thisclause may be quoted to confirm that assertion. But upona careful perusal of the whole it will be found impossible tosupport this position — and it appears most distinctly thatthe terms " burgess" and " citizen" were synonymous.The burgesses and citizens are to elect from among themselvesone burgess to be sheriff; by the provision for futureelections, the burgesses and citizens are to elect from amongstthemselves one fit person to be sheriff; and it afterwardsproceeds, " every burgess so elected shall take an oath ;"from whence it is clear that the burgess mentioned before,and the person to be elected from the burgesses and citizens,were of the same class — and for that class the general appellationwas " burgess," although the term " citizen " is alsoused to describe them.The former part of this clause having exempted the citizensabiding in the city from serving on foreign juries, the latterpart directs that foreign men shall not be put with them thesaid inhabitants : — from which it is impossible not to infer,that the citizens were the inhabitants ; particularly as thoseterms are used in the same instrument with the former expressionof men of the city , See,It should be observed, that in this charter all mention of ^^*'the court leet, which is referred to in the correspondingclause of that of Edward VI., is omitted. As it was givenbefore, it was unnecessary to repeat it : but it is clear thatthese courts had not then got into disuse in this reign ; because,in the fourth year of Edward VI., the charter toLondon, granting South wark to that city, gave also a viewof frankpledge over the precinct of that borough.Bearing in mind these provisions of the charter, and the Partialwhich arise upon them, we proceed to the history.4o1186 LITCHFIELD.Philip and further Consideration of the parliamentary history of Lite'"^^ field.The right of election does not appear to have undergoneany precise investigation until the year 1701, when it wasresolved by the committee to whom the question eras referred,upon loose evidence of two or three the last precedingelections, covering only altogether a period of from 25 to 40Right. years, that the right of election was " in the bailiff — magistrates— forty-shilling freeholders — those who held by burgagetenure — and ^Mch freemen only who were enrolled andpaid scot and lot."Freeholds Objection was taken upon the splitting acts, that thenceholds had been divided ; and as to others, that they weremortgaged ; and a right to vote for rent-charges was alsoinsisted upon.As to the freemen a strange distinction appears to havebeen taken between those who were enrolled in the old andin the new book of the Tailor's Company ; the latter havingbeen made in pursuance of a bye-law allowed and approvedby the justices of assise in the 18 Eliz.; and it was decided,Right. that " only those enrolled in that new book had the rightof election."The burgage jury was mentioned ; and some persons havingheld public offices seemed to be treated as voters. Somewere objected to as not paying to the church and poor —some as inmates — some as living with their parents — andothers as not being housekeepers.More anomalous or incongruous decisions than these canhardly be conceived ; containing in them, it is true, somepoints correct in themselves, but which are so mixed andconfounded together, that it is hardly possible to draw fromthem anv correct conclusion.Bailiffs & The bailiffs and magistrates would certainly have a righttraces. to vote; uot in respect of those offices, but as burgesses.Freehold The freeholders either had the exclusive right, or none at all.For if Lichfield, being a county of itself, was within thestatute of Henry VI., then the freeholders only could havethe right of election; and the bailiffs, magistrates, anders.LITCHFIELD. 1187burgage holders would all have been excluded. On the P^jjj'P andcontrary, if Lichfield was not within the statute, then thefreeholders would have had no right at all.As to the burgage tenants also, we have already shown Burgage^^^ ' ; tenants.that such a right of election ought to apply generally to allboroughs, or to none ; and that, strictly speaking, it is onlyapplicable as descriptive of the occupier of burgage houses,in which sense it resolves itself into the general descriptionof householder J or, more properly, " housekeeper."As to i\it freemen we have also already shown, that being Freemen.oi free condition was only one qualification for a burgess:and that the additional requisites of holding a house — inhabiting— paying scot and lot — and being sworn and enrolled— were also necessary.These resolutions therefore seem to have been foundedupon an erroneous view of the statute of Heniy VI. — a mistakeninference as to burgage tenure from the fact of Lichfieldhaving been an ancient borough — upon a misapplicationof the doctrine with respect to freemen — and an incorrect useof the term enrolment ; — which is applied to the roll of freemenof the Tailor's Company, instead of being referred tothe enrolment at the coil leet. Such an enrolment, withthe payment of scot and lot, are in truth, the only correctparts of these resolutions.In a petition of 1722, it is stated, that the citizens were 1722.elected in the county court ; which appears to be a furthererror, adopted from Lichfield having been made a county ofitself.AYLESBURY.The next place occurring in the list of charters granted 1553.by Queen Mary is Aylesbury y which we have before seen,was not entered as a borough in Domesday ; but the manor y Manor,in the reign of King John, was granted by the crown atfee-farm to the Earl of Essex.* In that of Henry VIII.,it came by partition to Thomas Parkinson, and Queen Elizabethreleased the fee-farm rent.Vide ante, pp. 415 et20l.4g21188 AYLESBURY.Philip and Mary incorporated the inhabitants; giving them a separatejurisdiction with return of writs; and assise of bread. AndIncorporated that the bailiff should be the escheator and coroner;Return* of that there should be a court leety and that the town shouldT^t'. ^ ^ county of itself. All which privileges removed it fromthe jurisdiction of the sheriff, and placed it entirely under thegovernment of its own officers. To these immunities is addedthat of a market, and the power of returning two membersto Parliament.Parity Its parliamentary history is somewhat peculiar.nectary r j j rhistory. It seems that its members were, for some short time,chosen by the bailiff, nine aldermen, and twelve burgesses.Corpora But the corporation of the place was dissolved by neglectLived. to keep up the community.1571. In the 14th and 28th of Queen Elizabeth, the lords of theconstitutes. manor made the returns to Parliament ; and the constables,the common law officers of the place, who were chosen atL«€*« the court leet, have ever since been the returning officers.^^' In the seventh year of William III., the right of electionfor this place became the subject of inquiry; the petitionerinsisting that it was in the inhabitants paying scot and lot ;the sitting members, that it was in the housekeepers ; relyingupon a usage of 40 years.Evidence was given in conformity with the doctrine wehave before insisted upon, that those who claimed to vote.Watch & had watched and warded. And objections were taken tovoters that they were not housekeepers ; that they were in-mates boarders , or tenants ; and one was objected to onthe ground that he was not an inhabitant for want of noticeaccording to the statute: which, referring to the poor laws,establishes that union between these matters, upon which wehave frequently remarked.Right. The right was eventually determined to be in the householders.Which, as far as it goes, is consistent with thecommon law; but the resolution was insufficient, inasmuchas that it did not require that the householders should behousekeepers'' or occupiers ; — or in the ancient legal language," resiant ;"— or in the more modem — " inhabitants."AYLESBURY. HggNor did it require them, according to the common law, Philip andto be sworn at the court leet, which was held within the '—borough.In the tenth of William III., the same right was agreed los.upon by the litigant parties; a further question with respectto alms being raised, which being a general disqualification,is unnecessary to be inquired into with reference to anyparticular borough.The celebrated proceedings in 1703, by Ashy against 1703.White and others the constables of Aylesbury, relatingchiefly to the general privileges of the House, are also passedby, as immaterial to this particular inquiry. Excepting weshould observe, that the Lords, in their resolutions uponthose proceedings, adopted the ancient common law termof ^^freemerC^ — used in Magna Charta, as descriptive of thesubjects of this realm who were entitled to its general privileges.The act which passed in the 44th George III., relative to 1804.the right of election for this place, is also beside the presentinquiry.Cheltenham.The next place which occurs in the list of the charters of 1563.Queen Mary is Cheltenham ; the parliamentary history of Partialis also peculiar. history.We have already seen that it is not mentioned in Domesdayas a borough. But it returned members to Parliament,with some considerable intermissions, from the reign of EdwardI.Queen Mary granted it a charter of incorporation, in the Incorpo-first year of her reign, at the petition of the men and inhabitantsof the town, directing that it should consist of abailiff and 12 burgesses, by the name of '' the bailiff and 12burgesses of Cheltenham."That queen also included in her charter, a grant that thereshould be two burgesses to Parliament, who were to be Members,elected by the bailiff and burgesses.This authority to return members was altogether unneces-1 190 CHIPP£NHAM.Philip and say, as they had enjoyed that privilege from theperiod ; and if the election was to be by the ancient " fticr-guesses' in that respect also the charter was unnecessary.On the contrary, if under that term was intended to beintroduced a new class of voters, the charter of the crowncould not be legally operative for that purpose : as was decidedby the celebrated committee of the House of Cannons1G23. in the gist year of James I., whose proceedings are reportedby Mr. Serjeant Glanville.*The petition at that time, appearing by the Journal to havebeen by the inhabitants was heard six several times beforethe committee, in the presence of most of the parties, witnessesand counsel, on both sidesReturns. It appears that the returns after the charter were the samein form as before, until the third of Elizabeth; when a returnwas made by the bailiff and 12 burgesses of the borough,which form had continued till this question arose. Bat itappeared by the proof of witnesses, that at the election forseveral Parliaments in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, diversburgesses, inhabitants of the borough, called freemen, claimedto have voices in the elections ; though, liking the men thatwere chosen, they complained not to the Parliament forbeing excluded. A striking circumstance to show howUsage, little usage ought to be relied upon in inquiries of this description.It further appeared in evidence, to the satisfaction of thecommittee, that at the election of burgesses for this borough,inhawunta ^^ *^^ ^^^ ^^ James I., the burgesses, inhabitants of theborough, called freemen, were admitted, and joined in theelection of the members, and in the payment of theirwages.1623. At the election in dispute, it appeared that the bailiff and11 of the 12 incorporated burgesses, met at the place appointed,being an upper room, with the doors left open andfree for any one to enter, and elected Mr. Maynard ; diversinhabitant other of the inhabitants of the borough, called freemen, hemat that time in the under room, not offering themselves to• See also Harl. MSS 6806, p. 101. f Vide Glanville, p. 47.CHIPPENHAM. 1191come into the upper room, nor to join in the election with Pi»>l>pandthe bailiff and incorporated burgesses.As for the second seat, the bailiff and five of the 11 incorporatedburgesses, gave their votes for Sir Francis Poplar,and the other six for Mr. Pym ; and not being able to reconcilethis difference, the bailiff and all the 11 incorporatedbui^esses agreed to adjourn the election for the second to the 23d of the same month — the other burgessesand inhabitants, called freeineriy continuing still in the otherroom, neither called, nor offering, nor denied, to come up ;and so the assembly was for that time dissolved.At the time and place appointed by adjournment, thebailiff and all the 12 incorporated burgesses met, and 32 ofthe freemen also attended. The bailiff and five of the incorporatedburgesses gave their votes for Sir Francis Poplar,and the other seven incorporated burgesses for Mr. Pym ;and all the other burgesses and inhabitants called yreemera,being demanded by the bailiff for whom they gave theirvoices, all gave them for Sir F. Popham. Two indentureswere made ; the 32 burgesses not incorporated signing oneof them.The committee resolved, first,* that " they would for Solutions.bear giving any opinion, whether the borough was a corporationby prescription before the charter of Queen Mary;it not being material to the question : for the borough mightlive right to return members to Parliament though it wasno corporation'' Which is a distinct determination, by thebody competent to decide the question, that the return ofmembers to Parliament was not a corporate right; — andthat the incorporation was — as we have throughout contended— a matter altogether collateral to the ancient boroughprivileges.The committee also resolved, that " the charter of QueenMary did not, nor could, alter the form and right of election ;so that if before, all the burgesses and inhabitants calledfreemen or any other larger number of qualified persons,had always used, and ought of right to make the election,♦ Glanv. 53.1192 CHIPPENHAM.PhUipaixlthen the charter, although it might incorporate this town,which was not incorporate before ; or alter the name or form^j^j^^ * of the corporation in matters concerning only themselves,and their own government, rights, and privileges; yet t^could not alter and abridge the general freedom and farm ofelection of burgesses to Parliament, wherein the commonwealthis interested. For then, by the like reason, that it mightbe brought from the whole commonalty, or from all theburgesses of a town, to a bailiff and 12 ; so might it bebrought to a bailiff and one or two burgesses, or to thebailiff alone ; which is against the general liberty of therealm, that favourite all means tending to make the electionof burgesses to be with the most indifferency ; which,by common presumption, is when the same are made bythe greatest number of voices that reasonably may be had,whereby there will be less danger of packing, or indirectproceedings. And howsoever the said letters patent, touchingsome other points, may have made an alteration in theborough ; yet, touching the matter of election of burgesses tothe Parliaments the form remaineth, and the same course is tobe held as was of right, before the said letters patent**It was therefore further resolved by the committee, thatmore than the bailiffs, and the 12 incorporated burgesses,ought to have voices in the elections for Cheltenham.And as it had been urged, that the former returns, bybailiff and burgesses, might well be satisfied if only thebailiff and 12 joined in the election, it was resolved, " thoughthat were tine, yet they would be more proper if the bailiff,and all the other burgesses, freemen, and inhabitants, betherein comprised."And as to the course since the 35th of Elizabeth, it wasto be intended, that it was only by colour of the void charter,and of precedents passed in silence and without oppositions**Usage. Another authority for disregarding usage on these subjects.In the printed Journals of the House, those who are inGlanville described as " burgesses, inhabitants, and freemen,"\^^\d?' ^^^ called " burgesses and householders ;" and the returns• Glanv. 57.CHIPPENHAM. 1 193appear to have been by the "ballivus, burgenses, et alii P*J[|IP^°**homines."The question also as stated in the Journals appears tohave been, " Whether the burgesses at large had the right ofelection?" apparently assuming, that the inhabitants were ante.*described under those terms.It is a singular circumstance, and difficult to be accountedfor, that notwithstanding this ample inquiry into the rightof election in 1624, in which nothing is said of any burgagetenure right of election, or any peculiar privilege belongingto any particular class of voters — the only question beingbetween the select body of incorporated burgesses and theinhabitants, or freemen at large; yet, in the third of William ^^and Mary, the right of election was determined to be in theoccupiers, or inhabitants, of certain ancient houses, called inhabitantsfree-houses or burgage-houses.There is no pretence for suggesting, that any burgagetenure right existed for voting at Cheltenham ; nor is thereany mode of accounting for this decision, excepting thefollowing — which, it is obvious, ought, properly speaking,to have nothing to do with the right of burgess-ship, or thereturning members to Parliament.In the fourth year of the reign of James I., it was deter ^^^6.mined, in Steward's case,* that no inhabitant could claim Outward'scase.a right of common, except by prescribing in right of a house;from which it necessarily follows, that the house must haveexisted from time immemorial — and consequently no personcould prescribe for such a right, unless in respect of anancient house.At Cheltenham, there is a large, valuable, common meadow,adjoining the town, in which the occupiers of certainancient houses claim certain common rights. This they did, Right ofno doubt, under the authority of this case ; and in such amanner the occupiers of the houses might have obtainedpeculiar privileges — but not with reference to their right ofbeing burgesses, or their right of voting for members of Parliament.• 6 Co. eo a.i1194 CHIPPENHAM.Philip and Similar rights were enjoyed over the commons in theneighbourhood of Cane, in respect also of certain ancienthouses in that borough — ^no doubt under the authority ofthe same case. The commoners the occupiers of thosehouses, in the year 1710, set up their exclusive right tovote for members of Parliament, and the committee determinedin favour of their claim ; but in the year 1723, theirright was rejected, and they have never since enjoyed it.1694. However, in the sixth year of William and Mary,* theRight, right of election at Cheltenham was agreed to be in thefreemen and inhabitants of the borough houses who everafterwards exercised that right, till the late act of Parliament; notwithstanding a petition of appeal was presentedin favour of the scot and lot voters in 1804 ; but no proceedingswere had upon it — for nobody appeared to supportthe petition, and consequently the order for taking it intoconsideration was discharged. It is suggested, that a compromiseput an end to the inquiry.BUCKINGHAM.The next charter, in order of time, is that to the borough1553. of Buckingham. This was granted on the 27th of January,in the first year of the queen's reign.It commences with a recitals that her faithful subjects ofthe town of Buckingham had, for their better regulation andgovernment, and the amelioration of the town, humblyInhabit besought her, that the town and its hi habitants might beincorporated; and that a body corporate might be made andcreated, of one bailiff and burgesses. And it speaks of theirfaithful adherence to the queen, and the assistance they hadgiven her, during the rebellion of the Duke of Northumberland,then attainted of high treason.Town and It directs, that the town and parish of Buckinghamcorporate should be a free borough, incorporated of one bailiff and 12burgesses, by the name of " the bailiff and burgesses of the• Et vide etiam, 24 Jour. 65, 1 Doug. 329, 1 Peck. 264.t 1 Pet. MS. In. Temp. Lib. p. 3.BUCKINGHAM. 1195borough 2Lnd parish of Buckingham;" and that they should Philip andbe a body corporate, with the usual corporate powers.*It then provides, that the 12 burgesses should be, and be p^^^ j '^^called, "the principal burgesses ;" and they are required to burgesses.be " commorant and inhabitant within the parish of Buckingham;" and to have a qualification, of lands and free tenet Qualifiescation.ment to the value of 3s. 4d,f or goods and chattels to 20Z.A steward is also given, with power to appoint a deputy. Steward.John Lombard is made the first bailiff, and is described as Fistan inhabitant of the borough and parish ; and it is directed,that he shall take an oath faithfully to execute his office. Oath.Twelve inhabitants of the borough and parish are named First 12as the first 12 principal burgesses; who are also to take "'^^®*^*their oaths, and to be the common ccmnctZ of the borough and Commonparish.Authority is given to the bailiff and burgesses to hold acourt, before the bailiff, three burgesses, and the steward, or Court,his deputy, in the common hall, or other more convenient placein the borough, from three weeks to three weeks, to hear anddetermine, by plaints, all pleas and actions of debt, account,contracts, transgressions, vi et armis, or otherwise ; and allactions, real, personal, and mixed, arising within the boroughand parish, and the limits, bounds, and liberties ofthe same, not exceeding the sum of 5/., with power of summoning,&c. : — and for default of lands and tenements withinthe borough aforesaid, to attach by the body ; and similarprocesses and executions as in the court of the county ofBucks, before the queen's justices of the court there. Court ofAll fines and amercements are given to the said bailiff and hamsWre.burgesses, to be expended for the use and profit of the bailiff, ^*°***burgesses, and commonalty of the borough and parish.And for the better support of the borough and parish. Holdthe bailiff and burgesses are declared to be capable of pur ^^^^'chasing, receiving, and taking manors, lands, &c., situate,lying, and being within the borough, which were not immediatelyheld of the queen in capite, nor by military service.See before, p. 1103, as to parishes.I IQQ BUCKINGHAM.Philip and A prison, or gaol in some convenient place within theborough is also granted.Prime. View of frankpledge o( M inhabitants, residents, as wellpl^le' ^^^^i'^ly ®s 'sot entirely residing within the borough andparish, and within the limits and bounds of the ancientborough of Buckingham. And all things belonging to viewof frankpledge. To be held in the common hall or housewithin the borough, twice in the year, within a month ofMichaelmas and Easter, before the bailiff and steward of theborough and parish aforesaid only for the time being.Bounds. The bounds of the borough and parish are then set outwithparticularity ; and all the lands and tenements withinthem, are declared to be part and parcel of the borough andparish.AauM of Assise of bread, wine, and beer, and other victuals, and <^weights and measures, are also added.Bye-laws. And power is given to the bailiffs aid burgesses, by thecommon council, or the major part of them, of making, fromtime to time, laws, statutes, and ordinances, for the rule andgovernment of the artificers and other inhabitants, and forthe victualling of the said parish and borough ; so that theywere not repugnant to the laws and statutes of the realm,or to the queen's prerogative.*i"'£*i^ff ^^^^ ^^ ^^ granted to the bailiff and burgesses and theirsuccessors, that the burgesses might every year meet together,within the borough and parish of Buckingham, and theretoname two men, then being principal burgesses of the sameBefore ic borough, before the other inhabitants then there present, tohabitants. ^^^ intent that such other men and inhabitants, or the greater^^^^' part of them, might elect one of those two bui^esses sonominated and assigned, to the office of bailiff of the boroughand parish for the year next following.Vacancies And as often as it should happen that any person beingbailiff shall die, or be removed from his office, during theyear in which he is bailiff, then the surviving burgesses,or the major part of them, might meet together, at a certainfixed day, within eight days, and there name two personsBUCKINGHAM. 1197of the number of the said burgesses, before the other inha- Pyipand. Mary.bitants. to the intent that the other men and inhabitants1553.might elect one of those two burgesses to the office of bailiff, inhabitantsAnd if either of the 12 principal burgesses should die, or Vacanciesinhabit without the borough and parishes or should be re- principalmoved from his office for any cause, that then it should be ^**''6c*se8-lawful for the bailiff and burgesses, when it should pleasethem, within 40 days next following the death or vacation,to meet, and there nominate one or more of the otherpersons then inhabitants of the borough and parish, and thosenot being burgesses, to be a burgess during his life. Andthat every person so nominated should be a burgess during hislife, or otherwise, if it should seem fit to the bailiff and otherburgesses, &c.And that there should be in the borough two burgesses ^^*^'of Parliament, and that the bailiff and burgesses, upon the ^^^^'writ to them directed for the election of such burgesses,should have power to elect two discreet and honest mento be burgesses of Parliament for the same borough ; andthat they, at the cost and charges of the borough andparish, and the commonalty of the same, should send suchburgesses to Parliament, wheresoever it might be held, in thesame manner and form as in other boroughs in the kingdomof England, and in the ancient borough of Buckingham,had been used and accustomed.The bailiff is then appointed a justice of the peace within Justice,the borough and parish.The return of writs, and execution of them, is also Return of. . Writs.granted ; so that no sheriff or other bailiff, or minister, should 1^^^.'enter that liberty for the execution of writs, summonses, or >*i^"»>^attachments, or to execute any other judgment there, exceptin defect of the bailiffs and burgesses, and their successors,and of other their ministers.The bailiff is directed to be the escheator and coroner Eschcator,Coroner,and clerk of the market within the borough : — with a similar Clerk^ of thenon-intermittent clause. market.It should be observed, that this charter is granted uponSee also post. temp. Eliz. charter of East Looe» and Truro case.1198 BUCKINGHAM.^•jjjjp *°** the request of the inhabitants; and the officers appointedby it, are described as " commorant and inhabitant withininhabitants Buckingham." All the powers granted are to be executedwithin the borough and parish; and all other officers andministers of the crown are excluded, except in default ofthe officers of the borough. Every clause more or lessimports, that those who are to be affected by it mast beResident, resident within its precincts. Thus, amongst others, ifany person within its jurisdiction could not be attached byhis lands, he was to be so by his body which necessarilypresumes that he was resident within the borough. In confirmationof the observations we have before made with^stociT'^ respect to the common stocks all fines and amercements areto be expended for the use and profit of the bailiff, burgessesand commonalty of the borough and parish.It is evident from the clauses relative to the elections,that the inhabitants were the corporation; for the capitalburgesses are directed to be nominated before the ^' otherinhabitants:" — and in another part it is said, before the** other men and inhabitants," which latter term we have hadfrequent occasion to note.Men. The expression of " men of the borough," is of commonoccurrence, as we have already seen, in the early charters,but seems to have been much misapprehended. There canbe no doubt, that when used with reference to the lord'sright, it often means his tenants; but used generally, itmeans the persons inhabiting within some given district —as, the men of the realm — the men of the shire — the men ofthe hundred, in the case of hue and cry, and the liabilitiesarising from it : and the men of the borough, town, or will.Thus also the writ to the sheriff to elect justices of thepeace, was to elect, " in plena coniitatu unum de probinget potentioribus comitatus sui"*So also the precept to the sheriff to summon juries is,'* quod venire facias tam 24 propos et legates homines dequolibet hundred quam 24 milites et alios propos etlegales homines de corpore comitatus J'^'^• 2 Inst. 174 ; Lamb. I. i. c. 3; 4 Com. Dig. 497. f Vit. Lamb. 377, 1. iv. c. 2.BUCKINGHAM. 1199And it is notorious, that all these persons were required to P*j^{»P ^^^be resident in the counties for which they were to serve; andanciently even in the hundreds.Buckingham has also a steward given to it for the purpose Steward,of presiding at the courts, particularly at the court leet, meet.which was one of his peculiar functions.This charter also contains a clause for the election of Members,members of Parliament, which we have seen was first introducedinto the charter to Wenlock, in the reign ofEdward IV. Subsequently such clauses became more general.However, Buckingham had befor(|kretumed members,though only so recently as the 36th of Henry VIII.It is mentioned as a borough, as we have seen before, inDomesday, when there were 27 burgesses, who appear to Domesdayhave resided there.*After Queen Mary had incorporated it, the bailiffs, and12 principal burgesses, returned the members; but, fromthe decision in the Cheltenham case, which we have justquoted, the charter could not legally give them the right.But this is one of the instances in which the charter of thecrown seems to have been perverted for the purpose ofgiving the right to the select body, instead of the generalbody of the burgesses at large. For the words of thecharter are, that the " burgesses " should elect, which, accordingto the doctrine in the Cheltenham case, ought to be intendedto mean the body at large ; as by its primary significationit clearly does.On the restoration of Charles II., this matter came before ^^^•a committee of the House of Commons for decision ; thequestion being, whether the bailiff and 12 burgesses, or thefreemen at large, had the right to elect the members.And it is said in the Journals, that upon view of several Right,ancient precedents — hearing witnesses — and view of thecharter of incorporation — the committee were of opinion,that " the bailiff and 12 burgesses had a right to elect."But these precedents should have been referred, as laiddown in the Cheltenham case, to the illegal construction of• Vide ante, p. 200.1200 BUCKINGHAM.Philip and the charter of Queen Mary. The witnesses, necessarilycould not have spoken to any time, before the grant of thatcharter : which of itself could not have given the right ofelection to the select body.This decision, therefore, was clearly erroneous. It is probablyto be attributed to the feeling in favour of the selectbody of corporations ; the control of which also, was at thattime, so much the object of the crown and the legislature.Pen '^ *^^ second year of William III., a petition was presentedon the election from this borough, claiming the right ofelection for the inhabitants at large; upon which manyformer returns were produced in evidence, but the decisionwas the same as it had been in 1610.1696. But in the seventh of William III., another petition waspresented by divers inhabitants of the borough, truly alleging,that it was a borough by prescription, and claiming theirright to vote.But this petition was withdrawn.1714. Afterwards, in the first year of George I., the right wasagreed to be in the bailiffs and principal burgesses. Theconsequence was, that a long investigation took place as tothe voters being proper corporators; and whether they hadtaken the sacrament, according to the corporation act ; andwhether they were duly qualified ; and the question was involvedin all the legal intricacies of quo warranto and mandamus,and upon points respecting summonses, and othercorporate, subtle distinctions.Dover. With respect to Dover,* the next in the list, we have1553- .already given, in a previous part of this works a shortaccount of its parliamentary history.Lyme. As to LymCyX ^^ charter only granted to the burgesses ofthat place a market and two fairs, with a court of pie-powder,and stallage, pickage, tolls, and customs, with thecorrecting of weights and measures, and the fines, forfeitures,amerciaments, and profits, in them. To hold in fee-farm at• Vide Glanv. 63. t Vide ante, page 73. % Vide ante, 527—794—823.LYME. 1201(is. 8d. annual rent. And that none should be arrested or trou ^^jj^^'^**bled during the time of the fairs, but for matters done in them.Other neighbouring fairs not to be prejudiced by that grant.This charter does not affect the right of burgess-ship.But in the third year of the same reign, an exemplification 1555.was ffiven of the charter of the 13th of Edward II.The parliamentary history of Hertford we have already Hertford,given.*BANBURY.Queen Mary appears to have introduced into the constitutionan entire novelty, by giving to a few boroughs, — Banbury,Higham Ferrers, and Abingdon, the power of returningone burgess only to Parliaments One.The charter to Banbury, in conformity with the observationwe have previously made, incorporates the " inhabitants; " inhabitant*and includes the " parish.";}: Parish.It is granted to the inhabitants of the town, and after 1553«reciting the services which had been rendered to the queenby them, and in order that they might be the better certifiedof her affection to themes — it was directed, that thetown should be a free borough, incorporated of one bailiff,12 aldermen, and 12 burgesses, by the name of " the bailiff,^' aldermen and burgesses of the borough and parish ofBanbury." And that the bailiff, aldermen, and burgesses,of the borough and parish, should be a body corporate and• Vide ante, 176.t In this reign 10 boroughs commenced returning members to Parliament, viz.,Abingdon, Aylesbury, St. Ives, Castle Rising, Higham Ferrers, Worketh, Banbury,Knaresborough, Boroughbridge, Marlborough. There were also two boroughsrestored, viz., Woodstock and Droitwich.X To show what was the legal doctrine as to jfari&hesy even subsequently to thisperiod, the following passage is extracted from a case in the reign of Jas. II., whereinan appeal, the second objection taken was, *' That it was alleged, that the defendantassaulted the husband of the appellant 'in jtarochia Sancti Martini in*' caliphs ;'— now, though that word ' parthia* has crept into fines and recoveries,and likewise into indictments, it must not be allowed in appeals. There may beseveral vills in one parish ; and though this is ruled good in indictments, it oughtnot to be so here, because of the difference between an indictment and an appeal ;for in indictments you need not mention the hour, but it must be done in appeals.A parish Is an ecclesiastical division, and though such may be a will, it is not nespessary ex vi termini that it should be so"— In Goring v, Peering, 3 Mod. 156,Ill. T. 3 Jas. II. § See Brady, p. 48.4h1202 BANBURY.Philip uhI politic, and a perpetual community, with the usual corporatepowers. After which, the charter directs that 12 of the12 alder inhabitants should be aldermen, and 12 of the inhabitantsi2prfncV principal burgesses ; and that one of the aldermen should bep£^«'- annually elected bailiff. The first bailiff— the first 12 aldermen— and the first 12 principal burgesses — are then named,and are all described as '^ inhabitants."Common After which it is provided, that the bailiff, aldermen, andcouncil. . * • r-capital burgesses, should be the common council of theborough. And the queen further granted, in the last clauseof the charter, that there should be in the borough, aOnemem- burgess of Parliament: and that the bailiff, aldermen,and bui^sses, of the borough and parish, should electone discreet man, a burgess of the said borough, to be theburgess of Parliament for the borough ; and to be at the costsand charges of the borough, parish, and community; and tobe sent to the Parliament in the same manner and form as isused in the other boroughs of the kingdom.Brady. ^jj extract from this charter is given by Dr. Brady in hisHistory of Boroughs ;* which is accurate in many respects —but in one or two material parts, which could hardly havebeen unknown to the author, is strikingly inaccurate.For instance, Dr. Brady says, that this charter directs thatonly the bailiff, aldermen, and burgesses, should choose themember for Parliament ; and introduces the word " only" inadifferent type, for the purpose of marking the importance ofit. But in the charter there is no such word ; the clauserelative to the election of the member of Parliament merelydirects, that it shall be " by the said bailiff, aldermen, andburgesses." Burgesses and capital burgesses had both beenmentioned before in the charter: — and so far from this clauseconfining the election to the 12 burgesses, (which is Dr.Brady's construction,) by any express words, such as " tantum,"to be met with in some charters ; this clause, comparedwith the rest, would lead to the conclusion, that its fairconstruction would be to include all the burgesses at large,and not only the 12, who are before called "capital burnBiatly, p. 48.BANBURY. 1203gesses." And by the return to Parliament of the fifth of P*VI'p*"^. . . . Mary.Elizabeth which is the earliest now in existence, the election "TTTT"1553.was not confined to the body consisting of the bailiff, 12aldermen, and 12 capital burgesses alone ; but it was madeexpressly by the whole commonalty of the town, as wellof the community, as of the corporation. Consequently, sofarfrom the community or commonalty being, as Dr. Bradycontends, the same as the corporation, and confined to thatbody, the commonalty of the town is contra-distinguishedfrom the corporation in this return; and it is clear, thatthe whole commonalty of the town as well ass of the corporation,joined in it. In that part of the clause, whichdescribes the person to be elected. Dr. Brady has omittedthe important word, " burgess :" — the charter requiring thatthe member should be " a discreet man, a burgess of theborough :" but this author has only the words, a discreetman of the borough. Now, as his whole argument is, thatthe word " burgess," in this clause, means only the " capitalburgesses," he could not have failed to have seen theimportance of the word which he has omitted — for if it meansin the other part of the clause capital burgess, it must alsomean so here ; and then the clause requires that the membershould be a capital burgess, which the Doctor must haveknown never was the case. It seems, therefore, difficult toexcuse him from a purposed omission of this important word,which, when restored, affords so strong an inference againsthis hypothesis.The fact is, that the charters of the crown can not be Chartersallowed to affect the right of election,* without leaving the Crown.House of Commons altogether in the power of the crown.And considering also, the return of the fifth of Elizabeth,which is made " by the whole commonalty of the town, as'* well as of the corporation," the latter being in fact, asinhabitants, part of the former, although they were also corporators,it seems impossible that such a return could havebeen made according to the charter, at least, according tothe construction put upon it by Dr. Brady, but it must haveEt vide Cheltenham Case, Plan. p. 47.4n21553.1204 BANBURY.Philip and \yeen according to the common law, " by the whole common-mary.* ^ -^alty of the inhabitants' — and which, for the reasons we havegiven before, is according to the construction of which thecharter is capable, and for the reasons given in Glanville,if capable of such a construction, it ought to be so taken.However, in point of fact, Banbury does not appear tohave returned any member to the first parliament of QueenMary, which met on the 5th of October.1554. To the next Parliament, which met in the April following,Mr. Denton was returned for it — and again to another Parliament,in November in the same year.1555. In the second and third of Philip and Mary, no memberwas sent — but in the fourth and fifth, Mr. John Denton sate.Notwithstanding the obvious construction of the charter,supported as it is by the principles laid down by the celebratedcommittee in the reign of James I., a committee ofthe House of Commons, in the third year of the reign of1691. William III., upon the question coming before them, whetherRight, the right of election was in the mayor, aldermen, and capitalburgesses, or in the burgesses at large, — decided, " that it'* was in the mayor, aldermen, and capital burgesses onlyFrom the report in the Journal, it appears that this questionwas stated to arise from some doubtful words in thecharter ; but we have already shown that the words are notdoubtful in themselves : and that there is no difficulty inputting a legal construction upon them. Moreover similarAbingdon. words in the charter of Abingdon were, even at the time of1660. ^ 'the restoration of Charles II., held to extend to all the inalitany householders.And this perversion of the charter of Banbury was in theface of the returns, in the time of Queen Elizabeth, whichwere <!:iven in evidence before the committee. Nor did it appearthat there was any return by the mayor, aldermen, andcapital burgesses only, till the 13th of Charles II. — the paroltestimony not extending farther back than that period.The consequence of this decision as to Banbury, was thesame as we before noted with respect to Buckingham. Itnecessarily involved the (question of the return of members ofBANBURY. 1205Parliament for this place, in all the intricacies of corporation ^Jliar^"^law — and accordingly we find, in the close of the reign of1700.William III., the committee of the House of Commons engagedin considering a corporate question, arising out of there beingtwo contending mayors. And a subsequent charter of thesixth of James I., regulating the election of mayor, was givenin evidence before them, as well as certain bye-laws made bythe corporation with reference to his election. These inquiriesnecessarily embarked the committees in considering pointsupon which the courts of common law have at least a concurrentjurisdiction with them; notwithstanding the expressdeclaration of the House of Commons to the contrary, in thecelebrated case of Ashy and White.It is impossible to account for this decision in the case ofBanbury, were it not that Dr. Brady wrote his book aboutthis time, in which he perverted the language of the charter,chiefly for the purpose of asserting the rights of the selectbody — and suppressed altogether the fact of the previousdecision of the House of Commons, in favour of the inhabitantsof Abingdon, where the words of the charter are thesame as that of Banbury.We have already seen, that although a place once incorporatedshould lose all its corporate privileges, yet it mightreturn its members under the common law — as in the casesof Aylesbury and Taunton. ^a^toZ'Warrington.The next place in the list of charters in this reign is Warringtonwhich affords the striking instance of a place beinga borough, returning members to Parliament, the mayor,aldermen, and burgesses, being incorporated by Queen Mary,whose charter was confirmed by James I.; and yet it has sincealtogether ceased to return members : — although it continuesto maintain its local and municipal government and corporateofficers.LAUNCESTON.A charter of Queen Mary recites, that the borough of i555.Launceston having been by ancient kings endowed with1206 LAUNCESTON.Philip and many privileges and great immunities; and anciently governedby a mayor, &c., (which officer it had in the time of^nx^' Henry IV.) ordains, that it should be incorporated by thename of *^ mayor, aldermen, and commonalty of the borough*' of Dunheved, alias Launceston," and by that name shouldhave perpetual succession; and be enabled in law to purchaselands, &c., and to plead and be impleaded, &c.That the mayor and aldermen should have a coition sealfor their affairs; and that the borough and corporation shouldconsist of eight aldermen besides the mayor, who shouldyearly be chosen on the nativity of our lady ; which saidCommon mayor and aldermen should be called the common council.council. •'and have power to elect a recorder — who with the mayorshould be justices of the peace within the borough.HIGIIAM Ferrets.The second place to which Queen Mary granted the privilegeof sending one member to Parliament was Higham .rersy* which she incorporated in the second and third year ofher reign, and made it a borough ; the corporation consistingof a mayor, seven aldermen, and 13 burgesses.1684. This charter was subsequently confirmed in the 36th yearof Charles II.This borough had previously been in the hands of thecrown.1660. Immediately after the restoration of Charles II., the rightof election was disputed upon a double return, and the ques-right.^JQjj ^jjg^ whether it was in the select number of burgesses.Burgesses, or in the burgesses at large. — The committee decided thatthe right was in the latter.A decision, which forms a striking contrast to that ofBanbury, where the words of the charter were similar, if theyhad not been perverted by Dr. Brady.1702. In 1702, the same question came again before the Houseof Commons, when the petitioner insisted that the right wasin the mayor, aldermen, and burgesses at large, and in thefreemen residing within the borough.• See Brady, p. 50.HIGHAM Ferrets. 1207The sitting member, on the other hand insisted, that the Philip andFreemen ought to be householders.Usage was proved by the petitioners, for 20, 30, 60, and60 years, during which, it was said, freemen had voted whowere not freeholders; and some had voted as freeholderswho were not householders.On the other hand, the counsel for the sitting membergave evidence, that the usage was otherwise; and reliedupon the resolution of 1660. And they called witnesses toprove the usage for 11,40, 50, and 60 years, that the house ^^q^^.holders paying scot and lot, were the persons entitled to vote, ^J®* *°**and that no freeman had been permitted to give his vote,though they had sometimes claimed. And they read thecharter of Philip and Mary, wherein they are styled, '* themayor, burgesses and commonalty :" — the corporation beingappointed to consist of a mayor, seven aldermen, and 13burgesses.The committee resolved, (in accordance with the commonlaw,) that " the right was in the mayor, aldermen, burgesses. Right.and freemen, being householders*The variety of these decisions, upon the same words in thekings' charters, founded upon the particular usage of each Usage,place, must carry conviction to the mind of every dispassionatereader, of the impropriety of giving effect to theusages different places; which can have no other tendencythan that of introducing anomalies and endless intricacy ; atthe same time that it gives the fullest opportunity forabuses, by establishing a varying, instead of a certain rule,by which all abuse might be prevented.The sound principle of English law is — *^ malus usus abolen- 1670.dus"* which alone can prevent or correct abuses ; and LordCoke properly adds in his Commentary, as to the time theymay have perverted this reason, " quia in consuetudinibusnon diutumitas temporis, sed solicits rationis est considerate."And how illegal customs were dealt with by the law mayLiUleloo, sec. 212.1208 NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE.Philip and be collected from Powder,* where it is said, that if a townMary.has customs which are against law or reason, and no othercustoms, and their customs are confirmed by Parliament insuch case, Darby, chief justice (in Loi, 4th Edward IV.)says, " that such confirmation shall not extend to those customs; far a thing used merely contrary to law and reason is nocustom, notwithstanding the usage* And, therefore, the actof Parliament which confirms their customs, is referred tothat which is not — for they have no customs, for which reasonthey shall be void."1553.NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE.This queen also, in the first year of her reign, by a charterof inspeximus, dated 15th of November, confirmed to thesociety of merchant adventurers of Newcastle-upon-Tyne , thecharter of her late royal brother; but without the addition ofany new privileges The confirmation, however, being toInhabiting, the merchant adventurers inhabiting within the town.A bye-law was likewise made at a court held in this yearwhich recites, that divers brethren of the fellowship, hadtaken apprentices, bound by indenture, some for seven, J:others for eight years ; by reason of the shortness of thewhich apprenticeship, the number of the fellowship was soaugmented, and daily would increase, that if speedy remedyin that case were not provided, it would be the utter destructionof the fellowship; for reformation whereof, it was agreedby the governor, assistants, wardens, and the whole fellowship,that from thenceforth no brother /rce should take anyApprcn- apprentice to serve for less time than for 10 years. Andthat from thenceforth no brother should take any apprenticebefore he was 16 years old at the least; upon pain, thatany which should do the contrary, should forfeit to theuse of thei fellowship, the sum of 20/.; and the apprenticeshould lose all the time he hud served.♦ riowdcn, 3W). So al-o Keilw. 142 a, p. r Srropt'. l.itt. U. 'JO:i, Haidi. 41 ;2 Sill. 120; Co. Liu. 2<Kj b ; I)y. 2(vi, pi. 37 ; (;ovvel\ U\>{. tj.t 2 I'lJtlcrs lll.-»t. NuWC.ImIIc, .ipp. (>.V>.X '\ IMiilip and Mjiiy, it >v\l- ilirw tul ley a l»yc-law made alCliCbtci, Uidt noue&houM be take ac apprentices uuJtr the Icriii of seven ytajs.times.AXBRIDGE. 1209Philip andMary.AXBRIDGE.It may also be desirable to mention, although it is not nowu parliamentary borough, that Queen Mary granted, in thethird and fourth years of her reign, a charter of incorporation il'to Abridge,* which recites, that the borough was an ancient ^^^^'borough, always consisting of 32 burgesses, (which ishighly improbable) from whom, have been always chosen14 aldermen, and of them one reeve or provost, called " theport reeve'* and out of the 32, a bailiff, and two constables,and other officers. By which reeve, bailiff, constables,and other officers, the borough had been immediately governed.That the burgesses and inhabitants had imme- inhabitantsmorally enjoyed divers jurisdictions, liberties, and franchises; paying an annual fee-farm of 60^. 2Jrf. : which boroughand fee-farm had come to the hands of the crown.And that the burgesses and inhabitants, not being incorpo- inhabitantsrated, could not govern the borough as was meet. They,therefore, beseech the king and queen to incorporate themaccordingly : and the king and queen granted, that the boroughand town should be a free borough corporate : to consistof one mayor and 32 burgesses : who should be able topurchase and hold lands, &c., in fee : and plead, and be impleaded: and that they might have a common seal. Theprecincts, jurisdiction, and bounds of the borough, are directedto extend in like manner as theretofore, from time immemorial: the mayor and burgesses having power to makeperambulations thereof, at their pleasure. That 32 of themost discreet inhabitants should be called the burgesses ; of inhabitantswhom fourteen should be called the aldermen : who shouldyearly elect, out of themselves, one mayor, one bailiff, andtwo constables, and other officers, for the governance of theborough, as theretofore. That the mayor and burgessesshould be quit of suits of counties and hundreds, and aids of Suits ofshires andsheriffs : also of all passage, pontage, stallage, lastage, and hundreds.Axl)iiilgc seat intjmbcrs to Parliament in the 23<I of Itkiward I., and during theloigi) uf Edward II., but was excused from so doing in the I7th of Edward III. fupon the petition of the burgesses.1210 AXBRIDGE.Philip and toll, throughout England. That no sheriff, under-sheriff, &c.,-r: — r- should intermeddle in the borough. And the charter ^ °transit. eludes with the ordinary provision, that the mayor and burgesses,and the inhabitants of the borough, should have andenjoy all their liberties, customs, &€.,. as theretofore i whetherby prescription or charterABINGDON.1555<6. Another charter by Queen Mary, giving the power ofreturning one member to Parliament, was granted in thethird and fourth year of her reign to Abingdon,* and wasnearly in the same words as those of Banbury and HighamFerrers.1660. The right of election was, like Higham Ferrers, discussedimmediately after the Restoration. There was no question, asin Banbury, whether the word burgesses, in the parliamentaryclause, meant only the capital burgesses ; but the only pointRight was, whether it extended to all the inhabitants, and the committeewere of opinion that it did.1689. At the period of the Revolution, the subject again cameunder discussion, and it was then admitted, on all sides, thatRight, the right was in the inhabitant householders paying scot andlot, and in taking the scrutiny of the votes, persons wereobjected to as not being housekeepers — as living in parts ofhouses — as lodgers — as servants — as living with theirparents — as not being inhabitants — and some as beingforeigners.1698. Ten years afterwards, the same right of election was againassumed upon a petition, and a similar inquiry was institutedas to the above objections to voters. And the right was1708. again admitted in 1708, to be in the inhabitants paging scotand lot.Thus we see, that upon three charters, nearly in the samewords, there have been these three decisions. Two of them,strange as it may appear, at the unfavourable period of theRestoration, determined, according to the common law, to bein the inhabitant householders paging scot and lot. The• Sec Brady I p. 51.ABINGDON. 1211third at the period of the Revolution, in defiance of the com- PhjHpandMary.mon law, and of the two former decisions, and against theplain construction of the charter, to be in the select body ofthe corporate officers. But this, it must be remembered, waseffected by Dr. Brady's book, published in the year in whichthe decision took place, and in which he suppresses the factsof two former decisions ; with one of which it is hardly possiblehe could have been unacquainted, as it immediately precededhis publication, and probably took place at the timewhen he was collecting his materials. Notwithstandingthat decision and the plain words of the charter, Dr. Bradyhas the boldness to assert, after speaking of the principalburgesses, that the corporation only had the grant to choosethe burgess to Parliament.Hindoo.In the seventh and eighth year, the last of the reign of 1557-8.Philip and Mary, a charter was granted to the borough ofHindon, providing that there should be one chaplain to celebrateservice in the chapel there. That eight men of discretion,burgesses and inhabitants of Hindon, should be the govern inhabitantsnor of the goods and possessions of the chapel, commonlycalled the free chapel of Hindon, within the parish of EastKnoyle.That certain persons named, then inhabitants of the townor borough, should be the first governors for their lives.That they should be a body corporate and politic, with acorporate name, and the usual corporate powers. And it wasprovided, that if any governor should die, or go out of theborough, and with their families from the said borough depart, the residue of the governors surviving, and then andthere abiding with their families, or the major part of them,any other person, inhabitant of the borough, in the place ofhim so dying, or with their family departing y into the officeof governor should elect. There then follows a grant of thechapel, the chapel yard, and a tenement and garden belongingto the chapel, with other property, including twoshambles in the market-place.1212 Hindoo.^ Mvy."^ Hindon had before this sent members to Parliament ; ithad a precept directed to it, but made no return in the 7thyear of Richard II., but it returned in the 27th year ofHenry VI., and has continued to do so ever since.The parliamentary history of this borough is singular;and affords an instance of the difficulties which arise in allthese questions, when the simplicity of the common law isdeparted from: and those principles are disregarded, whichafford the proper clue to solve every difficulty.Ipso. The burgesses of Hindon had never been incorporated.Upon the Restoration the question was, whether the '^fre^men" in general ought to elect, or such only as paid scot andlot. Here it is obvious that the word freemen meant theliberi homines of the common law, and not any membersof a corporation, for none such existed in the borough.The committee erroneously decided that the freemen in gene-right,oral ought to elect : — thus negativing the payment of scot and2o< as a qualification ; and saying nothing as to the inhabitantsor resiancy; nor as to the swearing and enrolling atthe court leet. And although this determination must havehad the effect of extending the right of election, yet it wasequally erroneous, and as much opposed to the principles ofthe common law, as those which restricted the right to theselect bodies.1701. However, it will be seen that the parties afterwards abandonedthe general term of" freemen" as descriptive of thevoters; and at the close of the reign of William III., upona petition being presented, the question was, " whetherthe bailiff, burgesses, or such inhabitants only who paidscot and lot had the right of election ; or whether it was Inthe inhabitants generally." The latter was insisted uponby the sitting member ; the former by the petitioner, whosecounsel properly urged that the law excluded those fromvoting who were not contributory to the common charge ofthe borough,prescriptive sitting member on the other hand contended, thatHindon was a borough by prescription : — which does notappear to be true, for it is not so mentioned in Domesday,Hindoo. 1213nor do we find any charter granted to it until the reign of ^*j.'}>P*"^Henry III. * when there is a mere confirmation to the inha- — ~~ —bitants of exemption from tolls.It was also argued, that " burgesses" and " inhabitants" inhabitant*were synonymous terms : — which is only correct in part ;because, although a- burgess must be an inhabitants yet, bythe common law, he must also have other qualifications.It was also added, that the inhabitants had a naturalright, unless usage could be shown to the contrary. Whattheir natural right could be, seems altogether unintelligible.That they had no right under the common law, unless theyhad the other requisite qualifications, is most clear.And usage of forty years only was set up to support their Right,right; but the committee properly decided, that it was inthe bailiff y burgesses and such inhabitants only who |?airf inhabitantsscot and lot'^ Which finding, in its legal effect, included Scot andresiancy ; because otherwise they could not perform lot ; —and housekeeping ; because otherwise they could not beresiant ; — in which character they would be suitors at thecourt leet,+ (where the bailiff of the borough is appointed,)and where they would be regularly sworn and enrolled and f*^®!?^complete all the qualifications required of them by thecommon law.The petition being recommitted, the petitioners allegedthe right to be in the purgatory who held under the tenant, Purgatory.the Bishop of Winchester ; and returns were given in evidenceto support that right ; as well as parol hearsay evidence.But the practice actually proved was in favour of theinhabitants paying scot and lot ; for whose right the sittingmember contended ; alleging, with truth, subject only to thequalification we have before given, that the purgatory (meaning;,no doubt, the householders,) — the burgesses — and theinhabitants of a borough — were synonymous terms. He alsoproduced returns to establish his case. The committee resolvedgenerally, that the right was in the inhabitants. Upon Flight.^ "^ ^ * Inhabitants• Vide ante, p. 438.t The sheriff's tourn was also in practice in this reign, as appears in the case of(crocker v. Dormer, Pope. 28, where it is shown, that the sheriff's office was seisedinto the king's hands, for holding his tam in an unaccustomed place.1214 Hindoo.1701.^ MsuT***^ which the inquiry was gone into as to who were housekeepers— part occupiers — or traders— or inmates. As to one,it was stated, that he did all the duties (by no means aninappropriate explanation of lot) ; and as to another, it wasproved that he had borne an office. And upon these inquiriesthe election was determined.About 26 years afterwards, the right was again in question; but the committee determined, though not in the samewords, yet in the same spirit as the former decisions, thatRight, the right was '^ in the inhabitants of houses within theborough, being housekeeper's In conformity with whichthe right was ever afterwards exercised by inhabitants payingscot and lot.CHIPPING Combe.1567^.The last place to which a charter was given in this reignwas Chipping Wycombe^ which received a grant in the 6th &6th of Philip and Mary.We have before seen,* that this place was not a borough atthe time of the compilation of Domesday ; and it probablywas not a borough by prescription, as it was an ecclesiasticalpossessions But in the time of Henry III., the bui^essesare mentioned. And in the reign of Edward I. it was in thehands of the crown: but returned members at that period;and also in the reigns of Edward II. and Edward III.It is said to have been first incorporated by Edward IV. ;but we have not been able to find a charter of incorporationof that date. However, the members in that reign were returnedby 12 persons, who, according to the observations wehave before made, were, no doubt, the jury for the time being.In the reign of Edward VI., the return was by the mayorand burgesses.1673. In the reign of Charles II., a petition was presented bycertain burgesses, freemen and inhabitants of the borough,complaining that the election had been made contrary to therights and custom, and in infringement of the liberties ofthe borough.Vile ante, 201. t Vi<lr ante. 4(>5.Combe. 1215In the commencement of the reign of Queen Anne, another ^^jjj*"**discussion arose as to the right of election for this borough ;. 1702.and it was agreed to be in the mayor, bailiffs, aldermen andburgesses. Which was followed by a question as to the legalmode of making the burgesses : it being contended, on theone hand, that they ought to be made by the majority of theburgesses at large; and on the other hand, that they shouldbe made by a majority of 16 : but it does not distinctly appearin what manner that question was decided.On a subsequent occasion, a further inquiry as to the ^725.making burgesses being instituted, itj|u>eared that an erasurehad been made in the entry of thar; and it was resolved RMoiuUon.that certain persons " had no pretence to be burgesses, butunder a charter of James II., which was never accepted or James II.enrolled ; and therefore that they had no right to vote."From this it will be seen, that by connecting the right ofelection with the corporation — instead of allowing it to bedecided by the principles of the common law, as we haveexplained before — the parliamentary elections have been involvedin all the intricacies of corporation law — which hasled, in the course of the last few years,* to embarrassinginquiries, appearing in succession to have baffled the wisdomof the courts of law, and even of the House of Lords — thecourt of dernier resort.We have observed during this reign the more frequent introductionof the term " inhabitants," — as well in the statutes inhabitantsas in the charters : — and have given the explanation of thischange which history sanctions. The same expression occursalso in some of the returns of this period — nothing ofthe kind having been found in any former reigns Thus theterm " inhabitants" expressly occurs in three several returnsfor Ludlow, during the parliaments called and summoned byRex V. Westwood, Dowlas Ryl.vol.7, p. 267; Barn. & Cress, vol. 4, p. 781 ;and Dom. Proc. 1830.t Id the first of Henry VII., a return is stated to be made " per majores nu 1485.serum gentium tunc residentiary' see Cornet v. Talbot, Plow. 126 ; and Hast.Went. 446 ; and Buckley v. Rice Thomas, Plow. 118 ; where the knight who waselected is described as ** born'* within the county. — S. C. Dyer, 113. pi. 67.1216 INHABITANTS.-INCORPORATION.Philip and Philip and Mary; and no doubt there are many others, if^ time and opportunity sufficed for collecting them.Another circumstance also occurred at this period, whichshould not be passed over in silence: particularly as it hassince produced so much error by the statement and misapplicationof the case we are about to quote.^raHon?" ^^^ doctrine of incorporation appears to have been carriedfurther in this reign than it had in any preceding — but by acourt, whose decisions have never been regarded with muchfavour.1563. i^ ^j^ holden for law in the Star Chamber, in the firstyear of Queen Mary, Dy Bromley, Chief Justice, Sir JohnBaker, and others — that " if the queen should at this daygrant land by her charter to the good men of Islington, withoutsaying — * to have to them, their heirs and successors, renderinga rent ' — this is a good corporation for ever, to this intentalone, and not to any other, because there is a rent reserved,&c. But then it seems they are only tenants at will : and ifthe queen release or grant to them the rent and fee-farm, itshould seem the corporation is dissolved ipso facto ; for therent and fee-farm were the cause which enabled the corporation,&c. ideo quaBre.''*The principle of this case is sufficiently obvious, and appliedonly to the extent to which the determination reallygoes — it is neither erroneous in itself, nor could it lead toerror.It in effect determines, that if the inhabitants of a placereceive a grant of land from the king for which they are topay rent, they shall not, after they have enjoyed the land,object that they are not liable to pay the rent, not being in-corporate ; but (as is stated in other books,) " rather thanthat the king should lose the rent, they shall be held to beincorporated — but to that extent and for that purpose only."This case, however, was afterwards frequently cited, for thepurpose of showing that any grant of the king to the inhabitantsof a place incorporated them — the latter qualification1 Dyer, 100 a. 10 Co. 30 Ji. 44 Kd. HI. 4 a. 3 Leon. 2(.n2.INCORPORATION. 1217of the doctrine being omitted. And text authors — as well as PhjHpand^ Mary.the abridgments — have also inserted the doctrine generallywithout the limitation. Indeed, it has been likewise carriedto the further extent of being supposed an authority for assumingthat the numerous charters of immunity, granted inthe reigns of King John and his predecessors and successors,were charters of incorporation. Although the position containedin this case, and which in fact was only adopted as anecessary consequence, resulting from the general doctrinesof corporation, was not laid down by the court till centuriesafter the granting of the charters, to which it has been sounjustifiably applied.Notwithstanding the general adoption of the doctrine ofincorporation in this reign, and the application of it to theearly charters ; still the following case will show, that insome instances they were merely treated as grants of franchises,and not of incorporations.Thus in the, first year of Queen Mary, in the King'sBench,* a juror was challenged by the defendants, becausehe had nothing within the hundred of Morden, nor hadany servants, nor dwelt, at the time of arraying the panel,nor at any time afterwards, in the hundred. To whichthe plaintiff replied, that the juror at the time dwelt inthe will of Wallingford, in the county aforesaid, which is,and at the time was, within the hundred of Morden. Towhich the defendant rejoined, that the will of Wallingfordwas, from time immemorial, a franchise, and wholly exemptfrom the same hundred ; and that the inhabitants ofthe will, and the inhabitants within the hundred, neverunited themselves, or met at any court, or were sworn uponany jury together. And upon this the plaintiff demurred inlaw,and the challenge was disallowed, and the juror sworn.And the opinion of Bromley, chief justice, was, because itwas confessed that Wallingford was once within the hundredof Morden : if it had been exempted since time of memory,it should be shown how, and by what means, wherefore, &c.• 1 Dyer, 100 a.4i1218 IRELAND.Philip andMary.IRELAND.?^4' ^^ ^^ Ireland, we have only to note, that the charter ofEdward VI. to Dublin'* was recited and confirmed by agrant of Philip and Mary in the second and third years oftheir reign : — the fee-farm was also released.^^^\5^^ And the mayor, bailiffs, citizen inhabitants, and commonaltyof Waterford received a confirmation of the charters ofKing John, Henry VI., Edward IV., Henry VII., Henry Vii,and Edward Vl.fCONCLUSION.We have now concluded the important reign of QueenMary ; in which, although many changes were not actuallymade, yet the foundation was laid, upon which, in the succeedingreigns, many extensive innovations were established.The only considerable alteration effected by Queen Mary,was the more general adoption of the term '* inhabitants"and the creation of new parliamentary boroughs, with theright of returning one member only. In every other respectthe municipal institutions continued as they were before : —and there is no ground whatever for assuming that theburgesses were not, during any part of this reign, as theyever had been, the inhabitant householders paying scot andlot, and sworn and enrolled at the court leet.ELIZABETH.1558 The reign of Queen Elizabeth — so long in its continuance,1603. and, in its course and consequences, so glorious to thecountry in general — is also an important aera in the progressof the subject of our inquiry.The queen had found the necessity of securing lier assPat. 10.t Rot. Conf. 2 & 3 Philip & Mary, n. 11.HOUSE OF COMMONS. 1219tendency in the House of Commons ; and as the best means Elizabeth,of effecting that object, had discovered the expediency ofobtaining an influence over the boroughs. Boroughs.The establishment of the corporations, with their govern corporationbodies, afforded her an opportunity of attaining this end :and therefore we find those institutions, which had beenproduced by other causes, and were intended for differentpurposes, during this reign applied to incline the boroughsto support the views of the crown.Hume appears to have been of opinion, that the preroga- ^Jf™**"time was in itself so powerful, that no other aid was necessaryto establish the influence of the crown. But it must at thesame time be remembered, that the House of Commons House ofCommons.asserted its right to institute all the bills for the supplies ;and besides there was, between them and the queen, greatdifferences upon points of religion and ecclesiastical affairs —the latter prohibiting all interference by the House on thosepoints; and the House and the country, on the other hand,being most anxious to have those matters established oncertain and secure grounds.However, it must be admitted, that even these positionsmay be considered points of historical doubt. But there isone fact which is decisive to show the interference of thecrown in this respect — namely, that shortly after the commencementof this reign, some ancient boroughs, which had Boroughseither long intermitted sending members to Parliament, orhad never previously done so, were required to send theirrepresentatives — in conformity, as it would seem, with thepractice which was suggested and partially adopted in thereign of Henry VIII.This point we shall more minutely consider hereafter. Inthe meantime it is necessary to observe, that the changes Changes,introduced by Queen Elizabeth were not effected hastily,but, in the spirit of the policy of her government, advancedby slow degrees. Thus it becomes necessary to trace thesuccessive course of events during this reign ; and departingfrom our previous mode of arrangement, of giving success Chronology1 I 1 • • gical orderlively the statutes, charters, and legal authorities, occurring4i21220 STATUTES.Elite beth. 'm the period, we shall, in this instance, refer to all the factsas they arose in point of time.1558. Tjjg Legislature, during the first year of this reign, wasCrown, principally engaged in restoring to the crown the ancientjurisdiction in ecclesiastical and spiritual matters — annullingthe power of the Pope in these dominions— restoring theCommon Prayer and the service of the church, with theadministration of the sacraments — the recognition of thequeen's title to the crown — the restitution of the first fruitsthe protection of the queen from treason and from slanderousreports — and the efforts of unlawful and rebelliousSubsidies, assemblies : — and a subsidy of tonnage and poundage wasgranted for her life, as well as two fifteenths and a tenth.Authority was likewise given to the queen, to make ordinariesfor collegiate churches and schools.The statutes of this year, speak of cities, boroughs, andtowns corporate and make provisions with respect to theinhabitants and dwellers in different parts of the country —and for offences to be presented before the steward at theleet ; as we have seen in the last preceding reigns.It does not appear that Queen Elizabeth, at the beginningof her reign, made any essential alteration in the charters ;but confined her interference chiefly to the confirmation ofthe former grants;* thus she inspects and confirms allCharters, ^j^^ former charters of Huntingdon, Bristol Poole, andMarlborough.1560. Ij^ the case of Million v. Berkeley's in the third year ofQueen Elizabeth, it was said, that there are distinctions inCorpora bodies politic — that is to say, between those which are madetions. ,by the king's letters patent, and those which exist in commonlaw. For those which are made by the king's letters patentas dean and chapter — mayor — and such like — cannotHeirs, purchase in succession by the name of " heirs'' but only bySuccessors the name of " successors."• But see post., p. 1228, Minehcad charter.15P8. t Entries of the elections of the niayore of Bristol are extant from the 40th ofElizabeth, and they nre all by the common council.♦ Plow. 242.CHARTERS. 1221The reader will remember the observations which have Kiizabeih.been made upon the charters of King John,* of which thisdecision is a striking confirmation.And that the courts leet were in full practice at this time, 1561.Leet.is established by two decisions in the next years by whichit was determined, that if the jury at the court leet refuse tomake presentment, according to the articles of the leet, topresent which they are sworn, the steward may set a fine Steward.upon them for the concealment and the contempt.No other material documents or authorities occur till the 1563.fifth year of this reign — when after an interval of four years,another Parliament was held ; and the interference of the Parliament.queen, in summoning new places began to be exercised.In the Lansdowne MSS., amongst the Cecil Papers, thefollowing extraordinary letter is found, dated in the sameyear, to which the reader must give such explanation ashemay think fit ; but a suggestion may be hazarded, that itwas written to conceal the real wishes of the queen, as herconduct was so much at variance with the import of it. Forno sovereign of these realms ever granted so many chartersof incorporation as Queen Elizabeth ; and in many instances, Corpora-althoughthe places to which the charters were granted hadnever been incorporated before, they were, nevertheless, inthe recitals, declared to have been " immemorially incorporated:" — a fact decisive to show that the queen was notso opposed to incorporations, as this letter would seem toimport.I have, with much argument, obtained of the queen's K^'highness to sign the book for the inhabitants of Poole: —and notwithstanding that I told her, as truth was, that theyhad been long suitors — that they desired no new grant, butconfirmation of the old — that their counsellors were agreeable,and that the attorneys had orderly proceeded in thesame — yet the name of incorporation is so discredited withhers that she told me plainly, she signed the book for no♦ See before, p. 422. t 2 Dyer, 211 b.^ Sec also post., MSS. in the possession of Lord Gainsborough, relative to Ireland.1222 CECIL PAPERS.Eiiiabcth. liking of the matter but only because they had been longsuitors, and to save my reputation, (as she termed it,) in thatI had given them hope. Therefore I crave of you, seeingthe matter is so far on, and as I take it by very good reasonablemeans, that it may please you to pass it favorable,except you shall find some substantial cause to the contt^if,as I trust you shall not. I have stayed this matter upon myLord Montjoie's importune requests this 10 or 12 weeks ;and in the end, he saith nothing that is material : and thetown will be bound as high as himself can devise, that theirgrant shall no ways prejudice his right. He stirred in thismatter by indirect means ; and hath done sic, quod dignumest ejus religione et person : — sed hee tibi in autem. Ipray you give your lawful assistance ; and as I promised thequeen's highness, so I will promise you, it shall be the lastincorporation that ever I will deal with at all, except I bespecially commanded," &c.*Journal. The records of Parliament up to this period are very imperfect;and contain but little matter to illustrate the historyof boroughs.The Journals commence only in the reign of Edward VI.,during which and the succeeding reign of Queen Mary, thereare merely a few short minutes extracted from the book ofthe then clerk of the House, which, from his name, is calledSeymour. " Seymour."The question in the reign of Edward VI., as to the right ofMaintenon. Maidstone to return members to Parliament, we have alreadynotedIn the reign of Queen Mary, the seat of the member forWestwood. West Love was vacated on account of his being: a vrehendartiPrebend . .cary. of Westminster, having as such a voice in convocation, andlion. J therefore not capable of being a member of the House ofCommons.• Cecil Papers, MSS. Lands. No. 7, p. 23.t Se before, p. 1162.Ewes' JOURNAL. 1223At the beginning of the reign of Queen £iizabeth| Sir Elizabeth.Sir Simon D' Ewes' Journal gives us a somewhat more perfectaccount of the proceedings in Parliament. And in thatcollection we find it reported to the House of Commons, inthe same year as the above letter to Poole, that burgesses 1662.had been returned of divers boroughs which had not latelyreturned members to Parliament ; Tregonyy St. JermyneSy Gregory.and St, MaweSy in Cornwall ; Minehead* in Somersetshire ; mains.St Makes.Tamworth in Staffordshire; and Stockbridge, in South Minehead.hampton. The speaker declared to the House, that the lard stock-stewardagreed that the members should resort to the House, " ^^'and with convenient speed, show letters patent why they werereturned to Parliament.Here the short minute of the proceeding ends. And itwould appear from it, that the question was put upon theground of these boroughs not having charters to show fortheir returning members. If their representatives wereallowed to sit in consequence of their having charters, itcertainly was a strong assertion on the part of the queen,and an admission on the part of the House, that the crownhad power to grant such charters. It was, however, afterwardsbut rarely exercised, was resisted in the case ofNewark in the reign of Charles II., and has never since beeninsisted upon.Indeed it will be seen, that although Queen Elizabethpurported by her charter to corporate some of these places,she did not profess to give them any right of returningmembers.Sir Simon D'D'Ewes puts the question upon much sounder P«80.and more constitutional grounds. He treats these places ashaving anciently been boroughs, — but by their poverty,having neglected to return members to Parliament, whenthey were paid wages by their constituents, they for a timelost the right of returning members. But when the paymentof wages was discontinued, he says, many boroughs,both in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, and that of her successor,King James, returned members, which had not returnedin the preceding Parliaments.1224 Ewes' JOURNAL.Elizabeth, this is the Same sound and constitutional doctrine so distinctlylaid down by the committee in the 21st of James I.,in the principle they established, that " the right of aborough to return members having once existed, can neverbe lost." However, that same committee, in its determinations,totally disregarded the charters of Queen Maythereby negativing the right of the crown to interfere by itscharters with the right of returning members. The wordsof Sir Simon D'D'Ewes are, that " it was very common andordinary in former times to avoid the charges of theirburgesses' allowance in time of Parliament (when the towngrew into any poverty or decay) ; that the boroughs dideither get license of the sovereign for the time being, to bedischarged from such election, and attendance, or did by degreesdiscontinue it themselves ; but of later times the knights,citizens and burgesses of the House of Commons, for themost part bearing their own charges, many of those borough-towns,who had discontinued their former privilege, by notsending, did again continue it (as these towns here) bothduring her majesty's reign, and afterwards in the reign ofKinjiC James her successor."These observations are in substance correct as to thefacts ; but manifestly erroneous as to the constitutional principlesupon which they appear to have been founded.l^>o»i-hs It is certainly true that many places, originally returningnuud. members to Parliament, discontinued sending representativeswhen they fell into poverty or decay ; upon the ground wehave stated before, of their ceasing to keep up the exerciseof their exclusive jurisdiction; by which they, in fact,ceased to be boroughs, separate and distinct from the jurisdictionof the sheriff, and were absorbed again into thecounties.It is further stated in these observations, that " boroughs,in order to avoid the charges of their burgesses' allowance^'Jl?f ^^' " ^^ Parliament, obtained a license from the king to be dischargedfrom the election and attendance." This is alsotrue : but those licenses, in point of fact, were not actedupon; as the places obtaining them notwithstanding sentcense.Ewes' JOURNAL. 1225their members ; whilst on the other hand, places which had ^^'"^^<*''ceased to be boroughs by falling into decay, altogether discontinuedsending members.Both of these circumstances were consistent with the trueprinciples of the constitution.The latter we have before explained. As to the former,the licenses were inoperative, because it is clear that the l°5>P«ra-' live.king had no power to discharge any place from returningmembers as long as it continued a borough. The crown hadthe undoubted prerogative of directing within what districtsthe law should be administered, whether of the county atlarge, or of any particular franchise, as a city or borough :but when the king made any place a borough, all thelegal consequences followed as a necessary result of law ;and amongst others, that it should, in conformity withthe writ, be called upon by the sheriff's precept to returnmembers to Parliament ; by which means the burgesses ofthe borough were consequentially exempted from contributingto the wages of the knights of the shire. But theking could not exempt them from both. They must contributeto the one or the other. And therefore, if the burgesses,by reason of the place being a borough, were exempt fromcontributing to the wages of the knights, the king could notdirect that they should not send, nor pay, their memberswhilst it continued a borough : — if he, or the burgesses,wished that they should get rid of that liability, then theplace must cease altogether to be a borough, and as aconsequence, become contributory to the knights of theshire.The other assertion in this note, that the members had Member'sbegun to pay their own charges, is also no doubt correct: — ^**^'and it is the strongest proof to establish, that the beingreturned a member to the House, had then, in public estimation,lost its character of being a burden, and had becomean object of desire ; — which would hardly have beenthe case, if the House had continued to be in the samestate of subserviency to the crown in which it had been inthe former reigns. But the truth is, that the House of1226 Ewes' JOURNAL.Elizabeth. Commons had begun to feel its power and importance ; whichgenerated on the one hand a desire in persons of station andproperty to obtain seats in it ; and on the other, a necessityin the crown to put some species of restraint upon the increasingand ill-regulated power of the people.Our constitution had not then made such advances towardsperfection, that it could venture to adopt the mostdirect and sound methods of controlling the people ; whichevery government, in order to effect its purpose of covent'ing^ must, in some manner or other, possess.Instead, therefore, of restoring and enforcing the oldensystem of our ancestors, which would have established thegovernment on secure grounds, the project was unfortunatelyadopted, of moulding the institutions, which thenexisted, in such a manner as to make them indirectly servethe purpose of government : — a bad expedient for doing thatwhich was undoubtedly necessary, bat which might havebeen effected in so much more desirable a manner.But to proceed with the consideration of the real historyof these places, the returns for which were the subject ofinvestigation before Parliament.Tregony. Dr. Willis says, that Tregony had returned members toParliament in the 23rd and 25th of Edward I. ; but Prynnemakes no mention of those returns. The assertion as to thefirst cannot be correct; for no general returns were made atthat time ; and the statement as to the second, is, in all probability,also incorrect. It seems, therefore, the sounderopinion to infer, that this borough returned members, for theIncoroo- first time, at this period ; and that it was not incorporateduntil the 19th of James I.1695. In the seventh year of William III., the ricrht of electionwas agreed to be in the inhabitants : with one of thoseabsurd additional qualifications that have led to so muchintricacy in questions connected with the right of parliamentaryelection. It was said that the electors were " suchinhabitants as provided for thenisclces, whether they livedunder one roof or not'' This has given birth to that ingensGERMAIN'S, fcc. 1227bible description of voters by the term of " potwallere," of Elizabeth,which there are only three instances in England, — Honiton — PotwaUe™.Taunton — and this place : in all of which the determinationsin favour of this right can clearly be traced to their mistakenand erroneous source.In this instance, the evidence chiefly related to the questionof whether those who joined in the election were housekeepersor not; as contradistinguished from lodgers andboarders : — and two instances are mentioned, one of " aperson who lay in a hog-sty" — and another of a man'' who worked in a chamber which had no chimney, and hadneither pot nor bed." It was properly contended on theother hand, that the right was in the inhabitants payingscot and lot, which would have been both reasonable andconstitutional. Whereas the decision in truth, convertedinto a right of election, one fact which only tended to provepermanent inhabitancy.The consequence of which has been, that in this place, aswell as in Honiton and Taunton, the most ridiculous as wellas fraudulent expedients were resorted to, in order to increasethe number of voters, by getting every individual atthe place to " boil a pot ;" of which fact the most disgustinglycontradictory evidence was given in confirmation anddenial.The next place, with respect to which the House of Commonsdecided, was St, Germain's, which like Tregony had Staggersnot before returned members to Parliament : and it does notappear ever to have been incorporated, neither is there anydecision as to its right of election, which was exercised bythe inhabitant householders.The third place is St. Makes, which had likewise never states.before sent members, nor had it any corporation: but like St.Germain's was under a port reeve, occasionally called mayor.The right of election, in consequence of the court baronhaving been held, and confounded with the court leet, wasexercised by the resident free tenants sworn at that court.1228 MlNEllEAD.Kiiztbeth. this was, in fact, according to the particular abuse in thatplace, a slight perversion only of the common law right ofthe inhabitant householders. But there are also traces ofusurpations having been attempted in this borough of acorporate character, by the arbitrary and irregular admissionof freemen — even after the date of the writ — for the purposeof controlling the election.Minehead. The fourth is Minehead, which likewise never was incorporatedtill the first year of this reign,* by a charter whichcommences with a recital that it was an ancient town, andthat the inhabitants had petitioned that the town and themselvesshould be one body corporate and politic, of onereeve, called " a port reeve," and burgesses.The queen, therefore, for the amelioration of the townand inhaJntantSff granted that the town of Minehead shouldbe Vifree borough incorporate in deed and name, of one reeve,called a " portreevey^ and burgesses; by the name of " reeveand burgesses of the borough of Minehead."The usual corporate powers are then given.Bye-laws. And that the reeve and burgesses should for ever havethe power of enacting laws and ordinances for the governmentof the borough.12 Men. That there should be twelve men of the most discreet andworthy men of the borough, who should be assistants to thereeve for the time being, and should be called the principalburgesses, and compose the common council.The first reeve is then named and appointed, who isInhabitants described as one of the most worthy men and inhabitants,and the twelve principal burgesses are also styled inhabitantsof the borough.Steward. The reeve and steward of the borough for the time beingare appointed justices of the peace : — and power is given tothe reeve and burgesses to assemble yearly to select from thespat. 1 EHz.p. 1.t The object of these charters of Queen Elizabeth, is said to have been to invitepersons of industry and skill to inhabit in the boroughs, and to add to their prosperityand opulence. 1 Peck. 160, arg<l- Tewkesbury case.— There can, therefore,be no doubt that the privileges were intended for the iiihabiianU,MINEHEAD. 1229twelve principal burgesses two men, and present them to the Elizabeth,other* men and inhabitants then assembled, the major part inhabitantsof whom should elect the reeve.And when any vacancy occurred in any of the principalburgesses, they and the reeve were to assemble within eightdays, and elect one other person, then an inhabitant of theborough, to be a principal burgess.A serjeant-at-mace is then appointed for the execution ofall precepts to be executed within the borough, and who wasto have the same power as those of the city of London. London.That the reeve and burgesses should elect a steward, withpowers to hear and determine all actions, real and personal.The charter then concludes by granting a prison, with a criminaljurisdiction. A fair, market, and profits therefromaccruing, and freedom from tolls, &c. for all the burgesses ofthe borough.But there is no clause in the charter purporting to give anypower to elect members to Parliament.This charter, however, was in the second year of James I. 1604.forfeited, and the corporation dissolved, the king seizing thefranchise ; and in the 20th of Charles II., a quo warranto was 1667.brought against the corporation, upon which judgment wasgiven against them.Notwithstanding which, Minehead continued to returnmembers to Parliament ; and both before and after the dissolutionof the corporation, the returns were by the freemen andburgesses, and the burgesses and inhabitanus. And although inhabitanuits right to send members to Parliament was questioned inthe reign of James I., yet it ever afterwards continued to 1620.send representatives, and therefore its privileges as a parliamentaryborough were not, in feet, affected by the dissolutionof the corporation.In the course of this discussion, it was alleged that theborough did not challenge its privilege by charter, but byprescription ; for which latter claim it seems clear that there Prescription.was no pretence.The corporation having ceased, and the provost's officeAs in the East Love and other charters.1230 MINEHEAD.-TAMWORTH.Elizabeth. being therefore entirely determined, the constables, as pre-construct.siding over the place, became the returning officers, in theTaunton, same manner as they did at Taunton, under similar .stances. And accordingly in the fourth year of Geoi^e h,there was an express resolution to that effect.It appears from one of the petitions, that Minehead hadalso, in another respect, attempted to imitate Taunton, forthe 'spot-boilers" are expressly mentioned. But in that sameyear the right of election was in substance declared to beaccording to the common law — namely, in the '* parishioners;"for it was requisite that every person should have resided longenough in the place to have made him a permanent inhabitantwhich in fact is the same as being a parishioner; and it wasadded, that they must be housekeepers — which necessarilysubjected them to the other common law liabilities of payingScot and scot and lot, and being sworn and enrolled as resiants at theLeet. court leet, at which the constables, the returning officers,were yearly chosen.Such was the right of election till the time of the ReformAct ; and it is impossible for any case to prove more stronglythan this of Minehead, that the right of election was not acorporate right ; but that even if the corporation ceased, thereturn would then be made by the officers and the burgessesCommon pointed out by the common law.law.Tamworth. The fifth is Tamworth : — which Camden says, during theCamden.reigns of the Mercian kings, was a royal town, and a celebratedplace; and Lombard, quoting the Chronicles of Worcester,says it was called, in divers donations made to it bythe kings of Mercia, " locus famous, notus, et illustrious." Itwas the seat of government under Offa, Engulf Beoniwulf,and had a mint. The town was destroyed by the Danes ;but Elfleda, the wife of Ethelred, and sister to Edward theElder, repaired it, and made a castle there. Upon her death,Edward took it, fearing it might fall into the hands of theDanes. It is situated partly in the county of Stafford, andpartly in Warwickshire, and both sheriffs make the return forit, on two different precepts: the one from the sheriff of War-tamWORTH. 1231wicks requiring the burgesses to elect one member — and the Elizabeth ,other from the sheriff of Staffordshire, requiring them to electtwo members — ^a whimsical variety, for which it would be verydifficult to account.The borough of Tamworth, as we have seen before, is notexpressly mentioned in Domesday ;* but its burgesses are Domesday,mentioned, and amongst the king's lands in Warwickshire,the entry as to Coleshelle. So that there can be no doubtthat it was then a borough ; and from the burgesses beingdescribed as in that place, though the tenants of anothermanor, there seems, even in that early period of its history,to be a strong inference that its bui^esses were its inhabitants,and that they were not made so by reason of tenure only.Tamworth continued a borough in the two succeedingreigns, as in a record of the time of Henry I., its aid (aux Hen.l.iliad) is entered at 30s.It also continued a borough in the fifth year of King 1139.Stephen ; but was then probably falling into great decay —because the sheriff returns an amount of 26s. of the past aidof the borough of Tamworth, which therefore appears to havebeen in arrear, although it was 5s. less than the aid in theformer year ; and in the pardons, by writ of the king, to theburgesses of Tamworth, is included this aid, on account oftheir poverty.In the second year of the reign of Henry II., it also re- 1^55.gained a borough, as is proved by the sheriff's account ofits aid of 25s. And its bonum is returned, in the fifth year H58.of the same reign.From this time there does not appear, for an interval ofmany reigns, any mention of it as a borough ; and the subsequentrecords, in the reign of Edward II., will show thatit had before that period ceased to exercise those privileges. Inall probability, it had done so between the reign of Henry II.and the close of the reign of Henry III. — as neither in thereturn to the council, in the 39th of that reign, nor duringthe reign of Edward I., is there any return from thisborough.• Vide ante, pp.253. 256,257.1232 TAMWORTH.Elizabeth . This supposition is confirmed, by its being called '* village12*22. de Tamworth," in the roll of a talliage of the 7th of Henry which same roll, Stafford is called a borough.1297. However, in the 9th of Edward II., the sheriff of Stafibrd-Discontinued.shire being required to certify how many boroughs therewere in his bailiwick, returned only Stafford* — it had, therefore,at that time, without doubt, no separate jurisdiction, orthe sheriff must have known it ; but having ceased to be aborough, it had again come under his jurisdiction, as a partof the county.No mem Like the three prefixing places, it did not return members1562. to Parliament before the fifth of Elizabeth — and the earlygrants to it were to the town and tenants, and not to theburgessesIt was incorporated by Queen Elizabeth, in the third yearof her reign : — and there are two bailiffs, a recorder, highsteward, and 24 principal burgesses : — but whether thesewere any thing but the king's officers — the officers of theleet — and the jury — might be very questionable.From the fifth of Queen Elizabeth, during the remainderof her reign, and that of James I., and Charles I., till theend of the Long Parliament, Tamworth regularly returnedmembers. But it did not in the Parliament of the sixth,eighth, or 11th of Charles II.1670. In the 23rd year of Charles II., the right of election forthis borough came before a committee of the House ofCommons. Mr. Serjeant Charleston reported its proceedings;and the question appears to have been, Whether the right ofelection was in the bailiffs and 24 capital burgesses, orwhether it was in the populace and burgesses at large ? Andthe committee decided, that it was in the former; and negativedthe right of the latter.Upon what evidence this determination was founded doesnot appear. It however did not stand the test of furtherinquiry ; and it was, in effect, set aside 28 years afterwards,by the resolution of a committee, which will be hereafter• See before, pp. 256, 596. t See before, p. 654.X The castle was part of the vast possessions of the family of Mansions.TAM WORTH. 1233 '*f^'stated — and whiche as far as it annuls this determination Elizabeth.was confirmed by another committee in the year 1722.In the 10th of William III., a petition was presented to los.the House respecting the election of this place; and SirRowland Gwyn reported the proceedings of the committee.From which it appeared, that the right of the inhabitants i^abiuntspaying scot and lot was not disputed; but the petitioner lot.contended, that all such also as had freeholds, or paid scot holders.and lot, had a right to vote.The sitting member denied the right of the freeholders.The petitioner proved an usage by the non-resident freeholders,although not paying scot and lot, for 30 years.The sitting members recited the above resolution of 1670 :and proved, by witnesses, that from 1661, the right had beenin the bailiffs, capital burgesses, and scatters and letters;and that the out-freeholders did not claim the right of votingtill 1679, when they were admitted by a bailiff who wassteward of the candidate for whom the freeholders voted.The committee resolved, that the right was in the inhabit Resolution.tants paying scot and lot, and in such persons who have/rce- within the borough, whether they were resident or not — holders,one of the earliest instances of the introduction of non-residents,in defiance of the clear and express words of thestatute of Henry V.With reference to the inhabitants, the inquiry was,whether they were housekeepers — or servants — inmates — joint Housekeepers.occupiers — or living with their parents — clearly showing, thatalthough the general term "inhabitants" was used, yet theright, in fact, was considered and acted upon, as belonging tothe householders ; from which all the consequences followedof their paying scot and bearing lot, and being sworn and Scot andenrolled as resiants at the court leet, which was held in the Leet.borough.It appears also, that the vote of a person whose househad been divided ]\x%t before the election was disputed. Andit seems to have been taken for granted (as undoubtedlyit ought to be), that the payment of scot and lot included4k.11234 TAMWORTH.Elizabeth, all charges — the churchy as well ad the poor rate — and alsoRates, the constable's rate.1722. In the ninth of Greorge I., the right of election again cameunder discussion, and similar evidence was given withrespect to the freeholders ; but their voting was alleged tobe an innovation on the rights of the borough ; and the committeeproperly limited their determination as to the r^ht ofV^^' election to the inhabitants, being householders paying scotand lot.The petitioner contended it was a borough by prescription(which it undoubtedly was, as appears by the extract fromDomesday, and other records mentioned before), and thatthe right was in the inhabitants paying scot and lot.The sitting member insisted, that the freeholders had alsoa right to vote whether resident or not.The petitioner proved, as well by direct evidence as byreputation for 50 years, that th freeholders who were not inhabitantsdid not vote, and that they were first brought in about60 years ago, when they were admitted by one of the bailiffs,who was steward to the candidate for whom the freeholdersvoted, but they were rejected by the other bailiff, whorefused to sign the return; they had however voted eversince : — but it was urged that it was an innovation, and thatit was inconvenient, as multiplying freeholds.The sitting member called a witness to prove, that thefreeholders had voted for 60 years past ; and two others toshow, that they had voted for the last 20 years. And it wascontended that there was no room to alter the decision in1698, which affirmed the right of the freeholders.In the investigation of the several votes, the necessity ofHouse beiner householders was admitted on both sides; and ob-holders.o 'sections were taken again, by both candidates, to persons asInmates, inmates — and to certificate men — as not being legal and per-V'eriiiicsiiemen. manet inhabitants of the place. And the payment of bothchurch and poor rates was also insisted upon.And thus, after ineffectual attempts to introduce the twousurpations of the select body on the one hand — and the non-tamworth.1235resident freeholders on the other — the right of election — that Elizabeth,is, the class of persons who were the burgesses of this place — Burgesses,was legally and constitutionally defined to be the inhabitanthouseholders paying scot and lot.With a view to the general right of election for boroughs,Tamworth affords a striking instance of the principles whichought to be applied to this subject; of the varying groundsupon which committees were formerly in the habit of decidingand of the uncertainty of their determinations.Tamworth being a borough by prescription, was properlyenough admitted to its right of returning members, althoughit had discontinued for nearly 400 years.The right of the select body, which was created before itreturned members to Parliament, though once affirmed bythe resolution of a committee, to the exclusion of the populace,was afterwards properly negatived, and the right ofthe populace established. And although the right of thefreeholders, whether resident or not, was once supportedby a decision, it was afterwards confined to those freeholderswho were also inhabitants ; in fact, bringing back thisright of election to the pure principles of the ancient commonlaw.*It should be also observed, that a corporation was establishedin this borough before it appears to have returnedmembers to Parliament, and to have continued an existingbody ; and, analogous to Reading, Windsor, and severalother places, the corporators, as such, had no right of interferingin the election of members of Parliament.The sixth and last place was Stourbridge, which in like ^J?f ^"manner never returned members to Parliament till this time. ^^•NotiDcor-It never was incorporated, and all its municipal functions ported.were, as we have seen, always performed at the court leet Leet.of the borough.There were subsequent contests as to right, and in 1741 it was established, thatcertificate men had not any right. The last petition against the return was in 1819,when the question was raised, whether it was necessary to pay the church as well asthe poor rate. The committee decided it was not necessary. The evidence onthat occasion went to confine the right to parishioners.4 k21236 STOCK BRIDGE.Eiiiabcth. Although not incorporated, it had, like many other places.Seal, a common seal and serjeants-at-mace.This place has frequently been contested — sits rights muchdiscussed — and the conduct of the voters with respect tobribery often censured : — but yet there has been no expressdecision as to the right of election.*I hlw*' ^^ ^^^ ^^^^ James I., the petition was by the inhabitants; —1689. in the 2nd of William and Mary, by the burgesses and inhabitants; — in the 6th of William and Mary, by the inhabitants; — and in the 8th of William III., by the inhabitantsand Jreemen.f In point of fact, the elections were alwaysmade by the inhabitants, paying scot and lot.Thus we have shortly traced the histories of those sixplaces, and find in each of them that they were first calledto return members to Parliament by Queen Elizabeth : — ^thatin all, after some attempts at varying usurpations, the rightof election, (which it must ever be remembered is the samequestion as the right of burgess-ship,) was determinedto be, according to the common law, in the inhabitanthouseholders, paying scot and lot: — that in each of theseboroughs there was a court leet, and that the legal consequenceof their being such inhabitants was, that they oughtSworn, to be sworn and enrolled at that court as resiants — thus inEnrolled. /»i/»ii- i • ^ • i ^every respect lulnllmg the ancient law, which has existedand generally prevailed unaltered, notwithstanding all innovations,from the earliest periods of our history to the passingof the Reform Bill.Notwithstanding the right of these six places to returnmembers to Parliament was thus questioned, and no furtheraccount or proof of their title to this privilege appears afterwardsto have been given, still they continued to send representatives; and the only reason which is suggested for it is,that " the queen's inclination was well understood."Statutes. Many statutes important to the public weal, but not• See Hob. Rep. 107.t See Glanv. 97.STATUTES.material to our inquiry, were passed during the same Par ^^^abeth.liament.The first was the assurance of the queen's royal power over ^^' ^•all estates and subjects within her dominions. It was chieflydirected against the see of Rome, and was intended particularlyfor the purpose of securing the allegiance of ecclesiasticalpowers — who being exempted from the jurisdiction of the Ecclesiastics.court leet, were not bound to take the oath of allegiance. Oath ofallegianceThat oath, therefore, was by this statute expressly requiredfrom them, as well as others — chiefly persons who eitherwere not, or were thought not to be, liable to take the oathat the view of frankpledge.Hume observes, " that this statute did not extend to any Hume.of the degree of baron, because it was not supposed thatthe queen could entertain any doubt with regard to thefidelity of persons possessed of such high dignity." Butthe fact was, that they took more solemn oaths in the Houseof Peers ; and on that ground were exempt from suit at thecourt leet. It rarely happens that acts of state are foundedupon such punctilious grounds as Hume suggests : but ratherupon some sound distinction of reason or fact.Further provisions are made for the repair of towns ;* forthe punishment of vagabonds ; and for the relief of thepoor and impotent of every parish, " as every person willof his charity, that they may not openly beg ;" and if anyparishioner should obstinately refuse to pay reasonablytowards the relief of the poor, or should discourage others,then the justices were enabled to tax him. An act wasalso passed for the regulation of artificers, labourers,servants of husbandry, and apprentices ; by the 10th sectionof which it was provided, that " none of them shoulddepart forth of one city, town, or parish to another — norout of the lath, rape, wapentake, or hundred — or out of thecounty or shire where he last served without a testimonial, Testimoniesthe seal of the city or town corporate ; or ot the constableand head officer, and of two honest householders'* JJjJJJ;.• See also 26th Hen. VIll., ch. 8, a» to Norwich— ch. 9, as to Lynne—and 27thHen. VI II., ch. 1, as to Nottingham, Gloucester, Northampton, and other places.Vagabonds.Poor.1238 STATUTES.Elizabeth. So that permanent responsible residence was the clear objectof the Legislature. And the persons who were enabled toHouse take apprentices were the householders dwelling or inhabit"Dwelling, ing in any city or town corporate, using any art — andthey were enabled to have the son of any freeman — notoccupying husbandry — nor being a labourer — and inhc^t^Ling the same — or in any other city or town that then ^AfIncorpo- or thereafter should be, and continue incorporate — to be anapprentice, after the custom of the city of London for sevenyears.All the other provisions of this period have likewise a similarreference to residence and inhabitancy. And the chartersinhabitants of the Same date are usually to the inhabitants, where theyare general grants to the places; and to those inhabitingwhere they are given to particular companies or crafts — asto the merchant adventurers of Newcastle-upon-Tyne, &c.*Sandwich. The municipal documents of that period also establishthe same point — thus in Sandwich, in the sixth year of thisreign, 12 persons are appointed to tax the " inhabitants'*for the living of the preachers and ministers of the town.Poole. And in Poole, the inhabitants concur in allowing a lane tobe taken on certain conditions; on failure of which the partywas to restore it to the use of the town and the inhabitantsAnd in a case at law it was held, that a custom for thetenants, residents, and inhabitants within a manor, to makebye-laws, was good. JLondon. As to London also, we find that in the fifth year of Queen1563 •Elizabeth, the common council proposed an ordinance torestrain the receiving of freedom by redemption — that evilwhich tended so much to interfere with the ancient rigid rulesas to inhabitancy; and which has led, in modem times, tothe great increase of non-resident freemen — in fact totallyaltering the nature of citizenship; and almost destroyingthe local nature of their privileges, by making them nolonger exclusively applicable only to the inhabitants ofNon-resin j, y . ^-i- ni • idenis. London, but to persons residing out of the city, whilst a• 1659, 1 Eliz. 2 Brand, 656. t So also 1561 , 3 Eliz.t Moore, 75, 8 Eliz. Starling y. Criett.LONDON. 1239great portion of those within it are, contrary to its ancient Elizabeth.customs, excluded from a participation in its right. 1564.That this system was contrary to the practice and principlesof the original constitution of London is also shown bythis fact; that in the next year — the sixth of Queen Elizabeth," time was granted to those freemen, with theirfamilies, to come and live in the city, on pain of disfranchisement."In proof of the jealousy which existed as to the residenceof strangers within the city, by which after a year Strangers,and a day, according to the ancient common law, they mightobtain a right to enjoy the privileges of citizens ; — there werein the ninth and tenth years of Queen Elizabeth inquiries 1566-7.and certificates thereupon made by the churchwardens, constables,and sidesmen, of all the strangers dwelling withinthe respective parishes.*POOLE.As a specimen of the charters which were granted atthis period, we insert the following extracts from that ofPoole, of the 10th year of Queen Elizabeth, for which the 1568.bui^esses and inhabitants concurred in applying to thequeen. It contains by inspeximus the charters of the thirdof Henry VIII., the first of Edward IV., and the 11thof Henry VI., and confirms the privileges granted by themto the mayor, bailiffs, burgesses, and inhabitanus and their inhabitanusuccessors. It then recites that " the mayor, bailiffs, burgesses,and inhahitants, from time, &c., had enjoyed diverscustoms, liberties, &c., as well hy prescription as by char Prescribesters made to the burgesses and inhabitants, and their heirs^^ and successors : which for many years past they had notused and enjoyed, by which the town had suffered greatdamages, and losses, &c., and was threatened with almostutter ruin ; and the good government and rules of the townwere entirely extinguished. Whereupon the bui^essesand inhabitants had prayed the queen, for the better governmentof the town, to renew and create them, the bur-seeBentley's book, St. Andrew's, Lowborn.1240 POOLE.EiiiabeUi, « gesses and inkdbUants into another body eorparaie andclimate. '* politic, &;c. The queen, therefore, hoping that if the m-inhabitants ^ habUontg and their successors should be enabled by her'' grant to enjoy more ample honours, &c., they then would*^ feel themselves more especially bound to perform such sere'vice as they should be able :" — Granted, that the townNone. should be a free town, incorporated by the name of the may,bailifis, burgesses, and '' commonalty'" and have perpetualsuccession, with the usual corporate powers ; and that theburgesses should elect within the town from among themodomlUjor.ae. yearly one mayor and two bailiffs ; and also on vacancies toelect another fit and decreet person of the borough to bemayor or bailiff.£wh«tior. That the mayor should be the escheator; and that '' the'' bailiffs, burgesses, and commonalty, and their successors,** and the inhabitants and resiants within the town, should^ not be held to obey any mandates of the steward and'' marshal, or clerk of the market of the household ; and that^^v^^ *' they should in nowise enter the town, suburbs, and piecincts, but the mayor to be clerk of the market.Merchant That no merchant stranger should sell or buy any merchandisewithin the liberties, of any merchant stranger, otherwisethan in gross.Staple. And that there should be in the town one staple for recognizanceof debts.That the mayor, bailiffs, burgesses, and commonalty, theirheirs and successors, should elect yearly from amongst theinhabitants of Poole, and the suburbs thereof ^ or from amongstothers, as well brokers of merchandises, barges, and boats,as all, and all manner of porters and packers; as the mayor,ireton l^^l^ff^> ^^^ burgesses, of the town of Southampton and theirpredecessors heretofore have been accustomed to elect andappoint.And it was also granted that the town, with the suburbscorporate, and precincts, should be one entire county corporate in deedand in name, and distinct and entirely separated from thecounty of Dorset, to be called " the county of the town ofSheriff. Poole;" and that there should be in the same town one sheriff;POOLE. 1241the burgesses and their successors in every year electing one Elizabeth.discreet y able, and Lit man from their common burgesses to be 1568.sheriff, who should hold the county courts within the townmonthly, tciih the same powers as any county sheriff; and court!that no other sheriff should intromit within the liberties. Non-intermit.That the mayor, bailiffs, burgesses and commonalty, might court.hold a court in the guildhall before the mayor and the seniorbailiff weekly; of all pleas of debt, &c. with powers of arrestand attachment of the bodies and goods, &c. within theliberties ; and that they might hold a court of pie-poudre in Pie-poudrethe same manner and form, and by the same process astheretofore accustomed in the town of Southampton ; with Sou^^p-power to attach defendants in the same suits, &c. in mannerand form as the sheriffs of London. London.That the mayor should have assise of bread; and thatno marshal of the household should enter the town orprecincts.That the mayor, recorder and four burgesses should be thekeepers of the peace : — and that nine, eight, six, five, four,three or two of them, should for ever thereafter he justices; Justices,of whom the mayor or recorder should be one.That the keepers of the peace, and the justices of the of Dorset, should not enter the town, liberty orprecincts.That the mayor, bailiffs, burgesses and commonalty shouldhave for ever, in support of the charges incumbent uponthe town, the liberty of the view of frankpledge, and all Frank-thingswhich to such views belong, within the town, libertyand precincts; and all fines, &c. And all goods and chattelsof persons outlawed and waived.That the mayor, bailiffs, burgesses and commonalty, nor anyinhabitant or resiant dwelling and residing within the townand liberties of Poole, should thereafter, against his will, beput or impannelled in any assises, juries, inquisitions, &c. Juries,out of the town and liberties of Poole.And that the inhabitants, burgesses and commonalty of thetown might have their guild, and all their liberties, franchises,privileges, jurisdictions and customs, by land and by sea, as1242 POOLE.Eiiiabeth. sell and peaceably as the mayor, bailiffs and burgesses of1568. the town of Southampton,And that the mayor, bailiffs, burgesses and commonalty,and their successors and cUl the other inhabits and but'Quit of gesses, should be quit and discharged of toll, murage, &c.and all customs throughout the land.That the mayor, bailiffs, burgesses, and commonalty shouldReturn of have the return of writs, with a mmrintromittant clause. AndCoroner, to elect from among themselves a coroner.And that no one of the ^^ inhabitants or resiants" withinthe town should be impleaded out of it.That no writ should run within the liberty of Poole, unlessa writ of right, of novel disseisin, and a writ of dower undenihil habet, as is accustomed within the town of Southampton; but that they through all the realm might haveand hold all their liberties and free customs thitherto obtainedand used, as quietly and wholly as the burgesses of^"to" Southampton or any others in the kingdom, more freely haveand hold within their liberties.The usual general clause for the using and enjoying the privilegesis added; with a penalty of los. for obstructing them.And finally, the mayor, bailiffs, burgesses, and their successors,for ever, were to be quit of murage and passage, &c.The reader will have observed, that, throughout thisinhabitanu charter, the inhabitanus are treated as the persons incorporated;and as those who are to enjoy the privileges, andperform all the municipal functions. It is also clear fromResidence many clauses of the charter, that it required residence forthose who were to participate in the privileges. The burgessesare frequently described as persons of the borough.Repeated provisions show clearly the intention of the queento prevent, on all occasions, the necessity of the burgessesgoing from their borough. How can it then be conceived,Non-resin that she nevertheless intended that there should be non-cuts.resident burgesses ?The expression, inhabitants and resiantSy is clearly intendedto be the same as that used before, of burgesses andinhabitants. It is diiBcult to suppose that there was anyPOOLE. 1243real difference between these terms, or that they were used Elizabeth.to describe two distinct classes of persons: — which is the 1568.real answer to the hypercritical arguments founded by manypersons upon cumulative words of this description. '' Meshanty' properly speaking, is the appropriate term for thesworn suitors at the court leet' or " the permanent inhabitanthouseholders ;" and the more general term '^ inhabitants'was probably intended to include the new comers —those who then or thereafter might not have inhabited longenough to have been duly sworn.The staple has been treated by Dr. Brady as the origin of Theiupie.many boroughs ; but the clause in this charter appears toafford a strong inference against that supposition. It is thefirst time in which any mention of the staple occurs in thecharters of Poole ; the clause itself importing, that it is anew grant — and this place had been a borough for manycenturies before. Besides the staple towns were well known,and they by no means included all the boroughs.In the clause relative to the vacancies in the offices of thestaple, '^ departure*' from the office is spoken of: — which mustmean departure from the borough, and is treated as actuallyvacating it. But the cases of the King t;. Ponsonby,* andthe King t?. the Mayor of Truro have decided, that actualremoval by the corporation is necessary to complete thevacancy; although, upon an application for a mandamus,in the case of the Brighton commissioner, the mere factof quitting the place was held to put an end to the titleand the office. J As in many boroughs the majority of ^°°'the corporation were non-resident, or at least had an interestin continuing the non-resident corporators, the result of thedecisions in the Irish and Truro case was, that the corporationsthemselves refused to interfere; and consequently theclauses of this description which occur in many charters, the1 Ve8.Rep.p.l. t 3 Barn. & Aid. p. 590.X Also, in the Att.-Gen. v. Wilkinson, 3 Broad. & Bing. 260, a deed of the19th of James 1., disqualifying the feoffees of a school at Field, if they went to live poutof the parish. In neither of these instances of the commissioner or feoffee, couldany one doubt of the effect of the statute or of the deed. Why should any doubthave been entertained in the other cases, which related to corporations? Do law,reason, or language, vary when applied to those bodies?1244 POOLE.Elizabeth, intention of which cannot be doubted, were rendered totally1568. inoperative.It should be also observed with respect to residence, that, inthe clause relative to the appointment of brokers, Sec. wherethe queen intended to permit the selection of individuals toperform these particular offices from persons not residing inthe borough, it is expressly so stated : — which affords anotherstrong inference that in all other cases the personsResidents. mentioned were to be residents or inhabitants of the borough.The terms dwelling and residing introduced into the clauseJuron. relative to juries, and applied to inhabitants as well as re-giants, seem clearly to show that those terms must mean thesame class of persons as assumed before, for it appearsimpossible to say that there could be any difference betweenan inhabitant and resiant; both of them being obliged todwell and reside in the town. The exemption from juriesis also given to the burgesses ; and can it seriously be contended,that they could be entitled to it if they did notreside in the borough — and yet it is given to all the burgesses— BO that the clear inference from this clause also is,that the burgesses should be resident.It is singular, that only in the clause which relates to theguild, the tenn " inhabitants' precedes that of " burgessesand commonalty." The probability is, that this was altogetheraccidental, and merely another instance of the carelessnessand inaccuracy with which these charters were composed.The error seems to consist in assuming their accuracy, andarguing upon their terms, as capable of precise application.If, however, it is necessary, or justifiable, to do so, the inferencefrom the chancre in the succession of the wordswould be, that the guild was the more immediate privilegeof the " inhabitants' (at least, if they really were a separateclass from the burgesses,) and that therefore they were putfirst. Aliens, as merchant strangers, were sometimes allowedto be members of the merchant guilds, and to inhabit oncondition of their paying scot and lot : — but they could notbe burgesses. The general term of inhabitants might thereforebe intended to include them. But if it is so, it affordsPOOLE. 1245a singular comment upon the doctrine of non-residents; which Elizabeth.has been founded upon the supposed connexion of burgesses 1668.with guilds, &c. Besides the assumption is, that burgessesand inhabitants are distinct classes : — and if so, and they areall included in the guild, it cannot be said it is the guildwhich makes them burgesses. Indeed, even without suchminute and critical investigation of the words of this clause,it must be seen, from the general import of it, that the privilegeof the " guild" had nothing to do with the creation of Guild,burgesses, or the right of returning members to Parliament.If it had, then this clause would go the length of giving thatright to the '^ inhabitants and commonalty as well as theburgesses. At least, if they were distinct classes, which Burgess,would carry the matter much farther than the supportersof the corporate right intend — and even farther than thecommon law would warrant — for that would merely extendthe right to the " burgesses,'^ that is, the " siam inhabitanthouseholders of the borough'' certainly the mostreasonable construction of the term, as well with referenceto history and law, as to common sense. The preceptsrequire the election to be by the burgesses, and the returnsare almost universally made by them ; so that inhabitants(merely as such) have no ground for claiming the right: — andmere inhabitancy, unascertained by any enrolment or swearing,is too undefined a description to answer the wordburgess' and too uncertain to be adopted by the law.Finally, it is reasonable and just, that he, who has pledgedhimself to perform the laws, by taking the oath of allegiance, Oath,and bears the burdens of the state, by reason of his beinga householder, should share, by his vote, in the election of Houses. , • 1 • 1 , holder.those representatives, who are to concur m making the lawshe is to obey ; and in the imposition of those burdens, whichhe is to share.The clause relative to the quittance from toll, shows distinctlythat the composition of these charters is not soaccurate, that a precise application of every word inthem can be expected. It grants to the mayor, bailiffs,-.■ -■ *•-1246 POOLE.Elizabeth. burgesses, and commonalty that they and their successes.BorSy and all the other inhabitants and burgesses, shouldluiubitaiits be quit of toll, &c. It would seem that all the persistBurgesBtt. in the borough were included in the first terms '' burgessesaity!*°' *^^ commonalty." At all events, all the burgesses musthave been, because that term is expressly used ; and yetimmediately afterwards follow the words, '' and all theother inhabitants and burgesses," which latter word is clearlytautologous and unnecessary. Probably the real meaningof this passage, as well as the others of the same kind in thischarter, where cumulative words are used, is merely toinclude all the men or people of the town ; and the taut<do-goes words are only introduced for greater caution.Notwithstanding all these clauses, and the general importNon of them, nonresident burgesses were for a long time admitted,allowed, and voted for this borough.Borough But that this was in direct contravention of the ancientrecords. « .documents relating to it, may be collected from this cii1583. constance — that in the 25th of Elizabeth, (which is thefirst entry at present in existence of the admission of aFree burgess,) One William Pittee, of Weymouth, was made a freeburgess of Poole ; and was to give 200 wt. of good compowder for his freedom — and for his absence, he was to payto the use of the corporation, 20*. per annum, till he shouldcome to inhabit in Poole ; and he was to give his attendancealways at the Guildhall, on Friday next before St. Matthew's-day, at the election of the officers for the service ofher majesty; and for such corn or grain as should be ladenby him that year, he was to pay half the duties. And whenGod should appoint his mother's decease, he promised withina short time he would repair thither, and inhabit in thetown. And this entry is followed by a memorandum, thatPittee had paid the powder, and the 20*., to Michaelmas,1690, and then he came to dwell in the town.It is obvious, that Pittee was allowed to be entered as aburgess of Poole preparatory to his coming to reside thereonthe payment of the powder ; and that he was speciallyPOOLE. 1247excused from residence at that time, on the ground of his E>»^^^>>'aged mother residing at Weymouth ; but it is clear that he 1568.was then trading at Poole.An instance also occurs, in the 39th of Elizabeth, of John i^^-Dobbins, one of the burgesses, who was amerced in the sumof 40rf., for his absence from the assembly for the elections ;and it was directed, that if he should absent himself at the Absence,next elections, without lawful cause shown to the mayorand recorder, he should be disfranchised, without furtherassembly.That the resiants were the burgess of Poole before the ^^esiants.granting the charter of the 16th of Elizabeth, is also clear,from this fact — that till then the court leet was duly held in Leet.Poole, and the mayor and other officers were elected at it.And as a farther proof of the revival of the full functions ofthat court, on the dissolution or ceasing of a corporation — aswe have seen in the cases of Taunton* and Mineheadf —during the suspension of the charters of Poole, in the 26thof Charles II. to the fourth of James II., several courts leetwere again held there, for the purpose of electing the officers.In the recital of the charter, it is stated, that the inhabitantsof Poole had enjoyed many liberties by prescription.This is possible, if it was a borough by prescription ; becausewhatever the modem doctrine may be, it is certain that theinhabitants of the ancient boroughs did, before the time of inhawtanulegal memory, enjoy many liberties and privileges, notwithstandingthey were not incorporated): But it is not clearthat Poole was a borough by prescription. It is not mentionedas such in Domesday. However, on the whole, itis probable it was a borough before the time of Richard I. ;because, in the beginning of that reign, as we have seenbefore there was a grant to the " burgesses" as a body thenexisting. But there is no pretence for saying, that it was acorporation by prescriptionsThis term "prescription*' occurs not only in this charter,See before, p. 165. t See before, p. 1228.X 2 Inst. tit. Mag. Car. cap. 14. p. 247 ; 4 Co. 42.§ See before, p. 367. || See before, pp. 594, 657, 794, 854, 969.1248 PRESCRIPTION.Elizabeth, but in many of this reign ; and has led to the adoption ofPrescribe extensive errors on this subject.West'Looe ^^ *^® West Love case, it was supposed, by the presentlearned lord chancellor of Ireland, that it was decisive proofof that place having been incorporated by prescription, becauseit was said, 'that as the inhabitants were in thatcharter, as in this, asserted to have enjoyed privileges byprescription; and inhabitants could not prescribe but whenincorporated : * therefore it was clear, they must have beenincorporated before the time of legal memory."This ingenious legal reasoning, is first answered by thefact, that, in direct contradiction to this inference, neitherIncorporation — nor West Love — nor indeed any place — was incorporatedbefore the time of legal memory — nor till morethan two centuries subsequent to that period. Besideswhich, the probable practical explanation of the term is,that it alluded — as it was then generally used — to a periodof 40 or 50 years ; and which was the ecclesiastical time ofprescription, then frequently referred to — particularly withreference to questions of tithes, under the statute of EdwardVI., and the monastic possessions, under the statute ofHenry VIII.Tniro. Another instance of the use of this word is to be found in1588. the charter of Truro, of the 31st of Elizabeth, in whichthere is a confirmation of all lands and liberties enjoyed bythe mayor and burgesses, " by whatsoever pretence of anycorporation, reason, or colour of any prescription, writingor writings, by the space of 50 years last past, or more : "adopting a period of limitation far short of that of legalmemory.1673. The charter to West Love, in the 16th year of this reign,has a recital similar to this of Poole ; and so likewise that1586. of East Love, in the 29th year of Queen Elizabeth.In subsequent charters of this reign, the queen proceededstill farther in the recitals, and expressly alleged, that theplaces to which they were granted, had been from time immemorialincorporated.• See West Love case, p. 136.PRESCRIPTION. 1249The whole tenor of the history we have traced, as well as Elizabeth.the fact of the particular period when the first charter of incorporationwas granted, all tend to show the inaccuracy ofthis assertion : but there is no doubt, that an opinion thenexisted, though inaccurate, that some places had been incorporatedfrom time immemorial ; — thus in a case, in the 10th ^^^^'of Elizabeth, relative to York,* it was alleged, that the York,mayor, bailiffs, and citizens of that city, had existed fromtime immemorial ; and that, in the first of Richard II., theywere incorporated by that king, to be a mayor, sheriff, andcitizens. But we have before noticed that charters whichclearly is not one of incorporation. So with respect to Poole, ^oo\e.an heraldic visitation, speaking of the mayor, bailiffs, burgesses,and inhabitants, states that the inhabitants wereincorporated by William Longespie,;): and the incorporationconfirmed by William Mountacute;§ but we have beforeseen, that neither of them were, in point of fact, charters ofincorporation, nor is there any pretence for the assertion.The Clarencieux king of arms of course stated that which hewas told ; and his credulity was perhaps strengthened bythe hospitalities he received : — as these recorders of thememorials of our ancestors were invariably received withrespect and kindness. His certificate, however, is only tobe regarded as evidence of that to which it may with safety beapplied : — namely, as a record of what was then the generalopinion ; and therefore the assertion in this document, thatthe inhabitants were incorporated, may be taken as correct,and as the understanding at that time, proved by the charter ;although the other statement, as to the early incorporation,was not founded in truth, and is to be taken with caution —because it was at that time the wish and interest of everyplace to be esteemed a corporation by prescription.Besides the summoning of the six new boroughs, to whichwe have before referred, Queen Elizabeth also resorted to theDyer, 279. t See before, p. 739. t See before, pp. 367, 657.§ See before, p. 794.4 L12S0 BEVERLEY.EHiabeih. re-summons of places which had before returned membersBoroughs to Parliament.Beverley. In Yorkshire, Beverley had sent representatives from the26th of Edward I. to the close of that reign. In the firstand second years of the reign of Edward II., and in thesecond year of Edward III., the sheriff returned that he hadreceived no return to his precept ; but in the 33rd of edwardIII., it sent two members.We have before seen the charters to this place, in thereigns of Henry I.,* Richard I.,t King Johns Henry III.,§Edward I.,|| and Richard 11.,^ by none of which was itincorporated.1562. However, in the fifth of Queen Elizabeth, it was summonedto send members, and returned them accordingly**There has been no decision by the House of Commons,showing who were the burgesses — or in other words, whatwas the right of election. But the members have alwaysFreemen, been returned by the freemen. And as this place was notincorporated at the time of the return being made, in thesixth of Elizabeth, it is impossible that those freemen couldbe members of a corporation : on the contrary, from theirbeing entitled to their freedom by birth and servitude, it isclear their right was founded upon the common law.Subsequently to its being so called upon to return membersto Parliament, it was actually incorporated — Queen1573. Elizabeth, in the 16th year of her reign, granting it a charterrated, of incorporation : a decisive proof that the returning membersto Parliament was not founded upon that privilege, orindeed in any manner connected with it.1685. Another charter of the same description was granted inthe first year of James II., which is now the governing charterof the place.1565. No statutes material to our inquiry passed in the followingParliament. It is only necessary to note, that, in the recital• See before, p. 304. J Page 391. || Page 628.t Page 373. § Page 465. f Page 746.*• They were Nicholas Icon and Robert Hall.STATUTES. 1251of an act touching drapers in the town of Shrewsbury, it is Elizabeth.recited of the Company of Drapers, (as the queen recited Cap. 7.in her charters with respect to municipal bodies,) that theyhad been, by a great time, lawfully incorporated and made Corporations.a body politic: — which assertion must be taken, subjectto the observations we have before made. It being alsoremembered, that the societies could have had no existenceat all, unless they were incorporated — not being, like themunicipal institutions, aggregate bodies recognized by thelaw, for the purposes of local government. It appears thatthis fraternity had, amongst other, the laudable object ofsupporting the booty which, for the reasons stated before, had Po**'-necessarily become an important object to the Legislature.No other Parliament was summoned from this time tillthe 13th of Queen Elizabeth's reign. Preparatory to which, 1570.the queen again interfered, to secure a more favourable resultof the elections.WELLS.From the borough books of Wells, it appears that themode of admission to the borough continued, as we have Admittingseen in the Cinque Ports, to be founded upon a petition tobe allowed to have and enjoy the freedom of the place,and upon giving pledges and a payment, for having theentrance into the borough and the condition of being free.Ordinances also were established, about this time, for the Ordinancesmaking of burgesses — which recognized the rights of thosewho married burgesses' daughters and widows, persons, who. Burgesses'upon the principles and doctrine of villainage, would clearly be andentitled to be considered as free : — and that the law respect vicarage.ing villainage was at that time in use, may be seen by a casefrom the county of Somerset, of this date, reported in Dyer;*in which the doctrine is applied, as in more ancient times,to the right of freedom as connected with residence awayfrom the lord ; and with reference to the writ de nativohabendo. The case was determined in favour of theparty who was claimed as a villain, on the ground, as it is• Dyer, 266, 10 Eliz. 1667.4l21252 WELLS.Kiiiabetii. gait, that it was " in favour of liberty." We have therefore,in this instance, clear proof of the same law as to villainsand freemen, and their particular rights and duties, continuingin use at this important period, when encroachmentscommencing upon the rights of freemen, — and their privileges,being mixed up with other matter foreign from their originalnature, — it becomes essential to keep in mind, and to markthe continuance of the original law upon which those privilegeswere founded.Before we proceed with the books of Wells, it may be alsoLeet. material here to note, that the court leet view offrankpledge^pledge, and the sheriff's touruy were all likewise in full force at thisperiod-7-of which distinct evidence may be found in the samereporter.*The ordinances of Wells, to which we have referred, recog-Apprentice the right of those who have served apprenticeships —which title, it will be remembered, we have also traced to.the same law of villainage.Strangers. Strangers or persons coming into the borough, seeingthe privileges of the place, were, upon the principles wehave before explained, admitted, on paying a contributionCommon to the common stock,shock.Residence. And as a confirmation of the obligation of residencewhich we have before insisted upon, it appears, that aperson, in strict conformity with the common law, was"rfwcammowerf," or disfranchised, because he had not inhabitedwithin the city for the space of one year.1670. In the same book of Wells, there is an entry, of the 13thof Queen Elizabeth, of a letter from Sir Hugh Poulet, inMembers, the queen's name, desiring the burgesses to elect fit personsto Parliament, on peril of the queen's displeasure.There is also a letter from the council, for the same purpose.And the burgesses elect John Walworth, who appearsshortly before that time to have been the mayor.1570. Upon the meeting of Parliament, we find, in D'D'Ewes'Joumal,t that certain members were appointed to confer• Dyer, fol. 233, 6 Liz. 1563. t D'D'Ewes' Journ. p. 156.Ewes' JOURNAL. 1253with the attorney and solicitor general, about the returns for Elizabeth h,nine boroughs, which it was alleged had returned no burgessesin the last Parliament.1. — East Love, > ^ ,,ci T^ c Cornwall.2. — rowe, >^^. 3. — Cirencester, Gloucestershire.^^ 4. — Retford, Nottinghamshire.5. — Queenborough, Kent.6. — Woodstock, Oxfordshire.7. — Christchurch, Hampshire.scarborough, 7 g^g.^jj^9.— Eye, >Mr. Johnson* brought up the report, that Mn AttorneyGeneral prayed that the meeting might be made tomorrow,in the afternoon, at Mr. Treasurer's chamber, for conferencetouching the validity of these burgesses. And at the nextmeeting of the House, on Monday, the 9th day of April,the report was made of the validity of burgesses, and it wasordered, by Mr. Attorney's assent, that the burgesses shallremain according to the returns ; for that the validity of thecharters of these towns was elsewhere to be examined, ifcause be.And thus the inquiry into this exercise of the power ofthe crown was a second time passed by: the members,nevertheless, being allowed to sit, and no further investigationtaking place, as far as can now be ascertained.With a view of properly estimating the course which wastaken with these nine places, their histories may here beintroduced.1. — JSast Love is not mentioned in Domesday. In the EastLooe.30th of Edward I.,t Henry de Bodrijan, then lord of EastLove, certified his claim, amongst other things, to a view offrankpledge there, ducking stool and pillory, and assise ofbread and beer — all of which is within the usual jurisdictionof the court leet, and in fact gave this place a separate Courtjurisdiction from the county at large,Ewes* Journal, p. 159. f Place. Jur. Ass. apud Launceston.1254 ^^^'^ Love.Elizabeth. In the 14th of Edward IL, Otes de Bodrijan, the then lord1321. of Love, granted a charter, in which he mentions the reeveKeevc. ^jid mayor ; and the burgesses as a body then existing ; butBurgesses. a previous charter of one of his ancestors, speaks of thelatter only as townsmen.^^^^ It was at that time only called Love ; the opposite town ofWest Love not then existing. 'Aliens. In the reign of Henry VI 1 1., there is a return — snow extantin the Augmentation Office — by Henry Caylis, then lord ofLove, of the aliens then in the town.1653. In the seventh of Edward VI., there is a return of membersfor Looeburgh, made by the mayor and commonalty.Excepting these documents, nothing appears till the time1672. when its right to return was questioned ; and in the nextReturn, year there was another return, which was made by the mayorCommon' and burgesses stating, that the mayor and commonalty had*^' by their common consent elected the members. From whichit is clear that the burgesses and commonalty were the same inthis borough ; as we have seen before in others.The return is not under the common seal, but those of theparties to it. And it will be observed, that it is made by theMayor. mayoTy although East Love was not then incorporated. Insleeve. the above grant, it appears that the reeve was the headofficer ; who is again mentioned in a return of the 26th ofElizabeth ; as well as in the recital of the charter of thequeen of that date.1587. It was not till the 29th of Elizabeth, that the charter of1579. incorporation was granted ; and in the 21st of Elizabeth,there is a lease between the principal burgesses of WestLove, and some of the town of East Love, who covenant forthemselves, their heirs and executors; whilst on the otherhand, those of West Love— who had been previously incorporated— covenant for their heirs and successors. But thepeople of East Love, though not incorporated, put their com-Common mon Seal to the instrument — another instance of such aSeal.body using a seal although not incorporated.1585. The return of the 2Gth of Elizabeth was by the reeve andReeve.burgesses.EAST LOOE, 1255In the 27th year of Queen Elizabeth, a suit was com- Elizabeth,menaced in the Exchequer Chamber, by the port reeve and Portreeve.burgesses of the borough of Love, otherwise East Love. In Borough,the bill it is stated that it had been time out of mind anancient borough, and charged to send burgesses to Parliament; and that the inhabitants were at continual charge to inhabitantssupport the port and a weekly market. That the rents andprofits of certain bui^ages in the borough had been appliedin supporting the town. But it is alleged that the defendant,Francis Courtney, Esq., and one Walter Vahan, had procuredletters patent of the queen, dated the last day of October, inthe 2l8t year of her reign, containing a lease of the marketand fair within the town, and of all courts, the burgages andthe franchises belonging to it, for 21 years: — ^by colour ofwhich they offer weekly disturbance to the inhabitants. Inthe answer the defendant denied that East Love ever was anancient borough; or that it was chained lawfully to sendburgesses to Parliament. But he confessed it to be true, thatof late he had heard, rather by usurpation, than by any lawfulright or authority as he thinker, burgesses have beensent to divers Parliaments for the town. And he is inducedso to think, for that he never could learn, know, or ever didsee, any letters patent concerning the incorporation of thesaid town or village — or that it is or ever was incorporatedby the queen, or any of her predecessors. — All of which seemsto be most correct, as there appears no ground for supposingthat it had then ever been incorporated.Two years afterwards, in the 29th of Elizabeth, the queen 1587.granted them a charter : — which, notwithstanding the abovestatement, recites that it was an ancient borough, and thatthe men and inhabitants had (as in the charter to Poole) en in^J;^!,toyed many rights and liberties by prescription.The charter, in other respects, so much resembles othersof this period, that it is unnecessary to extract it, furtherthan to observe, that it is an incorporation of the inhabitants,with the ordinary corporate powers — appointing nine capital Corporate,burgesses, who were to be inhabitants, and to form the commoncouncil. It authorizes the place to return two members1256 EAST LOOE.Eiiiabeth. to Parliament, who are directed to be elected by the common1587. council.But that provision was, in fact, never acted upon, as theelection never was made by that body — a strong circimi-Charter. stance to show that the charters of the crown had not — aswas decided in the Cheltenham case — any power to controlthe election of members to Parliament.All the officers appointed by the charter are described asinhabiiukU inhabitants : — and in the clause for the annual election ofmayor, it is provided that the mayor and capital burgessesshall nominate two men before the other persons enablingthe borough, that they may elect one of them to be mayor.It seems impossible to resist the inference which arises fromthis and other similar clauses, that the inhabitants were theburgesses ; as the tenor of the clause, and the course of theelection, seems evidently to lead to that conclusion.In the clause which relates to the vacancies of capitalbailiffs, it speaks of those who should die or inhabit out ofthe borough — words so cogent to show that mere inhabitancyout of the borough was sufficient to put an end to the officeof capital burgess ; that were it not for the Truro case, towhich we have before referred, we should have thought itimpossible that any doubt could have existed on that subject.It is certain that death would create an absolute vacancy ;and it is strange that the other alternative — couched inlanguage distinct and intelligible — should not be treated asbeing equally absolute.Strangers. Strangers and sojourners are mentioned in the charter, ascontradistinguished from the burgesses and inhabitants.In the clause which provides for the exclusive jurisdictionBurgesses, of the borough it is enacted, that no burgess or other inhabitantshould implead other burgesses or inhabitants out ofthe borough.Here, by a strict construction of the words, the inhabitantsmight be said to be a distinct class from the burgesses ;but there can be no difficulty in giving to both these words,in the disjunctive, their full meaning — as the term *^ burgess*EAST LOOE. 1267would apply to those fixed and permanent inhabitants who Elizabeth th,had been duly enrolled and sworn at the court leet ; and the 1687.other inhabitants'' would be those, who not having lived40 days in the borough, had not become recognized inhabitantsthere — ^no court having occurred since their cominginto the borough, at which they ought to have been enrolledand sworn. And yet the privileges given by this clauseshould be extended to them, otherwise the sheriff would bedriven to execute his functions within the borough.That such is the proper construction of this clause, andwas the meaning the capital burgesses themselves affixed tothem at that time, appears from the bye-laws made in pursuanceof this charter; for the seventh bye-law, in furtheranceof this clause, provides generally, that " no inhabitant shallsue any other inhabitant out of the borough."The book which contains the above bye-law, commenceswith the recital, that the queen had been pleased to makethe borough of East Love a town incorporate, and a body Incorpo-politic ; — (a strong admission by the burgesses themselves,that they were at that time first incorporated) ; and to incorporatethe inhabitants ; — giving power to the mayor and nineprincipal inhabitants to make bye-laws. — that the charterbeing accepted, they made the bye-laws accordingly for the Bye-laws,rule of the borough and commonalty, which provide for thenecessary absence of the capital burgesses on any specialbusiness; — subject all aliens or strangers, inhabiting out of Aliens,the borough, to certain tolls — and the townsmen and inhabitantsto other payments ; — one of which is, that every personinhabiting within the borough shall pay towards therelief and provision of the poor, besides the weekly contribution,such sum as the mayor and principal burgesses shallassess. Provision is made that no inhabitant shall take intohis house to dwell, any stranger not before dwelling in the Strangers,same, without the consent of the mayor and the capitalburgesses, upon pain of five pounds, or departing againwithin one month.This bye-law, as it stands, is reasonable enough : — as it1268 EAST LOOE.Elizabeth, prevents any person from living in the town, and becoming1587. chargeable to it, without the consent of the mayor and principalburgesses. Which, as a mere protection to the town,could produce no injury ; but if the meaning of this bye-lawwas carried so far, as to extend to persons not strangers, andtreated as giving to the mayor and burgesses the power ofexcluding from the borough, or its privileges, any of theinhabitants; or of admitting any persons into the town againstthe wishes of the inhabitants — it would be contrary to reasonand law.That part of the bye-law which prohibits the harbouringpersons for more than three nights, without giving notice, ismerely in affirmance of the common law.*There are also other bye-laws, distinguishing the inhabittantSy and persons dwelling in the borough from strangers.The steward the court day, the law day, and jury, are allLeet. mentioned : — evidently referring to the court leet ; which itappears was, during this reign, held within the borough*Again, others, referring to the performance of personalduties, — which, by the old law, would have come under thelet. term of " lot," — impose penalties upon any person appointedby the mayor to work about the business of the town, —or summoned to come, or appear before him ; — or chosento fill any office, and refusing or neglecting to do so. The'I'Shock. " townsfolk' is expressly mentioned; — and it appears, subsequently,that all the incomes or fines, paid on the admissionof burgesses, were to be carried to the town fund ; aswell as the produce of the town-lands, &c. And any inhabitantdeparting from the borough, and not returning withinsix weeks, was to lose his freedom — excepting seafaring men.1587. There is a deed in the 29th of Elizabeth, a few monthsDeed.only after the charter, made between the mayor and eightothers, described as principal burgesses there, as well forthemselves as for all other the burgesses and inhabitants ofthe said borough of the one part ; and certain lessees of the• Sec Traction— the Mirror— Britton—Glanville— and Facta ; and before, p.482»in the notes.EAST LOOE. 1269other part ; by which the mayor and principal burgesses Elizabeth.demise for lives certain lands at Shutta — a place near the 1587.town.It should be observed that this deed, although after thecharter, is made with the consent of all the burgesses andinhabitants ; and shows clearly that the common councilwere not competent to convey the property of the boroughwithout their consent.In the following year, the first return subsequent to the «^^^-charter is made of two members, elected for the commonaltyby the mayor and burgesses, by the unanimous assent andcommon consent ; and is under the common seal.In the 30th of Elizabeth, the mayor and capital burgessestogether, with the unanimous assent and agreement, as wellof themselves, as of all other the burgesses and inhabitants ofthe borough, in consideration that one Philip Morgan, athis own charge, had newly built upon the ground of theburgesses and inhabitants a certain house, granted the same Leases,to him. And there are also many other leases in the sameterms.James I., in the first year of his reign, granted another „,^P^%charter to East Love, which, in the introduction, recites the Charter,charter of Elizabeth, and states, — ^that the professed object ofthe charter was, to remedy some defects in the governmentof the town : — that the mayor VLudfree burgesses had informedthe king, that some of the capital burgesses who were electedmayor had often refused to take upon them that office ;whereby the government and rule of the borough, whichwas then become a populous and large sea port town, wasinterrupted, to the great disturbance of the king's peaceand rule of the town : — and that the burgesses or inhabit ^^{^^^tants entertained disorderly persons, frequenting the same ^i^an^-port. — Wherefore the mayor and free burgesses prayed theking for reformation of the premises. — And the king, for thekeeping of the peace, and the government of the borough andhis people there inhabiting and resorting thereto, — granteda penalty of 5/., and imprisonment till payment, upon anyperson chosen and refusing to serve the office of mayor :1260 EAST LOOK.Kiizabcth. And that if any of the burgesses or inhabitants should com-1623. mit any offence for which by the law of England he ought tochuemenu lose the liberty and privileges of the borough aforesaid theirit should be lawful for the mayor and capital burgesses toamerce J exclude and expel such persons from all and singularthe offices, liberties, privileges and immunities of theborough.Justices. It also granted, that the mayor, recorder, and last mayor,should he justices of the peace within the borough.These were the principal objects of this charter; which,Confirma however, concludes with a confirmation to the mayor andfree burgesses of all the franchises, liberties, exemptions,and jurisdictions which they then had, or which their predecessors,by whatsoever name of incorporation had theretoforeenjoyed, by pretext of any royal charters or letterspatent, or in any other lawful manner, right, custom, use orprescription theretofore used, or accustomed ; although thesame had been abused, discontinued, forfeited, or lost.Freemen. In a bye-law subsequent to this charter, the ^^freemerC^ arementioned: — a term, as appears from many of the documents,then newly introduced into the borough; — which it is materialto note, inasmuch, as the burgesses must always havebeen by the common law, freemen, or liberi homines ; — butas that qualification was necessarily implied by the law,it was not requisite to be mentioned. However in thisBuying bye-law, relative to the freedom of buying and selling — withse ing ^yj^ipj^ ^g have seen about this time the term became connected— it was reasonable enough that the appellation of'freeman" should be introduced, and the records of thisborough afford a striking instance of the double mcanino- ofthis term, as the free burgesses occur in them at the sameperiod, and are entered, as well as freemen, in the sameyear.Borough East Love continued to return members till the protectorateof Cromwell, when one only was directed to besent for that borough and West Love.The books of this borough shared the fate of many others ;and all prior to the restoration of Charles II. were destroyed.EAST LOOE. 1261The oldest commences in the 16th year of that reign. They Elizabeth.contain, amongst other things, the proceedings at the court 1664.leet, at which the lists of the capital burgesses free tenants L«*^*and resiants, are included ; as in the books of West Love.But they cease after the 29th of Charles II. for 30 years.It appears, that the election of mayor was made by thecommons f^' who we have seen before were the inhabitants* Common.In the 22d, 27th, 29th, and 34th of Charles II., personswere presented for living in the town without acquaintingthe mayor, not being freemen and not giving security.These presentments at the court leet-are important, as ^^*'showing the real nature of the duty of the jury at that courtVagrancy was strongly prohibited, as we have seen, by ourlaw from the earliest time;* and persons were not allowedto go from place to place for the purposes of residence,without giving due notice of their being there; — a dutywhich was also incumbent upon the housekeeper with whomany such person might take up his abode. And as theborough was liable to an action if they entertained or harbouredthe fugitive villain of any lord; so also were theyliable if any offence was committed within their limits ; orif any of the bui^esses offending were not forthcoming toanswer to the law : hence in this case the jury present theomission of this person, in not giving due notice of hiscoming into the town ; or giving security or pledges for hisgood behaviour, and to be forthcoming if any thing wasalleged against him.At a law court, with view of frankpledge and session of 1683.the peace, holden on the 26th of October, in the 36th ofCharles II., there is in the borough-books an entry of apresentment of a person for living in the town ; and also oftwo others for not paying their incomes.And also the following : — " Ad banc curiam venit HenriesTrelawney ac ex assent majoris et capitulum burgensiumet liberum hominem burgi predict admitting et curatorliber homo burgi predict."• Vide ante, p. 8, 14, 15, 25, 31, 623, 1146.1262 EAST LOOE.Elizabeth. Entries are also made in the books of persons who hadApparent been bound as apprentices.1679. 1*he return of the 31st of Charles II. is made by the mayor^^"^' and burgesses ; and is signed by 63 persons ; 38 of whomare found in the resiant list of 1677, leaving 25 unaccountedfor ; who probably were inhabitants not enrolled ; but whohad come into the town after the making of the list in 1677.They some of them appear to have been admitted as freeburgesses after the making of that list, and five of themhad been presented at the court in 1677, for not beingfreemen.1684. In the 36th of Charles II., Lord Bath obtained from EastSurrender.Love, — as well as from many other boroughs — a surrenderof their charter, upon a request of the burgesses for the grantof a new one.Hume however states, that the king died before Lord Bathreached London with the surrenders.The deed by the corporation is dated the 20th October1684. On the 9th January following, petitions were madethrough the Earl of Bath, lieutenant of the county of Cornwall,on behalf of the boroughs of Bradninch — Penryn —Liskeard* — West Love — East Love — Truro — Plympton —Grampound — and Tregony — praying his majesty to regretto the respective corporations their charters which they hadsurrendered; with such alterations as his majesty shouldthink fit. The original petitions are not to be found ; but anentry to the above effect is in a book in the State Paper Office.King Charles died the 7th of February following : — andthe surrender was only recorded on the 19^/i day of March1685,t in the first year of the reign of James II. So thata lapse of five months took place between the making andrecording of the surrender. Added to which, the surrender• SeePyperv. Dennis, Holes Reports, 170; where the Liskeard surrender, andthe charter granted by James II., were both held to be void.t By the Old Style, the year 1684 began 25th March. The surrender was madethe 20th of October, and the petitions were presented the 9th of January 1684-5.King Charles died, and King James ascended the throne the 7th of February following,1684-5, and the surrender was subsequently enrolled on the 19th of Marchin the same year.EAST LOOE. 1263was made to King Charles II. ; — but the same was not Elizabeth,recorded till after his death, and in the reign of his successor.This case, and that of Marlborough, are precisely similar to Marl*><>-the one relative to Liskeard, which was decided in Piper v, ^^e^^^*Dennis, where the surrender and the charter of James II.,were set aside ;* and also to the Totness case, in 1696, where Totness.the right of persons to vote who had been made free hy a charterof James II. was negatived, fJames shortly after ascending the throne, determined uponsummoning a new Parliament; but in order the better tosecure the election of those persons over whom he had thegreatest influence, he determined to grant new charters tothe boroughs which had executed surrenders. The Paisliament was summoned to be held the 19th day of May, andon the 28th of March preceding the king granted a newcharter to this borough. Before we state its contents, it willbe proper to observe, that previous to this time none butinhabitants were admitted as bui^esses ; and that (dl the inhabitantsinhabitants presented by the jury at the court leet as fitpersons to be burgesses, were duly sworn as such. Butimmediately after the granting of this charter, many personsof rank and fortune residing in the neighbourhood were Non-readmitted: — asSir John Trelawney, Bart.Charles TrelawneyJohn Arundel > Freemen.Francis KellyJohn KellyAnd John Oben was made alderman, j;As to the validity of the charter the following authoritiesare material.The surrender being part of the consideration, if it is voidthe charter is voids• Holes Reporte, 170, and 12 Mod. 253.t A charter granted by James II., in this same year, to the borough of Totness,was held void by a committee of the House of Commons in 1693.t He was afterwards removed on the coming of Will. III., vide post.§ 1st Coke, 43, case of Alton Woods.1264 EAST LOOE.Elizabeth. For it will be taken that the king was deceived in law;* andwhen he is deceived, or mistake the law or there is amis-recital in the charter, the grant is void^i- for it is theduty of subjects to see that the king is truly informedAnd this principle of the English law prevailed in somedegree amongst the Romans. At least the Emperor Gratianis said to have declared, that '' if a person should so farimpose upon the emperor as to obtain a rescript, givinghim an exemption from the indictiorij it should be of noavailsAnd if the king's grant does not agree with the law, thegrant is void. IINow the surrender to Charles II., not having been enrolled,was void ;1f and consequently the charter granted in considerationof it could be of no effect, for the king was misinformed**that the former had been surrendered, and thereforewas deceived. And if this charter were not held to be void,the former not having been surrendered, there would be twocharters giving different rights to different persons existingin the same borough at the same time ; which the law willnot allow, as likely to beget suits and troublesome*1685. But to return to the charter: — it stated the surrender;and that the king, graciously affecting the bettering of theborough, and that for ever thereafter there might be in itacertain manner for keeping the peace and good governmentof the people there ; and that it might be a boroughof peace and quietness, for the rewarding the good, andfor the terror of the evil; and that peace, and justice, andgood will there, might be the better done and kept ; andhoping that if the burgesses and inhabitants and their successors,should be able by the king's grant to hold and• 1 Co. 43, and 18 Eliz. Dyer, 352.t See Legat'sCase, 10 Co. 109; and the Earl of Rutland's case, 8 Co. 109.Lord Chances' case, 6 Co. 56, 2 Dyer, 195 ; Recipe v, Williams*.X lb. 53.Cod. Theol. i.2. 7.II Ashen. Vii., Bro. 104 ; tit. pat. Lord Lovell's case.f Hex V. Osborne, 4 East, 327.•• As in 1 Co. 52.ft See 1 Co. M).EAST LOOE. 1265enjoy larger liberties and privileges, they might think them £elizabeth.selves more strongly obliged to him and his successors : 1685.in consideration that the mayor, burgesses, and inhabitantshad granted — and in the Chancery in due manner had deliveredinto the king's hands, and surrendered up their charters,messuages, &c., and privileges and immunities, whichsurrender the king had accepted : and at the request of John, acceptance*Earl of Bath, lord lieutenant of the county of Cornwall, theborough was declared to be a free borough of itself, and Free bo-theinhabitants thereof were incorporatedd by the name of corporatedthe mayor and free burgesses'' with the usual corporatepowers.That there should be 12 men of the better and more substantialburgesses inhabiting within the town, who shouldbe called aldermen, or chief bui^esses ; and to be the common Commoncouncil.councilThat one of the aldermen or chief burgesses should bemayor ; and one honest and discreet man, learned in the Mayor,laws of England, should be recorder. Recorder.That one discreet man, by the nomination and appointmentof the recorder, should be town clerk of the courts '^°^"clerk.within the borough.And that the mayor and free burgesses and their sue Commoncessors, by their common council, might make reasonable make bye1 laws.bye-laws.A clause for the election of members of Parliament, similarto that of Elizabeth, excepting that it expressly confinedthe right to the free burgesses " owZy," is then introduced.The mayor, the justices of the peace, the coroner, the clerkof the market, the keeper of the prison are named ; and 12persons, described as inhabitants, for aldermen ; and, unlikethe charter of Elizabeth, 36 are named as the free burgesses.The recorder, deputy mayor, and town clerk, are also appointed.And in the clause for the election of mayor, oneout of the two nominated by the common council was to bechosen by the burgesses, instead of the inhabitants, as inthe charter of Elizabeth.^rhe other clauses of the charter are similar to those of4m1266 list Lo£.Elizabeth. Elizabeth, excepting that greater power appears throughout1685. to be given to the common council.There is then added the following clause, for the admissionand swearing of freemen, which was not inserted incither of the previous charters; and which gave to the commoncouncil the arbitrary election of such burgesses as theymight think fit; with an express limitation that they ** any "should be the freemen.Section « That it should be lawful for the mayor, recorder, and o/-dertnen (whereof the mayor and recorder, or their deputies,to be two) from time to time, and all times thereafter forever,when and as often as it should seem to be fit or necessaryfor them, to name, elect, and make so many and suchpersons only to he free burgesses ; and of such sort and qualityas to them shall seem good. And that no other burgessesshould be accounted to be a burgess, except the burgesses inthose presents before expressly named ; and he or they, whichby election of the mayor and recorder, or their deputies, andthe rest of the aldermen or major part of them in such mannerand form aforesaid, should be elected, admitted, andsworn."This provision, that no other persons but those elected inthe manner directed by this clause, should be esteemed andreputed burgesses, as well as the word " oily '' introduced,as before observed, in the clause for the election of membersto Parliament, afford a strong inference that this new charterof James II. containing, as it does, a clause for the amotionof the chief officers by the king in council, was intended toexclude all burgesses but those approved of by the king, asthey were to be elected by the chief burgesses, who wereremovable at the pleasure of the crown. And these provisionstaken together, seem strongly to import that theyintroduced into the borough a new system, different fromthat which existed under the former charters — for no suchpower was contained in them. And by a subsequentclause the mayor, aldermen, and recorder, were to be re-movable by the king at pZtY/^j/r^. The new aldermen wereonly to be elected in the presence of the recorder, or hisEAST LOOE. 1267deputy. The mayor, aldermen, and recorder — being in the Elizabeth,power of the crown — were to name the new burgesses, without 1686.any restriction as to birth, apprenticeship, or residence.The majority of the aldermen, also, had not power to elect,unless the mayor and recorder were present; so that theking, by executing his power of amotion, could obtain whatfree burgesses he pleased.As to the clause for the amotion of the officers at the will Amotionbv theof the crown, in the case of the King v, Amer,* Mr. Justice crown.Buller cited the dictum of Lord Hardwicke, that '' the chareters of those times had never been countenanced in Westmin-** step Hall, and he would not give an opinion in support of'^ them, unless the strongest evidence in the world was laid fore the court, of their being uniformly acted under ever*' since'' And Lord Hardwicke added, that all the chartersof that time had been since exploded .fIn the same case, Mr. Bancroft speaks of the clause ofamotion as ^^ the detestable part of the detested chartered:This grant was never enrolled nor indeed is there anywarrant to be found among the state papers, authorizing itto pass the great seal.From comparing this with the former charters, it will appearthat the real object of procuring these surrenders bythe Earl of Bath was, that new charters might be granted,with such clauses of election and amotion, by means of whichthe king might control the elective franchise.All arts were used to manage elections, so that the kingshould have a Parliament to his mind ; and complaints weretransmitted from all parts of England of the injustice andviolence used in the elections, beyond what had ever beenpractised in former times.||• 2 T. R. 168.t See Palmer, 501 ; Sir W. Jones, 168 ; 2 Rolle's Abr. 164 ; 2 East, 633 ; 1 Rep.436 ; 6 Rep. 56. 66 ; 2 Under. 156 ; 2 Free. 17.t See alsoSerj. Adair's speech, 183, 206, 210, 272; same case. Mr. Erskine's argument,276, 290 ; Plumer's argument, 374, 375, 386, same case : 2 Special error,389, same case ; Sere. Adair's argument, 440, same case ; Mr. Erskine's argument,446, 449, 460, 467, same case ; Adair's reply, 628, 629 ; Baron Eyre's judgment,568 ; see also appendix to same case, No. 38.See 4 Inst. 246 and 87 ; I Co. 46, case of Alton Woods, Sid. 4 ; 1 Vent. 142.11 1 Burnet, 626.4m21268 East LOOE.Elizabeth. In the new charters, the election of members was taken1686. from the inhabitants and restrained to the members of thecorporation — all those being omitted who were not acceptableat court. In some boroughs they could not find a number ofmen to be depended on, so that the neighbouring gentlemenwere made the corporation men ; and among some of these,persons of other counties, not so much as hnoton in the boroughwere named. This was practised in the most avowed mannerin Cornwall, by the Earl of Bath; who to secure himselfas groom of the stoles, a place which he held all King Charles'stime, inserted the names of the officers of the guards, in almostall the charters in that county ; and having the privilege ofelecting 44 members, they were for the most part so chosen,that the king was sure of their votes on all occasions,*The return to this Parliament from East Love was of theHonourable Charles Trelawney, of Trelawney, in the countyof Cornwall ; and William Trumbull, of Doctors' Commons,London, knight. It was made by John Most, gent., the mayor,and the aldermen and free burgesses ; but signed by the mayoronly, with the common seal attached. Thus it is apparentthat the corporation accepted, and began immediately to actunder the new charter, and the first fruits were the nominationof Trumbull — a professed courtier.1(87. The Parliament assembled for the last time on the28th April 1G87, and shortly afterwards the king dissolvedit ; intimating that he should have a new one before winter.He then resolved upon making a progress through thewestern counties, which he effected ; but was received socoldly as to be disgusted. When he returned, he resolved tochange the magistracy in the several cities; who went boldly• " These methods were so successful, that when the members were all returned,the king said, there were not above forty members but such as he wished : for mostof them were furious and violent courtiers, and seemed resolved to recommendthemselves to the king by putting every thing in his power. This gave all thinkingmen a melancholy prospect."All people saw the way for packing a Parliament. A new set of charters andcorporation men, if those now named should not continue to be compliant, was acertain remedy to which recourse might be had. Of this Parliament it was said,that in all England it would not have been easy to have found 500 so weak — sopoor— and so devoted to the court as those were." 1 Burnet, 638, 639. 667.EAST LOOE. 1269to work, and took their measures so hastily, that men were KHzabeth.appointed in one week, and turned out the next. A longlist of orders of amotion may be seen in the council book ofJames II., beginning with Chester.King James had scarcely issued these orders, and procuredthe removal of the oflScers, when he received a letterfrom the Marquis of Abbeville, his minister at the Hague,which informed him with certainty of an intended invasionby the Prince of Orange. The course he took in his alarm,proves to what he thought the disaffection was to be attributed,for among other concessions, he replaced in all thecounties the deputy lieutenants and justices; and on the17th of October 1688, published a proclamation, entitled,A proclamation for restoring corporations to their ancient Proclama-charters,liberties, rights and franchises." This proclamationhas been so much commented upon, that it is notthought necessary to set it out here at length, but to refer toan accurate printed copy as set forth in 2 Lutes, 260. Itwill be sufficient to mention, that it purported to restore theold charters, where the surrenders had not been recorded ;and in cases where surrenders had been recorded, as in Thetford— Nottingham — Bridgwater — Ludlow — Bentley —Beverley — Tewkesbury — Exeter — Doncaster — Colchesterwinchester — Launceston — Liskeard — Plympton — Gregory— Plymouth — Dunwich — St. Ives — Fowey — East LoveCamelford — West Love — Tintegall — Henry n — Truro —Bodmin — Harleigh — Lestwyshall — and Saltash, the kingordered that new charters should be granted, free of expence.Having shown King James' opinion of these garblingcharters, it will be proper to see what William III, thoughtupon the same subject.Preparatory to his landing, he published a proclamation,wherein, after referring to the surrenders and new grants,and other acts of tyranny, he says,* " therefore it is that wehave thought fit to go over to England ; and we now thinkfit to declare, that this our expedition is intended for noother design, but to have a free and lawful Parliament ass8 Hume. 292.J270 ^^ST LOOK.Elizabeth, gambled as soon as possible ; and that in order to this, all1688. the late charters by which the election of burgesses is limitedcontrary to the ancient custom, shall be considered null and ofno force. And likewise, all magistrates who laye been unjustlyturned out, shall forthwith resume their former employments;as well as all the burgesses of England, shallreturn again to their ancient prescriptions and charters."We find entered in the books an order for removing outof the town of Least Love, Philip Stephen, mayor and altarsman ; Thomas Blight, Henry Eager Hawley, Philip Hicksaldermen ; and Thomas Oben, town clerk and alderman,*It should be observed, that Trelawney, the bishop of Bristol,was one of the seven bishops tried for contumacy, and confinedin the Tower, which demonstrates his being at variancewith the king ; which probably was the occasion of its beingthought necessary to remove the persons best affected to theTrelawneys.The bishops were acquitted on the 17th of June, and theorder of amotion was on the 12th of August.In the mayor's accounts are the two following items, whichshow what the feelings of the inhabitants of East Love wereas to their liberties.Paid for ringing when the good news came, when thebishops came out of the Tower, 2^. 6d.Paid for ringing when King William and Queen Marywere proclaimed. Is."It must here be observed, that James II. by his charter,to which we have so recently referred, granted new andextraordinary powers to the select body of the capitalburgesses or common council ; destroying the original constitutionof the borough, and taking away the ancient rightsof the inhabitants. That unhappy monarch resorted to thesemeasures for reasons we have before given. And havingsome of his supporters living in East Love, they also promotedas far as they could, the projected scheme of interference.For we find by the same books, that immediately• See his election, before, p. 1258.EAST LOOE. 1271after the granting of the charter, the new corporation com- Elizabeth.menaced their operations under it, in order to effect the designs i^^*of the government, and to drive the inhabitants into a compliancewith their wishes. They made a bye-law for the Bye-laws.payment of customs in the town, reciting the charter, whichstates, that the mayor and free burgesses should have powerto make laws for the good rule and government of the burgessesand inhabitants of the borough aforesaid for the timebeing, and for declaring how the officers, burgesses, artificers,inhabitants and resiants of the boroughs should behavethemselves in their offices, and businesses with the borough ;and otherwise for the further public good and utility, andgood rule of the borough, and the victualling of the same.But the bye-laws are stated to be made by the mayor andmagistrates of the borough — as in Colchester they were bythe " bench ;" — ^and it was directed, that no act could bedone but by the consent or order of the magistrates. Eventhe town-lands, which, in the days of Queen Elizabeth,the corporation did not think themselves competent togrant on lease without the consent and agreement of theinhabitants, could not now (so completely was the systemchanged) be contracted for, but by the consent of the mayorand magistrates. ^^*It may also be justly observed, that the surrender of thecharter of this place, the grant of a new one, and the assumptionof power by the select bodies, were by no means isolatedfacts which related to this place alone ; but they were partof a system which spread over the whole kingdom.*The following is a copy of a petition addressed to King petition.William and Queen Mary by the inhabitants of East Love,immediately after the abdication of James II.; what theimmediate result was, is not now known, as nearly all therecords of East Love have been destroyed by those who wereopposed to the rights of the inhabitants.The humble petition of several of the ancient and mostable burgesses, freemen and inhabitants of the borough ofEast Love, in the county of Cornwall.8 Hume. 178. 181 ; I Burnet, 527. 625.1272 £Last Look.g'"**'^- 'most humbly sheweth,— That the town and borough1688. have not only several rights and privileges by prescription,but also several rights and franchises granted by serialcharters of Queen Elizabeth and King James I., by which itwas granted, that every mayor and capital burgess ahooMbe an inhabitant, and should dwell within the town; andin case of his removing or discontinuing in the town, thata new person should be chosen in his place; and commissionersin such case had been appointed to see the samedone, and to swear a new mayor. That in the end of thereign of King Charles II., and by the violence of those times,the charters were surrendered, but without the consentof the major part of the freemen of the town ; and a newcharter was thereupon obtained, it being then given out, thatthe king had given the borough to some private person, andthereby several persons were named magistrates (and nowcontinue so) who never were inhiMtantSf or elected magistratesof the town, nor were they inhabitant* now* The presentmayor (Mr. Reynard Hawday) never living within eightmiles of the town; and the last standing mayor (Mr. JohnOben) being also no inhabitant there ; and being attomies atlaw, have lately sworn so many strangers freemen, and butlately five clergymen at one time and refused to swear ableinhabitants unless they would promise their votes, (as can beproved.) That the benefit of the government of the town isgotten mostly into strangers hands, and the burden thereoflays on the petitioners ; and the greatest part of the othermagistrates continued, who are so poor that many of themhave been prisoners for debt, and pay no taxes. All whichdoings are contrary to the charters, and your petitioners'ancient rights and privileges, and the government in general.By which means and oppressions several inhabitants of thetown have sold their shipping, and have left the town, andothers will be forced to do the same ; and the customs of thetown, which of late years have yielded 1,600Z. per annum tothe crown, yield not now 50Z.The petitioners most humbly pray, that the town andborough may be restored to their ancient charters andEAST LOOE. 1273government according to law ; and that the said Mr. Reynard ^'"^^^'Haw day (the present pretended mayor), and the said Mr. John 1688.Oben, (the last pretended mayor and justice of the peace,being no inhabitant of the town,) may be ordered to surceasetheir oflSce, being never elected magistrates, and being disabledto be so by the charter. And that the petitioners mayberelieved in the premises in such manner as to the kingshould be thought fit."There is a return for this year of two members, made by 1689.^ . . "^ 2W. &M.the mayor and burgesses under the common seal, and is signed Return.by 43 names " cum alias." This is the first return after thesurrender of the charter made to Charles II., the legalityof which was disputed by the inhabitants in the third yearof the reign of William and Mary ; and after the chartergranted by James II., which being founded upon the voidsurrender, was in fact itself void.John Dyer, William Eldon, and Robert Noble were sworn 1693.fi^;'^ .he said John I-yer .hen paid for Us ^ "remittancesor inhabitance, in the borough. This particularspecies of presentment, as well as others subsequent of thesame description, were probably to be attributed to the thenstate of the poor laws, and the statute of the 23rd and 24thCharles II.After this charter, appears a list of the free burgesses,many of whom were esquires, the greater part strangers tothe borough.However, presentments of persons for inhabiting in thetown without leave frequently occur, and the distinction betweenthe burgesses, freemen and strangers is marked burgesses.^ , , ^ Freemen.throughout the entries in the book, and the bye-laws : — andfree burgesses and freemen are both admitted. As late as the12th year of William III. it appears that the law-court days, 1700.or court leets, were still held ; and the j jurymen and con Court leet.stables elected there. The same is continued down to 1743, 1743.when the entries in the books cease.Before the admission seems to have been of free hurgetui—hat^ it is offreemen.1274 ^^T LOOE.Elizabeth. The free burgess or freeman's oath of this borough, willshow, in some degree, the nature of the privilege — the connexionit had with the municipal government — and the obli-Scot and nation of paying scot and bearing lot, which was connectedwith it.Oath. ti i^ ^^ 3^ being now admitted to the freedom of the boroughof East LooCy do swear, that I will be a true liege man, andtrue faith and truth bear towards his majesty the king ; thatI will be aiding and assisting to the mayor of this corporation,and others the officers thereof for the time beii^, inall things they, or any of them, shall lawfully and reasonablyrequire me unto ; that I will yield, pay and be coiUrilmtaryto and with this corporation as far forth as I shall be reasonablyrated and charged ; that I will be obedient to aillaws, orders and constitutions already made or hereafter tobe made for the better government of this corporation ; thatI will not, on any account whatsoever, by virtue or colour ofthis my freedom, bear out any foreigner or stranger againstthe interest, or any the rights and dues belonging to thiscorporation, or the privileges thereof; but in all things, tothe best of my knowledge and understanding, will endeavourto the utmost of my power to preserve, support and maintainthe same."1725. In the 11th year of George I., one Ryder again set up theright of the inhabitants at large to be burgesses — a strugglewhich they had before always maintained.Quo war And in this year, informations, in the nature of quo warranto.canto, were filed against 38 persons, being inhabitants, forusurping the offices of free burgesses ; against 20 of them,judgments by default were signed — 17 others entered disclaimers— and one was not prosecuted.But it appears by the affidavits, that the usage reliedupon for the admission of the free burgesses by the mayorand capital burgesses, was founded upon the void charter ofJames II.And as the affidavits upon which the rule was obtained,appear to have been framed for the purpose of supportingEAST LOOE. 1275the right of the mayor and capital burgesses to make and Elizabeth.admit freemen which power is given them by the charter ofJames IL, to which reference is also made in the affidavits ;but the information is drawn up upon the charter of Elizabeth,a strong inference seems to arise, that somethingmust have past before the court to satisfy the judges andthe litigating parties, that the charter of James was a voidcharter, and that of Elizabeth the only one which subsistedfor the regulation of the borough.In this year, a petition was presented by Emmeline Tre-^806.sawney, Esq., and Christopher Smith, Esq., one of the commoncouncil of the city of London, against the return ofJohn Buller, Esq., and Edward Buller, Esq.The numbers on the poll were —John Buller, Esq 22Edward Buller, Esq 22Capt. Trelawney 1Mr. Smith 1Fourteen persons claimed to vote, and tendered their voices,for the petitioners, 2iS freeholders and inhabitants paying scotand lot, and were rejected : as well as 14 inhabitants payingscot and lot.Of the 22 persons who voted for the sitting members, ninewere described as capital burgesses, or freemen, or free burgesses; and 13, of whom 11 were non-resident, as freemen,or free burgesses.The single vote admitted for the petitioners, was a residentburgess, or freeman.Subsequent attempts were made to assert the right 18^*of the inhabitants to be enrolled and sworn as burgesses, Q"© warranto.and, as such, to enjoy all the municipal and parliamentary Petition,privileges, as well as to exclude the non-residents : — but acommittee of the House of Commons put a negative on theirright ; and, on the ground of usage, supported that of thefreemen non-resident, and arbitrarily admitted by the corporation; which latter being a power given by the void charter ofJames II., the usage subsequent to that charter ought not tohave been relied upon as founded upon any legal origin, but1276 'est LOOK.Elizabeth. should have been intended, as in the Cheltenham case,*to have been by colour of the void charter.One other fact, for the purpose of showing how matters ofburden, and not of privilege, and unconnected with any parliamentaryinterest, have been left perverted in their originalJurors, state, will close the history of East Love. The jurors at thetown court have ever been selected from the inhabitants ofthe borough ; for which there could be no pretence, unlessthey were entitled also to all the privileges of burgesses.Fowey. 2. — Fowey, like the other boroughs in Cornwall, is notmentioned in Domesday ; but was a place of considerableimportance in the reign of Edward III., having contributedno less than 47 ships for the siege of Calais.1340. In the 14th year of Edward III., it sent, with Love, aCouncil representative to a council at Westminster; but it neverotherwise exercised the elective franchise till it was summonedby Queen Elizabeth. James II., King William III.in the second year of his reign, and George III. in 1819,granted charters of incorporation. By the latter, the corporationwas to consist of nine of the most honest and discreetfree burgesses of the inhabitants, who were to be calledaldermen and council of the borough ;" and one of themwas to be called the mayor.It was provided, that the mayor, recorder and aldennenFree bur might at all times nominate and prefer as iw^ny free burgessesgts>ht . ^^ ^j^^ borough as they pleased. One mayor, eight aldermen,a recorder, and five free burgesses were then nominated andappointed. And it was directed, that the mayor, recorder,justices of the peace, and the rest of the aldermen of theborough, should elect from the free burgesses, to supply anyVacancies, vacancies that might arise among the aldennen; and that themayor, recorder, and their deputies, with the senior aldermanand free burgess, should be justices of the peace.In Hilary Term, 1824,+ a mandamus was applied foragainst the corporation, to compel the election of additionalfree burgesses, under the following circumstances.• See Glanv. p. 57. t Vide Barn. & Cr. vol. ii. p. 584.FOWEY. 1277It appeared, that since 1821 there had been only six alder Elizabeth.men and four free burgesses ; that one of the aldermen, fromageand infirmities, was incapable of discharging his duties;that two of the free burgesses were above 70 years of age;and another was not an inhabitant, whereby the corporationwas in danger of being dissolved.The application, however, was rejected, because it washeld, that a mandamus could not be issued to compel a corporationto elect members of an indefinite body.In Trinity Term 1827, judgment was given against thecorporation ; since which period the county magistrates havealone interfered in the affairs of the borough.*From the proceedings which have taken place in Parliamentrespecting this borough, it appears that the headofficer was originally the port reeve — ^which of itself imports. Portreeve,that the place was of some antiquity, as it is a name of pureSaxon derivation. That appellation was however afterwardschanged for the title of " mayor." Mayor.In the 12th year of William III., a petition of the mayor, nop.recorder, and some of the aldermen and inhabitants payingscot and lot, stated, that the right of election was in the scotand lot men inhabiting within the town. But that the port-reevehad admitted several to poll for the candidate, hisnephew, who were not scot and lot men, in violation of theknown custom of the borough.In the next year, the matter was investigated, and a report ^'^^i.made — in which it is stated, that the right of election wasnot much controverted. But upon a usage of 60 years,it was decided, that the right was in the *^ prince's tenants Right.who were capable of being portreeves of the borough, and insuch of the inhabitants as pay scot and lot**The latter part of this resolution is in conformity with thecommon law — the former is altogether erroneous, beingfounded upon the confusion of the court baron with the court Courtleet ; for the prince's tenants were defined to be " such onlyas had been duly admitted upon the court rolls of the manor,Vide etiam, Lewis' Topog. Diet.1278 FOWEY.Elizabeth. and had done their fealty " — which is obviously a substitutionfor the admission and enrolment at the cotart leet.This error, though apparently immaterial, has a tendencyto lead to important mischiefs ; as instead of confining theright to the inhabitant householders, according to the commonlaw, it admits non-resident tenants — affording means,which were not neglected, of dividing the tenements, andby those means controlling the elections.The greater portion of the freeholds within the boroughor manor of Fowey, having become vested in two families,1765. prior to the year 1766, at a contested election in that year,which was for a single member, only 12 freeholders, orprince's tenants, voted. Before the general election, bow-ever,each of those families had conveyed a number oftheir freeholds to their friends, for the purpose of makii^1767. them prince's tenants. And at a court, held in 1767, thesteward of the court being in the interest of one of thesefamilies, admitted all of them, but rejected all those whoclaimed under the opposing family. The decision, therefore,of the committee who heard the petition on that election,that such prince's tenants must first do their fealty, disqualifiedall those whom the steward had rejected, and gave theother family the return.At first the practice was to make conveyances for thelives of the grantees only ; who, by a separate instrument,declared that their names were only used in trust for thegrantor, and to covenant that he should receive the rents andprofits. This practice continued, with very little or no .ration, till after the year 1790; when an opposition wasraised, in the name of the Duke of Cornwall, which gaverise to the case of the King r. Mein.* There was a petitionto the House of Commons against the return, and a subsequentpetition of appeal.Oil that occasion it was thought, that the grantees for lifeonly, did not hold of the superior lord of the manor — theDuke of Cornwall, but from the immediate grantor.-j-To cure this defect, conveyances were made to the persons• 4 T. R. 480. t See 1 Watkins on Copyhold, 13 ; and the cases there cited.1280 FOWEY.Elizabeth, of the unfortunate decisions of the committees with referenceto this place, it may be material, in order further to prove theintricacy in which, by these means, this subject was involved,to give the following list of objections to voters upon anelection petition for Fowey :Class 1st. — Because at the time of the election the landsin respect of which they voted were not held by them immediatelyof the lord of the manor of the borough.2d. — Because the lands had not continued to be heldimmediately of the lord.3d. — Because the titles of the several voters to the landshad not been duly presented.4th. — Because the voters were not duly admitted on thecourt rolls of the manor.5th. — Because the voters had not done their fealty.Class 2nd. — Because the estates in respect of which theyvoted were fraudulent and occasional, and created for thepurpose of giving votes at the election.1791. A resolution in the 31st year of George III., of a .tee under the Grenville Act, decided, that " the portreeveshould be chosen and presented by a homage jury; andthat the tenants were duly admitted by the steward at thecourt ; and that presentment of the homage was not necessary'*All of these circumstances are likewise founded uponthe confusion between the court baron and the court leet.Portreeve. The port reeve, or king's officer, who was intrusted withthe government of the town, could not be presented by thehomage jury, who could only have to deal with the rightsof the lord, and not with the municipal government of theplace.*Such an officer, if not appointed by the king, would bepresented by the jury at the court leet. And the term^^ homage jury'' of itself imports an anomalous compound, asHomage the homage belongs to the court baron, and the jury to theJury. ,court leet.Enrol As to the admission and enrolment we have observedbefore ; but with respect to the presentment of the homage• See lex t'. Mein, 4 T. Rep. 480.FOWEY. 1281not being necessary, it should be remarked, that the pre Elizabeth.sentient of a resiant at the court leet was also not absolutelynecessary before a person was sworn and enrolled : — becausehe might come voluntarily and do that service ; and if theking's officer knew that he was a resiant, he might admit,enrol, and swear him without presentment. But to justifyany amercement for not attending, or not being sworn, a presentmentwas necessary to bring the party into contempt.The distinction taken as to those capable of being port-reeves,is too absurd, as a qualification for burgess-ship, torequire a single comment ; and it is unnecessary to add, thestill more subtle distinctions made by the committee of appealin the seth of George III. To close, therefore, our remarks 1819.on this place, it is only necessary to add, that there was no realground on which it could have been entitled to return membersto Parliament : — nevertheless, though summoned at thislate period, still, like other places so circumstanced, the rightis substantially decided to be in the inhabitant householders,3. — Cirencester is not mentioned as a borough in Domesday, Cirencesterhad not returned any members to Parliament beforethis period, nor does it appear to have been incorporated,although it had a charter from Henry IV., which was afterwardsforfeited.* A court leet is held annually in the borough,at which the steward of the manor appoints two high, andfourteen petty constables, two for each of the seven wards ofthe borough.The election for this place was called in question in the22nd of James I., before the committee which laid down such unconstitutionalprinciples with respect to electionsBut it is strangely reported in Glanville, that this boroughhad, time out of mind, sent burgesses to Parliament, whichconsidering the numbers of returns still extant, and thatthose for Gloucester in the same county, are regularly preservedfrom the 26th of Edward I., and none appearing for 1297.Cirencester, could hardly be the case. It is stated in thereport, that a doubt was conceived who ought to have a voiceGlanv. 105. t Glanv. 104 ; 1st Journ. 708.4 N1282 CIRENCESTER.Eiiiabeiii. jn the election; and that the opinion of a serjeant-at-law1624. was taken who set it under his hand, that he thought onlythe freeholders of the land in the borough ought to have avoice, and at the election it was so agreed.Resolve But the committee determined, first, *^ that there being nocertain custom or prescription who should be electors, recoursemust be had to the common right, which to thispurpose was held to be, that more than the freeholders onlyought to have voice in the election ; viz. all men, inhabitantshouseholders resiants within the borough"* A resolutionin strict conformity with the common law: — for the inhabitantwould, according to the ancient legal term, be " men of theborough :" — the householders would necessarily pay scot andlot : — and the resiants would in that character be admittedsworfiy and enrolled at the court leet.It was further decided, that the agreement could not alterthe law, or make the election by freeholders only lawful.At the court leet which was always held in the borough,the steward and bailiff are appointed, who are the .ing officers. In the second year of William and Mary, aresolution was made as to the right of election, in conformcity with the law of the leet; viz. that inmates had no1709. right to vote. In the 7th year of Queen Anne, there wasa decision which referred only to the bounds of the borough ;and in the 11th George 1. and the 32d George III., the rightof the inhabitant householders was confirmed.Thus Cirencester is another instance of a place called uponat this time to return members to Parliament without anylegal authority ; and the right of election is fixed, accordingthe common law, in the inhabitant householders.Retford. 4. — Retford is not mentioned as a borough in Domesday ;but in the reign of Henry 111., as we have seen before, therewas a grant to its burgesses f and their heire. And in thereigns of Edward l.,J — Edward !!.,§ — Edward III.,|| —and Henry VI.,5[ charters were also granted to this place.• Glanv. 107. t See before. 468. t Rot. Carl. 4 Edward I.§ Id. 7 Edward II. || Id. 3 Edward 111. If Id. 4 Henry VI.RETFORD. 1283James I. gave one of incorporation — under which the borough Elizabeth.is governed by two bailiffs, 11 aldermen, a high steward, '604.recorder, and two chamberlains. Retford is also said to tion.have returned members to Parliament, in the 9th Edward II.; ^^^^*but as one member only was returned, and it did not forsome time afterwards send any parliamentary representative,the probability is, that it was only to a council. In thefourth of Edward III., the burgesses were excused fromsending members on account of their poverty.It appears from the parliamentary journals, that in the 1700.12th of William III., the returning oflScers were the bailiffs. Bailiffs.In the year following, the right of election was brought ^'^^'•in question ; the petitioners insisting, that it was in the burgessesat lai^e, being freemen ; the sitting member, that itwas only in the resident freemen; and parol evidence wasgiven of non-residents having voted, particularly of one whowas stated to have lived out of the town above a year and aday ; but he was a soldier, and his wife had been resident.Evidence was also given as to persons not resident havingvoted in the choosing of aldermen and bailiffs, as well as inthe parliamentary elections. And also that one person whohad lived above a year and a half " out of the town," hadvoted in Charles Ii's time ; — a period at which the usagescould not be satisfactorily relied upon as evidences of legalright. It was also said, that one person had continuedalderman when out of the town. — that must clearly havebeen illegal. — It was also said, that the non-residents were excluded by an order of the corporation ; which was inevery point of view inaccurate : — for by the principles of thecommon law, as we have traced them from the earliest period,non-residents are excluded, as, in point of fact, not belongingto the place. If they were legally allowable, the corporationcould not by any ordinance exclude them. The truth is,that the order given in evidence was nothing but a declarationof the common law, and an act in pursuance of it ; — aswe have seen before in Wells — the Cinque Ports — and many Wells,&c.other boroughs.By this ordinance, several persons not resident within the4n21284 RETFORD.Elizabeth, borough, were properly disabled from voting at any election1701. whatsoever. And it was also sally ordered, that ** if anyburgess should, at any time, remove his dwelling out of theliberties of the borough, and so continue for one whole yearhe should from thence be disabled from voting at any electionwhatever." A decree most clearly founded upon thecommon law.On the other hand it was insisted, that the non-residentshad no vote, and evidence was given for the 46 years preceding,and also of reputation, '^ that if any freeman wasabsent for a year and a day (as the common law was,) helost his right; and one person proved that his vote wasdenied as non-resident, though he lived but half-a-mile fromthe town — and another only a quarter." However, thecommittee, contrary to this evidence, and the declaratoryRight, order — as well as the whole tenor of the law — decided, that'' the right was as well in the burgesses non-resident asresident" — a more unjustifiable decision, and less supportedeither by law or evidence, can hardly be conceived.It is the more unaccountable, since with the exceptionTotness. of the Totncss case, in 1695, and the Marlborough (Suffolk)case, in 1689, which was afterwards overruled — this appearsto be the first decision expressly establishing the right of thenon-resident burgesses.The Totness case was as unwarrantable as the present, forbeing mentioned in Domesday as a borough, it was clearlyso by prescription, and returned members from the earliesttime.There could therefore, be no case in which the commonlaw right of election and the general obligation of residence,could more strictly apply than to Totness. But the right of28 persons made free under a charter of James II., similar tothe one we have lately quoted of East Love, was insistedupon : though it appeared that their freedom depended uponthe validity of that charter, which rested upon the sameground of a surrender in the reign of Charles II., as in theEast Love case. And upon the authorities there quoted,* it• See before, p. 1263.RETFORD. 1285is clear that the Totness charter was also void ; particularly Elizabeth,as in that instance it was shown, that after the proclamation Tones.for restoring charters, the former magistrates resumed theiroffices, and those appointed by King James never pretendedto act afterwards ; nor could the petitioners prove that thefreemen made by his charter, ever afterwards voted orclaimed to vote.It is true that on the other hand it was insisted, that thoughthe charter was not valid, yet if those made free, had aright to their freedom, they were well made by persons whowere officers de facto, and they showed that some of themwere sons of freemen, and that others had been apprentices. Sons ofThe freeman's oath at Totness was likewise given inevidence, whereby they swear, (as we have seen in manyother boroughs,) that they would claim and occupy the libertiesof the town only such time as they inhabited therein.It was also proved, that Sir Richard Gipps, being at themayor's, said, " he was commanded by the king to beacandidate, and that if he had but one voice he shouldsit, for he had as great interest with the king as anyman in £norland, and could procure 600Z. yearly for thecorporation?'The committee properly resolved, that the persons madefree by King James' charter had no right to vote for Totness :but they most improperly decided, that the right was inthe freemen not inhabiting, as well as those inhabiting. — Non-resinresolution probably founded upon some strong feeling atthe time, perhaps connected with the interference of the king,as they further decided, that the petition of Sir RichardGipps, was " vexatious, frivolous, and groundless." And hewas accordingly ordered " to be taken into the custody ofthe serjeant-alarms, and to make satisfaction to those hepetitioned against for the costs of the petition."Under these circumstances it seems clear, that neither theprecedent of Totness nor of Retford, as introducing nonresidentfreemen, can be relied upon with confidence, andthe Marlborough decision was afterwards overruled. But inconsequenceof the resolution of this committee in the East1286 RETFORD.Elizabeth. Retford case, evidence was given to add to the poll thoseToties. who had been disfranchised for non-residence.Appren' Another point was also raised with respect to apparentServitude, times ; — but the right by servitude was admitted.Eldest It was also questioned, whether any but the eldest sonshad a right to demand their freedom. The unfoundednature and absurdity of this doctrine we have before pointedout: — it clearly arises from the source to which we havelately adverted, of confounding together the principles applicableto tenure, and personal rights and duties : — sto theformer, the doctrine of primogeniture was applicable, andwas administered in the court baron : — with the latter, whichwere regulated in the court Uet, it had nothing to do : butevery son of a free father was by the common law of Englandfree. The confusion between the court leet and the courtbaron appears in the report of the next year; — for it issaid, that the freemen had applied to be made free in thecourt baron, which we have already shown was not theproper court.Making The method of making freemen, given in evidence, muchfreemen. , ^resembled that of the Cinque Ports, Colchester, Wells, Yarmouth,Lyme, and other places. — In the language of thecharters and custumals of the Cinque Ports, " they whodesired the freedom, came to the bailiffs, and made theirrequest, who bid them acquaint the aldermen with it, and ifapproved at the next court, they were admitted to their freedom."This is altogether consistent with the common law,as we have before explained ; and in every respect reasonablein itself, and calculated to secure as well the safety andinterests of the town, as the rights of the inhabitants : andthe best guarantee that the whole would be done fairly andproperly, was, that it was executed in the court before thepublic. How the pure spirit of these proceedings was afterwardsdeparted from, will be seen by the sequel.1701. In a subsequent report in the same year, it is stated thatsons, the right was agreed to be in the freemen or burgesses: — theonly question being whether the younger sons of freemen hada right to demand their freedom. From the form of thisRETFORD. 1287statement, it is clear that the matter was not then fully under Elizabeth.stood : the voters are called freemen or burgesses, leaving it ^"^o^-in doubt* which they ought to be. It is certain, from thewrit and precept, that they could only be burgesses : — andas to freemen J they were so by birth servitude, or residence;but they did not become burgesses till they were admitted,sworn, and enrolled; — in this agreement as to the right, thisdistinction is altogether overlooked, and freemen and burgessesare apparently confounded together.The old entries which were read from the books on thisoccasion, and which went back as far as the 13th of Charles I., 1638.were precisely the same as those we have seen in otherboroughs ; and in conformity with the evidence stated beforeas to the mode of making freemen. It is worthy of observation,that in two instances, a father requires that heand his two sons should be admitted at the same time, — thefather is sworn, but the oaths of the sons are respited tillthey become of age. The entries also prove the distinctionhetvfeen freemen and burgesses, as we have shown above, thefreedom being spoken of as pre-existing and taken up : — ^andthe party is therefore '* sworn a burgess," — one being expresslyadmitted as free and a burgess.An entry in the 20th of Elizabeth, was given in evidence,by which it appeared, that a father compounded for the freedomof his first-born son : — this was adduced to show thatthe eldest sons had a peculiar right. But on the contrary,the party claims the freedom for all his sons: — and compoundingfor the admission of his eldest son, does not showthat he had any particular right, but only proves that hebeing the eldest was of age to be sworn.There was contradictory parol evidence as to the right ofthe younger sons ; and the committee most strangely deter Right,mined, that the younger sons had not the right. A determinationonly to be accounted for, by its being at the sametime that the non-residents had been so extraordinarily supported.See complaint on this head by Mr. Justice Willes, in the Galway case, Cows.509. It is hoped the above statement will explain the whole, and remove thedoubt.1288 RETFORD.Elizabeth. Iq the further investigation of the votes it appears, that1701. the notion o{ freedom and burgess^hip being a corporateright was fully asserted ; and that by a lawyer ; who mightno doubt be more addicted to that doctrine than others,because it altogether commenced with the decisions of thelaw, and was supported by that profession, as the historywe have traced has abundantly shown. Serjeant Selbyinsisted, that '^ a person was not legally disfranchised, forit ought to have been done by the corporation." Whereasall the evidence went to show, that admission and diMfratir^casement ought to be in the court; and that it was notat any corporate meeting — nor the court baron — but theCourt court leet.leet.1702. The election of Retford was again a subject of inquiry inthe next year.The right was agreed as before ; but the question of qualificationfor the burgesses was again discussed.It was insisted for the petitioner, that the younger sonsof freemen, and those who had served apprenticeships, had^gjt to a right to their freedom ; and others living in the borough,but not foreigners, might be made free by redemption.The sitting member, on the contrary, insisted that onlythe eldest sons and apprentices had the right ; but that thecorporation had a power to make whom they pleased free,as well those who lived without, as those who lived withinthe borough.In this monstrous and anomalous claim, all the abusesPower to arising out of the corporate doctrine are included. The arW-make free ^men. tray power of the corporation to make whom they pleasedfree, is openly asserted. The unfounded nature of thatclaim we have shown ; and the reader cannot fail to perceivehow totally such a power is at variance with the generalprinciples of our law and constitution. This power extendingto non-residents as well as residents, in fact placesuniversal suffrage in the hands of the corporation ; for theymight make all the kingdom free of the place; and mighteffectually control the rights and wishes of the inhabitants,by the nomination of persons residing out of it : — a proceed-record.1289ing which it is notorious had often been adopted. A system Elizabeth.so absurd and incongruous could never have been a part of the 1702.law of England, Indeed it is clear that it was as contraryto law, as it was to reason. It being so decided in theHertford case, in Easter Term in the 10th of William III., „l^-to which we have already adverted in our history of thatborough.*And in the same term, two years before this case of Ret-fordoccurred, a rule was made upon T. Warburton, esq.,the late mayor of Holt in Denbighshire to show cause Denbigh,why an information should not be exhibited against him toshow by what warrant he claimed the privilege " to elect andswear peregrine" ** extraneous** anglice, ** foreigners'* tobe burgesses of that borough, " without the consent of thebailiffs and burgesses of the borough." And in the followingTrinity Term the rule was made absolute. Afterwards,however, in Michaelmas Term, upon some ground whichcannot now be ascertained, a supersedeas was ordered to thewrit of attachment upon that information, quia erronic^emanavit. And all further process upon the information wasordered to be stayed until the court should be further movedon the part of the prosecutor.The report of the Retford committee proceeds to state, ^'^^*that they had first examined what power the corporationhad to make foreigners free ; and parol evidence was givenfor the petitioners to negative that right. On the otherhand it was insisted for the sitting member, that this firsthad been decided by the former committee; and an orderin the town books of the 6th of James I. was produced, 16O6.which directed that no foreigners should be made freeunder 20^. fine ; and also an admittance to a freedom in the Fines.7th of Edward VL, the person paying 20s. pro libero suo. 1653.Both these entries are capable of easy explanation by theprinciples we have before shown to be a part of our legalhistory. Persons who had previously lived elsewhere wereallowed to come and inhabit in another place, providedSee before, p. 182.t Rex V. Warburton, cited 4 Burr. 2261, in Rex v, Breton.1290 RKITORD.Biiabeth. they were of good repute — could give their pledges in the1702. court leet — and were accepted by the people of the place towhich they came. And such a person would be called atwiv^en, foreigner f because he had not been born, nor had been previouslya permanent inhabitant in the place. And it wasboth reasonable and customary for such a person to pay someCommon contribution towards the common stock of the place intowhich he was admitted— end in the benefits of which he wasabout to participate — such payment being also some wecmiijfto the inhabitants of the place, in case they should be calledin question for any thing which such an individual had done.Z%if is the ante and intelUgiNe ground of them pa^memig,wkichwonU otherwise have been gross exactions on the pmbUcThus explained, these entries are consistent with the commonlaw ; but they in no respect support the point find wludithey were cited.Non-iea^ Parol evidence was also given to show, that non-residentshad been admitted ; which was not to be wondered at afterthe former decision ; but that hct could be of little avail,unless they were shown to be of an early date; and eventhen they would be open to the explanation given above.Foj^««- Seven foreigners made 17 years ago, were spoken of: —but they were in the suspicious time of James IL, and theiradmissions were afterwards stated to be, and with reason,irregular. On the other hand, in reply, it was shown thatone of the non-residents who had been admitted was memberfor the place : — ^which was often done in order to meet thewords of the writ and precept ; and which expedient probablyfirst suggested the admission of non-resident burgesses:which, if it had not been for some such indirect example,could not have entered into the mind of any man.Rttmlu- The committee properly disregarded the former extraordinarydecision, and, consistently with the common law,declared, that " persons not inhabiting in the borough wereRight, incapable of being made free by redemption." And someliving in Nottinghamshire Derbyshire and Yorkshire, whowere made free soon after King William died, were accordinglytaken from the poll.RETFORD. 1291Some stated that they had been summoned to take out their Elizabeth.freedom: and the admissions of many younger sans were 1702.proved, and that it was the custom for them to be admitted.On the other hand, witnesses were called to negative theirright, particularly by showing that they had paid fines;but that fact, well understood, and explained as above, byno means negatived their right.The committee, however, also in this respect, properlydecided that " all the sons of freemen had a right to their R»«*»i«freedom."So fruitful was Retford of election disputes, that three ^^^P?-*^ Petition.years afterwards, in the fourth year of Queen Anne, anotherreport was made upon a petition, that the right was agreedto be in the " bailifis and burgesses, or freemen" — but thequestion, as to the qualification for freemen, was again discussed,and the right of making persons living out of theborough, and the exclusive privilege of the eldest sons, wereagain insisted upon by the petitioners. The sitting memberson the contrary urged, that all the sons, as well the youngeras the elder, had the right ; and that persons having no rightto their freedom, could not be made burgesses unless theywere inhabitants.The petitioners, to disprove the right of the younger sons. Youngerproduced the entries of freedom, which stated the claims bythe fathers for aU their sons; but which, as we have observedbefore, leads to the direct contrary conclusion.The petitioners also produced parol evidence to negativetheir right ; and the former resolution of the 17th of March,in the first year of Queen Anne.It was also insisted, that Retford was a corporation byprescription ; which was admitted on the other side; thoughundoubtedly it was untrue.The order of the sixth of James I. was likewise proved : — 1608.but it has been already shown that some parts of that document,— particularly when explained by the general principlesof the law, and the practice of other boroughs, — raises aninference against the unrestrained admission of foreigners.That persons newly coming to inhabit in the town, and who1292 RETFORD.Elizabeth, might be properly, and were, called " foreigners," might be1706. admitted, there can be no doubt. And to such persons thisorder properly applied, which in the first instance directs, —for the reasons we have given before, — that all made free byredemption should compound for their freedom : and in oneinstance it has been shown that this was done by an eldestson. The order, then, so far from sanctioning the unrestrainedadmission of freemen, directs that nofareiffner shallbe made free by redemption under 20*. — thereby assessingthe fine or composition, which a person coming to live in thetom should contribute, to the common stock — as well assome other usual payments he was to make, including acontribution to the relief of the poor : — ^and it seems a mostextraordinary application of this restrictive ordinance tosay, that it is a proof of a custom to admit indiscriminatelywhat persons they pleased, whether resident within theborough or not.1624. It is a still more strange perversion of the evidence, toapply another order of the same reign, but 16 years after, tosupport the admission of non-residents, for it disabled anyburgess from voting who should remove his dwelling out ofthe borough, and continue so for a whole year — but providedthat if he returned again, he should vote whilst he livedthere. For by this mode of reasoning, an order which disabledfrom voting, on the ground of non-residence — even thosewho, according to their own system had a clear right toclaim their freedom, as sons and apprentices — was applied tojustify the general admission of non-residents; whereas thisorder was, a tiiith, in direct confirmation of the commonlaw — taking away all local rights in the borough, on theground of ceasing to dwell there — not on account of temporaryAbsence, absence, but of absence for a year, by which, accordingto the general law, new rights and obligations would havebeen acquired in some other place of residence. At thesame time providing, that if the party returned and dweltagain in the borough, he should then be allowed to vote,for these obvious reasons — that they could not doubt hisbeing a freeman, for they had before recognized him as suclpRETFORD. 1293by admitting him as a burgess ; — and having been before Elizabeth.admitted, he had paid his fine or composition, and had been n06.sworn and enrolled — and dwelling there again, would of coursebe again entitled to enjoy all the privileges of a burgess.How it was possible that an order, thus placing the lossand requisition of all rights on the reasonable basis o{ actualpermanent residence, could for one moment be suggested asproof of a right to admit mm-residents, cannot be comprehended,unless the perverse disposition of the human mind,in assuming every thing which tends to support the pointsought to be established, is taken into consideration.They likewise proved some few cases of the officers of the boroughbeing admitted as freemen, though non-residents, as the and others : — these clearly were excepted cases, and officers,could not be the foundation for any general rule — particularlyas a special order was made for one of them to vote, notwithstandinghis non-residence — a decision illegal on the face ofit; and in truth acknowledging the general necessity ofresidence. In the instance of another individual who hadbeen made a burgess on the ground of his being one of themembers, it was stated that he had never voted till late —establishing, that in his case, though an excepted one, thevoting was an innovation.To answer this and other proofs as to non-residents, andalso as to the exclusive right of eldest sons, evidence wasgiven — which would seem to be decisive of the point, thatyounger sons had been admitted at the same time, and inthe same manner as the eldest sons: — and the resolutionin the first of Anne, that all sons were entitled, was read.Parol evidence, as far back as it could go, was called, to 1702.show that non-residents could not be admitted ; and theterm ^' foreigners " was explained to mean persons inhabitingin the borough not admitted as burgesses. To exclude thenon-residents they also read the resolution on that head inthe first year of Queen Anne.Notwithstanding the general principles and history of ourlaw, so opposite to such an absurd system — notwithstandingthe unsatisfactory nature of the evidence on the one hand,]294 RETFORD.Elizabeth. and the reasonable and satisfactory proof on the other — and1705. notwithstanding the former decisions to the contrary, theRight, committee resolved, that the right was in *' the freemen cnfy/'(not the burgesses) ^' having a right to freedom by birth (aseldest sans)" — not positively asserting — for after the evidenceit would seem to have been too bold to do so— that theeldest sons only had the right ; but putting them as an instance— " or by serving apprenticeships — or by redemption,'^ whether inhabiting or not inhabiting at the time of beingmade free."The violence thus done to truths laws reason and communsense, must be left to the dispassionate consideration of thereader, without further comment.On these resolutions being submitted to the House, an attemptwas made to correct one of the most objectionableparts of it, by an amendment, leaving out the words '' whetherinhabiting or not," and to insert the words ** being inhabitantswithin" — but it was negatived.1708. By another petition in the seventh year of Queen Anne,only three years after, some of the violent and illegal acts resortedto in this borough, and probably produced by theseextravagant decisions, clearly transpire — particularly thatwhich was then becoming common throughout the country.Court namely, the suppression of the court leet — a court more importantto the real rights of the people — to the protection oftheir privileges, and the correction of their grievances ; as wellas to the due administration of the law — the good governmentof the people — and the constant preservation of the connectinglihh between the governors and the governed, than all the othercourts in the kingdom.It appears from this petition, that the bailiffs, by theancient charters, were to keep a court once every three weeksbeing the court of review — and on Michaelmas day theywere sworn to keep this court according to the custom,and tie keys, where the charters and records are kept, andthe corporation books, ought to be delivered to the seniorbailiff; but William Jessop, esq., a member of the House,the recorder of Retford, had got into his possession the char-record,1295ters and corporation books, and refused to deliver them ; and Elizabeth,had displaced his late deputy and not appointed another for 1708.keeping the courts, in regard of which the petitioners prayed,that as they could have no redress at law, they might be relievedin the premises, as the House should see convenient.It not being true, in point of fact, that the parties couldnot have remedy at law, this petition was rejected.Two years afterwards, in the 9th of Queen Anne, another , I'll.^ Petition.petition, and a report upon it, occur.The right of election was agreed as before, to be in thebailiffs and burgesses — but the qualifications for burgess-shipwere again discussed ; and it was stated that appren-^ticesy eldest sons and persons by redemption inhabitingwithin the borough at the time of being made free, were qualified— apparently disregarding the resolution of 1705, whichdecided that non-residents might be made free ; but whichquestion was again raised, the sitting members asserting theaffirmative, the petitioners the negative.For the negative, the orders of 1624, which were beforegiven in evidence on the other side, were again produced, butfor the petitioners : — and also another order of the 12th of ^^oo.William III., disabling and utterly disfranchising severalburgesses from their freedom, who, by reason otiheAX dwellingm foreign places, were become foreigner s^ and had so con Foreigners.tinned above a year; and that, from thenceforth, they werenot to be reputed freemen or otherwise than foreigners : —an order certainly going too far, at least, in terms, for itcould not put an end to their being freemen, inasmuch ashaving once been free, they must always have continued so —but dwelling out of the borough, though still free, theywould cease to be burgesses of that place.The petitioners also called parol evidence, to show thatnone but inhabitants were ever known to be made free, orto vote, before King James' time, till within ten years,when honorary freemen were made ; a term, of itself im Honoraryporting innovation, for it was altogether unknown to thelaw, and a mere novelty. It was added, that the votes ofthese freemen were protested against in the borough, and1296 RETFORD.Elizabeth, disallowed by the House, by the resolution of the 26th of1710. November, 1702.The sitting member, to show thsit foreigners might be madefree and vote, insisted upon several entries in the reign ofEdward VI, Philip and Mary, Queen Elizabeth, and KinFine. Charles I., of admissions of several who paid Lines of 2Qf.,and reproduced the order of the 6th of James I., that noforeigner should be made free under 20s. fine ; and provedagain the fact of Sir Edward Neville having been elected analderman, and an order of 1685, giving five votes to twelveburgesses, named, although they were not resident ; but it isclear this latter order was illegal, and being an exceptedcase, established the rule to be the contrary.It was also proved that those who were made free, havingno right, paid a fine (which has been already explained)and those who had a right paid no fine, but only the usualfee : — which is also easily accounted for, because the fathersCommon of the sons of freemen had before paid to the common stock: —stock. .and apprentices had by their service in the borough contributedto its general welfare, and had also inhabitedthere for seven years.Persons living in or out of the town, not free, were statedto be called " foreigners," and freemen living out of the townnon-resident freemen." This might all be true, but doesnot materially affect the real question ; and the same witnessstated, that he knew no foreigners to be made till within thelast eight years. It appeared, also, that several who werenot inhabitants were made free under King James' charter —which at once explains the whole origin of this illegal andunconstitutional innovation. The resolution of 1705 wasalso read in evidence.Right The committee resolved, in the words of the former decision,that the right was " in the freemen only, having a rightto their freedom by birth as eldest sons of freemen" (for,strange to say, that part of the former decision was not disputed)," or by serving seven years* apprenticeship ;*' but as tothe right of redemption, it was properly confined to personsinhabiting in the borough at the time of their being madeRETFORD. 1297free; and they therefore determined, that the sitting mem Elizabeth.hers who insisted on the right of the non-residents were not 17 lO.Non-readilyelected, and that the petitioners who insisted against dentsthat right were duly elected — thus redeeming once more theborough from the overwhelming influence of non-residents.In the 15th of George II. there was another petition from 1741.^ * Petition.this place.In 1801, in consequence of the elective franchise having,by the decision of the House of Commons, been involved inthe intricacies of corporation law, the municipal privileges ofthis place were brought before the court of King's Bench.*In the 43rd of George III., the further consequences of thedecisions supporting the arbitrary right of the corporation toadmit freemen became apparent ; and the evils complained ofin 1702, by the arbitrary and illegal acts of the bailiffs inthe admission of freemen, contrary to the rights and customsof the borough, seem to have revived ; as it appeared thatthe bailiffs had held a court on the morning of the election,and had illegally admitted several to their freedom who hadno right, and rejected several who had a right, and whoclaimed to be admitted. The informations, in nature of quowarranto, against the bailiffs were referred to, and theiroysters under them ; and they were charged with corruptionand partiality in favour of the sitting members, against whoma similar imputation was also directed. But as the acts ofbribery had been committed by persons alleged to be agentsof the sitting members, and as the committee required proofof that agency in the first instance, the petitioners abandonedany further proceeding.In the same year, there was another quo warranto in thecourt of King's Benches which closes the inquiry as to theright of burgess-ship in this borough, discussed no less thanseven times before committees of the House of Commons,and often the subject of inquiry in the court of King's Bench40 freemen being at once ousted, as illegally admitted.The subsequent disgraceful proceedings with respect to• See Rex v. Clarke, 2 East, 75. t 1 Pat. 475.t See Rex v. Thornton, 4 East, 294.4o1298 4 Hertford.Elizabeth, bribery, which occupied the attention both of the House ofLords and the House of Commons for a considerable period,are too recent and too notorious to require further mention: —being indeed foreign from our inquiry, excepting as far asthey may be assumed to be the indirect consequences of thearbitrary power given to the corporation by the erroneousdecisions we have pointed out; and which power beingabused by the leading members of the corporation, that disgracefulexample naturally begot in the lower class of freemena disregard of their public duty, and left them, withoutrestraint, open to the temptations of corruption.The great bulk of honorary freemen were made at the closeof the last century, and were used to influence the leetjuries ; but the court of King's Bench determined that theywere illegal, and consequently they were all ousted.Thus has this place — irregularly called upon to returnmembers to Parliament by Queen Elizabeth, though it mustbe admitted that there are grounds for supposing it to havebeen a borough earlier than the three other previous places ;and it is said to have once before returned a representative —been the scene of endless parliamentary inquiry, legal dispute,expensive litigation, and gross bribery and corruption :whilst the simplicity of our ancient institutions, and thegeneral principles and practice of the law have been materiallyinfringed upon, by the dubious, varying, and unguardeddecisions, which have from time to time been made as to itsmunicipal rights.through. ^- — Qneenborovgh, the next place summoned by Elizabeth,was clearly not a borough by prescription, because we have1368. before* seen the period — the 42nd Edward III. — at whichit was created and built. But it is a singular circumstancewith respect to this place, that although it wasthen expressly made a borough, it did not return membersto Parliament till this period. The charter of Edward III.was confirmed by many succeeding kings to the burgessesand inhabitants.• See before, p. 663.QUEENBOROUGH. 1299It was not incorporated till the second year of the reign of Elizabeth.Charles I., long after its creation as a borough ; — and even 1626.when incorporated, all its municipal business was transactedat the court leet, which is regularly held to the present day. ^o»^'The charter of Edward III., is a grant to the inhabitants, inhabitsobject being to induce people to come and dwell there ;and it is clear therefore, beyond all doubt, that its burgesseswere originally the inhabitants, and their class ordescription has never since been altered. In conformity withthis fact, upon the charters of this place coming before thecourt of King's Bench [upon a proceeding in quo warranto,*it was held that an inhabitant might be made mayor, althoughhe had not been previously admitted as freeman or burgess.It is true that the doctrines as to freemen, and their rightsby birth and servitude, were engrafted on the constitution ofthis borough : — but it was not by virtue of any charter— forthere is none relating to it : — nor of any prescription— forthere could be none, inasmuch as the place was built withinthe time of legal memory: — but it was from the generalCOMMON LAW OF VILLAINAGE AND FREEDOM, OS WC havebefore pointed out, that this doctrine and practice werederived.Fortunately for this place, though it has been on othergrounds much before the public, it has not been often thesubject of parliamentary or legal investigation.There were some petitions arising out of the elections, butthey were not followed by any other proceedings, till thethird of George II., when the right was agreed to be in the ^729.mayor, bailiffs, jurats, and burgesses. And according to thedistinction which we have frequently pointed out, the committee,expressly negativing their right of electing resolved,that the power of admitting burgesses was in the mayor. Admittingjurats, and bailiffs: — which doubtless was correct: because,whenever any inhabitants of free condition applied to them,See Rex v. Greet. 8 Barn, and Cr. 363.t A select body being only part of the corporation, was held to have no right tomake freemen ; although they had exercised that right a long time ; it havingbeen before exercised by the body at large. See Rex v. HoUand^Oakhampton —2 East. 70.4o21300 QUEENBOROUGH.Eiiiabeth. ^s the head officers of the place, to be enrolled and sworn;or were presented to them by the court leet in that character,it was their duty to swear and enrol there : the jurats beingin this instance, as in those of the Cinque Ports, and otherplaces in the county of Kent, originally the jury at thecourt leet.^'^ The proceedings of that court are in existence from a veryearly period, and show precisely what were the real nature,rights, and functions of a borough ; * and as there are entriesimmediately preceding and succeeding the grant of thecharter of Charles I., it can in this instance be most distinctlyshown, that the charter, which was one of incorporation,did not in any material degree affect the rights ofburgess-ship, or indeed any of the privileges of the borough,except only as far as it expressly purported to do so.Notwithstanding, therefore, all the magic which is thoughtto belong to the important act of incorporation, when itsreal nature is not considered; upon a proper investigationof the subject, and examining the real facts which exist,it will be found, that it did not extend further than togive the ordinary power of taking by succession, and suingand being sued by a corporate name ; although clauses forregulation of the elections, and relative to the markets, fairs,justices, and other officers were added to the grant; as wellas a power of making bye-laws : — but the latter privilege wasunnecessary to be expressed, as far as related to the bodyat large, because it was incident to the whole corporation,but not to any select body; — and therefore, when it wasintended that such a body should have that power, thecharter expressly gave it.In truth, Queenboroygh is a place about which thereInhabit could have been no doubt as to the inhabitants, and thetants.inhabitants only being the burgesses. The first charterdraws the distinction between the inhabitants and foreigners,Non and gives privileges to the burgesses as long as they inha-resident. |^j|. . ^^^ ^^^ non-resident freemen by degrees were irregularly• See printed report of the case of the Mayor and Burgesses of Queenborough v,Sky. — Maidstone, July, 1826.QUEEN BOROUGH. 1301allowed to interfere — although there are, upon the records of Elizabeth.the court leet abundant entries to show, as we have seen inother places, that every person going from the borough for ayear and a ray, ceased to have any rights of burgess-ship.And the bye-laws of the borough, in effect, prove the same.On a recent occasion of an election petition, these entries,and the other evidence, were proposed to be given in evidenceagainst the right of the non-residents ; but the sittingmembers were unseated without going into the inquiry, andthe facts were not proved — though no doubt can properlybe entertained respecting it.Before we close these short observations it should beadded, that in the books of this borough, as in those ofColchester, interpolations and erasures have been made, forthe purpose of introducing the usurpations of the select body.6. — Woodstock is not mentioned as a borough in Domes Woodsstock.day ;* nor had it, as far as appears, any very early charter.It seems however to have been a borough in the reign ofEdward I., shortly after representatives of the commonswere first returned to Parliament ; for it sent members inthe 30th year of that reign — and again in the 33rd of 1301.Edward III. — and it is said also in the first of Queen Mary, 1653'.and two other Parliaments in that reign — after which it intermitted,till the 13th of Elizabeth, when its right to returnmembers was disputed.We have before seen, that, in the reign of Henry VI.,fWoodstock was incorporated, on the request of the inhale"tants and residents who, with their heirs and successors, wereto be free burgesses.And, in the 26th of Elizabeth, we find in the LansdowneManuscripts, amongst the Burghley Papers the followingpetition to Lord Burghley ; from which the species of usurpationsin the select bodies of corporations, at that timeprevalent, may be ascertained.It should be observed, that this is only 13 years after itwas re-summoned to send members to Parliament.• See before, p. 203. t See before, p. 883. X No. 40— 32.1302 WOODSTOCK.Elizabeth. '< Causes of Consideration, and respect of dangers to be1683. foreseen, before the alteration of the charter of Woodstock,Petition. i^mnij^y tendered, in behalf of divers inhabitants of the sametown, to the Right Hon. Lord Burghley, lord high treasurerof England.** First, all inhabitants and tenants within the burgh, ofancient time, had divers great privileges and liberties byprescription, before their charter; by which ' every inhabitantand tenant is and aught to be a free burgess**^'And also, by virtue thereof, might devise all thir landswithin the town, which otherwise, by common law orstatutes of this realm, they were prohibited to do.^* By that charter also the election of the mayor ought tobe by the whole commonalty, by common consent : and also,by letters of privy seal. King Henry VII. did strictly commandand charge the town, to make choice of their mayor bygeneral assent, and such as were of good disposition, indifferent,and sufficient ability. And thai no serving-men,or any of livery, should inhabit or be free amongst them.Furthermore, by the said charter, the mayor is also clerk ofthe market, and has the determination of all causes concerningthe assise of bread, ale, and victuals.And also, by the charter, a piece of land or marsh, calledLe Poole,' was granted to all the commonalty. For performanceof all which liberties and privileges, and diversothers in the letters patent contained, all the bui^essesand freemen were sworn, and not to consent to the breachthereof.But of late, within these few years, certain victuallers ofthe town, being confederate together, and having a mayor fortheir purpose, who was also a victualler, have first broughtto pass, contrary to their oath and charter, that the mayor isyearly chosen by a few of their own pack and confederates,whom they name in common council, and not by voice ofAnd it is by no means singular, that all the inhabitants should be incorporated ;for we have seen many instances of it : — and in a case respecting the burgesses ofRockingham, in Berkshire, Lord Hardwicke, with respect to a similar charter, saidexpressly, that ** all the inhabitants were incorporated by it." And the inhabitantsof Sandwich, under like grants, claim and enjoy exemptions horn juries.WOODSTOCK. 1303the commonalty. Whereby they assure themselves, con Elizabeth,tray to the ancient statutes in this behalf, evermore to i683.elect a victualler, who will yearly, for a fine certain, dispense ®^^°°*with all victuallers, to the utter decay of the poor.And by this policy of private election, have, within thesefive years, four times chosen one Skelton, being a butcherand victualler, to be mayor. Who hath first, by ordinancescontrary to the statute made in the 19th year of King HenryVII., not approved by the right honourable the lord chancellor,or by the chief justices of either bench, or justices ofassise in the same circuit, disfranchised two of the aldermen Disfran-of the same town, only for maintaining their charters accordingto. their oaths. And under pretence of authority,hath grievously imprisoned, fined, and amerced, divers of thebest disposed men — not according to their offences, but afterhis own greedy mind, to enrich himself; having, by thecharter, all fines and amerciaments granted to the mayor andcommonalty, which he employed at his own pleasure. Andfurthermore prohibited, when he listeth, to take any benefitof the said marsh, called * Le Poole ; ' and also restrainedthe better sort from dealing in any matter touching the estateof the town, or employing of the common stock to the Commonpublic benefit of the town. Threatening daily to disfranchiseothers of good behaviour ; and giving out confident reports,that by the new charter, he will purchase authority to dosuch things, which neither by law nor their {uicient charterare justifiable. And by this means, disturbed the commonpeace and quiet of the town ; which, by the maintenance oftheir ancient'charter and liberties (till now of late) they havealways enjoyed.May it therefore please your good lordship, honourablyto foresee and provide that your supplicants may not beinherited — by disfranchising them — depriving them of theirvoice in elections — or abridging their former liberties todevise their land by will — or by prohibiting them from takingequal benefit with others of the land called ' Le Poole.'To all which things your supplicants and their heirs are,both by custom and charter, now inheritable. And finding]304 WOODSTOCK.Einabttth. this, all your supplicants will most willingly assent, and1588. to their power further the reformation of the said charter.Petitionin any point defective." An offer of timely and prudentreformation highly creditable to the petitioners.The charter of Henry VI. was confirmed and amplifiedby Charles II., under whose charter the borough is nowgoverned, by a mayor — four aldermen — a high steward-recorder— 17 common councilmen — and a town clerk.1713. Few other particulars appear of this place ; but, in the12th year of Queen Anne, it seems the same evils which hadoccurred in Retford, and which had unfortunately leeredin part the sanction of the House of Commons, had extendedthemselves to Woodstock. It is stated, in a petition of thisdate, that two of the candidates had prevailed with theNew free mayor to make divers new freemen, for the purpose of tie""^^ election; and by imprisoning — bribery — and other illegalpractices, had procured their return.The petitioners insisted that the right was in ^' the mayor,aldermen, common council, and freemen, living as well withoutas within the borough'' The sitting member, on thecontrary, that the right was only in the freemen, residents,and inhabitants.Several witnesses were examined on both sides ; and thecharter of Henry VI. was produced.Right. The committee resolved, that the right was 'ein the mayor,aldermen, and freemen " — apparently negativing the right ofthe non-residents, as they ought to have done, consistentlywith the particular charter to this place of Henry VI., andwith the general law.Christ — Christchurch is mentioned in Domesday * as a borough,Tbuinam. under the name of Thuinam.1336. In the ninth year of Edward III., there was a grant toWilliam dc Mouteacute (inter alia) of the castle of Christ-borough,church Twynam, with the borough and manor of Weston,and the hundred of Christchurch.1306. I^ is ^^id that it was allowed to send members in the 35thSee before, p. 109.CHRISTCHURCH. 1305year of Edward I., and summoned in the second of Ed Elizabeth.ward II.; but no returns were made to the precept, and lace.Prynne does not include it in his list of the places whichreturned members: — but in another part of his work, hementions the summons in the reign of Edward II.*But it intermitted again till the 13th of Elizabeth, whenthis question arose, as to its returning members to Parliament.After which many petitions were presented respectingthis place, but none of them were followed by anyresolution.In the 9th George I., a petition stated truly, that this was 1722.a borough by prescription; but it is added, without anycolour of authority, that it anciently consisted of a mayor jburgesses resident in the borough — out-burgesses, and inhabitantscalled the populace.Anciently there could not have been any aut-burgesses • to the history — principles — or practice we haveendeavoured to developed. And as to the inhabitants beingcalled the " populace' it seems to have been altogether a Populace,gratuitous assumption; as such a term was then totallyunknown to the law.It appears from this petition, that the mayor was sworn inat the Michaelmas court leet ; and as we have seen in. formerinstances, the first appearance of abuse was in neglecting tohold that court.By another petition it appears, that from the fifth of 1718.George I., there had been great controversies and prosecutionsat law, including a trial at bar in the court of King's 1720.Bench ; and afterwards, the burgesses and inhabitants appliedto the king by petition for a charter of incorporation : andupon an inquiry before the king in council, it was reportedby the attorney and solicitor-general, that the corporationwas disabled to act without the king's aid, and that the mostadvisable method for his majesty, if he thought fit, would beto grant such a charter.No further circumstances appear with respect to thisborough, which is, in some degree in a different positionBrew. Red. Pari. p. 210.1306 CHRISTCHURCH.Elizabeth, from the Others summoned by Queen Elizabeth, as it wasa borough by prescription, and had previously returnedmembers to Parliament.Aidiio- 8 — Aldborouqh is not mentioned as a borough in Domes-rough.•' ^^day, — and it never returned members to Parliament, till the!S?* 13th of Elizabeth. It was incorporated in the first year of1606. Edward VI. — again in the fourth of James I. — and byCharles I., under whose charter it is now governed, by twobailiffs, 10 capital and 24 inferior burgesses, with otherofficers.There are but few records material to our inquiry, relatingeither to its municipal or parliamentary rights.1689. In a petition in the first year of William and Mary, however,the abuses which we have pointed out in other places,appear to have been introduced in this, by the power ofelecting freemen, (negatived by the House in the Queenboroughcase,) being exercised by the select body of thecorporation ; and by their nomination of out-burgesses.The petition stated, that '' at the poll there appeared to beinhabitanu 26 freemen and inhabitanus for Sir E. Turner, and only 14for Mr. W. Johnson; whereupon Sir Henry Johnson andMr. Johnson, brought in out of the country several gentlemen,farmers, and others, not inhabiting within the borough,nor paying scot and lot, nor bearing any charge of thecorporation,* being but lately made free contrary to theusage and custom of the borough, by the procurement of onealderman Bence, purposely to assist in that election. Bywhich means the petitioners' right of election is destroyed,and they are deprived of their freedom therein, and prayingthat Sir E. Turner might be admitted to sit in Parliament'*This petition, which appears to state so distinctly the realgrievances of which the inhabitants had at that time such• This is an instance, of which there are many others, of the parties who complainof the misconduct of the corporation, themselves tacitly admitting their right,by adopting the name of corporation. The petition ought to have referred to thecharges of the borough.— bearing the charge of the corporation is insensible, and languageunknown to the law ; bearing the charge of the borough, would have beenconsistent with law and other precedents.ALDBOROUGH. 1307just cause to complain ; was omitted to be renewed the next Elizabeth,year. And when in 1691, the case came before the House, 1689.the petition of the inhabitants was disregarded, as none hadbeen presented by them in the last session.Sir Edward Turner's petition was renewed. And Serjeant ^®^*Trenchant reported the question to be, whether the right of ^s^^'election was in the freemen resident within the borough;or in the freemen at large: for it was agreed, if in theformer, the petitioner was elected ; if the latter, the sittingmember.For the petitioner it was insisted, that this was a porousby prescription, and was incorporated in the first year ofEdward VI., whose charter was produced; and a paperwhereby the rum-resident freemen had subscribed not fohave advantage of the marshes, quay and causeway, belongingto the town.For the sitting member it was insisted, that Aldbordughwas a borough by prescription, (which there is great reasonto doubt) ; — and Thomas Wall, who was produced by thepetitioner, having proved that rumrresident freemen had votedin other elections of burgesses to serve in ParliamentThe committee resolved, —That William Johnson, Esq., wus duly elected. — sand theHouse agreed to the resolution.It will be remembered that this decision is subsequent to Non-residents,the reign of James II., in which we have seen by other cases,non-residents were introduced by the violent acts of thecrown. Wall's evidence is general that non-resident freemenhad voted before, — not saying whether it was in thereign of James II., or not. Considering that the interferenceof non-residents with the local rights of the inhabitants is sounreasonable — as well as so entirely contrary to the wholenature and spirit of the municipal institutions of the countryit is not an unjustifiable assumption, to presume that thisunconstitutional practice to which Wall referred, was introducedin the reign of that unfortunate monarch. Particularly,as it is subsequently shown that it was illegal, by1308 ALDBOROUGH.WnhtOu another committee afterwards bringing back the right to die170M. There was also a report upon another petitio in theseventh year of Queen Anne, again stating that the petittones had insisted, but it seems merely as an assaniptioawithout any evidence, that it was a borough by prescription.They truly added, that it was Jir$i incorporated ifEdward VL, and they reasonably contended, that the rightwas in the largest$ tndfreemenf inhabitants in the borough.SittiM The sitting member insisted, that it was a corporation ifpreBcriptkmf — for which there is no pretence — nor had itbeen before asserted, — and the right was said to be in thebailiffs, capital burgesses, and other inferior boigeaseSy andthe freemen*Another person, also of the name of Wall, was called as awitness, who spoke to four or five elections, having lived inMarlborough 16 years. But that period did not go back to theformer determination in 1691, and doubtless after that decisionfumFTeiidents would have voted. When, therefore, heasserted that the non-residents had voted as well as theresidents, without distinction or objection, he proved nothingas to the ancient practice of the borough ; but only showedthat the former decision had been acted upon. It is true,he added that he had never heard that the usage in electionswas otherwise — but such negative assertion could atthe best be of little weight : and when he likewise producedthe report of the fonder committee, it cannot be consideredbut that he was in truth referring to the usage subsequent tothat period ; before which he could have no knowledge.However upon such evidence as this, the committee, as inRight, the Totness and Retford cases, decided that the right was inthe bailiffs, burgesses, and freemen'* — thereby in effect —Non-rwi. though not expressly — supporting the right of the nattyIt should be observed, that both the petitioners and thesitting member, as well as the committee, seemed to haveerred in form, in asserting the right to be in the burgesses andALDBOROUGir. 1309freemen ; because it imports that there were two classes en E elizabeth.titled to vote : which could not be. For there is no doubt, 1709.that both with respect to the municipal and parliamentaryrights, there can be but one question, which is — who arethe burgesses? They by the charters are to enjoy themunicipal rights : and they by the writs and precepts are toelect the members. There cannot be two classes.Mayors, aldermen, jurats, sheriffs, and bailiffs, are often Mayors,mentioned in the charters — in the name of incorporation —and in the determinations as to the right of election; — but thegrants are not made to them, nor are they incorporated, nordo they vote, or enjoy other municipal or parliamentaryrights in those characters, but generally as burgesses. Tothis point, therefore, the whole must come : — and the questionis, " Who are the burgesses?"It is true that none could be burgesses hni freemen. It isalso true, that since' villainage has ceased all are freemen.And if the taking the oath of allegiance, and the beingadmitted, and enrolled at the court leet, is no longer necessary,but obsolete, (as the court of King's Bench decided inthe Maidstone case,) then indeed all the inhabitant householderspaying scot and lot without more, would be the burgesses— and this description might be sufficient to denote theburgesses. But whatever it is, there can be but one class —and therefore, in form this description was inaccurate. If itmeant that the freemen were the persons entitled to vote,and then the others, though also freemen, were merelycalled " burgesses," as by their name of dignity or office,then the decision is so far intelligible. As far however asit included non-residents it was erroneous, for the reasonswe have given before.The plausible pretext upon which such a right was supported,was the assertion that " once a freeman, always afreeman :" — and therefore, although a person left the place inwhich he had been admitted as a freeman, he still continuedfree. — This taken with reference to the doctrine of villainageis undoubtedly true ; for no person having once been of freecondition, could ever afterwards be reduced again into a1310 ALDDOROUGH.EUubeth. state of villainage. But in that view the principle is inapplicableto the point we are considering; for though such aperson continued free, he was not a freeman of the placehe had left : — and therefore, if it was a borough, he ceasedto be a burgess of it. The misapplication of this rule of theancient law to modem circumstances, has produced in thisinstance, as in many others, anomalous and absurd consequences,— all of which may be obviated, explained, andreconciled with the law, if the real origin from whence theyarose, and the principles upon which they are founded areregarded, and correctly investigated.Another instance of error on this subject has crept intoour law books and the practice of the courts, for the explanationof which, the present may be a fit opportunity.In many legal proceedings it has, in modem times, beenBumat. assumed that the situation of a burgess is an office. Butfrom the whole tenor of the history we have traced, and thenature of his condition, it is obvious that this is a mistake.A burgess is nothing more or less than an inhabitant in aborough : doing in that district what others do in the countyat large : giving his pledges to the law there, which hesolemnly sanctions by his oath ; being enrolled* thereatperforming all duties, and contributing to all charges withinthat limited district.It is not therefore an office, but a description of an inhabitantwithin a particular district, — and it was expresslydeclared by Lord Holt,+ that " it was not an oflSce, but a privilege."And it has been held that freemen: were not withinthe Test Acts, because they did not exercise any office.The enrolment of the inhabitants in every district, seems so practically useful,and so obviously to be necessary, that we cannot be surprised that it should be apart of our law. Some arrangement of that kind is to be found in almost everystage of man's existence : and in every part of the world. In the Mosaic law —where the tribes were classed and taxed. In the Athenian law — where all whowere of a certain age, and not excluded by any personal fault, were enrolled. Bythe Roman law — where such a system formed a considerable head of their institutions,—and certainly amongst our Saxon ancestors, — not to mention the numerousanalogous instances to be met with in modern travellers, even amongst the most uncivilisedpeople. In truth, it is almost a natural result of the social compact.t Rex V. Morris ; 1 Lord Ray. 337.X 2 Tr. 828, in the case of the borough of Christchurch.ALDBOROUGH. 1311And the distinction between offices ^lA franchises is properly Elizabeth.taken in the margin of the valuable reports of Sir JamesDyer.*Besides it is clear, that even according to the modemmode of considering these rights, it is impossible thatbnrgess'ship could be an office ; because, where the supposedqualification was burgage tenure, or the payment of scot andlot, the burgess could not be considered as holding an office.But to proceed with the only remaining decision withrespect to Christchurch, in which the former errors werecorrected, and the right properly restored to the residents.A petition in the second year of George I. stated, that the 1715.bailiffs had permitted a number of people called honoraryfreemen and outsiders to poll ; and with threats, bribery, &c.,and by detaining freemen nine days at Sir Henry Johnson'shouse, had procured him and H. Johnson, Esq., to be returned.And another petition by great numbers of the burgessesand capital freemen stated, that there was a great majorityof the freemen and other inhabitants for the petitioners, butthat the bailiffs permitted the honorary freemen and outsidersto vote.The allegations and the evidence on the one side and theother, were nearly similar to those in former cases, exceptingthat a charter in the reign of Edward VI., was relied upon,which gave power to the bailiffs and burgesses to makeordinances for the government of the borough, and any of theking's subjects, wholly or not wholly resident there.But it is obvious that such a power had no tendency toprove that the burgesses might be non-resident; for it isapplied generally to the king's subjects ; all of whom inthe place must be subjected to the local municipal government,whether permanently or temporarily, wholly or notwholly resident.The charter of the fourth of James I., was also produced, inlandan order in the town-hook, during the Commonwealth, ex Town book\ . 1667.eluding out-burgesses and foreigners from common on the Foreigner.3 Dyer, 332 b, pi. 28.1312 ALDBOROUGH.Elizabeth, town marsh, because they did not contribute to any publiccharge.Two returns were adduced in evidence, which did not materiallyaffect the question : — and parol evidence was givenas to the elections in the reign of Charles II., to show thatnone but inhabitants had voted: — and that out-burgessesWatch & did not do watch and ward.On the other hand it was attempted to be proved, for thesitting members, that the freemen at large had voted forOot-bur- fifty years : — that the witness never knew any out-burgessesrefused : — that they served town offices, and were annuallycalled over from the roll, and fined for non-appearance : andhe spoke of four out-burgesses who voted in 1669. Otherwitnesses proved to the same effect, and the decisions in1691 and 1709 were produced.For the petitioners it was alleged in reply, that in thosecontests, little or no evidence was to be had against thosemembers who were then returned.Relations The Committee resolved, that the right was not in thebailiffs, burgesses, or freemen ;" but in the " bailiffs andburgesses resident within the borough." Thus restoring theright properly to the burgesses — inhabitants of the place.CHESTER.Many instances have already been shown of the provisions incharters, and ordinances in bye-laws, enforcing the residenceof the burgesses ; but the following document from theHarleian MSS., relative to Chester, puts it in so clear apoint of view, that its insertion in this place may be excused.1593. It is of the date of the 36th of Elizabeth,* and is a letter tosome of the non-resident citizens : —My very hearty commendations unto you remembered.Whereas this incorporation, for the good opinion conceived ofyou both, made you free of this city, as also an aldermanthereof; which of a long time you have enjoyed, hoping thatyou would have been ready, according to the course, tohave taken further charge upon you — as the office of mayorsHarl. MSS. 2082, p. 140.CHESTER. 1313alty of this city — ^and afterwards your contributions accord Elizabeth.ingle. And albeit, the admittance of you, and of every 1593.other person entering into the franchises and liberties of thiscity, are upon condition, that if any such franchised personshall not make his abode or resiancy within this city, butwithout, by the space of a twelvemonth and a day, thensuch admittance to be void. And by the absence of you andothers, yrce citizens of this city, the countenance thereof isgreatly weakened, and the ordinary chaises of scot and lotsupported both to her majesty, and to this city, and everyother way, by a few inhabitants here. And albeit, also, thisincorporation heretofore minding the amendment of thesame, took general order that you, and all other free citizensof this city, should make your repair hither by a day longpast for the accomplishment of such order, and you, havinghad thereof warning, have not accomplished the sameeftsoons, as this present like order is taken by this incorporation,that you and all others, free citizens of this city, whohave inhabited out of this city by the space of a twelvemonthand a day, not having borne scot and lot as citizens, by thefeast of the purification of blessed Mary the Virgin nextcoming, must either repair to this city and marie your resiancytherein, and accomplish that as is required thereby, or elsethenceforth to lose such freedom and calling here : whereofI, as mayor, do hereby certify you. And forasmuch as thisincorporation greatly favourite you, and that you have alwaysbeen friendly to the same, and showed yourself otherwise asagood citizen, and every member of this common weal desirousof your continuance amongst them, therefore I do requestyou, as your good friend, and one that greatly favouriteyou, that by the well-limited time you do fully satisfythis incorporation of your resolution under your own hand inwriting, whether you will repair hither to take order for duepayment and answering of all contributions henceforth, as toyour calling within the city requireth, or else as before tolose the same, considering your good acceptance amongst us ;and therefore the rather pray your due consideration of thepremises as thereof speedy answer, and to accept hereof in4pJ314 CHESTER.Elizabeth. gQ^j part in respect of the all good intended hereby to its1503. due effect. And thus ceasing, commit you to the blessedtuition of the Almighty. Chester, October 27, 1693.Your very loving friend and mayor."Several letters to the like effect were directed — to Mr.Robert Snagg; Mr. Edward Hammer; Mr. John Tyson;Mr. Thomas Reward."EYE.9. — Although Eye is not mentioned as a borough in Domesday,its burgesses are spoken of in the entry for Suffolk :* —but it did not return members to Parliament till this period.An inquiry, however, occurred as to the delivery of thewrit, with respect to two elections; but nothing is containedin the Journals relative to the municipal or parliamentaryrights of the burgesses.1680. In the 32nd of Charles II. there is an entry on theJournals, that the House, taking notice of several abuses andmisdemeanors committed in this borough and corporation,relating to elections and otherwise, ordered a committee tobe appointed to examine and report upon them. But no furtherproceedings occur respecting it.William III. granted a charter to Eye, under which it isnow governed, by two bailiffs, a recorder, 10 capital burgesses,and 24 common councilmen.The right of election, as it was exercised affords anotherinstance of the anomalous confusion produced in boroughsby modem usages : as two classes of persons claimed to beentitled to it, " the free burgesses or corporators," and " theinhabitants paying scot and lot."1822. This borough has given birth to a curious inquiry in thecourt of King's Benches founded upon a bye-law of the corporation,which directed that, " upon the happening of anyvacancy in the number of twenty-four common-council men,it should be filled by the freemen inhabiting the town, and• See before, pp. 279, 281, 282.t Hex V, The BailifTand Corporation of Eye, 1 Barn, and Cr. p. 85.EYE. 1315that a court should be holden once every year, at which it Elizabeth,should be lawful for the bailiffs to admit to the freedom ofthe town such persons of good fame as had been residenttherein /or one whole year*' And it was held by the court,that this bye-law did not give to every such person, who hadbeen so resident for that period, an absolute right to be admittedto the freedom of the borough ; and therefore the courtrefused a mandamus to the bailiffs to admit such a person :although it appeared that he had been fined for carrying on atrade within the town without being admitted to his freedom.It should be observed, that this bye-law is consistent withthe common law — the bye-laws of many other places — theCinque Ports, &c., and, properly considered, should be treatedas declaratory of the general law. It is, therefore, a matterof surprise, that the court should not have allowed the mandamusto issue, either on the ground of the general law, orthe bye-law. For although it was said that " it could notbe supposed that the corporation meant to impose an obligationon themselves, but rather only to acquire the powerof doing the act if they thought fit*' — yet, surely, it would bemore consistent with a due regard to the proper execution ofpublic duties, to assume, that the framers of that bye-lawconsidered that it was beneficial to the place, to admit allsuch persons as burgesses: and that they made the ordinancewith a view of publicly announcing, that all persons so circumstancedshould be entitled to be admitted, if they thoughtfit (according to the language of the Cinque Port bye-laws) toask for their admissions, &c. : — and that, on the other hand,they should be compellable to be sworn and enrolled, if forthe good of the town, in any respect, it should be consideredexpedient to constrain them to do so. This assumptionwould be consistent with the fact stated above, that theparty had been fined for carrying on a trade within the townwithout being admitted to his freedom. Whereas, on theother hand, to hold that he was not entitled to be admitted,if he thought fit; and yet was liable to be fined if he tradedwithout being admitted ; would operate as a direct restraintupon trade — be contrary to the general policy of the law —4p21316 EYE.Eiiiabeih. and, in fact, make the whole illegal. It is, therefore, a justground of surprise that where there were two modes ofconstruing a bye-law — one which would make it consistentwith the general law and practice — and another which wouldrender it contrary to law, and practically inconvenient, — thecourt should have adopted the illegal, and rejected the constitutionalconstruction.The reader will, therefore, have now a full opportunity ofconsidering the varying circumstances under which QueenElizabeth summoned these nine places to Parliament : — andthe contradictory decisions and abuses which have beendeveloped, in the progress of the inquiry into the differenthistories of these towns.Not only were the burgesses who elected members to Par-residenceliament at this time resident in the respective boroughs, butalso the members themselves : — and it was not till the 13thyear of Queen Elizabeth, that a bill was brought into Parliamentfor the validity of burgesses not resiant. Upon itsbeing read a second time, the following debate is reported tohave taken place : —Mr. Wamecombe said,* that it behoved all those whowere burgesses to see to the bill ; — for this may touch andover-reach their whole liberties; as not having whereunto tostay, but i\\^i lords' letters \so\\\A from henceforth bear all thesway.Mr. Norton, in support of the bill, urged the imperfectionof choice, which was too often seen, by sending of unfit men ;and lest happily any thing might be objected to the imperfectionof Parliament, which may seem to be scant sufficient,by reason of the choice made by boroughs for the most parto( strangers (whereas, by the positive law, no man ought tobe chosen burgess for any borough but only resiants and inhabitantsJ,f He said, further, that the choice should be ofsuch as were able and fit for so great a place and employment,without respect of privilege of place or degree ; for• Dews' Journal, p. 168. t Sut. I Hen. V.RESIDENCE. 1317that, by reason of his being a burgess, it might not be in- Elizabeth.tended or thought he was any thing the wiser. Withal, heargued that the whole body of the realm, and the good serviceof the same, was rather to be respected, than the privateregard of place, or the privilege or degree of any person."To which it was answered, by a member whose name doesnot appear, that the question was, what sort of men were tocome to this courts and public consultation in Parliament ?Whether frooy the benefitof the liberties, or especially to be of the council of this city.Yet nevertheless, the mayor and council do protract andrespite the final order to be taken of those enfranchisement ^until the assembly next to be holden within the said city,with contentment, that if in the meantime, they or any ofthem, should deliver to the mayor in writing, a simple declarationof the true cause that moved them, and by whoseprocurement, and upon what occasion, acknowledging theiroffence in their so doing, with submission to the mayor andwhole council, to stand to what punishment or fine theyshould take, touching their said misbehaviour, and withprotection never in the like, or in any thing that maytend to the prejudice of the liberties of this city, to bedenizen or partaken with others : that then the mayor orcouncil upon such submission, and the trial, whether theCHESTER. 1325same be simply or feigned, to stay their disfranchisements^ Elizabeth.with putting them to such punishment, by fine or otherwise,as to the mayor and council at that assembly y upon dueconsideration of their submission, shall think most requisiteand convenient.In a case in the 25th year of Queen Elizabeth, respecting London,an apprentice in the city of London a distinction is takenbetween a citizen and freeman: the former being stated tobe such as inhabit within the city.*TRURO.As the circumstances connected with the borough of Truro,are somewhat peculiar, it will be advisable to introducethem at this period when a charter is granted to the town.The return of members to Parliament in the sixth year of 1662.Edward VI., was by the mayor, with the consent of thewhole commonalty ; and in the 26th of Elizabeth, it was by 1683.the mayor and burgesses.It must be observed, that this is prior to the charter ofElizabeth : — there were no capital burgesses before thattime : — and consequently' those terms could not have meantthe capital burgesses ; but must be intended to denote theburgesses at large ; — who were, as shown before, " the in-habitants.'^In the 31st of Elizabeth, the queen granted a charter to 1588.Truro, which commences by reciting that it was an ancientborough : — and that the mayor had been called by the nameof the mayor of Falmouth. That the ports of Truro andFalmouth had fallen into decay, but that the inhabitantshad endeavoured by all means to preserve the ports bycleaning and repairing them. And that the borough ofTruro was the principal place for the coinage of tin. Thatthe burgesses and inhabitants had enjoyed divers franchisesby prescription and charters, as well by Reginald, Earl ofCornwall, and other lords of the borough, and divers kings.And that the inhabitants of the borough had besought herMoore's Rep. p. 135.1326 TRURO.Elizabeth, ^gj^g^y^ sot the better government and improvement of it,1588. to make the inhabitants a body corporate and politic. Thequeen therefore granted, that it from thenceforth, should beafree borough of itself, and that the ** inhabitants'* and theirsuccessors from thenceforth, should be a body corporate andpolitic, by the name of " the mayor and burgesses of theborough of Truro, in the county of Cornwall** with theusual corporate powers and a common seal.24 Assis That twenty-four of the most discreet and honest inhabitantsof the borough, should be assistants to the mayor.Council. That the mayor and common council (apparently the 24of the most discreet inhabitants, for none other had been mentioned),or the greater part of them, might make statutes andordinances, &c., and impose penalties for enforcing them.4 Aldermen That there should be selected four men of the better andmost honest of the 24 capital burgesses, who should becalled aldermen of the borough, and be chosen every yearby the greater part of the twenty-four.That there should be a recorder, steward, and two Serjeants.And that the mayor should be clerk of the market.That the mayor and burgesses and their successors,whenever a Parliament should be assembled, should haveauthority or else (vel aliter) by their common council, orthe greater part of them, to elect and nominate two discreetand honest men to be burgesses of the Parliament, toremain there at the charge and cost of the borough and thecommonalty thereof," &c.The first mayor, and the first 24 capital burgesses arethen named and appointed : and are described as inhabitantsof the borough.• The words and import of this charter, like many others, must be altogetheraltered, before it can be contended, that it is not an incorporation of the inhabitants.In truth, this construction is so plain and obvious, that it would be considered selfeevident truism, and improper to be particularly insisted upon, had not usage and thedecisions of the courts of law thrown doubt upon ittThe capital burgesses had only been mentioned once before in the charter, andthen coupled with the number 24, which leaves no possible doubt who were inert*meant. So also here it seems apparent, that the term burgesses, without any additionof the term " capital," or the number 24, can only mean the burgesses at large,or the irihahitaiits,t The charter of East Love is the same, see before, pp. 1255, 1256.TRURO. 1327The mayor and recorder are empowered to be justices of E^"**^^**-the peace. 1588.And there is directed to be within the borough a commonhall and council house, for the mayor and capital burgessesand common council, who were empowered to call a hallwhen they should think fit.Four persons of the capital burgesses and inhabitants were Aldermen.named as the first aldermen of the borough.If the mayor should die, be absent, or removed from his Mayor,office, during the time of his mayoralty, the common councilwere to assemble within twelve days, to elect another aldermanto be mayor.And if any of the capital burgesses or counsellors should Capita]burircsscs.die, or go out of the borough to dwell, or be removed, itshould be lawful for the mayor and other capital burgessesto supply the vacancies from the burgesses of the borough.Power was given to remove capital burgesses, and electothers from the burgesses and inhabitants.Two honest and fit persons of the burgesses and inhabitants constables.of the borough were to be constables.The charter then confirms to the mayor and burgesses of Confirma-truro,and their successors, all their former possessions;which the aforesaid mayor and burgesses, or the inhabitantsthereof, by whatsoever name or names, corporate or incorporate— or by whatsoever pretence of any corporation— or byreason or colour of any prescription, writing, or writings, bythe space of 50 years last past or more, &c. had enjoyed.Infangthef,&c., toll, &c., within the borough is then granted,(as by the charter of Reginald de Fitzroy).The burgesses of the borough are not to be put with men*Homines, — This tenn occurs so frequently in the ancient laws, and in chartersand other documents, that it may be excusable to cite a passage showing itsoriginal application. In the treaty made between Henry II. and his sons, 1174,it is said, — "Barones et homines sui qui recesserunt ab eo decent habere terresseas :" and afterwards the king grants — " quod omnes ill qui recesserent ab eo postfilius suum et in recess suo forisfecerunt, in terra domini regis ad pacem ejusrevertantur. Ita quod de catalans, quae asportaverunt in recess suo, non respondents*'Hovered, fol. 309 a, n. 30.So in the treaty between Frederic, king of Connaught and Henry II., 1175, —Frederic is declared to be the king's liege man ; and that he should be prepared todohim service, " sicut homo suus et ut tenet terram sum ita bene," &c. Hovered,312 b, n. 20.1328 TRURO.Elizabeth. out of their corporation, in any assise, juries, &c., out of the1588. borough of Truro, except for lands and tenements belongingto the borough.And it is directed, that the burgesses and inhabitants, andtheir successors, should be quit and free from toll, anchorage,keyage, &c. &c. &c. throughout all England, except the cityof London, suburbs, and liberties thereof.Strange. That no Stranger y nor any person inhabiting out of ike boroughlimits, and precincts thereof, should sell goods or merchandisewithin the borough, or liberties, without the consentor license of the mayor and capital burgesses.Fine. The mayor and bui^esses (that is, the inhabitants) were tolevy to their own use and profit all fines and amercements.Leet. Assise of bread and wine was also granted ; and a leet* orlaw-day, and view of frankpledge of all the inhabitants anddweller within the borough : and that the recorder for thelaw-day, or frankpledge, should be called the steward.The attention of the reader has been drawn before to theInhabitants plain construction of this charter, by which the '' inhabitants**are expressly incorporated ; and he will have seen, throughoutthe whole context, that the intent of it was to benefit theborough and its inhabitants — that the mayor's assistants wereto be taken out of the inhabitants — that the first 24 wereactually nominated out of that body — that if they went todwell out of the tom, they were to cease to be capital burgesses,and their vacancies filled from the burgesses andinhabitants ; and, what is probably more convincing than allConcubines. the rest, the constables, who by the common law must beinhabitants, are directed to be chosen in the same manneras the capital burgesses from the burgesses and inhabitants.It is also a strong confirmation that the inhabitants wereto be the burgesses — that the ancient court leet and view offrankpledge was to be held in the borough, at which inhabitAnd presentments were made at the court feet of Truro with respect to theenjoyment by the inhabitants of the right of dredging for oysters, and other matters,as at Queenborough.t All the resiants were to appear at the court leet ; but the freemen only were tobe sworn there ; otherwise the lords would have to complain that their villains wereseduced away from them, and improperly sworn at the leet, whereby, under thelaw in Glanville, they would be disfranchised.TRURO. 1329tant householders, as resiants, would by the common law Elizabeth.owe their suits ; and ought to be there sworn and enrolled. 1588.It should also be observed, that it is provided by the charter,that if a person, elected to be mayor, should refuse to fillthat office, he is to be compelled to do so by fine and imprisoned &c.sonnet — neither of which could be enforced beyond theprecincts of the borough ; and, consequently, from this circumstance,as well as from the express words of the charter,it is clear that the capital burgesses ought to reside withinthe borough — notwithstanding which, non-residents havebeen allowed in modem times.The confirmation of the possessions which the inhabitantshad enjoyed affords also a strong inference, particularly whencoupled with the recollection of the former documents, toshow that the privileges granted by '' Reginald " to the bur Burgesses.gesses of Truro had always been enjoyed by the inhabitants; inhabiunuand although there is a reference to a former corporation, by Corpora-theloose general words which had become at this period socommon, viz., " by whatsoever name or names incorporate,or by pretence of any corporation," yet it is most clearlyestablished in this borough, as in many others, in respect towhich the same words have been used, that in point of factthere had been no previous incorporation — notwithstandinggreat pains were taken at this time to raise the inferencethat corporations existed by prescription.*The exemption from Jwrie*, granted by this charter to the Juries.burgesses, affords also another strong ground for inferringthat none but the inhabitants were to be burgesses, and thatall of them were to be so — ^because this exemption could notbe enjoyed by any one out of the borough : for if it mightby one, it might by all: and so it might be made, in-• This doctrine is the more extraordinary, because in the case of Marion v.Rascal, Anderson, 202. 39th of Eli., 1686, it was agreed by the court and bar.That a corporation could only be made by the king's letters patent, which at alltimes should be the rule and guide, from the words of the king contained therein ;for it is the act of the king by which corporations are created, without whom theycould not be : and a corporation cannot be made by usage, prescription, or otW-ui^i;/'— This case is also reported in 1 Leon. fol. 159. See also the same point, 49Lib. Ass. fol. 8.4q■ TRURO, 1331■ part of the history of this place where it will be inserted in Elizabeth.• its chronological order — premising only, that the next clause 1588.i in the charter is, " that no stranger or any person inhabitingI *' out of the borough" — (who then are the strangers but thepersons inhabiting out of the borough ? and who the burgessesbut those inhabiting within it?) — "shall sell within the*' borough without the license of the mayor and capital burgesses."So that no strangers are to sell in the boroughwithout the license of the mayor and 24 capital burgesses ;and no burgess or inhabitant is to have goods landed therewithout paying toll to the same 24. A more unpropitiousposition for trade to be placed in, by a charter of the wiseand liberal Queen Elizabeth — granted for the express purposeof benefiting the town — can hardly be conceived.It only remains to observe upon the important clause in Membersthis charter relative to the election of members of Parliamentment; the language of which, it must be admitted, is in somedegree ambiguous. However, the doubt which arises uponit, if any, will not materially affect the right of election, forreasons which will be hereafter shown.The doubt arises upon the words " vas aliter :"* — theclause, providing that there shall be two burgesses of Parliament,directs, that " the mayor and burgesses shall havepower, or else by their common council, or the greater partof them, to elect two burgesses to Parliament," &c.The construction of these words would seem to be, thatthe mayor and burgesses may elect either by themselves orelse by the common council : — a provision neither illegal —unreasonable — nor contrary to usage. Not illegal — ^because,though all have the power to elect, any number who are presentmay do so — those absent, either waiving their right orimpliedly delegating it to those who are present. Not unsVolumes, &c. quod sint duo burgenses parliament prout antea statum fuitpro eodem burgh quoque predict! major et burgeruet quandocumque parliament*turn convocari continent virtute brevis nostri de election burgensium parliamenteis direct! vel aliter per forum comment consilium aut majores parted eorumdem utprefertur habet potestatem eligendi duos discretion et propos vires fore burgensesparliament et eodem interesse ad parliament ad opera et custodia dicti burgi etcommunicate ejusdem."4q21332 TRURO.Elizabeth. reasonable, for it is a principle of reason as well as of law,1588. that, Fas est quicunque enunciated jus pro se introduction.Not contrary to usage, — because there are abundant instances,from the earliest time, of elections made by smallnumbers — by the 12 — the 24 — or even by the commoncouncil — which, as long as discontinued the mere exercise ofa delegated power, capable of being abrogated, when necessary,by those who delegated it, was not inconsistent eitherwith the constitution — sound reason— or public policy.There seems, therefore, no extrinsic reason for rejectingthis construction. But supposing it to be otherwise, andthat the words " vel aliter" apply to the writ, or to the otherpreceding matter of the clause ; and that the words were intendedexpressly to give to the common council the right ofelection — it is the clearest law, from the express authorityof the Cheltenham case,* that such a clause in the king'scharter could not alter the right of election. We havealready seen that it was originally in the burgesses andcommonalty at large, and was exercised by them from the26th of Edward I., and therefore upon this broad, general,constitutional ground, this clause could not have the effectof giving the right to the common councils and excludingthe burgesses and inhabitants at large. Besides there is alsoanother ground for this assertion, namely, that, as the burgessesand commonalty at large had enjoyed the right ofreturning members to Parliament, and their rights were inthe reign of Henry VI. confirmed hy Parliament y the king'scharter, though accepted by the inhabitants — could not alterthat right, which is, as Lord Coke,' and the election committeein the reign of James I. said, " for the general public good."• Glanv. p. 47.t Much of the difficulty with respect to the rights and powers of the *' commoncouncils" would be removed, if the real nature of those bodies were duly considered.They have only a delegated authority from the body at large, for the easeand convenience of that body, and for the better despatch of business. It is justlysaid, that ** the common council, properly speaking, is no part of the corporation,but is a body collateral to it, appointed for particular purposes, — such as, advisingand assisting the mayor, and making bye-laws, &c." Cro. Jac.540. In Warren'scase ; and in 2 Rolle's Rep. 112. In the same case it is said, " the office is only to** give assistance and advice for the good of the city." Kt vide etiam ante, pp. 53,61, 293, 303, 387. 651, 590, 981.TRURO. 1333Up to this time, therefore, whatever the construction of El«abetb.the charter may be, it is clear that the right of returning i588.members to Parliament for Taro was vested in the burgessesor inhabitants at large ; and by the same constructionand reasons, the inhabitants were the burgesses— o( which,in truth, there can be no doubt, as there are not in this boroughfreemen, or any other class, to represent that body.By what acts and decisions this right was, like the others,gradually usurped by the select body, we shall hereafterpoint out.The returns to Parliament before this time appear to have 1503.been under the seals of the respective parties to them : andclearly, therefore, do not import to be corporate acts. Butthe return of this date seems to be under the common seal :no doubt, in consequence of their having become incorporatedunder the charter of Elizabeth : but which, by the authority ofthe Cheltenham case, ought not to have affected the right ofreturning members to Parliament.As Truro has supplied us with so perfect a specimen of aparliamentary borough, whose charter is clear and express,and where the abuses are most distinct ; — so will Singleton Congietonafford us a similar specimen of a borough not summoned toParliament.As to its early history, it is not mentioned in Domesday as Domesdaya borough, nor did it ever return members to Parliament.In the reign of Edward III., Henry de Lacey, Earl of Lincoln,granted to his free burgesses of Singleton that the townshould be a free borough; that they should have a merchantguild ; that they and their merchandises should be free fromtoll, stallage, &c. ; that they should not plead or be impleadedof any plea as to their lands and tenements withoutthe borough ; that they should elect from among themselvesa mayor, and other inferior officers ; that they shouldhold peaceably and quietly their burgages for 6rf. each,fand for every acre of land, \2d. ; and that they might give,• Harl. MSS., 2074, 194.t See Domesday, fonim^1334 CO^JGLETON.Elizabeth, gell, and pledge them to whomsoever they would, exceptto men of religion, &c.1525. A chasm occurs in the documents relative to this placetill the 16th of Hen. Viii,* when upon complaint madeto the chancellor and council of the duchy of Lancaster,upon behalf of the mayor and commonalty of the town ofSingleton, parcel of the duchy, that upon plaints and othersuggestions made before the justices of assise, and otherofficers at Chester, they had compelled them at Singleton,and in other places within the liberty of the said duchy,to appear as well at Chester as at counties, eyres, sheriff'sturrets, and other courts within the liberties of Chester,against their ancient charters to them by the kings of thisrealm granted, and confirmed by his majesty King HenryVIII., and against their custom time out of mind used, to thegreat oppression and unquietness of the tenants and inhabitantsof the town of Singleton, and in breach of theliberties of the duchy ; the chancellor and council of thecourt, not willing their ancient good customs, nor the libertiesof the duchy, should be so usurped and broken, did, byprocess of injunction, under the seal of the duchy, will andrequire the j ustices of assise, and all other officers of Chester,as also charge them, that from thenceforth in nowise theyshould distrain any of the tenants and inhabitants of thetown or lordship of Singleton aforesaid, within the libertiesof the said duchy, to appear at Chester, or at any other oftheir counties eyres, hundreds, sheriff's tourns, or courts, forany manner of cause contrary to their franchises and ancientcustoms.1532. I^ ^^6 24th year of Henry VIII., an injunction was issued-sonthe complaint of the mayor and commonalty of the townof Singleton, parcel of the duchy of Lancaster, that diversof the said inhabitants of Singleton had been distrained toappear at Chester, against their ancient charter and custom,time out of mind used, to their great oppression and unquietness,charging, from thenceforth, in nowise, to distrain anyof the tenants and inhabitants of the town of Singleton, to• Harl. MSS., 844, p. 18 b. f Ibid. p. 14 b.CONGLETON. 1336appear at Chester, or at any counties, eyres, hundreds, sheriffs Elizabeth.tourns, or courts.Here, by the words of reference, " said inhabitants," it ismanifest (and no other construction can be supported), thatthe word ^' commonalty used above was intended to describethe body of th inhabitants — which construction is confirmed,as well by the general observations we have beforemade upon the nature of the grants of these privileges — asby the clause at the close of the former document, and of thisinjunction, which insists upon the exemption of the inhabitantsof Congleton/rom suit at the county courts, eyres, andhundred courts, out of their town ; and from the sheriff's toum :because they did their suit royal at their own leet, and theirother suit at the different courts of their own borough — anobservation we have frequently had occasion to make withreference to the charters of other places. And it will be remembered,that the exemption from suits of shires and hundredsis not only the most ancient, but also the most generalprivilege granted in all the charters, English, Welch, Scotch,and Irish.*We have already seen many instances in which QueenElizabeth granted charters, reciting, that places had beenlong before incorporated ; which statement we have shownto be inaccurate. We have another instance of the samekind in the 26th year of Queen Elizabeth, in a charter to this 1583.boroughs which states, that the men and tenants had beenfrom ancient time, a body corporate ; for which there is nopretence.It then recites, that from the variety of names by whichthey had been called,, many inconveniences, &c. had arisen.And to take away such uncertainties and inconveniences, theburgesses had petitioned the queen for the better governmentof the town, and the burgesses and inhabitants, to reconstitutethem into another body politic and corporate. Andconsidering that it was an ancient and populous town, andthat there should be one mode of government, &c. andSee early charters of Ireland, among the Egerton MSS. in the British Museum.t Ilarl. MSS. 844, &c. p. 10, and the Confirmation Rolls at the Rolls Chapel.1336 CONGLETON.Elizabeth, hoping that if greater liberties were granted the burgesses1583. and inhabitants, and their successors would feel themselvesmore especially bound to serve her, granted, that it shouldInhabitants for ever be a free town, and that the inhabitants should forincorpo- ''***^ ever be a body corporate and politic, by the name of " themayor and commonalty of the town of Singleton," &c.The charter then proceeds to grant the usual corporateMayor, powers. And that there should be a mayor, to be chosen fromamongst the inhabitants: and appoints Richard Greene, aninhabitant, to be the first mayor, until another inhabitantshould be presented and sworn into that office.The charter confirms all former grants.These words, " men and tenants," adopted in this charter,taken with reference to the former documents, clearly meanthe tenants and inhabitants, who were the burgesses.Although the charter asserts that Singleton had beenfrom ancient times a corporation, it does not state, as insome of the former instances, that it had been so by prescription;which the previous documents show to be impossible; but it merely uses the expression " ab antiquo," towhich it may be difficult to give a definite application.However, be it applicable to whatever former period it may,it is clear that it was untrue ; and although Singleton was,as stated in the charter, an ancient town, it was not incorporated,but the tenants and inhabitants as residing in thetown, and enjoying a jurisdiction exclusive of the sheriff,possessed many privileges common to other boroughs andtowns, although not incorporated.Burgesses Upon the expression *^ burgesses and inhabitants," webitants. have before had occasion to remark. It is obvious, fromthe general tenor of this charter, as well as those we havebefore quoted, that the privileges which were granted forthe purpose of the better government and regulation of thetown, must, in order to insure their object, have been intendedfor the benefit and use of the inhabitants y otherwisethe whole purpose of the charters would have been defeated ;and accordingly the queen, in express and emphatic words,directs, that the inhabitants should, by the name of" theCONGLETON. 1337mayor and commonalty," be the corporation; words goEUiabeth,clear — so explicit — and so unambiguous — that nothing but 1683.the most determined perversion could have raised a doubtabout their meaning ; and yet such doubts have existed insome places, and have been acted upon even by the courtsof laver.• But Singleton never having returned members to Parliament,there vires not the same temptation to abuse itsprivileges for the purpose of procuringparliamentarymfluence;and therefore this, and some few other places, exhibit instancesof the charters being acted upon according to the plainimport of their terms, and the obvious intention of the grants.Whereas in other towns, having charters with preciselythe same words, they have been tortured and perverted forthe purpose of giving exclusive privileges to the select bodies,and supporting the arbitrary election of burgesses.In the reigns of Henry VIII., Philip and Mary, andQueen Elizabeth, the privileges of Singleton were enjoyed inhabitantsby the inhabitants, who were called the burgesses, and theofficers were selected from them.Now if the charters of this place are compared with thosethat we have given of other towns and boroughs, it will befound that they are, in terms and substance, the same,although illegal usages have been permitted to give thema different application, and have produced the abuses ofwhich complaint is now so general, but which could so easilybe removed, and the real constitutions of the boroughs beobserved, if the real intention of the charters was regarded,and they were construed according to the pure principles ofour law, which is described in one of our reporters,* as " themost reasonable law upon earth, regarding the effect andsubstance of words more than the form of them ; and takingthe substance of words to imply the form thereof, rather thanthat the intent of the parties should be void*The clauses which follow in the charter as to there beinga mayor — the appointment of the first mayor, and the elections,as well annual, as those arising on vacancies, all confirmPowder, 140, in Browning v. Barton.1338 CONGLETON.Elizabeth, that the inhabitants, as such, were the burgesses, becausethe mayor is directed to be chosen from the inhabitants;the person first appointed mayor is described as an inhabittante and he is to continue mayor till another inhabitant iselected.Officers. There is also a provision in this charter which will illustratesome of our former observations. The mayor is to takehis oath of office before his last predecessor, and twelve of thecommonalty. Which will instantly occur to the reader asastriking confirmation of our former statements, that theborough and town jurisdiction was to be under the care ofthe hinges presiding officer (the bailiff, reeve, or mayor),aided, in conformity with the practice of our early institutions,by a jury of the inhabitants of the place — ^in thismanner most admirably and practically uniting the executivepower, and the people themselves, in the due government ofthe towns, and the administration of the laws.1585. In the 27th and 28th of Queen Elizabeth,* certain tenantsBill, in Singleton exhibited their bills in the chancery of the duchy,complaining — that whereas they and others, the queen'stenants of the duchy of Lancaster, by force of divers chartersshould be free of all manner of toll, stallage, &c. ; and thatthe defendants distrained the tenants and inhabitants of thetown of Singleton dwelling there, contrary to the tenor ofAnswer, she said charters. To which complaint answer was made bythe defendants, stating, amongst other things, that most ofthe inhabitants had been used to pay toll. Yet the bill andanswer being by the chancellor and council of the court con-decree,ordered, it was determined, that " although it be true thatsome of the town have neglected to take the advantage oftheir liberties and privileges, that is not material or prejudicialto them'' And the answer not containing any sufficientmatter to require toll of the said inhabitants it was, therefore,by the chancellor and council of this court decreed,that the " complainants and all others, the tenants and inhu-• 27 & 28 Eliz. October 12th. M. T. Harl. M SS. 844, p. 17.t Inter Ricardo Green Majores de Singleton et comrounitatem ejusdemVillain V, Thorn. Beckett et al.CONGLETON. 1339bitants of the town should from thenceforth be free, and dis Elizabeth.charged from all manner of toll, &c."In the 29th year, the queen,* reciting the complaint and disjunctionmade in the 16th of Henry VIII. — and that althoughthe liberties, privileges, and exemptions had beengranted, ratified, and confirmed by the queen's highness tothe mayor and inhabitants of Singleton aforesaid, yet one inhabitantsJohn Mylner, of Chester, had of late caused process of subpoena,out of the exchequer of Chester, to be served uponthe mayor for staying the appearance of one of the inhabitantsof Singleton, upon process served upon him by a deputyof the said John Mylner, to appear in the exchequer atChester, contrary to the tenor and effect of the ancient charters; upon which process, Mylner, in the further violation ofthe liberties and exemptions of the duchy, for the mayor's nonappearancein the said exchequer at Chester, sued out diversprocess of contempt against the mayor. It was, therefore,ordered by the chancellor and council, that an attachmentshould be forthwith awarded out of the court, to attach thesaid John Mylner for the breach of the liberties and exemptionsso often confirmed to the mayor and burgesses of Con" Burgesses.gleton under the seal of the court. This document againconfirms the assertion, that the inhabitants of Singletonwere, by the successive kings and queens, and by thecourts, treated as the burgesses of the town.The chancellor and council of the duchy, speaking of theconfirmation of Queen Elizabeth, describe it as made to themayor and inhabitants; and the complaint is, that one ofthe inhabitants had been served with process, contrary to theancient charters and privileges of the place. And they assertthat '' the liberties and exemptions had been often conefirmed to the said mayor and burgesses, under the seal ofthat court," — thus treating the term " burgess " as synonymouswith that of " inhabitants.' ' And it prohibits theparty from further proceeding against the mayor, or anyother of the inhabitants, — clearly establishing that the privilegesextended to all who dwelt in the place, subject toEarl. MSS., 844, p. 186.1340 CONGLETON.Elizabeth, the common law restrictions of paying scot and lot, and1586. being sworn and enrolled.In the same year, also, the decree in favour of the exempt^q^ ^f ^jjg inhabitants from tolls, was further enforced by anorder of the queen herself.*Court Further particulars of the court leet, and of the municipalconstitution of Singleton, and of the abuses introduced intocity may be collected from the following resolutions (amongstothers) of Mr. Atkinson, for the town of Singleton to the15912. questions following ; in Hilary term, in the 35th of QueenElizabeth.*' The form of the proclamation of the court hath been inthe queen's nameyX sd Sir John Savage, steward there ; thatthe court leet and court baron should be holden, &c. Query,Queen. Whether the proclamation should not be only in the queen'sname, and not in the steward's ?** In the queen's name only. || For it is danger to makeproclamation in the name of a subject.Usage. << The steward or his deputy of late time hath taken uponhim to associate the mayor in walking the fairs in Singleton.Query, Whether he so might, for the usage hath commencedsince man's memory.If it hath been used time out of mind, whereof nomemory is to the contrary, so it ought to continue.Editors. " The steward, within thirty years past, used to nominateone person in court, and the mayor another, and these twowere sworn to eleze and name so many more unto them asshall make jury, to inquire for the queen at the leet ; and• Ilarl. MSS., 844, p. 20. t Harl. MSS., 844. p. 24.X A person was fined for saying, that the court leet was the court of the mayor.See Sir Thomas Jones, 229, in Barrington v. Brookes.§ That the court leet was in full use, at this time, in other places, may also beseen by many cases relative to them in the reports of the courts of law at thisperiod. — See 2 Leon., p. 74, Lawson and Hare's case, in which a court Uetand the Uet fee are both mentioned, as well as the sheriffs toum. And at Liverpoolthere were also presentments by the court Uet jury during this reign. See alsoOwen's Reports, p. 35; 2 Bon. 206, 30th Eliz. 1587; 4th Leon. 216, 32 Eliz.1589; 33 Eliz. 1590; Cro. Eliz. 581, 37 Eliz. 1594.II 4 Leon. 104, 29 Eliz. 1586. Exception was taken that a court before whichperjury was alleged, was described as " the Uet of the Earl of Bath — whereas everyUet is the king's court, although another may have the profits."CONGLETON. 1341after verdict the steward named one of the jury, and the Elizabeth.mayor another, to be sworn to assess fines upon the present 1592.ment. Nevertheless, of late time, the steward hath madechoice of them all himself, without the mayor. QueryWhether, therein, the steward do wrong unto the mayor,and if it be a wrong, then, how to reform it ?The mayor ought to join with him. It must be reformedby complaint in the duchy.The burgesses of Singleton, before and since the time of Fees,memory, have used to be free from paying any fees to thesteward in court for bonds for peace; and for releasing fromthe peace in the leet: and also every burgess hath had duringlike time, freedom in entering, or on swearing actions in thecourt baron, without any fee, therefore, to the steward; untilnow of late, within these few years, that the deputy stewardurgeth them to fees therein. Query, Whether this be awrong, and how it may be reformed ? Query, Whetherthis prescription be lost?*' It is a wrong, and they may indict the steward of extortion.No prescription is lost, because it is the less part of Prwcrip-Ix years; and the interruption being by wrong, and claimstill made to the contrary, taketh not away the lawful prescriptionthat was before.'^ In our charter are these words, * Et si aliquis forum inmisericordiam nostra incederit, ante judicium per defaulternon except xii<^. et post judicium rationalismmisericordiam secundum quantities delicti.' Query, theexposition and interpretation hereof?This is meant of plaints that be affirmed in the court S^^^^ baron.baron; and not for the leet; because there be no judgmentsthere.Query, Whether the mayor upon court days may takeplace of the steward in going into the court house, and untilthey come to the bench, and upon the bench, and in otherplaces of the town, or not ?The steward is chief officer in both courts.Query, Whether the mayor be a suitor to the court, andif he be, whether he may sit upon the bench with the stewardupon the court days, and on the better hand or not ?1342 CONGLETON.Elizabeth. « He is a suitor. In respect of the office, he is chief; b1592. respect of his reliance, but as another person.Where it is incident to the charge of a Uet (an authoritygiven by divers statutes) to inquire of the assise of breadand ale ; and of butchers, victuallers, artificers, tanners, carriers,shoemakers, offending contrary to the statute of 18 EdwardII., chap. 6, et 2 Edward VI., chap. 10, and the same^^^- has been used to be inquired of in the court leet of Singleton,and presented, fined and levied for the queen : Query ,Assembly. Whether now the mayor in his court of assembly* mayinquire of these defaults, and punish them, and levy theirforfeitures, to those of the town or not : and, whether thesteward ought not to be discharged thereof for any furtherinquiry or punishment of the same ?See the statute of 19 Henry VII. chap. 7, by which it isordained that no ordinance shall be allowed, unless the samebe allowed by the justice of assise; or such other as arenamed in the same act."Foreigner. The 11th question relates to trespasses done by cattle offoreigners upon the wastes of the town.Query J Whether the mayor ought to certify the bondsleety. and recognizances of the peace at the next leety or when elsemay he certify them ?At the leety if he have so used. He cannot compel themto be bound, but may imprison the offenders for the peace atdiscretion.Liberties. " Query, What liberties are incident to a free town, as Singletonis ?They shall have such liberties as are granted them byPrescribe charter. And such as they have used by prescription, soas they be not contrary to law, and none other.Lottery, Whether by force of our new grant or otherwise.Courts, we be discharged from appearance at Salton hundred courtand county court, and such like ?They are exempted by the words of the old grant out ofall the king's courts.• This is a similar attempt to that made in the Cinque Port— Queenborough —Colchester — and other places, to withdraw the matters proper for the court Uet fromthat legitimate jurisdiction to the corporate meetings.CONGLETON. 1343Query y Whether our alabaster ought to present default at Elizabeth,the queen's court or the mayor's court, considering the fines 1592.are given in such cases to the mayor and commonalty ?He ought to present at the leety and the queen to have the ^^*-benefit.Where the alabaster should take his oath — where thecatchpole should take his oath ; and whether they may notbe sworn by the mayor upon the day of his election ?They ought to be sworn at the leet and not by the mayor, Leesthe last court leet of Singleton, C. D., a burgess, wascalled, and in his absence, the steward accepted his essay.The jury found and presented the same C. D. and A. B., theconstables for the year following. The steward accepted theverdict, and swore affeerors who assessed the fines, and after Affeeron.wards called for the new presented constables, and findingone of them to be absent, charged the jury to go togetheragain, and present another in his stead, which they refused.Whereupon he set down a fine of 20d. a piece for this refusal.Query, How the office shall be executed until C. D. besworn ; and when he may be sworn ; and whether the mayorat his court of assembly may give him another to execute Assembly,the office ; or must it be respited until the next court leet ?Query, Whether this fine be a wrong, and if it be, how it shallbe avoided?*' It must now be executed solely by him that was sworn.C. D. may be sworn at the next leet. The mayor may not Leet.swear him. The fine, if the case be true, is a wrong; and tobe avoided in the duchy court.We are the queen's tenants in burgage tenure. K foreignerstrespass upon our commons. Query, Quid faciendum ?'* Impound them damage fesant."A charter to Singleton, in the 22nd year of James I.,* re- ie24.cites, that the burgesses and freemen of Singleton hadenjoyed, from time immemorial, by divers names, privilegesas well by charters as by prescription ; and grants that themayor and commonalty, by whatsoever name or names theyare now incorporated, or were heretofore incorporated, should• Pat.2ajac.I.1344 CONGLEION.Elizabeth, b^ from thenceforth one body corporate and politic, by thename of *^ the mayor, aldermen, and burgesses of theborough of Singleton."That it should be a free borough, with the usual corporatepowers. That one of the burgesses inhabiting and rendingin the borough, should be elected mayor; and eight burgessesbe elected aldermen ; and 16, or a less number, of theburgesses and freemen inhabiting or resident, to be called thecapital burgesses. That the mayor, aldermen, and capitalburgesses, should be the common council ; and should framebye-laws.And power is given to the mayor, aldermen, and theirsuccessors, to elect, of the most honest and discreet freemeninhabiting and rending within the borough, not exceeding16, to be the first capital burgesses.A chief steward was appointed, and a town clerk. Themayor and two aldermen to be justices : with a general confirmationof former privileges.And this charter closes the municipal documents of Singleton.Statute. The statute of hue and cry, of the 27th of Queen Eliza-cap.13. beth, in the preamble and enacting clauses, mentions theinhabitants and resiants in hundreds and counties as the personsliable to be charged. And the fifth section imposes thecharge upon every inhabitant and dweller, which is to beconfirmed by the constables and headboroughs.Graham.1586. That the wages of the members for Grantham were evento this time paid by the inhabitants of Grantham, may becollected from the following extract from the Journals of theParliament of the 28th and 29th of Queen Elizabeth, respectingMr. Hall, who had been proceeded against for alibel on the House.*On Friday, the 2nd day of December, upon a motion thisday renewed, on the behalf of the inhabitants of the borough• D'D'Ewes' Journal, p. 407.Graham. 1345of Oranthaniy touching a writ brought against them by Elizabeth.Arthur Hall, Esq., whereby he demanded wages of theinhabitants, for his service done for them, as their burgessin attendance at sundry Parliaments: forasmuch as it isalleged, that the said Arthur Hall hath been heretofore disabledby this House, to be at any time afterwards a memberof it — and also that he hath neither been free of the corporationof the borough — and also hath not given any attendancein Parliament at all — it is ordered, that the examinationthereof be committed to certain members named, who movedthe lord chancellor to stay the granting of any attachment,or other process against the inhabitants, for the wages, atthe suit of the said Arthur Hall ; which was granted accordingly.We have before seen, that the inhabitants were mentioned inhabiunuin the charter of Edward Iv,* which first incorporated thisplace. And that in a subsequent document, in the reign ofRichard Ill.^t ^^^ former incorporation was not alluded to,as, in truth, by no means material to its municipal government.Here, although the wages are not obtained from the inhabitants,no person disputed their liability to pay them, if theywere due at all. And if so, it would seem strange that theyshould not be entitled to vote for the members they wereto pay.And yet, in 1711, upon no satisfactory evidence, the right 1711.of election was determined to be in the freemen. Freemen.In 1730, this usurpation was carried still further, by its 1730.being decided, that the freemen, resident or non-resident, vote : so totally was the real right of the inhabitantsdisregarded; who, in 1697, had petitioned both against theadmission and right to vote of strangers, whose claim was Strangers,stated, as we have seen before to have been the case in otherplaces, under pretence of a charter of James II., which he James il.afterwards revoked ; and from which illegal source, no doubtthis usurpation was derived.• See before, p. 970. f See before, p. 1034.4r1346 COLCHESTER-elizabeth.COLCHESTER.The nature and extent of the queen's interference with theparliamentary elections,* may be collected from the followingstatement as to Colchester ^ respecting an occurrence in the1584. 26th year of Queen Elizabeth.Nominate bailiffs, aldennen, and common council, to serve themembers. queen's grace, and get rid of all trouble, made the followingextraordinary order, — ^*'That Sir Francis Walsingham shall'^ have the nomination of both the burgesses of the town far theParliament, for time to come, according to his honour's'^ letters to the bailiffs, aldermen, and common council of thetown, directed." Whereupon, two persons were returnedaccording to the order.Other constitutions were also made for Colchester in1587. the 29th year of this reign, at the ^* mote hall" to removecertain doubts with respect to the elections, andBurgesses, the qualifications for burgesses, which are repeated withsome slight alteration of language, though the same insubstance.They are described (in conformity with thecommon law, and the doctrine we have maintained) as thewhole ^^ commonalty, burgesses, and freemen there:" — thatis to say, " all manner of persons householders dwellingwithin the borough, being .9M7orw to the queen's majesty andthe borough, paying and bearing scot and lot to the town ;except common innholdei*s, bakers, brewers, butchers,victuallers, chamberers, journeymen, men's children nothouseholders in their own persons, — such persons as havereceived punishment — or have been convicted for adulteryfornication, drunkenness, theft, or as common swearers, —or persons receiving or asking relief of others to relievetheir poverty." Nothing can be more consistent withthe common law, than the exceptions, as well as the qualificationshere stated.The "common landholders, bakers, &c.," are excepted,• The queen also interposed in the »Mu»iicipfl/affaii-s of the cities and boroughs : —1587. thus, in the 29th year of her reign, she ordered, contrary both to the general law,and the then practice of the city of London, a stranger born to be admitted to thefreedom of the Sales' Company.— Jour. 22, fol. 101.COLCHESTER. 1347because the assise of bread and beer, and the due regulation Elizabeth.of the inns or hostels, and all matters connected with thepublic supply of provisions, — were parts of the inquiry at thecourt leet : and therefore it would have been improper thatthey should attend and serve upon the juries there, beingthemselves participators in the subjects of inquiry, — and forthe same reason, in modem times, such persons are excludedfrom many offices and functions, for which otherwise theywould be eligible — as magistrates, constables, &c.All the enumerated persons, are by these constitutions and ^^^te hall,the common law, called upon to attend on the proper days atthe '^ mote hall," ** and any making default were to be fined12(2." according to the law of the court leet.They are also directed to elect " four headmen, being treeburgesses and inhabitants, — one out of each ward : — whoare to elect five other honest and discreet free burgesses, —'' and the 24 are to elect 10 aldermen, out of which two** bailiffs, and four justices of the peace, with two coroners,and two glaciers, are to be chosen."Notwithstanding these decisive declarations as to the class Burgesses.of persons who were to be the burgesses: — and notwithstandinga decision in 1696, in conformity with them — that theright of election was in the swam burgesses : — and a resolutionin 1710, against the power of the mayor to make foreignersfree of the borough : — the right has since been determinedto be in there burgesses: — the power of making foreigners 1714.free has been decided to be in the mayor and free burgesses :and the practice has been for the non-residents to vote, to Non-resin1 . . dents.the destruction of the rights of the inhabitants.Besides these places, the right of which to return membersto Parliament was questioned in the 5th and 13th years ofQueen Elizabeth, 12 other boroughs first commenced returningmembers in this reign ; and three others were restored.The former were, —l.-CALUNGTON.Wellington, which returned in the 27th of Elizabeth ; but 1584.like the other boroughs in Cornwall, it is not mentioned in4 R 21348 CALLIMGTOH.PJMfc^tfc* Domesday ; nor ii there any roasoa to think dii itborough by prescription — nor b it incorporated.FtoitiMM. The port reeve is the returning officer, who is appointed atCooriWii. the cart leet.There are no records relative to the burgesses nor theelections ; but as a proof of the indiscriminate maire inwhich the term SMyor is often used; it is stated in the16B&. journals in the beginning of the reign of James 11^ that SirMtfcr. John Corridor was unseated because he was Mayor at thetime of his election; and yet the par t reeve had, as we haveobserved above, always been the resuming officer.The right of election is, in hct, substantially exercised bythe inhabitant homdMden p^nfiMg wot and loiX.BE&EALSTON.Mi Members were also returned for BereaUtom in the sameyear as Wellington* This borough is not mentioned inDomesday — neither is it a borough by prescription, nor hatsFnimvt. it any corporation ; but the resuming officer is the p o r i$ ' e e ve,and he and the other borough officers are appointed at thecourt leet.VXI. In the 30th year of this reign,* the mayor and burgessesr him of are stated, in the return at the Rolls* chapel, to have elected' Richard Spencer, Esq. and Thomas Ferdinand Clarke, Esq.at the request of William, Marquis of Winchester, and Wil*I lias Lord Mountjoye, chief lords of the borough. A decisiveproof of the direct influence which prevailed in thisborough so soon after it was first summoned to Parliament.1040. In the 16th of Charles L, the election for this place camebefore the committee of privileges ; and Mr. Jones reported,that the election had been made after due notice to the fudntantSf and the question turned upon, whether the electionhad been conditional or not. It was determined, thatI '^ elections ought to be free ; and that a condition to anelection was void, and against law. But that the electionwas good, and without any conditions."tSee afterwards, Gattonand Old Sarum.— Southwest MSS.— Orrery — Campbellend Walpole Papers.BEREAL8T0N. 1349Upon the Restoration another report was made by the Elizabeth,committee of privileges, that two persons had been returned 166O.by the freemen who, in a second report in the same year, Freemen.were called burgesses. Burgesses.Five years afterwards, the sheriff of Devon was directed to ieee.be taken into custody for his abuse, in refusing to make areturn of the writ for a new member for this borough.In the eighth of (George I., a petition was presented by 1721.several of there burgesses, stating, that the right of election Right,was in them, or freehold tenants of burgage lands, paying3d. yearly ancient rent to the lord of the borough. Butthat the port reeve, who was one of the commissioners of the Portreeve,excise, had introduced himself into the office of portreeve,and did thereby, with a design to subvert the ancient methodof election, refuse legal, and admit illegal, votes.Upon the examination of the question, several returns arestated to have been produced in evidence, and the committeeresolved, that the right was " in the freehold tenantry holding Right,by burgage tenure, and paying 3d. per annum, or more,ancient burgage rent, to the lord of the borough — ^and inthem only." Upon which the sitting member declinedfurther maintaining his seat, and the port reeve, who had refusedto receive the return made by the freehold tenants, wasordered by the House to execute it; and the clerk of thecrown was directed to receive it.It is impossible to account for this decision of the committee,unless indeed it is considered, that the right theyestablished was asserted in the petition, on the one hand, anddoes not appear to have been controverted on the other. Noevidence was adduced in support of it ; and we have alreadyshown, on general grounds, that there is no pretence formaintaining this right with respect to any particular bo .rough, inasmuch as that it was the universal tenure: and ifit prevailed in one place, it should in all. It is the morestrange that this right of election, which is generally affirmedto belong to the more ancient boroughs, should have beenattributed to a place so recently summoned for the first time.The result of this unfounded determination was, that the4<4t1360 BEREALSTON.Elizabeth, borough came entirely under the control of those who possessedthe lands in this borough ; but it must at the sametime be recorded of this place, that it has returned to ParliamentyyMr. Serjeant Heywood, a great lawyer and constitutionalmember — the justly celebrated Lord Chief JusticeHolt — and the Marquis of Wellesley.The same confusion occurs in this borough as to the useMayor, of the title of mayor: — ^as in 1660 and 1661, the return isstated to have been made by that officer, although there isno ground for supposing that any legal authority was everPortreeve, given for appointing a mayor ; but the port reeve has alwayspresided.3.— CORFE CASTLE.^^'^^' Corse Castle did not return members to Parliament tillthe 14th of Elizabeth, when its being summoned by thequeen may probably be accounted for, from the circumstanceof her having granted the lordship of the place to Sir ChristopherHatton.This place does not appear to have been a borough byprescription ; nor had any charter been granted to it beforethe 18th year of this reign, when the queen gave it thesame privileges as those enjoyed by the Cinque Ports; andits burgesses were, like those of London and the CinqueBarons. Ports, called " barons."The charter by which the borough at present is governed,is one granted by Charles II.; under which the governanceof the town is confided to one mayor and eight barons whohave served the office of mayor ; who is annually elected atthe court leet of the lord of the manor.Nomina Corse Castle, which thus began its parliamentary repletionof .members, sensation under the queen's favourite minister, affordedagain, in the reign of James I., an instance of the effect ofthe powerful interference of Sir Edward Coke, the king'sattorney-general, who applied to the barons to return a personwhom he recommended ; and their motives for adoptingthat recommendation may be collected from the followingletter, in which, according to the fashion of the times, but asCORFE CASTLE. 1361far as appears without any legal authority, they assumed to Elizabeth.themselves the title of a " corporation."Right worshipful and our undoubted kind friend. Wethe mayor and barons of the borough of Corfu Castell, withinthe isle of Purbeck, in the county of Dorset, salute you inChrist. Forasmuch as at the request of the right worshipfulSir Edward Coke, Knight, his majesty's attorney-generall,we have elected and nominated you to be one of the burgessesfor our said borough, for the service in his majesty'smost high courte of Parliament; and for the other, havechosen and elected this honest and kind gentleman, Mr.Edward Markham, our townsman, this bearer, a man ofsufficient ability and livelihood. Our request therefore untoyour worship is, that you would be well pleased to affordhim your kind assistance in furthering any such motion asmight be thought beneficial and for the good of our towne ;as also in moving Sir Edward Coke, that by his goodcounsel and direction, a grant from his excellent majesticmay (if possible) be had, for the corroboration and confirmationof the auntient liberties of our borough, which wehold by charter; wherein, if you vouchsafe to manifestyour love to our poore corporation, we shall have no causeat all to repent us of our choice in electing you ; but gratefullyto accept the same, and rest ever rede, to the utmostof our powers, in what we may, to make requital, as occasionshall be ministered. Thus commending yourself, andyour serious affairs, to the blessings of the Almighty, doemost humbly take our leaves.Corse Castle, 10 March 1603."^gned by six persons, including the mayor.Upon which Carew justly observes, " that this is an instanceof persons in high stations intermeddling in theelections of members to serve in Parliament, which hasalways been looked upon as destructive of the freedom ofelection," and as such inserts it.In the 31st of Charles XL, a question arose whether the 1679.freeholders only of lands or houses paying scot and lot, or aU1362 CORFE CASTLE.Eiiiabeih. the freeholders and leaseholders generally had the right toPctiuoner. VOte.1679. For the petitioner witnesses proved, that the freeholdersleaseholders, and chattel leases, had always voted ; and alltenants for 20 years or more ; and that the mayor invited allto the election, as well leaseholders os freeholders.And it appeared that some of the poor voters had been paidIs., and some Is. 6d. for their hindrance of work for half aday.Sitting On the other hand it was proved, that the freeholders®" '* paying scot and lot were entitled to vote ; and it was said,that the barons, upon an application from the mayor, haddeclared the right so to be.The committee unseated the sitting member, and seatedthe petitioner ; in effect negativing the exclusive right of thefreeholders. The mayor was ordered into custody for hisconduct at the election in returning the sitting member.1698. ^^ ^^^ ^^^^ y^^^ ^^ William III., the election for thisplace again came before a committee, upon a petitionwhich stated that one of the candidates, in order to get amajority of votes, had, by several conveyances, multipliedvotes, contrary to the then late Act of Parliament ; and themayor had wrongfully admitted them.The principal charge, however, upon this occasion wastreating, which is not material to our inquiry ; but it wasRight, stated, that the right of election was in the lessee for years,paying scot and lot ; and also in the persons who had thefreeholds in reversion upon such leases. Than which a moreabsurd right of election can hardly be supposed; as it appearsto give the right to the land, and yet allows both personsthe lessee as well as the reversioner to vote for it. Whichappears inconsistent in itself, and also militates against theobvious principle to which we have before alluded ; that theburgesses could only be one class ; and not, as has been suggested,both lessees mid freeholders ; particularly of the sameproperty.Some of the voters were objected to, as being the trusteesof land belonging to the poor, and 14 were objected to asCORFE CASTLE. 1353split votes. But the candidate who had them was declared Ei'^j^abeth.to be duly elected, and thus they were in effect supported.In the same year, there was another petition by the magis 1698.traces, burgesses, and inhabitants of the borough; and uponthe report the right of election was agreed to be " in those R»g*»^«who have estates of inheritance, or freehold for years, determinableon life or lives, paying scot and lot." — ^^This againvaries from the right before adopted, and seems an anomalousconfusion of freehold and chattel interest, hardly intelligible;and which led to much intricacy of proof withrespect to the livery of seisin.In the 6th of George I. the right of election was again ^?18.agreed, in some respects more distinctly than on the formeroccasion ; but still upon the whole involved in much complexity.It was stated " to be in such persons as were^* seised in fee in possession or reversion of any messuage,** tenement, or corporeal hereditament in the borough;*' and in such persons as are tenants for life or lives ; and'^ for want of such freehold, in tenants for years, determinableupon life or lives, paying scot and lot, and in themand no others."Thus we see a place, first summoned by Queen Elizabeth, 1764.soon becoming subject to the direct influence of one ofthe law officers of the crown — and since characterized bythe exercise of the most anomalous rights of election, involvingthat question in all the intricacies of title — conveyancing— and questions connected with real property — aswell as introducing the illegal and unconstitutional practiceof non-resident voters. Notwithstanding it appears from a ^J^jJ^*'case in the 4th of George Iii,* that a court leet had been Court leet.immemorially held within the borough, at which the resiantsonly would be the suitors — ^and where, consistently with theuniform history we have traced from the earliest times, theresiants ought to be sworn and enrolled as burgesses; andnot at the court baron, which would be the result of theirbeing freeholders, as assumed above in the arguments relativeto the right of election.• 3 Bur. 1452, Rex v. Banks.1364 NEWTON.Elizabeth.4.-NKWT0N.Newton in the Willows in the county palatine of Lancaster,is also another place which first returned members toParliament in this reign; it is not mentioned in Domesday;nor is there any reason to suppose it to be a borough byprescription ; and it has never been incorporated.There are few records relative to the municipal or parliamentaryrights of this place.There were only two petitions previous to the year 1797;and neither of them followed by any particular result, oraffording any light as to the exercise of the elective .chase. But in 1797^ statements as to the right of election.State*meats, were delivered in by the contending parties, under the statuteof the 28th of George III.Petitioner. That for i\ie petitioner asserted, that " the right was exclusivelyvested in the freemen, or burgesses, of the borough'' — that is to say, in any house, building, or lands, within** the borough, of the value of 40«. a year, and upwards ; and^' in case of joint tenants, or tenants in common, no morethan one person had a right to vote for one and the samehouse or tenement." A claim very similar to that whichwe have previously quoted relative to Corse Castle.Sitting That for the sitting member, stated it to be " in personsmember. . ;having an estate of freehold, or for a term, or residue ofa term, of 99 years or upwards, determinable on one ormore life or lives, in any messuages, lands, or tenements,within the borough*'Right. The committee decided the right to be exclusivelyvested " in the freemen or burgesses, of the borough — that"is to say, in any person seised of a corporeal estate offreehold, in any house, building, or lands, within theborough, of the value of 40*. a year, and upwards ; and incaseof joint tenants, or tenants in common, no more thanone person had a right to vote for one and the same houseor tenement"*The petitioners* statement alleged the right to be " in the63 Journ. 146, col. I.(IliNEWTON. 1355^^ freemen or burgesses :" — ^a striking instance of the doubtful Elizabeth.uncertainty with which those terms were used.If it meant that they were synonymous, we have shownbefore that such a supposition was inaccurate; becauseevery freeman, or liber homo, was not a burgess, but onlysuch as were resident, paid scot and bore lot, and had beenenrolled and sworn.If, on the other hand, it meant that they were separateclasses ; then it was erroneous, as supposing that the rightcould be in two classes of persons; and in assuming that thefreemen could have any right.The statement also included the necessity of the housebeing of the value of 40s., which we have before shown tohave been improperly applied to boroughs from the statuteof Henry VI., which relates only to county elections.The statement for the sitting members does not condescendto affirm, whether the voters were called burgesses, or freemen,or any other name.The committee, in its determination, adopted the absurdexpression in the petitioner's statement, of 'freemen," or'^ burgesses," as well as the qualification of 40s. And byadopting the right of the freeholders, supported the inter Non-referenceof non-resident voters.6.-CLITHER0E.Clitheroe is another place in the county palatine of Lancaster,which also returned, for the first time, members toParliament in the reign of Queen Elizabeth. It is not mentionedin Domesday: — but may have been a borough by prescription,as it had a charter granted to it in the reign ofEdward I., which referred to the previous enjoyment ofprivileges, under his predecessors.*It has never been incorporated — the returning officers arethe two bailiffs, — and it has had, from time immemorial, acourt leet. C°"^ ^^*-The inquiry respecting the burgesses of this place is somewhatcurious. It turns almost entirely on the parliamentarySee before p. 545.2356 CLITHEROE.Elizabeth, decisions upon the right of election, which will appear lihave been singularly in opposition to the ancient usages dthe borough, and the evidence which was adduced on iksuccessive investigations respecting it.1660. On the Restoration, a report was made respecting daplace, in which it was stated that the question was, '' whediaFreemen. " the freemen at large f or the free burghers seised far life arksee of borough lands or houses there, had the right to ekctmembers to serve in Parliament ;** and upon considerationthe testimonies, and other evidence, produced on both pait%Free the committee were of opinion, — that the said free hurgkm^Right (and not the freemen at large) had the right to elect.Both these statements of the right of election were inaccurate.The freemen at large without the qualifications ofpaying scot and bearing lot, and of being sworn and enroOiiicould not have the right of election, for the reasons we havegiven before. Nor could the burgage freeholders, becamethat is confining it simply to a question of tenure, — the inapplicationof which, we have previously shown :♦ and italso introduces the non-resident freeholders.The determination therefore, cannot be relied upon, eitherfor its legal or its constitutional accuracy.But we will proceed with the inquiry into the further factswhich appear respecting this place.1661. In the next year, another report was made upon the petitionof Mr. Pudsey against the election of Sir Ralph Ashton,and the question was upon the right of election, — whethersuch freeholders as had estates for life or in fee, or the freemenat large, had the right of election ; and the opinion ofthe committee was, that according to the judgment given inthe last Parliament, it was in such freeholders only as hadestates for life or in fee.1693. In the fifth year of William and Mary, there was a petitionof the bailiffs and burgesses, which speaks of the zn-bailiff,and that the bailiffs had caused notice to be given to theforeign burgesses to attend ; and that at the election, withoutreading the precept, or calling the court for the election, a• Vide ante, p. 15, 480, et passim.CLITHEROE. 1367stranger adjourned the electors to the shambles, just as the Elizabeth .bailiffs and many others were coming into court, who de 1693.landed that the precept might be read, which was not done.And after reading the writ, all the electors were adjourned tothe town hall, and elected John Weddal, Esq. And thereturn was made of him, and tendered to the sheriff, but hereturned another person.On the report it appears to have been agreed on both sides, ^^^that the right of election was in the burgesses and freemen.The " burgesses' were such as had, in any lands or houses in Burgesses.the borough, an estate of freehold or inheritance:* and theywere of two sorts, — au/-bui^esses, that lived out of the borough,and tn-burgesses, that lived in the borough, and hadsuch estate in houses or land there : and both these had theright of electingThe "/recwien" were such as lived in the houses within the Freemen,borough as tenants : — and they had the right of electing whenthe landlords did not vote for those houses ; — but when theydid, the tenants had no right.It was likewise agreed, that they had every year VLJury ^^^'of inquiryflll. kept on foot for some time of the year, toinvestigate the rights of the burgesses and freemen ; and, upontheir finding, the persons found were entered in a book,called the " call-books'' and sworn. And out of this jury thebailiffs were chosenIt was also agreed, that Mr. Roger Managing, the bailiffwho returned Mr. Gerrard, vf^s found a burgess by that Awry,and entered in the book and sworn. That there are twobailiffs, one called the ou^-bailiff, chosen by the ou^-bur-gesses ; and the other the in-bailiff, chosen by the t7i-bur-gesses ; and that the ou^-bailiff is the chief, and hath theprecedency.For the petitioners it was objected (amongst other things). Petitions.The same right was asserted in Bossinney.t And a committee decided in the same manner in 1695, notwithstanding the twoformer decisions.t Notwithstanding this was so agreed, the committees in 1695 and 1703, resolvedagainst the petitioners who insisted on this ending ; and to such resolutions inboth the cases, the House agreed.So likewise at Bossinney.1368 CUTHEROE.Elizabeth, that after the poll was ended, one proclamation was made,ia93. that all who had right to vote should come.Sitting On Mr. Gerrard's behalf, it was testified, — that the juryof inquiry was discharged by a note under the hand of oneof the bailiffs, when several burgesses and freemen were readyto tender themselves, to make out their right to be sworn ;whereas the jury never used to be discharged but by bothbailiffs, — that indirect means were used to hinder the juryfrom meeting for this purpose, and thereby Mr. Bradshaw,and others, were hindered from Yang found by the jury, andsworn, and put in the caU-boohf and thereby deposed oftheir votes at the election for members of Parliament.*It was further stated, that exceptions were made at theelection to many of the voters on each side.One of the members said, infants could not be bailie.Imitation. The committee resolved, — Mr. Gerrard to be duly elected.The House on division disagreed — and resolved, Mr. Wed-dalnot duly elected, — ^and the election to be void.It is scarcely possible that there should be a strongerinstance, of the impropriety of adopting the right of electionAgreed agreed upon by the parties, than this instance of Clitheroe.Such agreements are usually formed upon the interestedviews of the respective parties ; who frequently by commonconsent exclude the real voters.Nothing can be more absurd than the matters here agreedupon.Burgesses. First. — The ricrht is stated to be in the burgesses and free-freemen.. ^ ,. . •men : — meaning by those terms, two different classes; which,for the reasons we have given before,*!- could not be the legalright.Free The " burgesses '* are described as those who had freeholdestates, in any lands or houses, in the borough, — which,founding the right on tenure, we have already shown to beincorrect.The consequence of such a right would be, the introducedsee the decisions in 1695 and 1703, when presentment appears not to harebeen held necessary.t Vide ante, passim.CLITHEROE. 1369tion of non-residents, as is here expressly asserted ; as the Elizabeth,burgesses are said to be of two sorts ; out-burgesses living ie93.out of the borough, and in-burgesses living: within it : — con Out-burglaryto the whole tenour of the law and history which we in-bravetraced. s®*®^*On the other hand, the ^^ freemen " are described as those Freemen.who lived in the houses within the borough as tenants — adefinition of that term totally different from the common law,and never before occurring. Indeed the absurdity of that descriptionis almost apparent in itself; as the mere living in ahouse as a tenant could not, under any hypothesis, make aperson free. On the contrary, he might be a villain ; andnot a member of any corporation ; nor connected with anytrade or mystery.* So that neither under the ancient law,nor the modem practice, could such persons be consideredas ** freemen'*But the absurdity of this assertion is still further markedby the additional definition given of the rights of suchpersons. For they are said to have only a doubtful andprecarious right of voting, depending upon the fact ofwhether their landlords voted for the same houses or not,than which it is impossible that any thing can be less likethe law or practice of our constitution. Particularly if thewrit is considered which directs the election to be by the'' burgesses;" and it is too monstrous to suppose, that personshaving so equivocal a right as is here described, shouldbe the class intended by that term.The further part of the agreement, which states the usageof the borough, to have yearly a jury of inquiry , bears a jury,much nearer analogy to the law, and the principles andpractice of the constitution ; because they were, no doubt,the jury at the court leet: and, according to the law of thatcourt, they enrolled the burgesses in the " call-book ;" andThat freedom depended upon the ambition of the person, and not upon residence,may be clearly collected from this fact, that in 90th of Elizabeth, a personwas ordered to be admitted to the freedom of London by patrimony, although bornout of the liberties fact important to be remembered also when considering theusages of other places, in many of which, in disregard of the real nature of freedomby birth, it is sometimes required that the freemen should be born within theborough.1360 CLITHEROE.Elizabeth, swore them : which we have before abundantly proved to b^1608. the proper functions of the jury at the court leet. Thus, inthis same agreement, we have the curious instance of boththe absurdities and usurpations of modem usage, and thepure practice of our ancient law strangely blended together.In consequence of the vacancy created by the above resolution,a new writ in 1693, making a void election, wasordered for the borough ; and other petitions were presented,there being a double return.A report was made upon these petitions, from which itRight, appears, that the right of election was first considered, andit was agreed on both sides as before.Exceptions were taken to 13 of the voters ; five becausethey were not found by the Jury and sworn before the election; also as to one that he was a Quaker, and was notsworn. Others that they were minors ; and some that theyhad sold their burgages.William Odd, said he had been town clerk six years,and knew the town 20 years : — and that it was the custom,that no burgess or freeman should vote but those found bythe inquiry jury and sworn ; that he has been at severalelections, and never heard it disputed. That the juryhad been dismissed, and no new jury appointed before theelection.As to the persons excepted against, he testified that theywere not found; nor sworn. One had sold his burgage, andtherefore was struck out of the call-book. As to others,that they had not offered themselves to the jury to he found.Other witnesses said they had known the town, one 20,and the other 30 years; and it was the custom that noneshould vote in elections but such as were found and sworn,and never knew the custom disputed, or right claimed, bypersons not found and sworn, till the last election. And oneof these instanced the cases of two persons who had burgagetenements, and did not vote, because not found and sworn.*For Mr. Gerrard it was answered, that this custom was• Yet Mr. Gerrard was seated against this right, although there was this evidenceto support it.CLITHEROE. 1361void, because unreasonable — as putting too much in the Elizabeth.power of the jury, or bailiffs, to hinder whoever they pleased IGM.from voting, though never so well entitled.Henry Bayly said, one of the inquiry-jury owned to him. Evidence,that they avoided meeting on purpose that Mallam, and theothers objected to, for not being ybtcwrf, might not have anopportunity of being found and sworn ; and there being 1 1of the jury met, he absented himself, that they might nothave a jury. That the town clerk owned to him, that Mallam,and the other mandamus-men, had a right ; and declaredhe would have entered them, had they come to him. Healso testified that they offered themselves to the jury, andwere refused, yet voted at the last election ; and some hadgiven votes at the late elections for bailiffs, but he did notknow they did it before. Believes they had their borough-holdssince Mr. Parker's death — that they were received byone bailiff, but refused by another.Robinson said, that he was foreman of the inquiry-jury —that those objected to had lands in the borough, andtendered their writings to the jury. That Coleboum's rightwas/atm<2,and that he still continued to have it; in all otherthings belonging to the borough. That Nawell was a mangrown ; had borough-hold ; and tendered himself to the jury,lliat Franklin lived still in his house, and so has theright, till another be entered in the book, by the custom : —that Parkinson lived in a free house, and had right, his landlordnot voting.Mr. Gerrard objected to Shuttle worth and Webster, asreversions.Robinson said, the two first were reversions of burgage-houses,and two women had life estates therein ; but it wasanswered, that where women have estates for life, and cannotvote, there the reversions may. And Odd proved this tobe the custom ; and that these were found by the jury, andsworn, Robinson owned he was of the jury who foundWebster, and was for finding him, but is since better informed; and Dudley ^ another of Mr. Gerrard's witnesses,owned he was also of the jury, but against finding him.1362 CLITHEROE.Elizabeth. Jfy. Kenyon, a member, spoke as to the custom of beinglew. found by the inquiry-jury, and sworn. And that Mr. managingwas yet a minor. That Mallam, and the othermandamus-men, bought their borough-holds to serve a turnand Robinson sold them to them.KcfoiaUoiL Thereupon the committee resolved, That Fitton Gerard,Esq. was duly elected.The observations before made upon the decision in 1693,apply equally to this. But it should be added, that fromthe nature of the evidence given upon this occasion, it isclear, that the ancient right of Clitheroe was for the jury tofind — enrol — ^and swear the burgesses ; as we have shown tobe the practice under the ancient law.And it is also evident, that in this case, as in others wehave seen before, the attempts at usurpation and innovation,June* are accompanied with efforts to get rid of the jtary at theCourt lee court heelConsidering the uniform course, both of the principlesand practice of the ancient law, it is curious to observe thebold assertion made in this case, " that the custom for the"jury to present — enrol — and stoear the burgesses, was void,because it was unreasonable, as putting too much in thepower of the jury." A declaration in direct defiance of theMirror, and the other ancient authors ; and which if madenow, with respect to the trial by jury — which stands uponthe same foundation, and is open to the same observation —would probably draw down upon the assertor, the just odiumwhich such a position would merit.1695. In the seventh year of William III., another petition andreport occur; from which it appears, that the right wasagreed to be, in substance, as before stated.Petitioner. But the petitioner insisted that, at the late election, thebailiffs had refused to call an inquiry-jury ; by which means,several who ought to be found as burgesses and freemen,were not found, whereby he lost several votes.Evidence. Amongst other evidence, a witness stated, that he hadsearched the records of the town, and found inquiry-jurieshad been called in November, December, January, February,CLITHEROE. 1363March, hand April; and on the 11th of October, he desired Elizabeth,of Mr. Bailiff Whitaker, to have an inquiry-jury, which he 1G95.refused : and said it was in their power ; and that Mr. Stringershould not be member of Parliament : and the said Dugdale,RohinsoUj and Deane said, that on the 25th of October,they, with several persons, went to Bailiff Lister, and desiredhim to call an inquiry-jury, who said he would call a hall,and consider it — but did neither.Deane and others said, Mr. Pudsey, and Mr. Albany,his agent, told them, if they would be for Mr. Pudsey, thereshould be a jury called, and they should have good voices.Ivy said, he went with the petitioner to Clitheroe, andwas at the election ; that he told the bailiffs of several freemen,who would vote — but was answered, they would callnone but what were in their call-book, and as they werethere.Deane said, it had been found by the inquiry-jury, thatthe landlord did vote ; but not for this house : — that he wasnot found for the house he lived in ; but, about three weeksbefore the election, and before the proclamation for the dissolutionof the Parliament, he had tendered 4d. to the townclerk, to enter his name.DugdaU and Robinson said, that Henry Daily was heirby descent to a burgage-house ; but not found.Coulters said, he had been found and sworn, but was sinceremoved; but offered 4rf. to the town clerk, to have hisname inserted.For Mr. Pudsey, the sitting member, it was insisted, that Sittingthe inquiry-jury were discharged fairly, according to thecustom ; and many who would have voted for Mr. Pudseyhad been found, if there had been an inquiry-jury in being.And it was proved, that the custom of the borough was tocall the grand jury about Candlemas, and discharge it aboutMichaelmas. That this year it was discharged at the usualtime, for the want of business. That if a freeman removedto another burgage-house, he ought to be found again. Andthe demands of some of the voters to be found by the jurywere negatived, and the title of others disputed.4s21364 CLITHEROE.Elizabeth. Upon the whole, the committee resolved, That Ambrose1695. Pudsey, Esq., (sitting member,) is duly elected a burgess toRwoiutioiu ggj.^^ jj^ ^jjjg present Parliament for this borough : whichwas agreed to by the House.In this inquiry, we have further proof of the disposition toget rid of the jury at the court leet ; and to prevent theirexercising their functions, by omitting to immanuel them.1708. In the second year of the reign of Queen Anne, there wasanother report relative to Clitheroe ; from which it appeared,that the petitioner insisted upon a right of election, in substancethe same as that previously stated.On the other hand, the sitting members denied that it wasnecessary for the burgesses to be presented or sworn.The petitioner called witnesses to prove the necessity ofthe presentment and oath: — and they justly added, thatthe bailiff ought to swear such as were presented. An accuratedescription of what the ancient law required in thisrespect: to which the sitting members seem to have yielded,as they gave no further evidence upon the point, but left thejudgment to the committee.Petitioner. The petitioner's counsel objected to several polled forthe sitting members, who were not sworn burgesses; andtheir counsel admitted the fact as to 17, but insisted thatthey were good burgesses, and so presented, and ought tohave been sorry but were refused by the bailiff; and calledDugdale and Farrar, who said, that about 12 of them werefound by the jury of inquiry, the beginning of May, andthat in June they demanded a court of the bailiffs to swearthem ; but one of the bailiffs refused, saying, " he did notvalue the Parliament," and adjourned the court till the 3d ofAugust, the election being on the 28th. Yet on the applicationof Colonel Stringer and Mr. Pudsey to Mr. Lister, theother bailiff, on the 20th of July, and upon giving him a noteto save him harmless, he declaring some fear of the Earl ofMontague, and his interest, he called a court and swore those12 burgesses.Resolution. Upon the whole, the committee resolved, that the sittingmembers were duly elected.7.-HARWICH.In the 44th of Queen Elizabeth, complaint was made to theHouse of Commons, that Harwich in Essex, and Newtonin the county of Southampton, had returned members to Parliament,*which, it was alleged, they had never done before.D'D'Ewes* Journ. p. 628.CLITHEROE. 136§In the 9th of George I., a petition was presented by the Elizabeth.inquiry-jury setting forth the usage of the borough, for the 1722.burgesses to be presented enrolled and suborn at the court,in the manner before stated; but no further proceedingswere had upon that petition, nor has any subsequent decisiontaken place with respect to the right of election for this place.6.-BlSH0P*S CASTLE.Bishop's Castle was incorporated in the 15th year of 1572.Queen Elizabeth ; and in the 27th year of her reign, it wassummoned to return members to Parliament.In the 11th year of William III. it was agreed that the 16©.right of election was '' in the bailiff and all burgesses inha- agreed.'^ biting within the borough, to the exclusion of the out"burgesses or country-burgesses ;'' on which ground some ofthe votes, which had been tendered, were objected to.The principal inquiry, however, upon this occasion waswith respect to bribery, which, within a little more than acentury, had grown to such a height within the borough,that a special report was made, that the burgesses had beennotoriously guilty of that offence. In consequence of whichthe bad precedent of the House of Commons taking uponitself, as a matter of punishment, to withhold the writ, wasadopted.Similar allegations, as to bribery, were investigated in the13th of William III., and followed by a resolution, that one 1701.of the candidates had been guilty of gross bribery, and thewrit was a second time suspended.In the 17th of George I. another investigation was had 1726.respecting bribery committed at the elections of this borough,and the sitting member was displaced.1601.1366 HARWICH.ElUabeih. This as to Harwich appears to be inaccurate, as it had1343. made a return in the 17th of Edward III.*This place is not mentioned in Domesday : nor does thereBorough, appear to be any reason for assuming it to be a boroughby prescription. It was first made so in the reign ofEdward II., by Thomas Brothers, Earl of Norfolk andMarshal of England ; but it was not incorporated until the1604. reign of James I., by the interest of Sir Edward Coke, theNomina then attorney-general, who, we have before seen, ruminatedmembers, the burgesses for Corse Castle, That charter was afterwardsconfirmed in the reign of Charles II., through themediation of Sir Harbottle Christen, then their recorderand master of the rolls. It is now the governing charter ;under which the town has a mayor — recorder — high stewardeight aldermen — and 24 capital burgesses.1708. In the seventh year of Queen Anne, the election for Harwichwas the subject of inquiry, but nothing materiallyconnected with the question as to the right of burgess-shipoccurred in the course of the investigation.1713. In the 12th year of the same reign there was a report, fromPetitioner. which it appears the petitioner insisted, that the right ofelection was " in the mayor, aldermen and capital burgessesresiding within the borough ; and when a capital burgess'* removed from the borough, his place was ipso facto void**Another petitioner insisted that the right was in themayor, aldermen, and capital burgesses at large ;t and thatan order of the corporation for disfranchisement was necessarywhen a capital burgess was removed from the borough, otherwisehis place was not void.To prove the avoidance by non-residence the charter wasgiven in evidence, which requires the capital burgesses to beinhabitants et residentes,'^1658. In 1658 and 1661, it appeared that two persons wereelected into the places of others who had removed out oftown ; and a person who had been steward of the borough4 Prynne, 1002.t The reader may consider which is the most rcasonal)lc and correct of theseassertions ; and will, no doubt, remember the decision in the case of Truro.HARWICH. 1367for 40 years, stated, that the right of election was ** in the Elizabeth.'' mayor, aldermen, and capital burgesses or headbaroughsy 1713.** residing within the borough, and no others " — that it had boroughs,always been practised when a capital bui^ess left the towntotally, and had no family at residence there, he ceased tobe a capital burgess — that they made no order for disfranchisinghim, but his place was, ipso facto, void. And hespoke of several instances 20 years ago, when others werechosen in the place of those who had removed. But hementioned a person who acted as a capital burgess after hewent out of the town, adding, that the non-residents werenot then disputed. And there were two others who acted ascapital burgesses though they were only lodgers in the town. Lodgers.The committee appeared to have yielded to the evidenceof the steward. And the exclusive right of the select body Ri«*»t.not being questioned, they decided that it was *^ in the** mayor, aldermen, capital burgesses or headhcraughs residingwithin the borough." The case afterwards turnedupon tee evidence which was given on the one side or theother in proof or denial of non-residence.In the same year, it appears from a report, that the right 1713,was agreed between the parties, to be as in the last decision ;and the steward's evidence on the former occasion, was readbefore the committee.8.— Newton.The other place whose right to return members to Parliamentwas contested at the same time with Harwich, was New-town,in the Isle of Wight. It is not mentioned in Domesday,nor are there any satisfactory reasons for supposing that it wasa borough by prescription. Its ancient name was Franche-ville,by which we have seen it had received a charter in thereign of Edward I. : — but it has no corporation.*It did not return members to Parliament until the 27th ^^^•year of Queen Elizabeth. Since which, although there havebeen some petitions respecting the elections, there has beenbut one decision as to the right of voting, which gave it toVide ante, p. 529.1370 LYMINGTON.Elizabeth, numerous facts by which we have before shown,* that therewere, in truth, no corporations by prescription decided thatthis was so. And further, drew from that fact the inference,which by no means followed, that the select burgesses hadthe right of election. Because, even if the place had beenimmemorially incorporated, it was by no means a necessaryresult, that the select body should have that right.1695. In the eighth year of William III., there is anotherPetitioners petition and report ; the petitioners insisting that it was aborough by prescription — ^and that the right of election was inthe mayor, burgesses, and commonalty ^ paying scot and lot.Sitting On the other hand, the sitting members contended it wasa corporation by prescription ; and that the right of electionwas in the mayor and burgesses only.The returns which were read in evidence on the formeroccasion, were repeated on this. And we should observe.Common how little reliance is to be placed on the use of the commonseal — as it appeared to be adopted only on two occasions,out of the numerous returns which were produced on theone side and the other. And returns under the seals of theparties themselves, preceded and succeeded both of thoseinstances.Select To prove that there was a corporation by prescription, thesitting members read in evidence two ancient deeds — one, ofthe seventh of Edward III., being a grant " to the burgessesand their successors " — and the other, of the 10th of Henry IV.of a grant by the port reeve of Lymington and the burgesses,under the common seal.Successors. We have already abundantly shown, that the term " successors"was no proof of a corporation ; nor the use of acommon sealsBut still the committee expressly decided, in languagestronger than any we have found before, that the right wasnot in the mayor , burgesses, and commonalty paying scot andlot ; but in the mayor and burgesses. And confirmed theseats of the sitting members.1710. In the ninth year of Queen Anne, another report stated theVide ante, p. 486, ct passim. t Vide ante, pp. 443 — 495.LYMINGTON. 1371question to be, whether the right was in the mayor, bur Elizabeth.gesses, and commonalty — or in the mayor and burgesses ? rio.The populace having polled themselves out of the hall.The petitioners relying upon their votes, gave the same Petitionersreturns in the reign of Queen Elizabeth in evidence, andalso the resolution as to Boston, in the 4th of Charles I., by Boston.which it was agreed, ^^ that the election of burgesses in all^' boroughs did of common right belong to the commoners, and'' that nothing could take it from them but a prescription and*^ constant usage beyond all memory"*Edwards said, he had been a burgess 15 years, and had Evidence,known the borough above 36 ; that about the time of theconvention he was a scot and lot man, and that several ofthe burgesses sent 'to him, and told him he had b, right tovote, and asked him, why he did not try the right ? Thatat two elections the votes of the populace were asked bythe candidates, who stood by the populace. That those electionswere contested : the votes of the populace were thenrejected by this House : and the persons chosen by the selectnumber sat in Parliament, and since that the populace hadnot voted.Sir Robert Smith said, when he was mayor of this borough(above 20 years ago) he refused to make honorary burgesses :and his deputy, David Edwards, aged above 80, commendedhim for it : for he said it had never been well with the townsince the inhabitants had lost their right of voting. inhabitantsThat Edwards meant it would never be well with thetown till that right was restored, but did not say he everknew they had such right. That the inhabitants thoughtthey had right, and that the honorary burgesses took it fromthem.Hackman said, there are about seventy burgesses, ofwhich fifteen or sixteen are inhabitants j and there are nearone hundred other housekeepers, inhahitants, who are not burgesses,but generally in as good condition as the burgesses,This resolution, in fact, gave the right absolutely to the " commoner*— for thequalification as to prescription and immemorial usage, has no foundation : — inasmuchas it is now clear, beyond all controversy, that the House of Commons itself did notexist before the time of legal memory.SUDBURY. 1375In the next year, another report occurred, from which it Elizabeth,appears that the petitioners introduced a new mode of 1703.election, conformable to the usurpations prevalent at thattime.They contended, that the right was " only in the sons of Petitionersfreemen born after their fathers were free, — in apprenticeswho had served seven years, — and in those who were madefree by redemption,"For the sitting members it was insisted, that besides these, Sittingthose who had served as clerks to attomies, by virtue of 'such service were free, and had a right to vote.If involved in the intricacies and obscurities of the modemdoctrine as to corporations in connexion with trade, thismight have been a question of some difficulty : but consideredwith reference to the doctrine of apprenticeship, asconnected with the principles of the common law applicableto villainage and freedom it admits of an easy solution :For — a clerk who had entered into articles with his employer,and had resided in the town for more than a year and a day,serving his master under that contract, was clearly free bythe principles of the common law ; as explained in Glanville,and the other early text-writers.*Parol evidence for 40 years was given, that such persons Evidence.had voted, and were never refused; which was only answeredby proof that one person who had served as an attorney,had purchased his freedom. But he acknowledged hismaster had died before his time was out ; and he owned thatattomies had voted at former elections, and had never beenrefused.Nevertheless the committee resolved, " that the right was Right.'* only in the sons of freemen, born afler their fathers werefree — in apprentices who had served seven years — ^and "(adopting the usurpation which was asserted by the petitioners,and not denied by the sitting members,) " in such aswere made free by redemption''In the course of the scrutiny of the votes, all the inconveniencesof non-resident freemen were exhibited, as some of• Vide ante, pp. 235-698-722 to 727-762 to 765-1100,SUDBURY. 1377plate independent determination ; for there was no reference Elizabeth.to the former — and it declares a right of voting in a class of 1775.persons not before mentioned there. And it was urged, thatthe voters ought to show themselves completely freemen— which could not be without admission, of which theonly legal evidence was the enrolment of stamps upon thebooks of the corporation.The committee directed, that evidence should be given toshow by what right the rejected voters claimed to vote.Many honorary freemen who had polled for the sitting Honoraryfreemen.members, were objected to ; and, as they were unseated, itmay be inferred, that the committee rejected those votes.During the investigation of this case, it was truly said,that Sudbury was a borough by prescription, incorporatedby Queen Mary, and began to send members to Parliamentin this reign.That the corporation consisted of a mayor, six aldermen,24 capital burgesses, and an indefinite number of ** freemen*'as they were called : but who (for the reasons we have beforeabundantly given, as well as from the express words of thecharter) ought to be called " burgesses,"That till the year 1772, there were not above five or six 1772.instances to be found, in the books of the corporation, ofpersons admitted to their freedom without a title, acquiredeither by birth, servitude, or redemption. And those instanceswere (as we have pointed out in other places*) of candidates,or members, who were admitted out of compliment,but who never exercised any franchise as members of thecorporation. And they were all within the last 100 years.It appeared that in 1772, the year above alluded to, thegoverning part of the corporation (the majority of them beingin the interest of one of the candidates) took the bold stepof making an entry in their books, asserting their claim tothe right of admitting those who had title to their freedomand cdso gratuitously or by favour, without any previoustitle or consideration in money. A right which if they reallypossessed, and it extended to non-residents, would have» Vide ante, 613, 688, 1)34.4 TSUDBURY. 1379The proposal was at first rejected ; but such a committee Elizabeth.was afterwards appointed. They, however, were all in favour 1776.of one candidate ; and the persons who supported him, wereadmitted without any inquiry. Many of the magistrates Admissionsproposed and carried entire lists of their partisans, and wereheard to say, " they would enrol none but the friendsOF their favourite candidate."It was also shown much management had been used withrespect to a sham mandamus : upon which the same attorney Mandamus.had conducted the proceedings for both sides, and there wasa purposed omission in the evidence.It was also proved, that before the election a garbledclause, out of the Durham Act,* had been printed and cir- l^«"hamrelated in the town by the " mayors for the purpose of deterringthe freemen from voting r And many of them going tothe mayor to ask his opinion, whether they might vote withoutincurring the penalties of the Act, received an answer,that they certainly would be liable if they presumed to vote;and if not able to pay must go to gaol. In consequence ofwhich several were deterred from giving their suffrages : andthose who polled were considerably reduced below thenumber upon former elections.These facts were not contradicted by proof, but most ofthem admitted by the sitting members : and in the sequelthey lost their seats ; the mayor being also most severely reprimandedby the chairman of the committee.Upon a case which occurred in the court of King's Bench,which turned much upon a usage that had prevailed in a Usage,particular place, Lord Mansfield f said, he could not suppose,that during the " prevalence of that usage one half ofthe city were fools, and the other knaves." But afterreading the facts connected with the cases of Sudbury, andother places to which we have before referred, the reader willprobably think, that whether the learned judge was accuratein the proportions he suggested or not, one or other of theterms he adopted would apply to the greater part of theelectors.Srd Geo. III. c. 15. t Cocksedge v. Bashaw, 1 Doug. 119.4t2HASLEMERE. ]331bailiff was a second time ordered into the custody of the Elizabeth,serjeant-alarms.In the next year, an action was brought by Denzil Onslow, 1681.Esq., who had been omitted in the second indenture, formaking that false return.In the course of the trial, the chief justice who presided,for the first time adopted the doctrine, that a statute couldbecome obsolete; for referring to the act of the 6 Henry V., 6 Hen. V.chap. 1, which requires that " the members should be Free,resiant, and dwelling within the borough ;" he ruled, that^' little or no regard was to be had to that ancient statute, for** as much as the common practice of the kingdom had been*' ever since to the contrary," — (rather a strong observation,which, if it were examined, would lack evidence to confirmit.) And he added, " it was the way to fill the ParliamentHouse with men below the employment." The objection toMr. Onslow's right to recover on that ground was disallowed,as it would seem, on no just legal principle, but probablyfrom a feeling, that the returning officer ought not to havesheltered himself under such an objection.It is stated in the report of this case,* that it was agreedby the parties and the counsel of both sides, that the right of Right,voting was in the burgage freeholders, resiant and inhabitantwithin the borough, and none others. Another instance inwhich the agreement of parties (both probably interested insupporting the right of election, upon which they mutuallyagreed in order to exclude others) sanctioned a right whichcould not be supported by the general law.As to some of the voters, an objection was made, that their Fraud.conveyances had been recently executed, and fraudulentlycontrived, to make votes for the election. The court orderedthem to be produced, and it appeared that some of themwere made after the teste of the writ ; and some of them inorder to carry a former election.Two were conveyances of part of a garden, by a father tohis two sons, each containing about ten rods ; worth, at best,2^. per annum. Another was by a father to his son, of aLord Somers' Tracts vol. viii. p. 272.HASLEMERE. 1383without just cause such as are incorporate ; or the making Elizabeth.** other members of the corporation to serve a turn at an I68I.'^ election, will be equally dangerous, and also ineffectual.For as those that are so put in gain hereby no right to^' elect : so those that are so put out lose no privilege of'' voting; and the officers and persons doing the same, areseverely punishable.'^ So likewise, in case of election by inhabitancy ; the inhabitants'^ coming to live in a place for a small time upon some paretitular occasion ; or coming to or taking a house, to serve** an election, doth not give right to vote : according to therules of common law and the reason of the case."In the 10th Will. III., upon another report, it appears 1698.that the right of election was again agreed to be in ** the free Right,holders resident within the borough. And notwithstandingthe observations we have before quoted of the chief justice,and that evidence was given of fraudulent splitting of tenements,and possession taken the day the writ was proclaimed,and other fraudulent practices : — yet, strange to say, thepetition founded upon them was declared to be frivolousand vexatious.In the 28th of George II., a resolution explanatory of that 1755.of 1661 was made, by which it was declared, that, by the wordfreeholders," was meant only freeholders of messuages. Free-landsor tenements lying within the borough and manor ofHaslemere; whether the same pay rent to the lord of theborough and manor or not ; exclusive of any lands and tenementswhich are or have been parcel of the waste ground ofthe borough and manor; or any messuages or buildingsstanding thereon.This resolution affords another instance of the intricacy inwhich questions depending upon these rights were by degreesinvolved ; and as it had been before agreed, that thefreeholders had the right of voting, it is difficult to explainupon what principle the waste ground and the buildingsupon it could be excluded.In the 15th George III., a petition was presented* against 1775.Douglas, 319.1384 HASLEMERE.Elizabeth, the return of the two sitting members, which untruly stated1775. that it was a borough by prescription; and complained of thepractice of late years of splitting and dividing freeholds, andthat it had prevailed to such a degree, that if not effectuallyprevented for the future, the privileges and franchises of theplace would be destroyed, and the constitution of the boroughtotally subverted.This petition led to a tedious inquiry of the many instancesin which votes had been split, and to loi argumentsupon that and other subjects, particularly the boundsof the borough ; but eventually it was determined that thesitting members were duly elected.1812. In a book of questionable authority,* it is stated, that, inthe send Greorge III., an opposition occurred, when it wasfound that no proper conveyances had been made to thevoters, and on the day of election, there was not a singlevoter to be found in the borough,o/vote^ In this dilemma there was only one course that could beadopted, which was, to cause the bailiff to adjourn the pollto the next day, and in the mean time to put all the attomieswho could be procured from the neighbouring towns in astate of requisition, to make out as many conveyances ascould be prepared by the next morning.This was accordingly put in practice, and by nine o'clockon the following day, about a dozen or fourteen parchmentvotes were created for the occasion.These were all objected to, as sham conveyances of tenementsfor which the pretended freeholders were all payingrents to the landlord at the time ; but all of them were admittedas good votes by the returning officer.At the same time, seven persons, claiming to be freeholdersand resident inhabitants within the borough, tendered theirvotes for the opposing candidates; but were all rejected bythe returning officer.This conduct produced a petition, which was brought toa hearing the first session of the next Parliament, when theEvidence, landlord was called to prove, that he was possessed of allOldfield's History of Boroughs.HASL£M£R£. 1386the freeholds for which the person polled for the sitting Elizabeth,members had voted. 1812.The examination of this witness was objected to, on theground of his being an agent for the landlord.On the opposite side it was contended, that if he had been Evidence,an agent for the sitting membership might be objected to hisexamination ; but his being agent for a peer of the realm,who had no right to interfere in the election of members ofParliament, had no such effect. His examination was notadmitted.The rent collector was then called to prove, that he receivedrent of all the pretended freeholders for the premises theyoccupied, and for which they voted at the last election.His evidence was refused, for the same reason as theformer.The occupiers of the pretended freeholds were at last Veteran,called to prove, that they paid rent to the landlord for thesame; and that they only received the conveyances of thefreeholds on the morning of the election, and returned themas soon as they had voted.The committee resolved, that these men could not beexamined to disqualify their own votes.The petitioners having no other means of proving theircase, the sitting members were declared duly elected.Thus in a place only summoned for the first time to returnmembers by Queen Elizabeth, a right of election contrary tothe ancient law, and the ancient practices of the constitution,was adopted, which led to consequences severely censured,in cogent language, by one of the judges of the land — yetpersevered in — partly sanctioned by Parliament — and finallyproducing the greatest abuses and unconstitutional practices.The last place to which we shall refer, as being especiallysummoned to send members to Parliament in this reign, is Richmond.Richmond in Yorkshire.* It had a castle in the time ofWilliam I. ; but it is not mentioned in Domesday as a Domesday,borough. — However it very early acquired that character, asSee Sir Trellis* Domesday, vol. i. p. 222.J3gg Richmond.Elizabeth, a charter was granted to the " burgesses* by John, eldestson of the Duke of Britain, giving to them the borough andthe rents of assise. It was confirmed by Edward III., inthe second year of his reign.* In pursuance of which,Richmond was properly summoned by the sheriff, as beinga borough, to return members to Parliament ; but it madenone, as the sheriff states, that ^^ the names of the burgesseswere not sent to him."t Nor did it ever send members to1576. Parliament till this reign — in the 19th year of which. Queenrated* Elizabeth incorporated it — and in the 27th year, summonedSummoned it to rectum members to Parliament. A further charter was1667. granted in the 20th year of Charles II.No records afford any distinct information as to the bui^Court gesses of this place, excepting that it has a court leet ; but ithas shared the same fate as that of Haslemere, by havingthe right of election confined to the burgoyne-holders — which1713. was assumed to be the right in the 13th of Queen Anne ; and1764. again in the fourth year of George III.As might be expected, this place has also exhibited abundantinstances of splitting houses and lands, and multiplyingvotes ; as we have before seen in the case of Haslemere.We have thus stated the history of the places which werefirst summoned to Parliament in the reign of Queen Elizabeth; for the purpose of showing who were treated as theburgesses. And the reader will have seen how varioushave been the qualifications by which they were defined.As they were summoned for the unconstitutional purpose ofprocuring an influence in the House of Commons, so theyappear to have subsequently produced the most irregularUsages, and unconstitutional usages. Nor should it be overlooked,that notwithstanding these boroughs were of modem creation,the right of election adopted, with respect to many ofBurgage them, was that of burgage tenure, which is usually assertedtenure. • • , n •to be the most ancient right ot voting.Maidstone — Yarmouth, in the Isle of Wight — and Aid-borough,in Yorkshire — were restored to the right of re-• Pat. 1, Edw. III., p. 4, n. 11. f 4 Prynne, 1094.BOROUGHS RESTORED. 1387turning members to Parliament ; but after the full manner Elizabeth,in which we have canvassed the history of the precedingplaces it is here needless to further investigate their condition.We proceed to add such other documents as may bematerial for insertion in this reign.Nelson.The queen, in the 27th year of her reign, granted a charter to 1585.HelstoH, reciting, as in the former charters we have quotedthat the burgesses and inhabitants had enjoyed diversliberties by prescription and charters.* That they hadbesought her to incorporate them into a body corporate —which the queen accordingly did, by the name of " themayor and commonalty of the borough of Hellespontfirst mayor and aldermen are named, and describedas honest men and inhabitants.There is then introduced, for the first time, the clause. Power toadmitwhich afterwards became frequent, allowing the mayor and freemen.commonalty of the borough of Helleston, and their successors,with the aldermen, or the major part of the aldermen,to elect and admit such and so many of the more discreet,honest, and quiet men and inhabitants of the borough,to be the burgesses and freemen of the same borough, as tothem should, from time to time, seem fit and convenient.And the mayor, commonalty, and their successors, areempowered to nominate two burgesses for the Parliament.As to this power of admitting freemen, it should be ob Admission. . of free-served,that as far as the admission and swearing of bur men.gesses is concerned, it was only declaratory of the commonlaw; and would have the effect of protecting the mayor andcommonalty from any claim by any lords in consequenceof persons being admitted as freemen whom they mightclaim as their villains: and would also be a protectionagainst any similar claim by the crown. But as to theelection " of freemen, we have already seen, in the case ofQueenborough, that a committee negatived that right in the5 Bro. Par. Ca.512| in Hoblyn v. The King.1388 Nelson.Elizabeth, select body of the corporation ; and, in truth, it is obviouslyan absurdity to seek o{ ** electing ^* freemen as they couldonly be admitted in consequence of the fact of their being offree condition, to which they could not be said to be " elected."Nevertheless these clauses were introduced, like the interpolations,and adoption of the term ** elected," in the cases ofColchester, Queenborough, East and West Love, and otherboroughs — for the purpose of making it apparently a matterof arbitrary election, rather than, as anciently, a subject forlegal presentment. And as the elections were, in most instances,assumed to be by the select body, they gave a semblanceof legal authority to that system of usurpation, whichafterwards introduced those evils so much complained of incorporations— and the source of that distrust and odiumwhich has been directed against them.The arbitrary and exclusive practice of electing freemenreceived its final confirmation and legal sanction in the caseof the King and Bird, to which we shall hereafter refer.PORTSMOUTH.Portsmouth having continued in the same state withrespect to its burgesses, from the time of Richard /.* to theclose of the reign of Henry III. :+ — and confirmations of theformer charters having been made in the 6th year of EdwardII., 1313; in the 32nd of Edward III., 1359; and inthe 8th year of Richard II., 1386. And the returns ofmembers to Parliament in the 27th of Henry VI., 1449 ;the 29th of Henry VL, 1451; and in the 12th Edward IV.,1473, being made by the " consent and assent of the wholecommonalty'* and amercements having been frequentlyCourt leet. imposed in the court leet of the borough upon tradesmenof the town for exercising their trades, not being freemen ;and the mayor and commonalty having joined in thegranting of the lands of the borough ; — and the mayor andinhabitants in the regulation of the commons; — Queen .beth, in the 42nd year of her reign, hinted to the borough a• See before, p. 372. t See before, p. 468.PORTSMOUTH. 1389charter of incorporation, the material parts of which will be Elizabeth.found hereafter. leo.The penalties imposed upon persons trading in the town Free tonot being freemen, have been to some extent observed uponbefore : — but it may be material to add here, before we proceedto the consideration of the charter of Queen Elizabeth,that it is hardly possible to conceive, that the burgessescould have the power of enforcing these fines upon tradesmenfor not being freemen, if such tradesmen had not thepower of becoming freemen if they pleased. •Thus it was decided, that a bye-law of the common council. Bye-law.that none should use dancing who were not free of the companyof musicians, was held void, because the party couldnot compel them to admit him.*It has been before shoivn what the nature of this freedom Freedom,was, and how it connected itself with the regulations of trade.If a tradesman was otfree condition he was entitled to tradeany where.Thus it has been decided, that a right to trade could not Monopolytaken away without a consideration :f— otherwise thesefines and similar regulations would operate in restraint oftrade, and tend to monopoly.If a man was not free, but was a villain, he could not tradeat all in any place, for the reasons which have been givenbefore. Unless, therefore, he had ceased to be a villain, by Villains.living a year and a dag in the town, away from his lord ; hehad no right to trade ; but if he had lived such a time in theplace, to the knowledge of the other inhabitants, then, uponthe one hand, he was compellable to attend the court leet, Leet.and be duly enrolled, sworn, and admitted as a freeman; andupon the other, if he applied for such admission, the mayorand court were bound to admit him : and in this point ofview, these fines might be legal and reasonable, becausethey would be imposed upon persons who, as free, ought tohave been admitted as freemen ; and were guilty of a defaultin not being so. Nor had they any right, under such cir-5 Mod. 104. t Salk. 203, Mayor of Winchester v. Wilkes.1390 PORTSMOUTH.Elisabeth, substances, to remain or trade in the place, nothing .ing to show that they were not villains ; and they not beingcontributors in scot and lot with the rest of the burgesses.But upon the other hand, if it was assumed that the mayoror burgesses had the power of fining the party for trading,not being free: — and had at the same time the power ofexcluding him from being a freeman : — it is obvious that itwould be in direct restraint of trade : — and place a monopolyin the hands of the mayor and burgesses : — and would beso unjust and irrational, that it cannot be assumed to haveformed any part of the English law.It may therefore be justly inferred, from the imposition ofthese fines, that every person who had lived in Portsmouthfor more than a year and a day, was bound and entitled underAdmission, the common law to be sworn, enrolled, and admitted as afreeman: — and that if he was not so, he had no right toremain or trade in the place, and was therefore justly subjectedto these fines.With these recollections of the history of Portsmouth,from the reign of Richard I. to the time of granting thischarter, we proceed to consider its contents.1600. It recites that Portsmouth was an ancient town, basins:Charter. . . . . ' r?within it, from time immemorial, for the better governmentand rule of it, one mayor, two bailiffs, two constables, andother public officers out of the burgesses and inhabitants* ofthe borough; by whom the borough and inhabitants weregoverned from time immemorial. And that divers lands andliberties had been granted to the burgesses and inhabitants,sometimes by the name " of the honest men of Portsmouth,"and sometimes ** the burgesses of Portsmouth."It further recites, that disputes had arisen from the variety• The frequent mention of " burgesses and inhabitants" has been before commentedupon. Here it is obvious that the addition of the word " inhabitants'* might benecessary to meet the circumstance of a person having resided a year and a day inthe place ; and being fit, in the estimation of the burgesses, to be the mayor, shouldbe elected for that purpose before he had taken upon himself the character of aburgess ; and therefore would be properly described as an " inhabitants and whenelected he would be sworn and enrolled as a burgess, and take the oaths of office atthe same time.PORTSMOUTH. 1391of the names and incorporations,* and other defects in the Elizabeth.letters patent, as well as by force of the prescription and I600.usage of the borough. To remove the same, and that fromthenceforth one certain manner might be continually hadin the borough of keeping the peace, and for the rule andgovernment of the people, the queen granted, that theborough should be from thenceforth for ever a free borough Freeborough.of itself; and that the inhabitants for ever thereafter mightand should be a body corporate and politic, by the name of Corporate.the mayor and burgesses of the borough of Portsmouth."The usual corporate powers are added, and also the rightof having a common seal.The court leet, and view of frankpledge, are confirmed. Court ice.The first mayor is appointed :— and the mayor and bui^esses Mayor,are enabled yearly to elect one of the senior and principal,better and more honest burgesses to be mayor of the borough;who is to take his oath before his last predecessor, or theburgesses : — who are to fill up any vacancy of mayor byelecting another out of the senior and principal, better andmore honest burgessesThe mayor and three burgesses are to be the justices of Justices-thepeace. The first and modem justices being appointed.And it is further directed, that the mayor and burgessesmay in every year, among themselves, and out of the seniorand principal, better and more honest burgesses elect threeto be justices of the peace : who are, immediately after theirelection, to take their corporal oaths before the mayor andburgesses.And it is provided, that if any justice shall die, or departQueen Elizabeth here applies the term " incorporations" to the previouscharters of Portsmouth. But the reader has already seen, and must be satisfied,that they do not justify the use of that term. This is only another instance of theloose application of this expression.t This is an express and explicit incorporation of the inhabitants by the name ofthe burgesses ; and were there no other fact or document to establish this point,but this charter alone, it would appear to be the irresistible and indisputable constructionof ittThat is " inhabitants."That is '* inhabitants*'I) I'hat is " inhabitants."1392 PORTSMOUTH.Elizabeth . from such his office then the mayor and burgesses, or the1600. major part of them, shall elect another, of the senior andprincipal, better and more honest burgesses of the same.It is also further granted, that none of the mayor or burgesses,nor any inhabitant or resiant within the borough, orthe liberties thereof, shall be put or impannelled in any assisesJuries, or juries out of the borough.Confirma And there is a general confirmation of all lands, whichtitheburgesses or inhabitants oiihe, borough had enjoyed.Before we quit the charter of Elizabeth, it should be observed,that it contains no provision for the election ofBurgess. burgesses. It has been shown who they were from theearliest times : and this charter does not purport to alter thatinhabitant class. They were the inhabitant householders ; and in con-holden.forty with that fact, this grant ^' incorporates the inhabitantsas burgesses*' It would therefore seem to haverequired the fullest extent of legal ingenuity, or of hardyassertion, to throw the slightest doubt upon the position,** that the inhabitants of Portsmouth were the burgesses*'nor could such a doubt have been believed to have existed,had not the decisions of the courts and committees of theHouse of Commons authorized such a belief.ANDOVER.Lengthened as our extracts and documents have beenduring the reign of Queen Elizabeth, it is impossible to omitsome account of the borough of Andover — the history ofwhich is peculiar, and in every respect illustrative of oursubject; and of the successive encroachments upon the rightsof the inhabitants oi i\iQ place.Andover does not appear to be a borough by prescriptionit is not mentioned, as we have seen,* in Domesday — andin the reign of Henry II., there is a grant, not to the bur-men,gesses, but to the men of Andover, granting them a guildmerchant, &c. ; which is a strong circumstance, in contradictionof Brady's doctrine, to show that such a grant did not• See before, p. 109.ANDOVER. 1393create a borough.* And the privileges granted by Henry II. Elizabeth.were, in like manner, confirmed — and another grant made tothe men of the townsNor are the burgesses of Andover mentioned in any publicdocument, till after the time of legal memory.They returned members to Parliament in the 24th, 30th,33rd, and 34th of Edward I. ; and the first of Edward II.But in the second and fourth of the latter reign, the bailiffs of ^^lo.Andover made no return to the sheriff of Hampshire. Winchester,Basingstoke, and the Isle of Wight, were similarlydeficientPrynne states, that it returned in the 33rd of Edward III.,but of that there may be some doubt.In the ninth of Henry IV., a grant is made to the good ^^'men and the commonalty; and in the ninth of Henry VI., ^*^'to the men of the towns And charters of confirmation weregranted by Edward IV. and Henry VIII.Andover was restored to representation in Parliament in ^^^'the 27th of Queen Elizabeth, after having intermitted fornearly 200 years.With what view it was restored, and how the privilegeit obtained was used, may be collected from the historywhich we have given of the other boroughs summoned toParliament in this reign ; and the following letter from the 1^84.Earl of Leicester, high steward of the borough.After my heartie commendations. Whereas it has pleased Nomina-hermajesty, to appoint a Parliament to be presently members.called : being steward of your towne, I make would heartilyto pray you that you would give me the nomination of^' one of your burgesses for the same ; and yf minding, toavoid the charges of allowance for the other burgesses, you** mean to name anie that is not of your townCy if you will*' bestow the nomination of the other burgesses also on me, I** See before, p. 338. t See before, p. 410.t 2 Prynne, 295. $ See Mad. Fir. Bur. 210.II Vide post., a similar letter from Lord Orrery in the I2th of Charles II., whenhe was lord justice of Ireland, to the tiilui6i<aiitf of Kimalt,4u1394 ANDOVER.Eiiiabeili. a ^ju thank you for it ; and will both appoint a sufficient1584. ** man, and see you discharged of all charges in that behalf.And so praying your speedy answer herein, I thus bid youright heartily farewell. From the courte, the 13th October,1584.Your loving friend, R. Leicester.** If you. will send me your election with a blank, I will putin the names,To my very loving friends, the bailiffs and the rest of thetowne of Andover."1509. In the 42nd year of this reign, a charter was granted byIncorporate queen to the men and inhabitants, incorporating them, by^**°' the name of the " bailiff, good men, and burgesses of theborough." Since which time, the town has been governedby a bailiff, a steward, two justices, nine other good men,12 capital burgesses, and other subordinate officers.This charter has a recital of the previous enjoyment ofPrMcrip- certain rights " by prescription*' upon which we have beforecommented.It also confirms the view already taken of many of theMen and charters of this reisfn ; for it speaks of the men and inhabit. .tants. tants having had immemorially, for the better governing ofthe town, certain officers, by whom the borough or town,and the men and inhabitants, have been governed : — It thenrecites the former grants : — And it seems impossible to readit, without being satisfied that the approved men, the inhabitants,and the burgesses, were, in fact, all the same class.It is granted oji the petition of the men and inhabitants.It makes the borough or town a free borough — and the burgessesand inhabitants a body politic, by the name of " thebailiffs, approved men, and burgesses'The officers are to be selected from the better and moreinhabitant approved of the inhabitants.Ten of the better, more discreet, and approved burgessesand inhabitants, are to be the "approved men;" and 12 ^the inhabitants are to be capital burgesses.The 10 approved men, and the bailiff and steward, are toANDOVER. 1395be the common council with power to make bye-laws : and Elizabeth,one of the 10 approved men is to be yearly nominated baililBT. 1599.If any of the approved men die, they are to be filled up counts"from the burgesses ; and if any of the burgesses (meaningclearly the 12 capital burgesses) should die, or be removed,one of the inhabitants should be elected to fill the place.So that it appears from this charter, that the approvedmen — burgesses — Bid inhabitants — were oil incorporated; and inhabitantsthe 10 approved men, and the 12 capital burgesses, were,directly or indirectly, to be taken from the inhabitants.It is therefore clear, that, from this time, some of the inhabitantswere to be denoted by the name of " the approved Approvedmen;" and that term, which had before been used in theborough, was then appropriated to that select number.This grant probably was obtained, for the purpose ofgiving to the select bodies created by it, an ascendancy,which might enable them to effect the objects the Earlof Leicester clearly had in view : and which were adoptedat that period by the queen, and by many officers of thecrown.Nevertheless, as Andover had returned members to Paria Parliamentbefore this period it could not alter the class of personswho were to vote : and, in fact, it does not attempt to do so —for there is no reference in it respecting the return of membersto Parliament.This charter, therefore, should properly be thrown out ofthe question, with respect to the elective franchise, whichought to be ascertained by the previous charters and returns— and they fix the right in the " probi homines** — thefood men, tenants, or burgesses ; — or in other words, the inhabitanthouseholders. *Notwithstanding, however, the charter does not give theselect body of burgesses the power of election, still, con Selectordering the manner in which that power was before ^'exercised, it is not surprising, that all authority shouldhave been exercised in the borough by the select bodycreated by this grant. And accordingly we find, from theproceedings in the Journals, that the elections were, in4u2139() ANDOVER.Elizabeth, truth, made by the select body of the corporation, as may be1641. distinctly collected from this report.In 1641, there was a petition by Sir W. TFa/2^ againstthe returns for Andover, as appears by the report.Sir W. Herbert reported the state of the election: — There3d May are in the town 24 burgesses that have right of election.Eighteen only appeared ; — and nine were for Mr. Vernon ; andnine for Sir William Waller. That the bailiff, who challenges aCasting casting voice, gave his vote for Mr. Vernon, and returned him.Evidence. Th8.t there was one Mr, Bourne, who was elected, but notsworn ; and who was there at the door, but could not beadmitted during the time of election : which being over, hecame to the bailiff, and said, that he was there to give hisvote for Sir William Waller. The bailiff answered him,that he had no voice there, having only been elected aburgess, and not sworn. There were two other burgesses,William Basic, and another, who were at the town-hallbefore the election began, but they were all generally putout, as not being sworn. And they came not to give theirvoices during the time of the election, as the others did ; butafter the election was ended, then they came and said thatthey were come to give their votes for Mr. Vernon.Determined it was resolved, that Mr. Vernon's election was void.nation.And the question being proposed, whether Sir WilliamWaller's election be good ; it was carried in the affirmative, bya majority of five : — the numbers being for his election, 107 —against it, 102.This, although an erroneous judgment as far as the rightof the select body was sanctioned by it; seems to havebeen a correct determination, with regard merely to themembers. Because the bailiff was clearly not entitled to aCasting casting vote for Mr. Vernon; and the burgess who had beenvoice. .Forsworn ^^^^^^^9 ^^^ ^^^ swoTJi, might have been held, on correctprinciples, to have been entitled to vote, if he had tenderedhimself to be sworn; for he would have done all in hispower to complete his title : and the want of being sworn,was not his fault, but that of others. The other two couldnot be reckoned, because they had not tendered their votes*ANDOVER. 1397But it must be recollected, that the right of the inha- Elizabeth,bitants at lai^e was not at all considered on this occa- 1642.sion. It was not the interest of either of the litigant partiesto assert it; and, in point of fact, it never was in any mannertaken into consideration; but the right of the commoncouncil was assumed without question.Although Bourne s vote might have been legally establishedon the ground we have suggested, that he had been desirousof doing all in his power to complete his title ; so on the otherhand it might have been allowed on the ground that theinhabitants generally had a right to vote, if they had tendered inhabitantstheir suffrages — a suggestion which is not altogether withoutfoundation; as in Sir Robert Henry's petition, after theRevolution, it is said to have been proved by witnesses, that ^^^'Sir William Waller was chosen by the **paptUace"On the Restoration, in the 13th year of Charles II., i^^-several returns were made by the bailiff; two of the approvedmen, and two of the burgesses by name, with many othersof the approved men and burgesses, inhabitants, '^ fit andcapable to elect burgesses to serve in Parliament."Two returns of the 21st of Charles II., were made by the ^^^•bailiff, approved men, and burgesses, inhabitants within thetown. And one of them — showing how unimportant theuse of the common seal was thought — is under the seals ofthe persons joining in the return.In the 25th year of Charles II., another was made, much 1672.in the same manner ; excepting that some words were againadded to the description of the voters; that they werequalified, and capable to elect a member."In the 30th Charles II., the return of members to Partial 1677.ment was by 10 approved men, and 1 1 burgesses by name,'qualified and capable to elect," being a majority of thepersons qualified.In the 30th, 31st, and 32nd years of Charles II., there were 1678.petitions against the return for Andover; but they contain 1680.nothing material, and there was no report upon either of them.There was also a charter granted by Charles II., but itdoes not appear to have been acted upon, and therefore wa1398 ANDOVER.Elizabeth, probably assumed, like many of the same date, to be illegaland void.Approved The terms approved men, which occur so often in the documentsof Andover, are nothing more than another translationof the *^ probi homines'* But whether they were adopted forthe purpose or not, they seem calculated to encourage theidea, that " the approved men" were a selected class: — butwhich inference could never have been drawn from the wordsprobi homines," if they had been continued. Howeverthere can be no doubt, taking all the records of Andovertogether, that the probi homines, or approved men, were reallythe tenants, or inhabitant householders, of the place.Common That some of the returns are under a common seal does notprove them to be corporate acts; or to be done by the corporation: because there are many places having common sealswhich are not incorporated ; and where the returns have beenmade under the conmion seal; although the election hasbeen by the body at large of the burgesses or inhabitants.1688. After the Revolution, two unsuccessful candidates petitionedagainst the return, on behalf of themselves and thebody of the burgesses.The return was in the same form as the preceding ; andQuestion, in the report the contest is stated to have been, whether theelection lay in the bailiff, and a select number of burgessesonly, or in the populace.Common It seems that the common council of 24 were erroneouslysupposed to be the burgesses; by a misapprehension of thecharter, similar to that which we have before remarked asto Banbury; and upon the same ground; that in the clausefor filling up the vacancies of the capital burgesses, the termcapital " is omitted, and they are only called " burgesses*'but the context of the charter abundantly shows, that, inother parts of it, that term was intended to be applied tothe body at large.It seems clear, that the question on this occasion wasbetween the common council, and the general body of theinhabitants.The early charters, — their proper explanation — and the in-ANDOVER. 1399terence to be drawn from theniy do not appear to have been Elizabeth.submitted to the committee. But the inhabitants seem to 1688.have insisted upon their right nine years before. And in theParliament previous to 1689, they had intended to assert it,but the town-clerk threatened to prosecute them for a riot :a proof of the oppressive violence with which the right ofthe inhabitants was then resisted.The petitioners insisted that it was an ancient borough. Petitioners(which is true, although it was not a borough by prescription;)and they said, that it had been used to send members toParliament, who had been chosen by the populace.They produced the returns of the 33rd and 34th of Ed 1304-5.ward I. But as at that early period they were not made byindenture, but by indorsement on the writ, nothing could becollected from them as to who were the electors.Two other returns of the 30th and 39th of Elizabeth, by 1587.the commonalty, were likewise given in evidence : — and theyare stated in the report to be with the consent of the " corporation;"but it is highly improbable that such a termshould have been then actually used, as the charter of incorporationgiven by Queen Elizabeth was not then granted.Witnesses were produced, as we have observed before, toshow that Sir William Waller, who, during the common . 1542,wealth, was seated on petition, had been chosen by thepopulace**It was likewise alleged, that there was a petition in 1680,upon the right of the populace, which was never heard.For the sitting member, it was insisted, that Andover was membracorporation by prescription ; (which we have seen was nottrue ;) and it was stated, that the members had always beenchosen by a select number, which, in the reign of Edward I.,when Andover first returned members to Parliament — andwhich therefore is the important period to be considered — is,to say the least of it, highly improbable; and was at allevents gratuitously asserted on that occasion ; for there was noproof of it ; — inasmuch as no other evidence was given to thatpoint, but the returns, and they are silent as to the voters.They also produced an ancient book, in which it appeared.1400 ANDOVER.Elizabeth , that Several courts had been held by the maneloquiums ;and there was an order made by the steward and 24 ** per1458. wardens" in the 37th Henry VI.Some of the terms in this report of the evidence seem tobe strangely used ; but they are capable of easy explanation.Manelo- Maneloquium is a term we also find used in the books ofquum*Marlborough, and was descriptive of the meeting of the inhabitants.The steward and the 24, were the steward of thecourt leet and the jury there ; and the " wardens" wereprobably the wardens of the guild.The recital of the charter of Elizabeth, that Andover wasa corporation by prescription, was read and relied upon;several indentures under the common seal were alsoadduced in proof; and witnesses were called, who said theyhad known many elections, and all they remembered hadSelect been by the select number* Which, no doubt, was correct,number. •' / ^ ,because their evidence could not go back beyond the charterof Elizabeth. And considering the Earl of Leicester's letter, —the argument in it — the charter of Elizabeth asserting theimmemorial incorporation — and the circumstances whichafterwards occurred — there is no doubt that witnesses mightbe found who could correctly give this proof.Agreed. The report then states, that the petitioners agreed that itwas a corporation by prescription. Which was certainlycontrary to the tmth ; and in effect gave up the whole case.For, if it had not been a corporation by prescription ; norbefore the charter of Elizabeth : then the select body of corporatorscould not have been the voters in the reign of Edward I.;and the decision must have been against them. On the contrary,when the prescriptive incorporation was admitted, itUsage, let in the evidence of usayCy which being assumed to beproved in favour of the select body, the committee decidedKJK^it- that the right was in " the bailiff and a select number ofbury esse only*'1700. The effects of this determination were visible a few yearsafterwards : — for in 1700, proceedings were taken against Mr.Shepherd for the corrupt elections he had procured for this• See afterwards, temp. Jas. I.— the Dungannon case, 12 Co.VANDOVER. 1401place amongst others ; and the House resolved, that the EJiM>>cth.electors of Andover had corruptly endeavoured to set theirelection to sale ; and the bailiff and others, for having concurredin it, were ordered into custody. Mr. Shepherd wasdismissed the House ; and the others reprimanded.In 1701, there was a petition, by Sir John Cope, asserting noi.the undoubted right of the burgesses, freeholders and inhabitants,against the right of the bailiff, and capital burgessesonly, who had returned Mr. Shepherd; and it complainedalso of the disfranchisement of some of the burgesses withoutany cause. On this petition no evidence being offered by thepetitioners, the committee resolved again, in conformity withthe resolution of 1689, that the right was in ** the bailiff and Right.select number of burgesses onlyJ^Thus was the fullest effect given to the interference whichwith this place, commenced in the reign of Queen Elizabethto the false recital of the charter — and to the irregular andviolent acts which occurred in the reign of Charles II.; uponwhose void charter also, some of the usurpations were nodoubt founded.PLYMOUTH.In the 43rd of Elizabeth, there is a charter to Plymouth, leon.reciting, that the queen, observing how that borough wassituated near the sea coast, and that by the borough and inhabitantsthereof, there might be necessary convenience, notonly for the preserving and defence of the country near thatborough, and the people inhabiting there, but also for merchants,foreigners, natives and others, who might thereaftercome there: directs that the mayor, recorder and last mayor,should be justices; and that thejuatices of the county should Justices,not intromit.The mayor and 12 capital burgesses, calling to them 24 of Bye-laws,the better and more discreet merchants or free inhabitants,have authority given to them to make laws, statutes, &c.with power of fining for their breach.The mayor and commonalty are to nominate and elect suchand so many officers and ministers whatsoever, as to them Officers.1402 PLYMOUTH.Elizabeth. should seem fit for the better government and advantage ofthe boroughy as theretofore had been used and accustomed.No foreigner, not a freeman of the borough, was to sellany merchandises within it otherwise than in gross; unlessonly at the time of fairs or markets. And all markets,fairs, liberties, free customs and jurisdictions are grantedwhich the mayor and commonalty, by whatsoever name ofincorporation, or upon any pretence of incorporation whatsoever,had theretofore rightfully enjoyed, by reason or pretenceof any charters or letters patent, &c.PLYMPTON.1602. In the 44th year of Queen Elizabeth, there is a charter toPlymptoHy reciting that it was an ancient borough, of ancientdemesne, and (as we have seen in many other charters, withoutany truth) that the burgesses and inhabitants had beenincorporated from time immemorial; but that doubts hadarisen respecting the true name of the incorporation; andthat the borough had fallen into decay, in consequence ofInhabit which the burgesses and inhabitants had petitioned the queenlion. to extend her favour to them.Free The charter then proceeds to grant that it should for everbe a free borough ; the burgesses and inhabitants (by whatsoevername or names they had been theretofore incogported) should be a body corporate, by the name of " theti mayor, bailiff' and burgesses."The principal burgesses are to elect from themselves twoMayor, persons, one of whom the other inhabitants of the boroughwere to name as mayor.The bailiff* yearly to be nominated by the mayor and chiefburgesses from among themselves.The principal burgesses to be selected from the burgesses,by the mayor and principal burgesses.Fines. The mayor, bailiffs and burgesses to receive all fines andamercements, &c. — with assise of wine, bread and ale, &c.One market, two fairs, with a court of pie powder arelikewise granted.PLYMPTON. 1403The mayor and recorder are to be justices of the peace Eiiiabeth.and the town clerk coroner, ieo2.The mayor, bailiffs and burgesses are to choose two discreetmen for burgesses to Parliament.1^0 foreigner J not a burgess, is to sell any merchandiseswithin the borough; except during fair time.Jurisdiction is then given over all real and personal actions;and that the mayor, bailiff and bui^esses might have a viewof frankpledge of all burgesses, inhabitants and resiants, Frank,within the precincts of the borough. ^ * ^*'A confirmation of all previous liberties concludes thecharter.Some other charters granted in this reign, so nearly resembleeach other, and those we have quoted before, that itis not necessary to do more than signify the names of theplaces — the dates of the grants — and a few heads, to indicatethe substance of them.In the 2nd of Elizabeth, an inspeximus and confirmation ofthe charters of Henry VIII., Henry IV., Edward III., andEdward I. were granted to Lyme. And in the 33rd year, acharter, reciting that the mayor, burgesses, and inhabitantshad enjoyed certain rights, and at their request, the queenincorporated them by the name of the mayor and burgesses.In the 18th, to Durham, by Bishop Wilmington, incorporeal1676.rating it.And another by the queen, in the 44th year of her reign, ieo2.regulating the elections.In the 22nd of Elizabeth, to the English Company of 1579.Merchants of Newcastle.In the 23rd of Elizabeth, to Newcastle-upon-Tyne, giving i580.it admiralty jurisdiction — the court being held before themayor, recorder, and aldermen, inhabiting within the port.To Liskeard, incorporating the inhabitants, by the name of jj^y^^^j^the mayor and burgesses of the borough.* Nine of the ^^^•better men, of the more honest burgesses of the borough,• Fat. 29 Eliz. p. 13.1404 Unheard.— NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE.Elizabeth, and inhabitants within the same, are to be capital burgesses.From whom the mayor is to be elected yearly, by the menand inhabitants being burgesses. The borough mills andlands are granted, which had theretofore been held by ** theburgesses"— or *' the inhabitants"— or " the mayor and burgesses,"— or " the beloved and faithful men of Liskeard," — orby whatever names — or by whatever denomination of corporation— or by whatever incorporation — or reason of anyprescription, writing or writings, by the space of 50 yearsthen last past. And finally, exemption is given from servingJariei. upon juries without the borough.NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE.1533^ In the 31st of Elizabeth, another charter was granted toNewcastle-^ponrTyne^ incorporating the burgesses and inhabitants,and mentioning the several names by which theyhad before enjoyed privileges: and which must be assumedtherefore to have been synonymous — as, the good men — theburgesses — the burgesses and good men — the commonalty —and the mayor and burgesses, or any of them, by whatevername, or by whatever incorporation, or by pretext of whateverincorporation, had theretofore enjoyed, &c. And jurisdictionover the castle is also granted ; and over all personscormorants inhabitant, and being there.Although there is a regular series of the charters ofNewcastle from the earliest time, this is the first whichFirst incog speaks of the incorporation of the burgesses; notwithstandingon. j^^ there was a charter before this date, of the first of EdwardVI., incorporating the merchant adventurers.*1600. There is another charter to Newcastle, in the 42nd year ofthis reign, which regulates the elections of all the electiveofficers ; and which limits the interference even of the menCommo of the mysteries, to those commorant and inhabitant within^^^' the town ; and describes the hasten as also inhabiting.A clause in another part of the charter recites, that Newcastleis an ancient town ; and the mayor and burgesseshave, and from time immemorial have had, within it a♦ Vide ante, p. 1160.NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE. 1405certain guild or fraternity commonly called the hasten, ^^"^beth .for the loading and better disposition of coals : which guild 1600.or fraternity was not granted or established by any of the Hasten.charters or letters patent. And that the mayor and burgesseshad petitioned that the queen would make the fraternitya body corporate. Her majesty accordingly did so — providingamongst other things, that in case of vacancies, thegovernor, stewards, and brethren, from time to time, shouldelect and nominate, at their wills other inhabitants of the town,and burgesses of the toto. to be brethren of the fraternity. brethren.From this mode of expression, it seems clear, that thepreceding qualifications necessary to make a person eligibleas a postman, were his being an inhabitant and a burgess ;so that no person not an inhabitant was eligible ; and of theinhabitants, none were eligible but those sho had been inhAbiuntoadmitted, enrolled, and sworn as burgesses; and of those'who were inhabitants and burgesses, the governor, stewards,and brothers, had the power, by this charter, of nominatingwhom they thought fit — but this was afterwards materiallyaltered by the charter of James I.It should also be observed, that it is impossible to read aclause of this charter without being convinced, that it wasthe full intention of the queen ; in some parts of the charterexpressed — and in others directly implied — that the personswho were to have the privileges and perform the officesunder it, were to be inhabitant, commorant, and residentwithin the place.BATH.In the 32nd year of Elizabeth, a charter was granted to 1590.Bath, on the petition of the mayor, aldermen, citizens, andinhabitants, incorporating the inhabitants, by the name ofthe mayor, aldermen, and citizens.The city and jurisdiction was to extend over the wards. Wards.And power is given to the mayor, aldermen, and commoncouncil, to make, from time to time, of the inhabitants of theits, free citizens and burgesses, and bind them with an oath Makingto serve and obey the mayor, aldermen, and common1406 BATH.Elizabeth. council of the City, in all their lawful commandments ; and1500. to perform all other things which might lawfully be done tothe utility and profit of the city. And by all lawful means,to maintain and defend it, and all the liberties and franchisesthereof. With power to hold a court of record forhearing of all suits of personal and other trespasses, withinthe city, &c.But this clause does no more, than, as we have observedbefore, to transfer to the mayor, aldermen, and commoncouncil, the power of admitting the free inhabitants as city*zen, which power was before executed by the court leet ;and if so, surely the mayor, aldermen, and common councilought to exercise those powers under the same obligations asthat court leet.All writs wdrc directed to be executed within the city : — andthe mayor, aldermen, and citizens, and their successors, were tohave for ever thereafter within the city, and the suburbs andLeet. liberties thereof, a leet and view of frankpledge of all menbeing citizens j inhabitants or residents within the city, or thesuburbs or liberties thereof; to be holden and kept twice bythe year, in the guildhall of the city, before the steward ofthe mayor, aldermen, and common council ; at such days andtimes as should be agreeable to the laws and statutes of thisrealm of England : — and all and whatsoever belongeth to aleet or view of frankpledge, together with all summonses,attachments, arrests, issues, amerciaments, fines, redemptions,profits and commodities of the steward or stewards ofthe leet, or view of frankpledge.„ - The bailiffs from thenceforth were to have returns, as wellReturn of 'writs, of assise as of all manner of other writs, precepts, &c. withinthe city : and no other sheriff or king's minister to intromit.The assise of bread is given : and the victuallers, as wellfishers, as others inhabiting in the city, or any others comingthere with victuals, were from thenceforth to be under the ruleand government of the mayor and aldermen.The mayor to be coroner and clerk of the market,g ^^ , That all persons dwelling and inhabiting within the city*oi should be at scot and lot with the citizens, and should beBATH. 1407partakers with them in all burdens and charges. That no Elizabeth.inhabitant there should have challenge, or liberty, or anyfreedom within the city, unless he were commonly and far themost part residing and dwelling thin the city. And that the Residing,mayor, aldermen, and all the citizens for the time being, andtheir heirs and successors for ever, should be free and dis-chainedthrough all England, from all toll, custom, &c. Andthat the citizens inhabiting within the city,, or the suburbs orlimits thereof, nor any of them, should not be put with anyforeigners, nor men dwelling out of the city, in any assises,juries, or inquisitions whatsoever.WINCHESTER.In the 30th year of Elizabeth, a charter to Winchester i587.recites,''^ that it was an ancient town, having time out ofmind for the government, a mayor, six aldermen, two bailiffs,two coroners, two constables, and other public officers, ofthe citizens and inhabitants of the same city. That lands, inhabitants&c. with liberties and privileges, had been granted to '' thecitizens and inhabitants," sometimes by the name of ^' themayor, bailiffs, and commonalty of Winchester," &c. : — andthat ambiguities had arisen in consequence of the variety ofnames. That upon the force of their prescription and usage,and being desirous to rectify the same, and that they shouldenjoy more ample privileges, the queen had granted :That the city should be for ever agree city : — and that the Free city,citizens and inhabitants should be a body corporate, by the Corporate,name of ** the mayor, bailiffs, and commonalty of the cityof Winchester." And that the officers should be of the older Officers.and principal, better and more honest sort of inhabitantsand citizens. That there should be 24 persons of the betterand more discreet and honest men and citizens, to be assist Assistantsing and aiding to the mayor.Provisions then follow for the election of the aldermen,and the 24, from the citizens and inhabitants. — that theyshould hold twice a year, as accustomed, the borough mote Borough-mote.court, leets, lauMlays, and views of frankpledge, of the inha- Court leet.Rot. Confide anno 30.1408 " WINCHESTER.Elizabeth, bitants and resiants within the city, and all things thereto be1587. longing. That the mayor, bailiffs, and commonalty, and theirsuccessors, and all the inhabitants, should be acquitted andSuits of discharged from the suit of the county and hundred courts tothe sheriffs belonging — with quittance from toll. That noinhabitant or render within the city should be impannelledwith foreigners upon assises, juries, &c. unless it concernedthe king or queen. The mayor to be the clerk of the market,with assise of bread and ale, &c.That the mayor, bailiffs, and commonalty might establisha guild or fraternity of one master, two wardens of everyart used or occupied within the city; and that they, withthe assistance of the wardens, might make ordinances for thegovernment of the same, so that they were not repugnant tothe statutes of the realm.Witness.1596. In the 38th of Elizabeth, a charter was granted to themayor and burgesses of Totness,* directing, amongst other14 Inhabiting that 14 men, of the better and more substantial bur-wants.gesses of the borough, inhabitants within it, should be calledMasters, masters and counsellors. And that they might yearly electof the burgesses, inhabitants within the borough, two of themasters and counsellors, of whom the burgesses inhabitantsMayor, should elect one to be mayor. And power is given to theBye-laws, mayor, counsellors and 20 burgesses, to make bye-laws.1598. Two years afterwards, we find an agreement respecting the\ . Aerec- ^^ burgesses mentioned in this charter, which recites thement. power given to the masters and counsellors, and the 20 burgesses,to make ordinances for the government of the town,and the burgesses and inhabitants thereof; and that doubtsi had arisen, whether the 20 burgesses had voices in makingthe ordinances; whereupon it was agreed, that 20 burgesses,inhabiting within the town, being men of ability, and electedby the general consent of the mayor, masters and burgesses ofRichard Edgecombe this year sold the manor of the borough of Totness to themayor and burgesses, reserving a rent of2U.: and as it is said, a frur^ess-sfttp alsofor his family. 2 Bro. Will. 278.j,1rI ■Witness. 14Q9the borough (clearly a delegated power from the whole body), Elizabeth.for the making of ordinances, &c. should have a voice in assent 1599.ing to them — as long as they should continue dwellers and inhabitantsin the town. And that when any of the 20 burgessesshould happen to die or be displaced, or remove his dwellingout of the town, the mayor and burgesses might elect othersof the burgesses inhabiting in the town in their place ; whoshould continue only as long as they should inhabit and dwellin the town.That all laws and ordinances that might be made, shouldbe entered in a book, and published at the next law court Court leet.(court leet) to be holden within the borough.Here we find the mayor, counsellors and 20 burgesses,making amongst themselves an agreement for filling thevacancies of the 20 burgesses, nearly in the same words asthe clauses for the same purpose in the charters of this reign:and as the bye-laws made by the burgesses of Eye, which Eye'we have before noted.There can be no doubt that this body had the power ofmaking this agreement : for the charter required the 20 burgessesto be inhabitants, and therefore the provision, thatthey should act in that character only as long as they inhabitedin the borough; and that others should be appointed intheir places when they should remove their dwellings out ofthetoton; was in strict accordance with the spirit and intentionof the charter ; and, according to the proper officeof a bye-law, carrying into full effect that which the charterintended to prescribe.It should not be overlooked, that these bye-laws are tobe recorded at the law court or court leet. Law courtWELLS.The following letters from the Burghley Papers, relativeto the borough of Wells, so decisively show the anxietywhich at that time prevailed throughout the country to obtaincharters of incorporation ; and the consequences whichwere apprehended and followed from that innovation, thatit is impossible to resist the insertion of them.4x1410 WELLS.Elizabeth. " May it please your good lordship to be advertised, that1574. the townsmen of Wells* have gotten a corporation lately,whereby (if they shall enjoy the same) they do not onlyinherit the queen's majesty's grants, and the grants of herhighnesses progenitors, but also take away her majesty'sown commodities for ever ; and shall thereby take away theliberties belonging to the bishoprick confirmed by her majestyto me and my successors : for the which I do, and theyshall, pay a yearly portion, and shall receive nothing for thesame. I am desirous to answer their untrue suggestions. Iwill be reported by town and country, worshipful andothers, in what wist the town of Wells hath been governedsince I have been bishop. I shall humbly desire your goodlordship to be my friend, and to consider how many towns, byoration'" ^''^^^^ of new Corporations are come to decay : — whereof we havegood experience, both within this shire, and not far off without,in sundry and divers places. If it might please your lordship,at your leisure, to command this bearer to attend, heshall give your lordship further to understand. My duty tothe queen's majesty constrained me to complain; and theDecay, piety I bear to the town, which is like to come to decay, movethme to be an humble suitor to your lordship. I shall not forget(as my bounden duty is) to pray for your lordship's prosperityduring life.At Wells, this 25th of April 1574.Your lordship's daily orator, Wills, Bath and Wells."If it shall please your lordship to be advertised,*|- that^ aon^' if the townsmen shall enjoy their corporation, as they call it,grounded upon an old (as they would blind the eyes of theworld) but utterly defaced grant, as it doth appear by Kino-edwardthe Third, they shall work in the end their owndestruction, and shall covertly carry away the commoditiesbelonging to the queen's majesty and her successors, andspoil the bishop that now is, and those that shall followafter him for ever. The town hath no trade whereby to• Burghley Papers, Lansdowne MSS., No. 19, p. 3.t Burghley Papers, Lansdowne MSS., No. 19, p. 64.WELLS. 1411maintain a mayor, a justice of peace, a recorder, a justice, ^^^^beth.and two other justices, within the same town, which they 1574.have now gotten by this their corporation. The mayorthat now is, not being able to give his Serjeant meat,they are constrained, notwithstanding their attendance, toseek their meat at home or elsewhere ; and the next year,they must either have a shoemaker or a baker to be theirmayor, and so ?i justice of peace. The town is poor, andstandeth by handicraft men, which if the bishop were notpresent, and the masters of the cathedral church, (for whosecauses there is great resort to the town,) they were not ableto get their bread, much less to feed others. There are threeor four lately gotten up, very desirous to have the stock andland of the town into their own hands, thinking by dominion(if they could get the bishop's liberties) to bring the com- Common-moralityof the town, and the country that resort there twomarket days — viz. Wednesday and Saturday — into suchbondage, that thereby they will not seem only to be rulers,but also to get great gain. Even so they did in the saidKing Edward's days: whereupon he was moved to defacepropter melius et manus commodus, the grant that he hadmade them before their faces. I use the terms of the bookcase,well known to the learned in the law. It may pleasetherefore your good lordship to consider thereof ; and for thebetter quiet and commodity of the town, to take such orderas shall be for furtherance of the same. They shall bebound of duty to pray for your lordship's prosperity, and Ishall not fail during life so to do. At Wells, this 7th ofFebruary, in the 17th year of the reign of Queen Elizabeth.Your lordship's daily orator,Wills, Bath and Wells."It may please your good lordship to be advertised,* thatthe townsmen of Wells, perceiving that they cannot prevailby law, seek, by all sinister means, to molest me, and (asI believe) to make a supplication to the queen's highness forthe having: of a new corporation, only to maintain the name of New core^ ' J poration.Burghley Paper, Lamdowne Ms. No. 19, p. 66.4x21412 WELLS.Elizabeth, the mayor, recorder, two justices ; so that they may hB,ye four1674. justices of the peace within the town — which thing was neverheard of in that town before. They also (as I fear) intendby a multitude, to make an exclamation against me ; and tosuborn such matter, in malice, as they possibly can, to din-creditme. My humble suit unto your good lordship is,that I may not be evil thought of till I come to my answer ;and then I doubt not, but, by the grace of God, I shall soanswer them to every point, that they shall have final joyof their evil doings. Thus I trouble your good lordship,praying the same to stand my good lord, as hitherto youhave done, and I shall not fail (as my bounden duty is) topray for your lordship's prosperity during life. At Wells,this 28th of February, in the 17th year of the reign of QueenElizabeth.Your lordship's daily orator,« Wills, Bath and Wells."It seems that the townsmen succeeded in their applicationsto the queen, and pacified the bishop; and that her majestyhad granted a corporation to them, which was finally embodiedin a charter, and confirmed to them in the 31st year ofher reign. The books record some of the means which wereused to obtain this grant. It appears that, in the 23rd yearof Elizabeth, " an offer was made by the common council, to*' Mr. Attorney, of 20 marks and all costs, for a new charter."1687. And, in the 30th year of Elizabeth, it is also said, thatlOOZ. was paid to Mr. Godwin, for the goodwill of the bishopin obtaining the new charter. And the masters of the differentoccupations gave money for procuring it.1588. It recites, that it was an ancient and populous town, andFree city, granted that it should be u. free city or borough, and the• corporate. burgesses a body corporate, by the name of the 'mayor,*masters, or burgesses." And that the city should be governedby one mayor and 23 burgesses ; who should be called the• The name of " mayor' seems to have been given to the head officer for the firsttime by this charter ; as the term " magister" appears, from a recital at the close ofthe charter, to have been used as late as the first and second of Philip and Mary.WELLS. 1413common council; with power to make bye-laws, for the govern E^^abeth.ment of the burgesses and inhabitants.The provisions in this charter extending to a great length, 1695.and presenting no distinguishing characteristic from those wehave already cited, we shall refrain from further quotation.With reference to this charter, it should be observed, that,in the eighth year of William III., in an action of debt upon abond,* made by the corporation, by the name of " the mayor,aldermen, and burgesses," a special verdict was found, thatQueen Elizabeth, in the 31st year of her reign, created thema corporation, by the name of " the mayor, masters, andburgesses of Wells ;" and that King Charles II., in the 36tbof his reign, granted to them, that they should be known bythe name of the " mayor, aldermen, and bui^esses," &c.And by this last name they entered into the bond; and if Misnomer,this be the bond of the *^ mayor, masters, and bui^esses ofWells," then, &c. And it was adjudged for the defendants ;because by the thing of the second letters patent, the first Newname is entirely extinguished. But it was agreed, that aCorporation might have two names — the one by prescription,and the other by grant; or both by prescription, but nottwo by grant.This charter of the 31st of Elizabeth, could not have 1588.altered the class of the burgesses, for the reasons given Burgess.before : and there is no difficulty in showing that it did notpurport or attempt to do so ; for there is no express provisionto change the description of the burgesses ; nor is there anynecessary implication by which they must be considered ashaving been changed : — on the contrary, the inferences are,that they were intended to continue as before, and that theywere to be the free inhabitant householders.The grant is to the " burgesses," as the body then existing:and in addition to their other privileges, they areto be a body corporate — which did not alter their classor description, but only gave them the power of takingand granting, and of suing and being sued in their corporatecapacity.1 Lord Rayiu. 80, Knight t;. Corporation of Wells. Sec. I Lute. 406 519.1414 WELLS.Elizabeth. Xhe finns of entry and admission for Wells, are the sameAdmis in this reign as they had been before ;* both previously andfreedom, subsequently to the grant of the charter ; and in the followingreigns.The party applying to be admitted, (in the language of theEntry, entries to the Cinque Ports), petitions " to have and enjoythe liberty of the place : " — ^and gives, for having his entranceand station a certain sum ; and is admitted into the liberty,giving his pledges, as at the common law, ** pro ingress etstatu habendo et sic missus est in libertatem."Apparent An apprentice is admitted in the same manner, upon atime.similar petition.And in the fifth of Queen Elizabeth, an ordinance wasmade reciting the orders for making burgesses — which direct,Marriage, that every man marrying a burgess's daughter or widow, —or having been an apprentice, — was to pay nothing but twogallons of wine and a dozen of gloves. But strangers wereto pay 40^. — 20s. to the master, and 20^. to the commonLivelong. ** Uvelode."That order was repealed in the 15th of Elizabeth, butrestored again two years afterwards.Disjoin the ninth of Queen Elizabeth, one is " discommoned''money. -w 7 /by the consent of all the burgesses, because he had notinhabited within the city for the space of one year. Andall the burgesses, in the 30th of Elizabeth, affirmed, that"13 persons had lived without the borough for a yearand upwards, against the ordinances of the place ; andthey are to be dissociated from the society and liberty, andnot to be reputed as burgesses''House That the burgesses were the householders, may be inferredfrom an entry in the 26th of Elizabeth, which requires thatevery person should have a club in his house.And in the 10th of James I., an ordinance was made thatDwell. " the 24 should dwell in the town, and not without the town,for more than three months in any one year." And in theTh year, one of the common council was expelled, for beingout of the town more than three months.• Vide ante, pp. 1006, 1007.WELLS. 1415The 24 are spoken of, as having houses and dwelling Elizabeth.within the town. 1592.In the 36th of Elizabeth, there was an order made forthe burgesses who were inhabiting and dwelling in the country,to make their repair home, and inhabit and dwell in their ownhouses, on pain of being discomposed unless excused ; andthat a sufficient watch be constantly kept. Watch.In the 13th of Elizabeth, a letter from Sir Hugh Poulet Nomina-waswntten, m the queen s name, desiring the burgesses to members.elect fit persons as burgesses to Parliamenty in peril of thequeen's displeasure. And in consequence thereof, the burgesseselect " John Walworth and Henry Newton."The entries speak constantly of the making and admittingfreemen: but up to this time never used the expression^^ elected" as applicable to the burgesses ; although, in the Elected,books, that term is frequently applied to the elections of theofficers of the borough ; as well as the elections of membersto Parliament.And when a stranger is made a burgess, he is stated tobe admitted; because he has come to the town, 'quia estadvent."That the burgesses were intended to be resident within the Resident,borough, appears from the clause which directs, that uponthe death of John Ashe, the first mayor, another burgess wasto be elected : so that it is evident from this provision, aswell as from the other parts of this charter, that the burgesseswere liable to serve the offices of the corporation; and thereis a clause which subjects them to fine and imprisonment. Fines, &c.by the mayor, if they refuse to serve.* The functions alsoof the executive officers, as, the justices — and ,are limited to the burgh : — therefore, neither couldthe burgesses serve the offices — nor could they be committedto gaol — nor the fines levied upon them, unless they wereIn the 14th of Elizabeth, one was discommoned for not serving the office ofmaster ; and so strong appears to have been the feeling against him, for not takinghis share in the public functions— and so strong his apprehensions for not doing so—that he is described as having escaped, by leaping out of a little door at one side ofthe hall. A burgess also was fined, in the 17th of Elizabeth, for having mad defaultafter he had been summoned.1416 WELLS.Elizabeth, resident within the burgh ; and consequently inhabitant householdersupon whom the levies could be made. The fairinference, therefore, from this charter also is, that the burgesseswere the inhabitant householders — no longer requiringin substance to be particularly characterised (although theform was still kept up)as/r6e; because villainage had generallyceased — and all persons, without distinction, were free.Therefore, in the 39th year of Elizabeth, the burgessesInhabitants and inhabitants within the city elected the members to Parliament.And in the 40th year, a view was directed to betakenof all persons whatsoever inhabiting and dwellingwithin the city. If they find any strangers not bam withinStrangers, the city, to certify their names, or where they were born orlast dwelt, and how long they had been there.There were also ordinances for Wells according to theInmates, common law, against the admission of inmates and strangers,and persons not born in the borough : and against their continuingor trading in it, without licence ; and (as the commonlaw also required) unless the persons with whom they resided.Pledges, would be answerable foT them.It should be observed, that formerly all the acts done bythe 24, were at a general convention, and expressly with theconsent of all the burgesses. But about the 23rd of Elizabeth,the 24 began to act by themselves, without such consent;and the new charter which gave them the power ofelection and of making bye-laws, seems to have been obtainedlit their request, and through their influence.There are also many entries in the corporation books, whichHouses, speak of the houses of the burgesses ; and of their dwellingDwelling, in the borough ; besides those entries we have before mentioned,referring to their being discommoned for living out ofthe borough.It is particularly worthy of observation, that in all the entries,which continue from Richard II. down to the 4th CharlesFreemen. I., "freemen*' are not once mentioned: — all the admissions areBurgesses, of " burgesses," and they take the "burgess's" oath.So far therefore, bv the common law and the charters, theburgesses of Wells appear to be the inhabitants.SOUtH MALTON. 1417We shall hereafter see in what manner the decisions of Elizabeth.committees of the House of Commons and illegal modemusages, transferred these rights from that class of persons tonon-resident burgesses — arbitrarily elected — without any previousqualification — or direct connexion with the borough.Before we close the charters of this reign, it may be usefulto give a specimen of one granted to a place which, though ithad returned members, was not continued as a parliamentaryborough.It was a charter granted to the borough of South Malton, ^^^^in the 32nd year of Queen Elizabeth, on the petition of the 1589.men and inhabitants, for the better governing of the borough,and the inhabitants thereof. The men and inhabitants were Inhabitantstheincorporated by the name of the ** mayor and burgesses'' burgesses.Eighteen of the inhabitants were to be the common council,to aid the mayor. The same officers were appointed, and the Mayor,same powers given as to parliamentary boroughs. An inhabitantof the borough was named as the first mayor; anduntil ANOTHER inhabitant should be sworn into that office.Eighteen of the inhabitants were named for the first council. ^™ii"Three for the first chief burgesses, and until other burgesseswere sworn into those offices. If any of the 18 should die orinhabit out of the borough, or be removed, the rest of the commoncouncil were to elect other inhabitants. The mayor andburgesses were empowered to remove the common council Vacanciesmen, and to choose other inhabitants in their stead, as oftenas to the mayor, or chief burgesses, or common councilshould seem meet. No foreigner, nor any other inhabitant,not a burgess, (excepting butchers and victuallers,) was tosell goods in the borough, unless in the time of fairs.So also in the 41st year of this reign, a charter* granted ^^j'iii*''to Abridge, which had been a parliamentary borough, butwas excused from sending members on account of its poverty,recites that it was an ancient and populous borough; andthat the mayors and burgesses had enjoyed divers libertiesFrom the Corporation Records.1418 AXBRIDGE.Elizabeth. hy charter and prescription ; that certain ambiguities existed1598. in ^^The charter of Philip and Mary : — ^^The mayor and burgessestherefore pray the queen newly to incorporate them.And the queen, willing to preserve the peace and governmentof that borough, and that justice and good government shouldbe there kept and observed : grants, that it should be a. freeborough for ever, and the burgesses and inhabitants a bodyCorporate, corporate and politic, by the name of ** the mayor, aldermen,and burgesses of the borough of Abridge in the county ofSomerset;*^ and that they might be capable to purchaseand retain Lids and hereditaments in fee or otherwise ; givegrant, and demise them; plead, and be impleaded in allcourts whatsoever; and they should have a common seal;and a mayor, and one alderman, to be elected out of theburgesses ; the mayor, alderman, and capital burgesses to bethecommon council; and the capital burgesses to be aiding,and assisting to the mayor, alderman, and bailiff ; the capitalburgesses to continue in office during good behaviour.LONDON.Burgesses We have before shown the real nature of the usage ofby re- . . ,, . . ^deception. admitting " Jwr^e^^e*" by redemption; which, in fact, arosefrom the ordinary course and necessities of society, by whichpersons were called upon to remove from one place of residenceto another. And as every borough was responsiblefor the conduct of its bui^esses, it was a necessary consequenceof that responsibility, that they should have thepower of rejecting any new comer, of whose character theyentertained a just suspicion, or who was likely to involvethem in difficulties.On the other hand, in order to facilitate the removalfrom one place to another, it was likewise necessary thatevery borough should have the power of admitting, as burgesses,those who came to reside there, and who were ofproper character.It would obviously be reasonable, that they should contributesomething to the "common stock" of the place;which would also operate as a security for their goodLONDON. 1419behaviour. And thus an introduction was afforded to the Elizabeth.admission of burgesses, as it is termed, by ** redemption."Such is the reasonable and practical origin of this usage.The reader will perceive, from the following document 1507.relative to London, in what absurd intricacies this right was FreemenJ by re-involved — and under what improper influence and regula emotion.tions it was exercised — in this reign.In the 39th of Elizabeth, there is a report,* touching,amongst other things, the making of freemen by redemption ;and it is stated, that " there appeareth a certain kind ofnecessity to admit some by way of redemption into the freedomof this city. And that, during these seven years lastpast, with the consent and good liking of the commoncouncil of this city, and by themselves, there hath been, aswell at the contemplation of letters of divers great personages,being privy counsellors and other principal men, whomthis city, for the great and continual need they have of theirfavours, might not well deny, and for other just and reasonablecauses, admitted into the freedom of this city, by way ofredemption, every year, one with another, within seven yearslast past, twenty or two and twenty persons at the least : wethink it fit that it be ordered, that there be no one yearadmitted into the freedom of this city by way of redemption,by the lord mayor and court of aldermen, above the numberof 20 persons ; and that they be admitted by the discretion Twentyof the lord mayor and court of aldermen for the time being,to whom in right that properly belongeth, (without troublingthe common council therein, to whom in nowise it appertained,)for such fine as to the lord mayor and court of Fine,aldermen, in their discretions, should be thought fit. r^* Provided always, that it should not be lawful to the lordmayor and court of aldermen, to make any more, or greaternumber, in any one year, free by redemption, than 20 ; onehalf to be made free on the second court day after Easter —the other half, on the second court day after Michaelmas ;and that all suitors for freedoms should be adjourned tothose two days only.Hep. 24, fol. 138.1420 LondonElizabeth. " And if any lord mayor or alderman should attempt to1597. break this act, he shall forfeit 10/., to be paid to the chamberlain,to the use of the commonalty.Provided always, that over and above the number of 20aforesaid, it shall be lawful for every alderman, upon hisfirst taking upon him to be alderman, to present and nominatea freeman, to be admitted by redemption into theliberties of this city, as hath been accustomed. That it shallbe lawful for every lady mayoress for the time being, to havethe nomination or presentment of one man, to be admittedinto the freedom of this city by redemption, as hath beenaccustomed. And that it shall also be lawful to the lordmayor and court of aldermen, to re-admit any person whoshall hereafter be disfranchised, into the freedom and libertiesof this city."leo. And in the 42nd of Elizabeth, it was declared, that thechamberlain should/^resen^ six out of the 20 redemptioners —delivering out of the fines, to the lord mayor yearly, four runsof the best claret.*1602. In the 44th of Elizabeth, the common council weremoved, at the request of the Bishop of London and thesecretary to the lord treasurer, for two apprentices havingserved only six years, to be admitted to the freedoni.*f-l; , EVESHAM.1597. A long record of a suit relative to the borough of Eveshamaffords so much information respecting that borough, fromthe beginning of the reign of Henry VIII., and immediatelyafter the dissolution of the monasteries : as well as respectingLeet. the courts leet of that place in the reign of Queen Elizabeth,J that some extracts from it will be warranted.In the 39th year of Queen Elizabeth, a suit was institutedin the Court of Exchequer respecting the due holdingf^- of the court leet of this borough, and the perquisites of thecourts there.Long depositions were filed, many of them made by very• Rep. 25, fol. 131 B. t Rep. 26, fol. 33.\ Sec before, p. 1004, court leet, hemp. Edw. IV.II- :EVESHAM. 1421old witnesses.* One of them had been a monk of the abbey, Eiiiab eth.and spoke to his knowledge of the town for 70 years, and of 1597.the monastery for 21 years.Eight other witnesses, some of a considerable age, andothers less advanced in life, brought the evidence down tothe time of the suit, and spoke to many facts relative to thetown and monastery, as well as to the matters in dispute inthe cause ; of which the following are the principal, in theirorder of time.Littleton one of the monks, described the town as having 7 h. viii.been, during all the time of his remembrance, subject to thedirection of two bailiffs for the time being, as the chief Bailiffs.governors and rulers within it, under the queen's progenitors; that the abbots of the monastery had never elected orchosen the bailiffs of the town : but that one Clement Lichfieldf being some time since abbot, requested the inhabitants inhawunuof the town, that one John Matthews, then chief cook ofthe abbot, might be chosen bailiff, but the inhabitantsrefused so to do ; saying, that '* they would not seek theirbailiff in the abbot's kitchen." Whereupon the abbotprovided another cook. And the inhabitants then choseMatthews bailiff for the town for that year; and he furtherstated, that the queen, and not the abbot, had been reputedowners of the leet ; and that the bailiffs had nominated the Leet.jurors*Austin confirmed the statement of Littleton, and added,that the abbots had had no rule or government in the town ;and that the bailiffs, during all his time, had been chosen byMr. Tindal, in his history, quotes a fragment of these depositions ; but seemsto think that they lessen the jurisdiction of the abbot more than truth would warrant: but on the whole, the account given by the witnesses appears consistent withthe general common law, and highly probable ; and perhaps Mr. Tindal wouldhave thought so, if he had seen the whole depositions and the decreetTindal commends this abbot for his learning and virtues, and describes himas a munificent patron of the monastery, which he repaired, advanced, and enlargedand he adds, that he was a man who cannot be mentioned without emotions ofpity and reverence. He became abbot in 1513, and continued so till near the dissolutionof the monasteries, when being unwilling to surrender the abbey to King-henryVIII., he was, by Cromwell's arts and devices, obliged to resign his office,and was succeeded, in 1539, by Philip Afford, alias Bard, one of the monks,who surrendered the abbey in the same year.]422 EVESHAM.Elizabeth. the jury sworn at the great lee holden about Micliadmii^-1S67. that the bailiffs of the town had had the profits and perqp^^^' sites of the leets and the three weeks' court, &c. He eoi-finned also the statement that the abbots had never choieithe bailiffs, and added, that they had no right by propsve or authority, to intermeddle with the bailiffs of the torn,who had all the interest in every thing, and that they noah*named the common crier ; and he mentioned the names ofInhabitants three successive bailiffs, who were chosen by the iniabiiaaiiof the town daring the reign of Queen Elizabeth ; and headded, that all controversies and debates in the mariLeltand fairs before the dissolution of the monastery, were fetidand determined before the bailiffs of the town, who also hidthe assise of bread, and the correction of the weights andmeasures with the clerk of the market, when he happened tocome to the town.Payne confirmed the same facts, and particularly specifiedthe manner in which the bailiffs were elected, namely, thatJuron. the jurors sworn or charged to inquire of matters inquirableLeet. at the great leet, there holden yearly, about the feast ofSt. Michael, nominated six honest, substantial, and discreetpersons of the town to stand in election for theoffice of bailiffs, and delivered the same in writing to thesteward of the leet, who pricked two of the same personsto be bailiffs for that year. That the bailiffs have alwaysbeen reputed to be the chief officers and governors of thetown under the kings and queens of this realm ; and thathe never knew either Sir Philip Hobby, or Sir ThomasHobby, nominate any steward of the leet, nor any bellman,nor receive any profits of the fairs, &c. ; and he spoke ofThomas Winton as having been bailiff in the time of KingEdward and Queen Mary; and Philip Tolly in the latter reign.Law days. John Death stated, that two " law days were yearly keptin the town. Also a three weeks' court. That he was presentat some of the courts, and that one Mr. Cookseyey keptthem at the booth hall as steward of the prince, and appointedby the bailiffs of the town; he stated, that he hadJury, heard that the jury at the leet used, before the dissolution, toEVESHAM. 1423make the same elections as they then did. He stated that Elizabeth.the like courts were holden within the town since the time of 1597.Henry VIII. ad they were before, and by the prince's steward,Henry Dingle confirmed the bailiffs being the chief rulersand governors of the town under the queen, and that therewere two bailiffs of the town ; and that he well remembersone of the masters of the monastery, a little before the dissolution,making earnest suit to the inhabitants, that a kins- inhabitantsman of his, habiting within the town, might be one of thebailiffs, which, upon his earnest request, was granted ; and BaiiiflTs.he spoke of being present at a court holden within thetown, when one William Brantley was chosen bailiff; andthat he then heard Sir Philip Hobby say, that he couldchoose the common crier; to whom Brantley answered, thathe should not, for that he was bailiff; and if he might notchoose the common crier according to their ancient custom,he would disfranchise himself, and would not be bailiff.Whereupon Sir Philip seeing that Brantley would not permithim to choose the crier, asked him whom he would choose,to whom Brantley answered, one Bickerstaff. WhereuponSir Philip said, 'thou hast chosen the man that I wouldhave chosen."Wm. Littleton said, that no courts had been held in his BaiiiflTs.remembrance but by the bailiffs. That Sir Greorge Thrak-morton was steward of all the abbot's lands, and William steward.Cookseyey under-steward.John Wiles stated, that he was a scholar in the town ofEvesham, and boarded in the armoury of the monastery,before the dissolution, when Clement Lichfield was abbot.That before the dissolution there were two law days kept in Law-days,the town, one at Easter, and the other at Michaelmas.Robert Andrews stated, that one Greorge Hawkins kept a Leet.court leet within the town about May, as steward appointed Steward.by Sir Philip Hobby, but that the court was holden in thequeen's name, as other courts before. He spoke to the modeof pricking the bailiffs, as formerly observed, and that about10 years ago, the Lady Russell sent him (then her servant), 1587.to Mr. Cookseyey, the then steward, and before his going,1424 EVESHAM.Elizabeth. Lady Russell told him, that he should have the honour of15^. pricking old Hawkins to be one of the bailiffs, and desiredhim to tell Mr, Cookseyey that her will was, that Hawkinsshould be chosen bailiff for that year, which message hedelivered accordingly; and when he went into the town,Jurors, he went to the jurors and delivered to them his lady'spleasure, and some of them were willing to do the sameand some were not. Whereupon Mr. Cookseyey went up tothe jury, and dealt with them to the end that they shouldput Hawkins in election; whereupon the jurors afterwardsdelivered in writing, amongst other names, that of Hawkins,and afterwards he (Andrews) by the consent and privity ofthe steward, pricked Hawkins as one of the bailiffs for thatyear, and he was sworn accordingly.John Smith stated, that the six persons to be named by thejury to the steward were, three of the parish of All Saints ;and three of the parish of St. Lawrence; two of whom theJurors, steward pricked ; and sometimes asked the jurors what likingthey had of them, and the jurors always assented to them.William Smith also confirmed that the abbots never electedthe bailiffs of the town, but that he had heard, that the^' Inhabitants abbot would sometimes request the inhabitants to elect oneof his servants, of whom he conceived well, to be one of thebailiffs. And that he had heard, that the abbot had manythe most substantial inhabitants, who were his servants andtowards him, and for whom he sued advancement in thatbehalf; and he said, that such freemen as were obstinate,and not conformable to the orders of the town, and did notobey the bailiffs in matter of government, were, at the dis-ancients.creation of the bailiffs, and other the ancients of the town, dished.franchised; and that done they were to pay all toll, stallage.Freemen, and other duties , Q,s for eigjiers used to do; and that the freemenof the town came to be freemen there by their good beha-jl ij FraujchUed vigour, and other good and honest means ; that franchised men*^ Oath, of the town took an oath* at the time when they were madetlit• This oath was administered at the court leet, according to the rules of thecommon law; and the obligation was expressly restrained to the time the partyshould continue to reside in the town.EVESHAM. 1425franchised, which was administered by the steward of the court, Elizabeth.that they would be true franchised men, and true faith bear 1597.to the king and his heirs and should be obedient to thebailiff of the town, and be from time to time aiding andassisting him and the constables in the execution of theiroffices, and not to refuse such offices as they should be chosenand appointed to bear : and that they should not go about toimpeach in any manner of way, but to their power maintainand support the same, so long as they should be inhabitingwithin the town.George Likely stated, that he was present at the leet Leet.holden in the new hall, by Bartholomew Kighley, aboutOctober, in the 26th year of her majesty's reign, at whichcourt Kighley said he was authorized to keep it by one Donne,auditor to her majesty, and shewed a patent made to Donneby her majesty, and used some speeches to the suitorsthere present, letting them to understand, that the leet wasthe court of her majesty and that Sir Edward Hoby hadnothing to do to keep any court there, and that they owedno suit nor service to the complainant, but to her majesty'sleet. That one William Warner, bailiff of the hundred ofBlockenhurst, in the county of Worcester, by precept fromone Mr. Rowland Boughton, then steward to Sir EdwardHoby, summoned a court leet, to be held within the town,about April 1585; and that the inhabitants had notice 1585.given to them to make their appearance there. That he waspresent at the court, which was holden before Edward Littleton,Esq., and that he himself was one of the jury. Thatthe court was holden in the market-place, under the newhall, in the open street, and that the steward and resiantswere there. That the door of the new town-hall was lockedagainst the steward, and that he was kept forth of the hall,and therefore was enforced to keep the court in the commonmarket-place, and that the Serjeants kept the door of thenew hall with their staves, and the steward chained them inthe queen's name to serve in the court leet.William Biddle spoke of the bailiffs being the chief »»»»«»•officers ; and that before the dissolution, the jurors chose4y> I ■I ;J.1 I1426 EVESHAM.Elizabeth. them, without nominating or setting down in writing the1597. names of any other person to stand in election with them ;but that since the dissolution, he had credibly heard reported,and it was manifestly known, that Sir Philip Hobby, knight,deceased, made suit to the chief inhabitants of the town,jurors. that the jurors might set down in election for the officeof bailiffs, the names of six honest and discreet persons ofthe town, of either of the parishes there ; and that he, orthe steward of the leet, might have the pricking of thebailiffs, which was yielded unto, and the same manner ofelection hath continued ever since.House Thomas Rumford said, he thought there were 300 householderswithin the town, and that the abbots never chosethe bailiffs but that he had long since heard by many crediblereports, that an abbot of the monastery made suit toinhahitants the bailiff s of the town, that the inhahitants would chooseone Mr. Woolridge to be one of the bailiffs, which theyrefused to do, and did not gratify the abbot, because theyQueen's ^^^ ^^ liking to the gentleman — that the queen and her project,senators had always been reputed the owners of the leet.John Rape also negatived the abbots ever having electedthe bailiffs: but that Clement, when abbot, requested theInhabitants inhabitants that one Anton, being towards the abbot, mightbe one of the bailiffs, which request was yielded unto. Healso spoke of the old and new hall, and the keeping of thecourts there; that freemen who showed themselves contemptuousor disobedient to the bailiff in matter of government,or that were notoriously known to be of lewd andevil conversation, were, by the direction of the bailiff, andAncient. Other the ancients of the town, disfranchised, and, being so,chased! ^^^^^ ^^ P^y ^'^ ^^^^> stallage, and duties, ?iS foreigners ; andthat the inhahitants there came to h^ freemen by compounding with the two bailiffs for the time being:. And the freemenhave greater liberties, franchises, and privileges withinthe town ihsin foreigners and strangers ; and he stated, thatOath, when freemen were admitted they took the oath.Henry Strange stated, that, about two years before, whenthe bailiffs were desirous of going into the new hall, oneEVESHAM. 1427Thomas Cossar stood at the door and pushed them back and Elizabeth,would not let them go in. 1597.George Hawkins Clifford's Inn, stated that his fatherwas appointed by Lady Russell to keep the lets and three Leet.weeks' courts in the new hall; and he kept them thereduring the minority of Sir Edward Hoby ; and that he knewseveral bailiffs of the town, and that he was present whenone Bartholomew kept the leet, on the 6th of April 1681, in isti.the town hall ; and that Kighley was appointed by Sir EdwardHoby, and that his father kept the court leet in the26th year of her majesty's reign, as steward of Sir Edward ; Steward,and that whilst his father kept the courts, the Jicry nomi- jury,named three persons out of each of the parishes, out of whomthe steward pricked one of each parish ; and he confirmedthe statement of the former witnesses, particularly as toDonne's patent, and Bartholomew Kighley, as deputy ofDonne, disputing Sir Edward Hoby's right to appoint asteward ; and that there was a leet held the 15th April 1685, 1585.before Mr. Littleton, counsel-at-law.These depositions fully disclose the ancient mode of elect Observes'^ ^ losingthe bailiffs at Evesham ; and the method of appointing Bailiffs.the juries and their functions ; and of admitting freemen atthe court leet. And it is evident from this record, that thewhole of the municipal government of Evesham was in earlytimes managed by and at the court leet. And that the Leet.system continued at the time of this suit : — the usurpationswhich were attempted, consisting chiefly of encroachmentsupon the functions and jurisdiction of that court.The decree founded upon these depositions, recited letters Decree,patent of the 38th of Henry Vii, granting the view of frank 1^46.pledge to Sir Philip Hobby; and declared, that, for the pieTge'future, he should nominate the stewards of the leet ; which Steward.was to be held yearly in the new hall of the town ; and thatthe juries sworn there, should nominate to the steward six ofthe substantial franchised inhabitants three of each parish ; j^{^^^out of which six, the stewards should name one of each parishto be the bailiffs ; and in default of the stewards so doing, thejury should select two persons. Jury.4 y21428 EVESHAM.Elizabeth, The " compounding with the bailiffs" before a person isadmitted freeman, which is mentioned in the depositions, isCommon in fact making a contribution to the general stock of the town,in the manner we have before pointed out in many otherplaces, according to the practice and principles of the commonlaw.Statutes. Some extracts from the statutes, and a short reference toa few cases in the courts of law, will close the documentsof this reign relative to England.1586. In the 29th year of Queen Elizabeth, a statute was en-cap.4. •' , .acted to prevent extortion in sheriffs, under-sheriffs and bailiffsof franchises or liberties, in cases of execution ; which containeda proviso, that it should not extend to cities or townscorporate.The queen, who had secured an ascendancy in Parliament,Cap. 7. easily obtained, at this time, a subsidy of 6s. in the pound fromCap. 8. the clergy, and two fifteenths from the temporary. And in1587 to the 31st, 35th, 39th and 43d years, grants and confirmationsCap u ^^ subsidies were made ; for which the queen as frequently in^ ^^' return confirmed her general pardon.1502. The queen also, in the 35th year of her reign, framedenactments against the Popish recusants; their residencebeing restrained to certain specified places.Cap. 6. Provisions were also made in the same year against convertinghouses in London and Westminster into more tenements; and against inmates.Cap. 4. In the 39th year, a statute for the punishment of roguesand vagabonds.^^'2f' ^^ ^^^ 35th year, we also find a statute, consequent uponthe dissolution of the monasteries, and preparatory to theprovisions of the 43d of Elizabeth, authorizing any person, fortwenty years then next ensuing, to make feoffment, grants orany other assurances, or wills, to bequeath, in fee simple.Poor, as well to the use of the poor as for the provision, sustentationor maintenance of any house of correction or abidinghouses, or of any stocks or stores.STATUTES. 1429And the .39th of Elizabeth, in like manner provided for Elizabeth,the erection of hospitals and houses for the abiding and Cap. 5.working of the poor : by which a similar power is given for Poor,the conveyance of lands, as well as for the finding sustentationand relief for the maimed poor, needy and impotentpeople, and to set the poor at work;' incorporating the I'^cojpo-parties for such purpose, and giving all the ordinary corporatepowers to them for the purpose of securing the objectsof the statute.It is also material, with reference to the important city Wwimin-and liberty of Westminster, to extract the following statuteof the 27th year of Elizabeth, not in Ruffled, but in the ^^^*statutes of the realm lately published by the commissioners :and also amongst the Harleian MSS.*It commences with a recital, that the people within thecity or borough of Westminster had then of late very muchincreased, and were given wholly to vice and idleness : andenacts, that the city or borough of Westminster should continuesevered and divided into 12 several wards, f Wards.That for the government of the people inhabiting within thewards, the dean of the collegiate church of St. Peter, or thehigh steward, should elect 12 persons inhabiting within the '^ ^^^'borough, who should be called burgesses, one of whom shouldbe appointed to each wards to continue for their lives, if theyshould so long inhabit there, except they should misconductthemselves.That if any person resiant should refuse to accept the Resign.« Videetiam, Harl. MSS. 1831.t In Cro. Eliz. 260, it U said, that " wards" in London are as hundreds in thecountry, and the parish as the town.^ It is a curious historical fact, that an analogous system of police prevails inChina, to that which was used by our Saxon ancestors in this country : — thus,every city is divided into boards, and every ward has a principal, who takes careof a certain number of hours. He is answerable for every thing that happens ;and if there should chance to be any tumult that the mandarin is not immediatelyinformed of, he is severely punished.— Auber on China, p. 56.Masters of families are equally responsible for the conduct of their children andservants ; and those in authority are rendered culpable when their inferiors, whoshould pay them obedience and reverence, have committed any criminal acts.—Vide Preface to the Laws of China.I1432 CASES.Elizabeth.CASES.County In the following case, the county courts, as well as theofficer of the sheriff who was to hold them, are expresslySheriff, mentioned — also the duties and jurisdiction of the sheriff;and the power of the crown to interfere with that office iscanvassed.It is probable, that the following decision was founded uponthe same principles which had before induced the grants ofcharters, making boroughs counties of themselves ; a practicewhich also continued after this time.1683. Milton's Case. — ^^The queen granted ^^The office of clerk ofCounty the county court, or shire clerk of Somerset, to one M itton,with all fees, &c., for his life. The sheriff conceiving this tobe an appointment incident to his office, chose another : —upon which Milton appealed.* And it was determined,that the letters patent were void in law ; because the officeSheriff, of a sheriff is an ancient office which has had continuancelong before the Conquest ; and is an office of great trust andauthority. For the king commits to him '' custodiam comitatus."And when the king appoints a sheriff" durante beneplacito'' although he may determine his office at his pleasure,yet he cannot determine it in part, as in one town— or hundred— or any other part. Nor abridge the sheriff of anythingincident or appurtenant to his office. For the office isentire ; and so ought to continue in its entirety, without anyfraction or diminution : — unless it be by act of Parliament ;or, that the king makes some town, Sfc.j a county of itself:and appoints a sheriff, and all things incident to a sheriff,within the same town. But he cannot determine the office ofsheriff, or any part, without making a new sheriff for theexecution and administration of justice. That the countycourt, and the entering of all the proceedings in it, are incidentto the office of sheriff; and therefore cannot by letterspatent be divided from it.In a subsequent part of the same case, it was held, " thatGaols, the grants of gaols to any other persons but sheriffs, were• Sec Milton Case, 4 Co. 33./cases. 1433void ; because they were the immediate officers to the king's E>"abcth.courts."Another case also occurred, in the 30th of Elizabeth,* 15»7.respecting the grant to Coventry, that it should be a county Coventry,of itself.This case was moved upon the statute of the first of Philipand Mary, chap. 12. The town of Coventry was within thehundred of Offley, in the county of Stafford ; and QueenMary, by her letters patent, made it a county.-^ A distresswas taken on the residue of the hundred, and brought intothe town of Coventry — and if that be within the statute,was the question. It was holden by the court, clearly, thatnow the town of Coventry is exempted out of the hundredaforesaid, and is a thing by itself; and it is a good challengefor the hundred of Offley, that the juror challenged dwells inthe toum of Coventry — for now it is not parcel of Offley, asto the king. But as to the lord of the hundred, the townreams parcel of it, notwithstanding the queen's grant.And the citizens of Coventry shall do suit at the court of thehundred ; but in an action upon the statute of Hue andCry, of a robbery committed in the residue of the hundred,the citizens shall not be charged.In another case in the 28th of Elizabeth, in the King's 1685.Benches relative to the town of Leicester, (which we have l^cesicr.before partly cited),^ it was alleged that the town of Leicesterwas an ancient town, and ancient demesne, and the inhabitantsdischarged of toll.An exception was taken, amongst others, that landsholden in socage only, and no other, ought to be discharged Socage,of toll ; and here it is not shown in the declaration that theplace where, &c., is holden in socage. To which it wasanswered, that it need not to be alleged, for it is implied inthe words, " ancient demesne ; " for otherwise it cannot be Ancientdemesne.socage land only, and of no other tenure. A further except4 Leon. p. 86.♦ See Cornet's History of Counties of themselves. And the case in 1820, where IWW.the question arose. Whether it was still a part of the county, and whether the freeholdersthere had a right to vote in the county elections 1t 2 Bon. 190. * See before, p. 239.J434 CASES.Elizabeth, tion was, that the letters patent, giving exemption of toll,1585. were of no value ; for the king by his letters patent cannotdisinherit any one — ^nor discharge one of toll, which is a kindof disinheritance. To which it was said, That the plaintiffUsage, doth not declare of any grant, but of a usage or custom.And in another part of the report. Coke said, that he hadfound the reason wherefore such tenants should be quit oftoll throughout the realm, in an ancient reading, viz. —That all the lands in the hands of Edward the Confessorand William the Conqueror, set down in the book of Domesday,were ancient demesnes ; and so called Terrae regis. Andthey were to provide victuals for the king's garrison, for thenthey were troublesome times — and for those causes — andbecause they made provisions for others, they had manyprivileges, amongst which this is one, " ut quiet aratra suaexcrement, et terram incoherent." And he said, that theplaintiff ought to allege that his lands are parcel of such amanor, for there cannot be ancient demesne if there be notacourt and suitors ; and he granted that such a town mightbe ancient demesne of the crown, yet they shall not share theliberties and privileges which the tenants in ancient demesnehave.Inhabitant. Shut, Justice, was of opinion, that an inhabitant withinla ancient demesne, although he be not tenant, should have theprivileges.* Tenants at will in ancient demesne shall be dischargedof toll, as well as tenant of the freehold for life, orfor years By Moile — If a lord of a manor in ancient demesnepurchase all the tenancies, the whole privilege isgone, which Coke denied.The case was adjourned.KINGSTON-UPON-THAMES.1591. Queen Elizabeth, in the 34th year of her reign, granted acharter to the freemen of Kingston which commences witha recital, that it had been hitherto the custom that the menAncient and tenants of ancient demesne were and oui^ht to be, quitdemesne.from the payment of toll throughout all the realm ; — andSee F. N. B. 228 b. t 37 lien. VI. 27.KINGSTON-UPON-THAMES. 1435also from contribution to the expences of knights coming Elizabeth .to Parliament for the community of the county. lei.That according to the same custom, the men and tenants ofthe manors which were of the ancient demesne of the crown,should not be put upon any assises— ;;;Mri€5 — or recognizances, Juries,unless only in those which ought to be made in the court ofsuch manors.That as the demesne of Kingston and Emley Bridge,otherwise Chingstune and Amelebrige, were the ancient demesneof the crown : — the queen granted that the men andtenants should be free of toll — and from the expence ofknights. And that they should not be put in any assises —juries &c., to be held without the court of the demesne ;unless only in those things which ought to be done in thecourt of such like manors, and unless they held lands ofanother manor.Lowestoft.The town of Lowestoft also, having been part of the ancientdemesnes of the crown, had a charter and a town seal ; butthe greatest privilege they now enjoy from their charter,is, that of not serving upon juries, either at the assises orsessions.And in the 30th of Elizabeth, in an action upon the case,* ^^^•the plaintiff declared that Stock, in the county of Suffolk,is an ancient town and ancient demesne of the crown ; andthat from time immemorial all the men and tenants of ancientdemesne ought to be quit of toll in all places within the 'i'll.realm. And that Queen Elizabeth, in the 19th year of herreign, commanded all mayors, bailiffs, constables, &c., topermit the men and tenants of ancient demesne to be quit oftoll, murage, &c. through the realm ; that the plaintiff wasan inhabitant and tenant in Stock, and carried his goodsto Yarmouth ; and the defendant had taken and carriedaway the plaintiff's goods for toll.The defendant avowed the taking, upon the grounds thatthe exemptions of tenants in ancient demesne extended only Ancient^ demesne.• 1 Leon. 231. ,Lowestoft.Eiiiabeth. to the maintenance of the lands, tenements, families, &c.,and not to merchandise for which the toll was taken : — inwhich the judges coincided.1566.Men andtenants.Ancientdemesne.Toll.Expencesof knightsof theshire.Juries.ShynessandCent,ancientdemesne.Toll.Juries.STAFFORD.In the 9th year of Elizabeth, the queen recites : Whereas,according to the customs of our kingdom of England, hithertoused and approved, the men and tenants of ancient demesneof our crown of England, of toll, stallage, coinage,pontage, pickage, pannage, murage, lastage and passage,through the whole kingdom, ought to be acquitted: Andaccording to the custom aforesaid, the men and tenants ofancient demesne of our crown, always hitherto from timewhereof the memory of man is not to the contrary, havebeen accustomed to be acquitted from contributing to theexpences of knights of our Parliamenty and of our progenitorsin times past, kings of England, coming for the commonaltyof the county; and also, according to the customaforesaid, the men and tenants of manors, which are of ancientdemesne of the crown, ought not to be put upon juriesat the assises, or upon other recognitions for their lands andtenements, which they hold of the same demesne, except onlytouching those things which ought to be done in the courtsof such manors.And the manors of Swynesford and Clcnethy otherwise calledthemanor of Su?yn/brdand Cent ^ within the county of Stafford,are of ancient demesne of the crown of England, (as by a certaincertificate by our Lord Henry VIII., late King of England,our most dear father, by his appointment, sent into hischancery, and among the files of our chancery, remainingupon record, to us it doth appear.) We enjoin and commandyou, and every of you, that ye suffer all and singular themen and tenants of the manors of Swynesford and Lengthotherwise called manors of Swynsford and Cent, or eitherof them, to be quit of payment of toll, stallage, coinage,pontage, pickage, pannage, murage, lastage, and passage, andiVom expences of knights, and that ye put not the said thenand tenants of the same manors, or either of them, u\}on juriesSTAFFORD* I437at the assises, or upon recognitions except only touching those elizabeth.things which ought to be done in the courts of such manors, 1666.contrary to the usages aforesaid ; and if ye have done anydistress to them, or either of them on these occasions, releasethem from the same without delay.CASES.In other cases in Leonard's Reports, the residence of per- Residence,sons with reference as well to their duties, as to their privileges,are frequently mentioned.Thus, the goods were claimed of a felon who was describedas " dwellings within the district in which they were claimed.*Again, in another cases in language similar to that whichwe have seen before, '^ those of the town of Launceston'* arespoken of.|In Broke's Reports, in the same language as above, '^ those 1596.of Gloucester" are mentioned .§In Coke's Reports, *those of London" are twice alludedto.II .In an action of false imprisonment in the 42nd of Elizabeth, 1599.the defendant justified by a custom in Sandwich, within theFive Ports, that if the goods of a. freeman of Sandwich come tothe hands of a freeman and citizen of London, the mayor ofSandwich should write to the mayor and aldermen of London,to call the party before them, to make an order for the restitution; and if they refuse, or do not return an answer to themayor and jurats of Sandwich, the mayor should issue analias and a pluries, and then judgment of withernam againstthe mayor and commonalty of London ; in which it shouldbe signified to them, that if they did not make restitutionwithin 15 days, then ^^ those of Sandwich" were accustomedto detain the body of any Londoner who should come, untilrestitution was made.^2 Leon. t 3 Leon. 193.X In the course of that case, Anderson, justice, said that patents were .good withoutenrolment.Cro.EUz.710.I 5 Coke, 63.^ Paramour v. Vernal, Moore, 603. See also Anderson, 151.1438 Cases-SANDWICH.Elizabeth. Xhe judges held the custom was good; because the FivePorts are defensive places for the realm, for which reason theycannot attend elsewhere for justice, but within the FivePorts,leon. In an appeal* by Crispe against Tirol, late of Sandwichin the county of Kent, for the murder of the plaintiff'sbrother committed in Sandwich by the defendant, he pleadedthat Sandwich, is parcel of the Cinque Ports, where thewrit of the queen does not run ; and which port of Sandwichis not within the county of Kent; and demandsjudgment of the writ, and pleads over to the felony; andadjudged an ill plea, for although the Cinque Ports haveseveral great liberties, yet the reason of the grant of thoseliberties, was for the ease and benefit of the inhabitants,and not for their prejudice; and therefore in 60th EdwardIII., by Belknap, if a stranger comes into the CinquePorts, and commits a transitory trespass, and afterwardsgoes out of their jurisdiction, he to whom the trespassis done, may have an action at the common law ; for it ismore for his benefit to have the suit at the common law, thanwithin the Cinque Ports ; for they have no power to summonany man that is out of their jurisdiction, (viz, — in the countyof Kent or elsewhere,) into the limits of their jurisdiction.Another reason here, was because the defendant having committedthe murder in the Cinque Ports, and flying fromthence, if the pleading here should be good, it would be infailure of justice; for they of the Cinque Ports cannot try,because he is not there. But by Popham, if the defendant hadshown, that at the time of the murder supposed, and ever since,Inhabitant, he had been and was an inhabitant, and lived within theCinque Ports, whereby he had by his plea, given j urisdictionto the court there, and they as judges might have seen thatthe defendant, if he was guilty, might have received a judgmentof death, then the plea had been good. But the defendanthas not shown any such thing, whereby it appearsthat that court has such jurisdiction.1586. In another cases from which the limited nature of local• Wolverton, 12. f 4 Leon. 149.ITIIhCases-SANDWICH. 1439jurisdiction may be seen, it is said, " that to be a justice FJiiabeth.of the peace doth not lie in prescription for no justice of 1586.the peace was before the statute of the 1st of Edward III,,''and the beginning of them being knoum, prescription cannotbe.* That it was an unreasonable prescription. " That amayor may send for a person," unless it be added " withinthe city," and then it should be shown, '' that they had acorporation which might prescribe."In a subsequent part of the case it was stated, that ''con-suetudo and usage are all one;" that is, usage to be availablein law should, like a custom or prescription, be immemoriaLThe nature of watch and ward : — and that it continued in watch andward.this reign ; and was performed by the inhabitants ; may becollected from the following case f in the same year.In an action upon the statute of Winchester it was stated,that every town and city should be guarded by the inhabitants'&c. so that if any suspected persons did resort tosuch town or city, he should be stayed until the next sessions,in which case he should have deliverance according ashecould acquit himself. And if any town or city failedtherein, and a robbery was committed, the county shouldanswer for it.Again, in an action upon the statute of hue and cry,}: inhabitantswhich was brought against the inhabitants of the hundred ofAshton, in the county of Bucks, it was moved upon thepart of the defendants, that if upon such hue and cry theinhabitants did their endeavours to follow and take themalefactors, and yet could not apprehend them, in reasonthey ought not to be charged by the statute. But the courtwere strongly against it; for the inhabitants of the hundred inhabitantsin which the robbery was done were bound to apprehend thefelons, or satisfy the party robbed : who is not bound to givenotice to the inhabitants, nor to direct them which way thefelons took their flight; but the inhabitants are bound tofollow them without any such instruction.Also, in the 30th of Elizabeth, in a case of false imprison 1587.But see now the statute 2nd & 3rd Will. IV. f 4 Leon. 218.t 2 Leon. 174.■ ,1440 CASES.Eiiiabcth. ment,* the defendant justified, because at the time-he was1687. constable of D., and appointed the plaintiff to watch, and^wSSl!' he refused, by reason of which he set him in the stocks.Upon which the plaintiff did demur in law, because theInhabitant, defendant had not alleged that the plaintiff was an inhabitsant of the town; for the constable cannot compel strangerswhich pass, to watch. And it was moved, if for such a causethe constables might set one in the stocks ; for it was saidthat he ought to complain of the refusal to a justice of thepeace. Also the constable cannot appoint any to watch atTurn, his pleasure, hut only in his turn, for otherwise the constablemight upon a private revenge vex his neighbour.Way, chief justice. — ^^The defendant ought to show, thatthe plaintiff was inhabitant in the town, and that it was histurn to watch. And if such inhabitant refuses to watch inhis turn, the constable may set him in the stocks.The reader will remember how perfectly this case supportsthe doctrine upon those points which we have beforelaid down.^''issS**' In an action of false imprisonment brought by Clarkagainst Grapes the defendant justified the imprisonment,because King Edward VI. incorporated the town of St.Allan's, by the name of mayor, &c.; and granted to themto make ordinances ; and showed that the queen appointedthe terra to be kept there. And that they, with the assentof the plaintiff, and other burgesses, did assess a sum onInhabitants every inhabitant, for the charges in erecting the courtsthere: and ordained, that if any should refuse to pay,&c. that he should be imprisoned, &e. And because theplaintiff being a burgess, &c. refused to pay, &c. he asmayor justified. And it was adjudged no plea. For thisordinance is against the statute of Magna Charta, cap. 29 :which act hath been confirmed and established above thirtytimes. And the plaintiff's assent cannot alter the law in suchcase. But it was resolved, that they might have inflicted areasonable penalty, but not imprisonment ; which penalty• Stratton and Brown's case, 3 Leon. 206. S. C. Cro. Eliz. 204.t 5 Coke, 64.I',IfCASES. 1441they might limit to be levied by distress ; or for which an Elizabeth,action of debt lay. And the plaintiff had judgment.In a case of assault in the 30th of Elizabeth,* it was Salisbury.pleaded that Salisbury was an ancient city, and that withinthe same there was this customs-that if any man made anaffray, and assaulted any officer of the city, or any otherperson, if he upon whom the assault was made complainedto the mayor, he might send for him who made the affray, andmake him answer to it. But it was said, it is not shownthat " they of Salisbury have a corporation so as that theymight be enabled to prescribe.Fleetwood recorder of London. — If the statute of Magna ,Charta should be observed, no felon is duly handled atNewgate ; and here we have not pleaded by way of prescription,but of usage; consuetude and usage are all one; and Usage,afterwards judgment was given for the plaintiffs on thisground, amongst other, that the custom is too generalsIn Martin Van Henbeck's case, 30th Elizabeth it is stated, 1587.that " a steward of a leet was presented, for that he hadsuffered many brewers and bakers, to bake and brew contraryto the assise."In the 28th of Elizabeth in a replevin by Lawson against 1585.Hare, the defendant avowed for a leet fee: — and stated, thatall those whose estate he hath in the hundred of C haveused to hold a leet once every year : and that at each timewhen such leet hath been holden, the inhabitants withinthe leet have used to pay to the lord of the leet I6d. foraleet fee, and that the lord has been used to distrain for Leet fee.the same.In replevin in the 41st of Elizabethan an avowry was made i^^-that the township was amerced in the leet because they had Leet.not a pillory and tumbrill, and the bailiff distrained ; but itwas held, that a will was not chargeable without special prescriptionto find pillory or tumbrill, but the lord of the leetis chargeable, and if he failed his liberty was seizable. And1 Leon. 105, and 4 Leon. 149. t See before, pp. 777, 1190.t 2 Len. 39. $ 2 Leon. 74.II Stevenson v. Scrogs, Moor, 607.4z1442 CASES.Elizabeth. the bailiff without a special warrant from the steward, cannotdistrain for an amercement in a leet; and that thingsomitted to be presented in a leet should be presented in theSherirs tam of a sheriff.tourn. *f Mid09. The doctrine of villainous was also in practice in this Teen,Vaiaiiuge. . .for in the 42nd year there was a writ of error upon a judgmentin nativo habendo.*And in the same year it was agreed, " that if the lordmaim his villain he is enfranchisementMoDopo. In the 31st of Elizabeth, in an action upon the cBse,X thelies*1568. plaintiff declared, that, time out of mind, there had been amanor and a town called Rochester: — that they had beenused to have a bakehouse, and a baker, to bake bread for allthe inhabitants and passengers there — and that no personhad ever used a bakehouse there, but by appointment ofthe lord of the manor ; but that the defendant had done so,without any license.It was urged for the plaintiff, that there were two points ofprescriptions; usage and reasonableness: some prescriptionswere against strangers — and then there ought to be considerationand recompence. Some prescriptions i^instprivies, as between lord and tenant — then the tenure issufficient.For the defendant it was answered, that the prescriptionwas against the liberty of the commonwealth. And that itwas not reasonable, that such profits be restrained, anddrawn from the public good, to the private commodity ofany person. And a case was cited, in the ninth of Elizabeth,upon an information exhibited there by the burgesses ofsouAwnp. Southampton, " that the king had granted to them, that allthe sweet wines brought within the realm, should be unladenat Southampton only." And it was agreed by Lord Way,that such a grant was not good, to deprive the commonwealthof such a benefit, and to appropriate that to onewhich might be profitable to many."1589. That the lands of the church still continued exempt fromI ' Church. ^• Cro. EHz. 6. t Noy's Reports, 171.t 1 Leon. 142.CASES. 1443some public charges, may be seen by the following case, in Elizabeth.the 32nd year of Elizabeth.* 1589.One was assessed to 7s. for fifteens ; and upon refusal topay it, the collector distrained his beasts, and sold them.It was shown by counsel, that the statute of the 29th ofElizabeth, which enacted this fifteen, provides, that ifshould be levied of the moveable goods, &c., usuallychargeable ; and that the cattle distrained were temporedistractions upon the glebe land of a parsonage preventive, Glebe.which he had on lease — which land is not chargeable usuallyto fifteens granted by the temporary, nor the chattels uponit. But it was the opinion of the whole court, although theparson himself payeth tenths to the king, yet the lay farmersshall pay fifteens, and his cattle are distrainable for it, evenupon the glebe.A case relative to disfranchisement occurs in the 31st of Disfran-Elizabeth upon a writ de homines replegiando by Samuel 1588.Starkey to the sheriffs of London. Who returned, that hewas indicted de mala fama, et deception domini regis,with divers other general words, and that he had deceivedJ. S., a clothier, and that he was a common cozener; andthereof being found guilty, judgment was given by themayor and recorder, that he should be disfranchised of hisfreedom, and should be fined and imprisoned for a year ; andfurther said, that he had not paid his fine, nor was theyear expired. Cook. — Such return has not been seen, andit is directly against the statute of Magna Charta.The proper limits of the power incident to corporations, of Byc-ijws.making bye4awsy may be collected from the following cases]:in the 33rd year of Elizabeth ; in which the chamberlain ofLondon brought an action of debt, in the guildhall, groundedon an act of common council, made by the mayor, aldermen,and commonalty of the city, at their common assembly,(which they make by custom, and which, amongst others, isconfirmed by divers acts of Parliament,) by which it wasordained, that if any citizen, freeman, or stranger, within the3 Leon. 146, Sted's Case. S.C.3 Leon.259.t 4 Leon. 61 , Survey's Case. % 5 Co. 63.4z21444 Cases-LONDON.Elizabeth. city, put any broad cloth to sale before it be brought to1590. Black well Hall to be viewed and searched, so that it may^*H.iiT*^* appear to be saleable, and that village be paid for it, soil.Id. for every cloth, that he shall forfeit for every cloth, 6*. 8d.And that for such forfeiture, the chamberlain of the city ofLondon should have an action of debt, &c. And becausethe defendants had broken the ordinance, the chamberlain ofLondon brought an action for the penalty. And it wasBye-laws. moved, that " those of London'' could not make laws andordinances to bind the king's subjects, and principallystrangers; for then they would have as high authority asan act of Parliament : — and 2. The said ordinance (as it wasurged) was against the lady and the freedom and liberty ofthe subject to compel him to bring his cloths to any oneplace. 3. The impost of Id. for village, was a charge onthe subject ; and by the same reason that they may imposeId., they may impose 2d., and so in infinity. And it wasmoved to have a procedendo. It appeal's, by many procedendos,that it has been used within the city of London, timeout of mind, for " those of London*' to make ordinances forthe good government of the citizens, &c., consonant to lawand reason, which they call acts of common council. Also,all their customs are confirmed by divers acts of Parliament ;]] and all such ordinances are allowed by the law, which aremade for the due execution of the laws of the realm, for thewell government of the body incorporate. And all others,which are contrary or repugnant to the laws and statutes ofthe realm, are void, and of no effect. And* as to such ordinancesand bye-laws, these differences were observed : — theInhabitants inhabitants of a town, without any custom, may make ordinancesor bye-laws for the reparation of the church — or ahighway — or of any such thing, which is for the generalgood of the public ; and in such case, the greater part shallbind the whole, without any customs But if it be for theirown private profit, as for the well ordering of their common• And see Leon. 264,— where it is said, ** a corporation may make an act for thebetter execution of any law established at the common law ; but new laws they cannotmake." See also 15 Hen. VII.— 21 Hen. VII. 40-8 Fxiw. II. Lib. Ass. 413.t Vide44Edw. III. 19.fCASES.— London. 1445of pasture, or the like, then, without a custom, they cannot Elizabeth.make bye-laws;* and with one, the greater part shall not 1590.bind the less, unless it be warranted by it. For as custom Custom.creates them, so they ought to be warranted by it.f Alsocorporations cannot make ordinances or constitutions with Corporations.out a custom, or the king's charter J — unless for things whichconcern the public good, as reparations of the church, orcommon highways, or the likesAnd as to the case at bar, many statutes were made for thetrue making of woollen cloth, which is the principal com- Wooiieimodify of this realm : and to the intent that those statutesmight be the better executed without any deceit, this act ofcommon council was made, that they should be brought toBlackwell Hall, as to a place public and known, to theintent they might be searched and viewed, if they weremade according to the statutes. So the said ordinancebeing made for the better observation and execution of thelaws, to prevent all frauds and falsities, was good, andallowable by the law. Also the assessing of the Id, forvillage was good, because it was pro bono publico; andit was competent and reasonable, having regard to the benefitwhich the subject enjoyed by the reason of the said ordinances; and such assessments being for the maintenance ofthe public good, and not pro private lucre, were maintainableby the law ; and it was not to be called a burden or chargeto the subject, when he reaps a benefit by it. But it is likepontage, murage, toll, and the like, as appears in 13 Hen.IV., 14 b: — in which cases, the sum for reparations ofbridges, walls, &c., ought to be so reasonable, that the subjectshall have more benefit thereby than charge.Also the penalty inflicted on the offender, be he citizen or Penalty.stranger, was lawful — the offence being committed withinthe city, and the sum being competent and proportional toAnd yet there are many such bye-laws, which have been made by the resiantsat the courts leet, and constantly acted upon.t Vide 8 £dw. II. Assise. 412.X That is— to bind strangers.§ Vide 44 Ed IT. III. 19-8 Edw. II. Assise, 413-21 Edw.lV. 64—11 Hen. VII.13—21 Hen. VU. 20 and 40—15 Eliz. Dyer, 322.<1446 CASES^LOKPOK.BUttbeth. the offence ; and without n penalty, the ordinance would beifiOO. in vain. And the appointment of their chamberlain, beingtheir public officer for debts, to bring the action of debt waagood, and allowable hj law : — ^and the ordinance being accordingto law, may be put in execution, without any otherallowance, notwithstanding the statute of the 27di of HoaryVIL, chap. 7.Judgment And after great deliberation, Way, chief justice, by theadvice of the other justices, granted a procedendo.*In the same case, as stated by another reporter, it wascontended, that they could not make ordinances to bind diesubjects, as an act of Parliament.To which it was said, by Fleetwood, that the custom of thecity was, that the mayor and aldermen, and ftmr personsYiudB. chosen out of each ward by the commtmaUy, mir make ordinanceswhich they call acts of common council, and theybind every citizen 9Lnd freeman: and he sa, that tins act ofcommon council is good, and according to the law, IliBt is ofcommon right. There are divers statutes made for the truemaking of cloth, and to take away the abuses and dec ofmaking of it. And this act of common council is for thewell executing of those statutes. And I conceive there isa difference in making the laws by a corporation, who maymake an act for the better executing of any law ; but newlaws they cannot make — ^as those of a town who used to havein common certain lands, they cannot make a bye-law,that such a one in such a town, shall not have commonthere ; but a bye-laws that none shall use his common butat such a time, is goods A town had common of Turbary,in a marsh; and divers inhabitants of the town made trenches,by which they used to carry turfs out of the parish by boats,and sell them, to their great private profit, to the great grievanceof the others — for which cause, it was provided, byBye-Uw8 common assent of the freeholders of the lord of the town, thatholdup] &11 the trenches should be stopped, so as from thenceforthno turfs be carried in boats by them. And it was holden,Vide 2 Edw. Ill, 7. John de Britain's case. 3 Leon. 264.t See 15 Hen. VII.-21 Hen* VII. 40-8 Edw. II.~Tit. Assise, 413.fCASES. 1447that, if the greater part of the commoners assent, it shall bind Elizabeth.the others who have not assented. And if such towns may 1590.make laws, a fortiori the city of London. Secondly, Thislaw is good by custom, for they have used to make such acts Custom,and ordinances time out of mind, &c.; and those customs areconfirmed by act of Parliament : and also they may appointa penalty — for to what purpose otherwise should they makean act ? Also this action is maintainable ; for an amercementin a court baron, an action of debt lieth. Gaudy, chiefjustice, 44 Edw. III., 19. Way. — there the ordinance madewas to charge the inheritance, but here it is only to chargetheir goods ; wherefore the assent of the greater part is sufficient: — and afterwards a procedendo was granted.With respect to the legal doctrines held at this period asto corporations, the following extracts will serve as examples.It was stated,* *^ that it had been objected in case of asole corporation, or body politic, created by charter or pre Corporalas bishop — parson — vicar — master of an hospital^that no chattel, either in action or possession, should goin succession ; but the executors or administrators of the Successorbishops, parsons, &c. should have them : for the heir of aprivate man could not have them ; and succession in a bodypolitic is inheritance in case of a body private. But otherwiseit is in case of a corporation aggregate of many — asdean and chapter — mayor and commonalty — for there theyin judgment of law, never die — and this was affirmed by thecourt, 8 Edward IV.— and 18th and 20 Edward IV.In the 43d of Elizabeth, in a case respecting a devise to Goo.the poor people maintained in the hospital in the parish ofSt. Laurence in Reading ; exception was taken that the poorwere not capable by that name, for they were not a corporation: yet, because the plaintiff was capable to take landsin mortmain, and did govern the hospital, it was decreed, thedefendant should assure the lands to the mayor and burgessesfor the maintenance of the hospitalsFlood's case, 4 Co. 65.t Tothiil, p. 32, Mayor, &c. of Reading v. Lane.!■4KI4.t1443 CASES.Elizabeth. In the 40th year of this reign, the most important case1598. relative to corporations occurred, which has ever since,Case of unjustifiably, been considered a leading authority on thistions. subject, and has acquired the distinguishing name of ^' theCase of Corporations"*The results from this case have been so extensive — and themischiefs to which it has given birth so numerous and fundamental— that it is impossible to pass it by without particularnotice. Especially as it affords a striking illustrationin the fact of its existence, of how much importance thesematters were considered at that time : and illustrates mostdistinctly the assertions we have before made; as well as themode by which the usurpations we have deprecated wereintroduced.It affirms the authority of the select bodies — their powerof making bye-laws — the binding nature of such bye-lawswhen actually made, or when proved by usage — and, aboveUsage, all, it establishes the dangerous doctrine of usage, commencingwithin time of legal memory being evidence oflight.It should, however, be premised, that this not being adecision of any of the courts of law y but only an opinion givento the king in council ;+ — not open to a writ of error or appealcould not, under any circumstances, be considered as alegal authority. And when its principles and doctrines areconsidered, without prejudice or undue bias, it will be foundaltogether unfit to be relied upon, although it has been frequentlyquoted as an authorities:It is as follows : —In Michaelmas term, in the 40th year of this reign, atSerjeant's-inn, in Fleet-street, it was demanded of the chiefjustices, Popham and Anderson, Persian, chief baron, and• 4 Co. 77.t Reversal before the king's council of a judgment is of no effect ; for they havenothing to do with civil causes, 1 Inst. c. 44—39 Edw. III., p. 14; and see also7 Co. 44.X But see Rex v. Westwood, where its authority was doubted. And LordKenyon, in some of the corporation cases in his time, intimated his opinion againstbye-laws limiting the number of electors appointed by the charter, though made bythe whole corporation.I.CASE OF CORPORATIONS. ' 1449the other justices, that as divers cities, boroughs, and Elizabeth.towns were incorporated by charters, some by the name of 1598."mayor and commonalty," or "mayor and burgesses," &c.or "bailiff and burgesses," &c. or "aldermen and burgesses,"&c. or " provost," or " reeve and burgesses," or thelike. And in the charters it is prescribed, that the mayor,bailiffs, aldermen, provosts, &c. shall be chosen by the commonaltyor burgesses, &c., whether the ancient and usital Ancientelections of mayors, bailiffs, provosts, &c. by certain selectednumber of the principal of the commonalty or burgesses,commonly called " the common council " — or by such like Commonname — and not in general by the whole commonalty of burgesses;nor by so many of them as would come to the election ;were good in law : forasmuch as by the words of chartersthe election should be indefinitely by the commonalty, orby the burgesses, which is as much as to say, by allthe commonalty, or all the burgesses, &c. ? which questionbeing of great importance and consequence, was referred bythe lords and council to the justices, to know the law in thiscase. Because divers attempts were of late in divers corporations,contrary to the ancient usage, to make popularelections; and it was resolved by the justices, upon greatdeliberation and conference had amongst themselves, thatsuch ancient and usual elections were good, and well warrantedby their charters, and by the law also. For in everyof their charters they have power given them to make laws, charters,ordinances, and constitutions, for the better governmentand order of their cities or boroughs, &c. : — by force of which,and for avoiding of popular confusion, they, by their commonassent, constitute and ordain, that the mayor or bailiff. Bye-law.or other principal officers, shall be elected by a selectednumber of the principal of the commonalty, or of the burgesses,as is aforesaid : — ^and prescribe also how such selectednumber shall be chosen. And such ordinance and constitutionwas resolved to be good and allowable, and agreeable withthe law and their charters, for avoiding of popular disorderand confusion. And although now such constitution or ordi-i;.1t1450 CASE OF Corporations.£iiabt«h. dance cannot be showed ; yet it shall be presumed and in-1608. tended, in respect of such special manner of ancient andprattled. continual election (which special election could not beginwithout common consent that at first such ordinance orconstitution was made : — such reverend respect the law attributesto ancient and continual allowance and usage, althoughit began within time of memory; mos retinendus est veritatis; queen praeter consuetudinem et moremajoris fount, neque placent, neque recta videntur; etfrequently actus multum operator.And according to this resolution the ancient and continualusages have been in London, Norwich, and other ancientcities and corporations : and Nod forbid they should be nowinnovated or altered; for many and great inconveniences willthereupon arise ; all which the law has well prevented aaappears by this resolution.O^'^'* It should be observed » that this is the first case in pointof date which occurs with respect to the incorporation ofcities, boroughs, and towns in general ; and after the numerousdocuments we have given upon this head, there can beno doubt but that the general incorporation of the citiesand boroughs was an innovation of this reign.The recital of this case seems to import as much.And it is equally clear, as we have already shown by thecharters we have quoted, that the queen had not by herroyal grants, taken away from the burgesses at large theright of electing the municipal officers ; and therefore it istruly stated in this case, " that it is in the charters prescribed,that the mayor, bailiffs, aldermen, provosts, &c. wereto be chosen by the commonalty or burgesses'* And thequestion propounded is, " whether the ancient and usualelections of those officers by certain selected members of theprincipal of the commonalty or burgesses, commonly calledthe common council,' were good in law?"But in truth the fact here assumed, that the ancient and usualelections were by the select number or '^ common council''CASE OF CORPORATIONS. 1451is not correct ; as is proved by the numerous instances we Elisabeth.have shown of elections by the whole body of the burgesses.* 159S.Nor is there any pretence for saying, that the elections hadbeen by the select number ; excepting where they had beenby the jury for the time being; or in some such body, —not electing by right, but by sufferance — being a constitutedbody for other purposes, and the other burgesses abstainingfrom attending : which is the case with reference to everyindividual who does not attend at an election. But it hasnever been contended — and if it were, it would offend thecommon sense of all mankind — that, because individualsoccasionally absented themselves from an election, andallowed others to make it in their absence, that thereforethey should lose the right altogether, and that it should beexclusively enjoyed by the smaller number.This part of the question therefore wants the support of factfor its foundation ; and of reason and principle to justify it.The case properly admits, that, '^ by the words of the charters,the election should be indefinitely by the commonalty orburgesses ;" and it justly adds, '^ which is as much as to say,by all the commonalty, or all the burgesses''Now, if this be so, it seems that either the doctrine mustbe admitted, that the words of the charter are not imperative(and then the principle must be abandoned, that the kingalone can grant such charter, for if the words are not followed,it is no longer the king's charter)— or the election mustbe by the commonalty or burgesses according to the wordsThe case then proceeds to state, ^'that there had beendivers attempts of late to make popular elections contraryto the ancient usage'' Under which pretence, ofavoiding such elections ; and upon the assumption of theunfounded fact, of the ancient usage, the erroneous conclusionappears to have been adopted, that these elections werewarranted by their charters : whereas it is admitted in thecase, that it was contrary to them : they, by their words, requiringthe election to be made by the body at large.But it is said, '^ that in every of their charters they haveVide ante, Leicester, NortluunptOD, Winchester, &c.1452 CASE OF CORPORATIONS.Elizabeth, power given them to make bye-laws for the better governess.ment of the cities or boroughs."It is however contrary to law — and would obviously becontrary to reason — that such a power of making bye-lawsshould be executed in a manner to authorize any thing contraryto the words of the charter :* and therefore that poweris in fact limited by the words and cannot go beyond them ;so that, if it directs those elections to be by the body atlarge, no bye-law could give the exclusive power to theselect number.However the opinion given was contrary to this: and,as it is stated, upon the ground of " avoiding popularconfusion," an expression, no doubt, borrowed from thepreamble of the statute of Henry VI., which relates only tocounty elections.It was said, that, " by force of the power given to them,they might, by common consent, ordain, that the mayor orbailiffs, or other principal officers, should be elected by aselected number of the principal of the commonalty, and mightalso prescribe how such selected numbers should be chosen ;and that such ordinance would be good and agreeable to thelaw and their charters — repeating the ground for the avoidingof popular disorder and confusion.But with submission, it might be asked, whether, if theburgesses had the power thus to alter the mode of electionprescribed by the charter; why they might not direct theelection to be made by the mayor or any one of the principalburgesses ? Which would be so manifestly absurd, and socontrary to the charter, that it could not for a moment bemaintained.Or, if they could prescribe the mode how the select numbershould be chosen, they might direct a mode of selectionentirely inconsistent with the charter; and if they might prescribesuch a selection, they might in effect set aside theking's grant.• No length of usage will establish a form of election contrary to the charier.I Rex V, Tomlyn, Cas. Temp. Hardwicke, 316 ; Rex. r. Castle, And. 124.— Rex r.Tucker, 1 Barnard. 27. — And a bye-law, which alters the con.<lifulion of the corporation,is bad. Ilex i;. Cutbush, 4 Bur. 2208.ifiCASE OF CORPORATIONS. 1453In truth, it seems that this opinion must be accounted for Elizabeth.by the pressure of some temporary evil ; which the suggestionof " avoiding popular disorder and confusion " appears torender highly probable ; and the decision may be referablerather to expediency, than to law or reason.If such an ordinance could have been legally made, it wasnot unreasonable, in order to support the usage to infer, thatit had, in fact, been made.The exclamation at the close of the case, shows that it wasdecided under strong feelings of the time ; particularly as itis added, that " many and great inconveniences would arisefrom setting aside those modes of election," which had beenassumed to have been ancient and usual.It now only remains, considering the great length to whichthe records of this reign have necessarily run, to state verysuccinctly a few documents of this period relative to Ireland,Scotland, and Wales.IRELAND.It is due to the memory of Queen Elizabeth to record,that it was in her reign the first effective steps were taken togive the English laws full force in Ireland.James I. used his most zealous endeavours to completethat which his predecessor had begun ; but before the reign ofthe queen, the position of the two countries, with referenceto the application of their laws, was far from satisfactory.But few records have been quoted relative to that country :for although some have been preserved with much care,there is, generally speaking, a great deficiency ; and they areneither of that antiquity, nor so numerous, as those whichrelate to England.Previous to the reign of Henry II. there are in fact none.Nor should this be a ground of surprise, when it is recollected,that, in the early state of society in Ireland, propertywas so frequently subdivided, that records for the purposeof its transmission were less necessary.1454 Ireland.BiittbeOi. Henry IL, on his am¥al ia Xiftlaiid^ fimiid the countydivided into a multitude of petty stales compelled lovelierby no bond of political union.He attempted to put the country upon amie goakeral qf»-ten; and we find documents in the course of that lewhich mention archbishops, bishops, sheriffs, ministers i^justices.* A surrey of the kingdom was made — and GiraldusCambrensis, describes Ulster as containing 35 "CAiiTRaD6;"t(a term we have seen before used in Wales ;) Connaught, 30;Leinster, 31; Meath, 18; and Munster, 70.The Irish princes accepting the English laws, scots tothe king to preserve them.King John also, by a writ to De Buigo, his lord justice:directed him to summon all the archbishops, bishops, abbot,priors, earls, barons, knights, freeholders and sheriffs, tohear the laws and customs of England, which he had grantedthem, and to which they had sworn obedience ; and that thesame laws and customs should be proclaimed and observedin every county of Ireland,^wity There were however at one period no less than eight countypalatines in Ireland, whereby a great portion of the kingdomwas exempted from the general jurisdiction: as the Englishlords, who possessed those counties, exercised jura regaliawithin them, and had their own chanceries, treasuries andexchequers, and offices of record belonging to each.Towards the termination of the reign of Edward II., and thebeginning of that of Edward III., the English settlers hadbecome so degenerate, that they would not suffer their own,but only the Irish, laws to prevail in their territories ; so thatin the reigns of Henry VII. and Henry VIII. there were butfour counties wherein the English laws were administered ;and the crown possessed no regular revenues in Ireland .fore the time of Lord deputy St. Leger.||Under these circumstances, it is not probable that many• Egerton MSS. 212. 151.— Harris' History of Ireland.t Vide Giraldus Cambrensis.t Egerton MSS., 212.§ Davy* Sup. p. 106. Gordon's Hist, of Ireland, vol. i. p. 175.I See Irish Suture, 10 Henry VII. cap. 4.IRELAND. 1455records would be found in Ireland. Until the reigns of the Elizabeth.Edwards it may be said there are none; and from that timeuntil the reign of James I.The Parliament Rolls are still more defective, most of ^■J^gJ«"*them having been destroyed in St. Mary's Abbey.STATUTES.The Statutes commence with the reign of Henry II., and '^*°- ^^•contain in that reign only five chapters : from thence thereare none printed until the seventh of Henry VI.In passing we may observe, that in the reign of Henry II. ^^^^s*'there is an Irish statute against great lords taking lodgingsagainst the will of the people — a provision so common inthe early English charters.In the reign of Henry VI. we find that some provisions Punrcyon .against the extortion of purveyors were enacted similar tothose of England.The whole of the statutes during the reign of Henry VI. Hen. VI.amount only to 36.In the reign of Edward IV. there are only 23, which in- Edw.iv.elude provisions respecting constables in towns ; and particularlyone concerning the choosing of knights and burgesses Knight.for Parliament, directing that ^* no person shall be a knight'^ for a county unless he were dwelling within it, and might'* dispend 40«. yearly. And none be a citizen unless dwelling Ciuzen.'' within the city ; nor burgesses in borough towns, aimlessdwelling within the town."In the reign of Henry VII. there are 26 statutes. Hen. vil.One providing that no Parliament should be holden inIreland until the acts be certified into England; and theParliament summoned under the great seal of England.Another enacts that no dty nor great town should admitany to be alderman juror or free-man, but such as have been'prentice or continually inhabiting the town ; and all acts ^Sce!°'and laws made in any of the cities or towns contrary to the '"'^■^*^**king's prerogative, are declared to be void.Another states, that the records relative to the earldoms Records,of Marche — Ulster — lordships of Trim — and Connaught IRELANDw^-STATOTES.^^^>n>M^* need to the crown, ware scMOEietiilies remaining of leeoid iathe treasury of Trim, and were embezzled of hale by direripersons, directs that proclamation should be made thatwhosoever had any of the rous ledmrds or iminiBitioiiSyshould deliver them to the lords of the councilIn Ireland as in England the statutes much increased innumber and in length as the reigns advanced; and in theBcB. vin. reign of Henry VIII. there were no less than 67 acts. OnePdToing'i for the repeal of Poyning's Act— another declaring the feet^^ of it.Another for the i»lzoducti<m of die English order, habit,and language.Another extending to Ireland the English act ot the 2§thVifdHMHii. ^f Henry Vii, relative to vagabonds.Another, qualifying the former statute, winch made theActs of Parliament void because knights and burgesses salinthem who did not dwdl in their respective district pro*K^litt sides, that *^ the knights, eUizem and hwrgeuea should be'' reliant and dwelling within the cities, borough, and towns'^ to which they might be chosen, and elected by the greaterinbabitenii << number of the inhabitants of the counties, cities, and townsbeing present, under forfeiture of lOOZ."And another provides for the division of Meath into twoshires.^m£*°^ In the reign of Philip and Mary there were 15 statutes,one declaring how Poyning's Act should be expounded,elizabeth. j^^ ^^^ ^£ Elizabeth there were 49 statutes : one of whichprovides that no bill shall be certified into England for repealingor suspending the statute passed in Poyning's time,before the bill be first agreed upon in a session of Parliamentin Ireland.Shires. Another for turning counties that are not shire groundsinto shire grounds, for which purpose commissions are orderedto be issued.Besides those we have specified, there were many statutesivenes. jj^ Ireland as in England against the giving of liveries orhaving retainers. And in other respects the Irish statutes,in the most essential points, correspond with the English.IRELAND. 1457Many of the causes also which operated in England for Elizabeth.the destruction of records, had a still more decisive effect inIreland — as the baronial feuds — the contests between thehouses of York and Lancaster — and the courts being ambulatoryfrom place to place.*But the queen, in the 21st year of her reign, ordered Sir 1579.William Drury to arrange the records in the Birminghamtower ; and appointed a keeper, with a salary. And it isapparent from the greater number of Chancery rolls extantin this reign than in any preceding, that more attention waspaid to the records oat always pursued, that the privileges granted tothe towns should be for the purpose of their being better inhabited;which seems to have been the object of all thegrants of this description.In the eighth year of this reign, there are some bye-laws 1566.relative to the corporation of Irish towns, regulating theapparel of the inhabitants; and in the same book are the proceedingsof the doer hundreds held at this time, in whichthe port reeve, burgesses, and commons are mentioned.The dearth of documents relative to Ireland in this country,obliges us for the present to close the collection of recordsrelative to that country at this important period of our history ;at a future time more light may be thrown upon this subject,as many materials now scattered in almost every part ofthe world,* may again be collected for the information andbenefit of the country ; much will probably be effected inillustrating the affairs of Ireland by the publication of theState Papers of the reign of Henry VIII., which may shortlybe expected to appear under the direction of a commissionestablished by the Duke of Wellington's administration ; inwhich the most important historical documents, from theState Paper Office, Chapter House, Lambeth Library, andBritish Museum, will be embraced.The libraries in France, Spain, Italy, Austria, and Denmark, possess manycurious Irish historical papers; a bundle of which were discovered not long sincein one of the islands of the Archipelago ; and Mr. Croton Croaker has in hb possessionat the present moment, a letter of an Irish Jesuit, written in the time ofCharles I., which was picked up by one of the surveying ships in an island of thePacific.1466 SOOTSAMD.IScotland.The length of our extracts for this ren, compels tts to con*dude with a mere enumeration of the charters of Scotland ;ifioi. and with shortly observing, that in the 33rd year of thereign of Qae&k Elizabeth, there was a duurt^ gnarled toInvenit which speaks of the burgesses aUuoBjf Asffflliiy mthe borough ; and in the spirit of the decision of the smitesin the corporation case, recites the contentions which hadarisen in consequence of the multitude of theelectom.In that, as in other respects, Scotland seems to hare beenassimilated to England at this period, as it had been heretofore;and its own boroi]^hs and institutions continued in thesame form as they ever had been.im. In the 2%d of Queoai Elisabeth, tfaoce was a grant to theborough otBiurfhy James, to the provost, bailiff, and commonalty,f15S8. In the 26th of Elizabeth, another by the same kix^ toAwtruth^r JEaiteft to the nofuMt and imhabUoMU of the borough.15B4. And in the 26th year of the reign, there was a grant of acharter of confirmation by James of Scotland, to the boroughRothsay. of JRothsay, in the same form as those in England, the grantbeing to the provosts, bailiffs and commonalty ^ at the requestof the *^ burgesses and inhabitantsise5. And in the 27th of Elizabeth, another grant by King Jamesto Hrentislandf to the provost, bailiffs and commonalty.1587. Another by the same king in the 29th of Elizabeth, toAnstruther, Wester, ** to the natives and inhabitants of theborough."In the 29th of Elizabeth, to DingwaU, which confirms thecharter of Alexander, to the burgesses and inhabitants.1588. Another in the 30th of Elizabeth, by the same king, to thebailiffs and burgesses of Cross, and to the inhabitants, freemenand burgesses.And also another to the ** burgesses and commonalty ofBanff:'Another of the 3 1st of Elizabeth, to the free inhabitants andScotland 1467burgesses of Wich ; and in the same year, to the burgesses ^^"*^^'and inhabitants of Nan.Another in the 34th of Elizabeth, to the provost, bailiffs, 1^92.free largesses and inhabitants of the borough of Banff; andanother to the burgesses and inhabitants of Fartrose, confirminga charter by Alexander and James II.In the 36th of Elizabeth, to the provost, bailiffs, burgesses, i594.and commonalty of Elgin.In the 37th of Elizabeth, to the burgesses of Inverber- 1596.back.In the 40th of Elizabeth, another to the burgesses of /r- 1596.verkeithing ; Singular ; and Arbroath.WALES.The same observation made with respect to Scotland, willapply equally to Wales. The queen, availing herself of thestatute made in the 13th year of her reign, giving the sameeffect to the exemplifications of the charters, as to the original,granted exemplifications of many to the Welsh boroughs,particularly Cardiff, and caused them to be enrolled according Cardiff,to the statute.CONCLUSION.Thus we have seen Queen Elizabeth, during her longand important reign, using the greatest efforts to secure aninfluence in Parliament: — probably the only means she possessedof moderating the turbulent feelings which had arisenfrom the change in the minds of the people, recently absolvedfrom the restraints and darkness of superstition.Henry VIII. began to re-summon ancient boroughs longfallen into decay.Queen Mary followed the same course ; but Queen Elizabeth,as we have seen, extended that measure, as well as thesummoning of new places, much beyond what her predecessorshad attempted.Nor were her endeavours in this respect, unsuccessful ; forin the boroughs which the queen summoned, we have seenthat usurpation, and direct influence, soon began to assume\1^^ CONCLUSION.Etiiftbeth. the sway : and the intervention of the select bodies, completedthat which the queen had originated.These proceeding however like all of the same description,were not likely to pass without some attendant difficultties*The increase of the number of members though it addedat first to the number of her adherents, increased also thenumber of those who were to be controlled ; and hence we findafter all the queen's efforts, her majesty experienced greatdifficulty in managing the Parliament; and did not disguiseher disinclination to summon itSo also the endeavour to place the govemii^ power inthe boroughs, in the hands of the exclusive select bodies,necessarily created an inclination to resistance in the greaternumber, who were excluded : — and the power which wasgiven, created the necessity for its continuance and extension.These conflicting circumstances produced the plausiblejustification for the opinion of the judges, delivered to thecouncil in the corporation case ; — by which was laid the foundationof many of those abuses that have since arisen ; andwhich had not only their origin in that indefensible opinion,but have also unfortunately since been supported and justifiedby that authority.We have noted, both in the decisions of Parliament, andalso in some instances of the courts of law, the progressof those abuses. It is so far a melancholy prospect to theconstitutional reader, — to observe the neglect and gradualobscurity into which the best principles of our constitutionwere thrown, — to mark the decay of the most valuable andsimple parts of our municipal institutions, — and to witnessthe law bending from its direct course to support the gradualincrease of abuse.But it is still a consolation to trace through that web whichartifice and chicanery has woven — the bright thread of ourancient law still perfect and unbroken — and also apparent inevery part of the complicated mixture. And notwithstandingthe load of usurpation heaped upon our ancient municipalinstitutions, still the foundations continue entire : the originalCONCLUSION. 1469forms and principles of the law, serving as clues to unravel Elizabeth.the maze in vtrhich we should otherwise be bewildered. Sothat by these means, extricating ourselves from the intricaciesof the corporate doctrines — heedless of the strange jargon inwhich they have been involved, we are enabled still to approachthe ancient fabric of our constitution, to admire itssimple structure, and to mark the practical wisdom of ourearliest ancestors in the institution of the court leet : — to dis Court leet.cover the useful result of it, in the plain doctrine, that thecitizens and burgesses of all the cities and boroughs were thereal inhabitants — as householders occupying their dwellingsbearing all municipal burdens, pecuniary and personal —sworn to their allegiance to the king and the law — and enrolledand recorded as such, for the purpose of securing theirown rights, and publicly denoting themselves to their neighbours.Such was the system of our Saxon ancestors. It survivedthe Conquest — it continued during the struggles of the feudalbarons — it withstood the shock of the conflicts between thehouses of York and Lancaster — it continued with the Tutorsit remained after the Reformation — it outlived even theinnovations during the reign of Queen Elizabeth.END OF VOL. II.Stevens AND PARDON, PRINTERS.Bell YARD, Temple BAR.ERRATA, VOL. H.Page 585, line 32, insert '* as well."586, — I.*!, for *• juratis,*' read *• juratiis."595, — 27, insert " and."600, — 17, insert "the king."615, — 24, insert •* the."631, — 35, dele " last line and a half," and '' line and a 1and the first note.658, second note, dele "12."739, — 20, insert •* s."765, ■— 6, dele •* other."779, 4, for "at," read "of."779, — 20, for " being," read •* was."779, — 22, for "completing," read "completed."806, — 26, for "by," read "for."853, — 20, for " 7th," read " 6th."« 859, — 7, dele "to be."861, margin, for " 14,39," read " 1440."914, — 5, dele "legitimately."934, — 14, dele "that."950, — 2, insert "s."959, 28, for "sting," read " establishing."968, — 3, insert "expressly."969, — 28, dele "ly," in "essentially."1000, — 16, insert "of,"1015, — 22, dele "ever."1023, — 9, insert "not.";032, — 9, dele " In."1034, — 6, insert "they."1048, — 33, for "charter," read "suture."1087, — first note, for "Viii," read "VII."1186, — 12, dele "s."1207, — 32, dele " as to the time they may have perverted th1209, — 10, for "immediately," read " immemorially."1213, — 1.3, for "and," read "an."1213, — 25, for "tenant," read "Lord."1218, — 9, dele "important."12.33, — 13, dele "re."1237, — 7, for "powers," read "persons."1247, — 12, for "16," read "10."1300, — 8, dele "real."1317, — 12, for "and." read "nor."1.327, — note, for " recesserent," read " reresserunt."1347, — .30, for "these," read "those."1347, — 31, for " 12," read " 13."1385, — .32, add " 13, Richmond."1.395, — 24, for "respecting," read "to."139(», — 4, dele " as appears by the report."1400, — 6, dele "used."^ 14:i4, 15, inner "e."