LECTURESON THEPROPHETICAL OFFICE OF THE CHURCH,VIEWED RELATIVELY TOROMANISMPOPULAR PROTESTANTISM,BYJOHN HENRY NEWMAN, Bed.FELLOW OF ORIEL COLLEGE,AND VICAR OF ST. MARY THE VIRGIN'S, OXFORD.They that shall be of thee shall build the old waste places ; thou shalt raise up thefoundations of many generations ; and thou shalt be called, the Repairer of the breach, theRestorer of paths to dwell in. ISAIAH Viii. 12.LONDON:PRINTED FOR J. G. & F. Livingston,ST. PAUL'S CHURCH YARD, AND WATERLOO PLACE, PALL MALL& J. H. PARKER, OXFORD.1837.LONDON :GILBERT & Livingston, PRINTERS,sr. JOHN'S SQUARE.TOMARTIN JOSEPH ROUTH, Dad.PRESIDENT OF MAGDALEN COLLEGE,WHO HAS BEEN RESERVEDTO REPORT TO A FORGETFUL GENERATIONWHAT WAS THE THEOLOGY OF THEIR FATHERS,THIS VOLUME,IS INSCRIBED,WITH A RESPECTFUL SENSEOF HIS EMINENT SERVICES TO THE CHURCH,AND WITH THE EARNEST PRAYERTHAT WHAT HE WITNESSES TO OTHERSMAY BE HIS OWN SUPPORT AND PROTECTIONIN THE DAY OF ACCOUNT.ADVERTISEMENT.THE following volume has grown out of ParochialLectures delivered on week-days ; and, had itslimits admitted, would have embraced the Sacerdotalas well as the Prophetical office of theChurch. Great portions of a correspondence whichthe writer commenced with a learned and zealousmember of the Gallican Church are also incorporatedin it.To prevent misconception as to the meaning ofthe Title-page, he would observe, that by PopularProtestantism he only wishes to designate that generalizedidea of religion, now in repute, which mergesall differences of faith and principle between Protestantsas minor matters, as if the larger denominationsamong us agreed with us in essentials, anddiffered only in the accidents of form, ritual, government,or usage. Viewed politically, Protestantismis at this day the rallying point of all that is loyaland high-minded in the nation ; but political contiADVERTISEMENT.alterations do not enter into the scope of hiswork.He has endeavoured in all important points ofdoctrine to guide himself by our standard divines,and, had space admitted, would have selected passagesfrom their writings in evidence of it. Thisis almost a duty on the part of every author, whoprofesses, not to strike out new theories, but tobuild up and fortify what has been committed tous.In the absence of such a collection of testimonies,he hopes it will not look like presumptionto desire to make his own the following noble professionsof the great Bramhall.No man can justly blame me for honouringmy spiritual mother, the Church of England, inwhose womb I was conceived, at whose breasts Iwas nourished, and in whose bosom I hope to die.Bees, by the instinct of nature, do love their hives,and birds their nests. But, God is my witness,that, according to my uttermost talent and poorunderstanding, I have endeavoured to set downthe naked truth impartially, without either favouror prejudice, the two capital enemies of right judgment.The one of which, like a false mirror, dothrepresent things fairer and straighter than theyare ; the other like the tongue infected with cholermakes the sweetest meats to taste bitter. Mydesire hath been to have Truth for my chiefsfriend, and no enemy but error. If I have hadany bias, it hath been desire of peace, which ourADVERTISEMENT. Yllcommon Saviour left as a legacy to His Church,that I might live to see the re-union of Christendom,for which I shall always bow the knees of myheart to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Itis not impossible but that this desire of unity mayhave produced some unwilling error of love, butcertainly I am most free from the wilful love oferror. In questions of an inferior nature, Christregards a charitable intention much more than aright opinion.Howsoever it be, I submit myself and my, poorendeavours, first to the judgment of the CatholicEcumenical essential Church, which if some oflate days have endeavoured to hiss out of theschools as a fancy, I cannot help it. From thebeginning it was not so. And if I should mistakethe right Catholic Church out of human frailty orignorance, (which, for my part, I have no reasonin the world to suspect, yet it is not impossiblewhen the Romanists themselves are divided intofive or six several opinions, what this CatholicChurch, or what their Infallible Judge is), I doimplicitly and in the preparation of my mind submitmyself to the True Catholic Church, the Spouseof Christ, the Mother of the Saints, the Pillar ofTruth. And seeing my adherence is firmer to theInfallible Rule of Faith, that is, the Holy Scripturesinterpreted by the Catholic Church, than tomine own private judgment or opinions ; althoughI should unwittingly fall into an error, yet thisViii Advertisementcordial submission is an implicit retractation thereof,and I am confident will be so accepted by theFather of Mercies, both from me and all otherswho seriously and sincerely do seek after peace andtruth.Likewise I submit myself to the RepresentativeChurch, that is, a free General Council, or soGeneral as can be procured ; and until then to theChurch of England, wherein I was baptized, or toa National English Synod. To the determinationof all which, and each of these respectively, accordingto the distinct degree of their authority, I yielda conformity and compliance, or at the least and tothe lowest of them, an acquiescence." Works, p.141.ORIEL COLLEGE,The Feast of St. Matthias.CONTENTS.PAGEIntroduction 1LECTURE I.The Nature and Ground of Roman and Protestant Errors . . 33LECTURE II.On Romanism as Neglectful of Antiquity . 59LECTURE III.Doctrine of Infallibility Morally Considered 100LECTURE IV.Doctrine of Infallibility Politically Considered 120aCONTENTS.LECTURE V.PAGEOn the Use of Private Judgment 152LECTURE VI.On the Abuse of Private Judgment . 173LECTURE VII.Instances of the Abuse of Private Judgment 202LECTURE VIII.The Indefectibility of the Church Catholic 224LECTURE IX.On the Essentials of the Gospel 255LECTURE X.On the Essentials of the Gospel 284LECTURE XI.On Scripture as the Record of Faith 318LECTURE XII.On Scripture as the Record of our Lord's Teaching 345CONTENTS. xiLECTURE XIII.PAGEOn Scripture as the Document of Proof in the Early Church . . 369LECTURE XIV.On the Fortunes of the Church 392INTRODUCTION.So much is said and argued just at this time onthe subject of the Church, by those who use theword in different senses, and those who attach toitlittle distinct sense at all, that I have thoughtit might be useful, by way of promoting sound andconsistent views concerning it, to consider it attentivelyin several of its bearings, and principally inits relation to Romanism, which possesses the mostsystematic theory concerning it. Unhappy is itthat we should be obliged to discuss and defendwhat a Christian people were intended to enjoy,to appeal to their intellects instead of " stirring uptheir pure minds by way of remembrance," to directthem towards articles of faith which should be theirplace of starting, and to treat as mere conclusionswhat in other ages have been assumed as first principles.Surely life is not long enough to proveevery thing which may be made the subject ofproof; and, though inquiry is left partly open inorder to try our earnestness, yet it is in great mean2 INTRODUCTION.sure, and in the most important points, supersededby Revelation, which discloses things which reasoncould not reach, saves us the labour of using itwhen it might avail, and sanctions the principle ofdispensing with it in all cases. Yet, in spite ofthis joint testimony of nature and grace, so it is,we seem at this day to consider discussion and controversyto be in themselves chief goods. Weexult in what we think our indefeasible right andglorious privilege to choose and settle our religionfor ourselves ; and we stigmatize it as a bondageto be bid take for granted what the wise, good, andmany have gone over and determined long before,or to submit to what Almighty God has revealed.From this strange preference, however originating,of inquiry to belief, we, or our fathers beforeus, have contrived to make doubtful what reallywas certain. We have created difficulties in ourpath ; we have gone out of our way to find ingeniousobjections to what was received, where nonehitherto existed ; as if forgetting that there is notruth so clear, no character so pure, no work of manso perfect, but it admits of criticism, and willbecome suspected directly it is accused. As mightbe expected, then, we have succeeded in our attempt; we have succeeded in raising clouds whicheffectually hide the sun from us, and we have nothingleft but to grope our way by our reason, aswe best can, our necessary, because now our only-guide.And as a traveller by night, calculating orINTRODUCTION. 3guessing his way over a morass or amid pit-falls,naturally trusts himself more than his companions,though not doubting their skilfulness and goodwill,and is too intent upon his own successive stepsto hear and to follow them, so we, from anxiety ifnot from carelessness, have straggled each from hisneighbour, and are all of us, or nearly so, in a fairwayto lose our confidence, if not our hope. I say,we, or others for us, have asserted our right of debatingevery truth, however sacred, however protectedfrom scrutiny hitherto ; we have accountedthat belief alone to be manly which commencedin doubt, that inquiry alone philosophical whichassumed no first principles, that religion alone rationalwhich we have created for ourselves. Lossof labour, division, and error have been the threefoldgain of our self-will, as evidently visited in thisworld, not to follow it into the next.How we became committed to so ill-advised acourse, by what unfortunate necessity, or underwhat overpowering temptation, it avails not here toinquire. But the consequences are undeniable ;the innocent suffer by a state of things, which tothe proud and carnal is an excuse for their indifference.The true voice of Revelation has been overpoweredby the more clamorous traditions of men ;and where there are rivals, examination is necessary,even where piety would fain have been rid ofit. Thus, in relation to the particular subject whichhas led to these remarks, that some one meaningB24 INTRODUCTION.was anciently attached to the word " Church," iscertain from its occurring in the Creed ; it is certain,for the same reason, that it bore upon somefirst principle in religion, else it would not havebeen there. It is certain moreover, from history,that its meaning was undisputed, whatever thatmeaning was ; and it is as certain that there are interminabledisputes and hopeless differences aboutits meaning now. Now is this a gain or a loss tothe present age ? At first sight one might thinkit a loss, so far as it goes, whatever be the cause ofit ; in the same sense in which the burning of alibrary is a loss, the destruction of a monument,the disappearance of an ancient record, or the deathof an experimentalist or philosopher. Diminutionfrom the stock of knowledge is commonly considereda loss in this day ; yet strange to say, in theinstance before us, it is thought far otherwise. Thegreat mass of educated men are at once uneasy,impatient, and irritated, not simply incredulous,directly they are promised from any quarter someclear view of the original and apostolic doctrine,to them unknown, on any subject of religion. Theybear to hear of researches into Christian Antiquity,if they are directed to prove its uncertainty andunprofitableness; they are intolerant and open-mouthedagainst them, if their object be to rescuenot to destroy. They sanction a rule of philosophywhich they practically refute every time they praiseNewton or Cuvier. In truth, they can endure aINTRODUCTION. bpositive theory in other provinces of knowledge ;but in theology it becomes practical. They perceivethat there, what in itself is but an inquiryinto questions of fact, tends to an encroachmentupon what they think fit to consider their Christianliberty. They are reluctant to be confronted withevidence which will diminish their right of thinkingas they please, rightly and wrongly ; they arejealous of being forced to submit to one view ofthe subject, and to be unable at their pleasure tochange ; they consider comfort in religion to lie inall questions being open, and there being no callupon them to act. Thus they deliberately adoptthat liberty which God gave His former people inwrath, " a liberty to the sword, to the pestilence,and to the famine 1 ," the prerogative of being hereticsor infidels.It would be well if these men could keep theirrestless humours to themselves ; but they unsettleall around them. They rob those of their birthrightwho would have hailed the privilege of being toldthe truth without their own personal risk in findingit ; they force them against their nature upon relyingon their reason, when they are content to besaved by faith. Such troublers of the Christiancommunity would in a healthy state of things besilenced or put out of it, as disturbers of the king'speace are restrained in civil matters ; but our times,1 Jer. xxxiv. 1 7.6 INTRODUCTION.from whatever cause, being times of confusion, wearereduced to the use of argument and disputation,just as we think it lawful to carry arms and barricadeour houses during national disorders.Let this be my excuse for discussing rather thanteaching what was meant to be simply an article offaith. We travel by night: the teaching of theApostles concerning it, which once, like the pillarin the wilderness, was with the children of Godfrom age to age continually, is withdrawn ; and weare,so far, left to make the best of our way to thepromised land by our natural resources.In the following Lectures, then, it is attempted,in the measure which such a mode of writing allows,to build up what man has pulled down, insome of the questions connected with the Church ;and that, by means of the stores of Divine truthbequeathed to us in the works of our standardDivines.The immediate reason for discussing the subjectis this : In the present day, such incidental noticeof it, as Christian teachers are led to take in thecourse of their pastoral instructions, is sure to becharged with what is commonly called " Popery ;"and for this reason, that Romanists having everinsisted upon it, and Protestants neglected it, tospeak of it at all, though it is mentioned in theCreed, is thought to savour of Romanism. Thosethen who feel its importance, and yet are not Romanists,are bound on several accounts to showINTRODUCTION. 7why they are not Romanists, and how they differfrom them. They are bound to do so, in order toremove the prejudice with which an article of theCreed is at present encompassed ; and on the otherhand to prevent those who have right but vagueideas concerning it, from deviating into Romanismbecause no other system is provided for them. Tillthey do more than they have hitherto done, ofcourse they hazard, though without any fault oftheirs, a deviation on the part of their hearers intoRomanism on the one hand, a reaction into mereProtestantism on the other.From the circumstances then of the moment,the following Lectures are chiefly engaged in examiningand exposing certain tenets of Romanism.But this happens for another reason. After all, themain object in a discussion should be, not to refuteerror merely, but to establish truth. What Christiansespecially need and have a right to require, is a positivedoctrine on such subjects as come under notice.They have a demand on their teachers for the meaningof the article of the Apostles' Creed, whichbinds them to faith in " the Holy Catholic Church."It is a poor answer to this inquiry, merely to enterinto an attack upon Romanism, and to show thatit contains an exaggerated and erroneous view ofthe doctrine. Erroneous or not, a view it certainlydoes contain ; and that religion which attempts aview, though imperfect or extreme, does more thanthose which do not attempt it at all. If we deny8 INTRODUCTION.that Romanists speak the truth, we are bound invery shame to commit ourselves to the risk of atheory, unless we would fight with them at anunfair advantage ; and in charity to our own people,lest we tempt them to error, while we refuse to givethem what is better instead of it. But at the sametime, it stands to reason, that to do this effectuallywe must proceed on the plan of attacking Romanism,as the most convenient way of showing whatour own views are. It has pre-occupied the ground,and we cannot erect our own structure withoutpartly breaking down, partly using what we findupon it. And thus for a second reason, the followingLectures, as far as in their very form goes,are chiefly written against Romanism, though theirmain object is not controversy but edification.Their main object is to furnish an approximationin one or two points towards a correct theory ofthe duties and office of the Church Catholic. PopularProtestantism does not attempt it at all ; itabandons the subject altogether : Romanism suppliesa doctrine, but, as we conceive, an untrue one.The question is, what is that sound and just expositionof this Article of Faith, which holds together,or is consistent in theory, and is justified bythe history of the dispensation, which is neitherProtestant nor Roman, but proceeds according tothat Via Media, which, as in other things so here, isthe appropriate path for sons of the English Churchto walk in ? What is the nearest approximation toINTRODUCTION. 9that primitive truth which Ignatius and Polycarpenjoyed, and which the nineteenth century haslost?This is the problem which demands serious considerationat this day, and some detached portionsof which will be considered in the following Lectures.Leaving to others questions directly politicaland ecclesiastical, I propose to direct attentionto some of those connected with the pastoral officeof the Church.It is obvious to insist on certain supposed disadvantagesof considering such a subject at this moment.In replying to this objection, which I shall nowattempt to do, an opportunity will be given me toexplain more at length the object contemplated.It is urged, then, by conscientious and sensiblemen, that we have hitherto done sufficiently wellwithout any theory on the subject, and thereforedo not need it now or in prospect ; that certainnotions, in whatever degree abstractedly correct,have become venerable and beneficial by long usage,and ought not now to be disturbed ; that the natureand functions of the Church have been longsettled in this country by law and by historicalprecedents, and that it is our duty to take what wefind, and use it for the best ; that to discuss thequestion of the Church, whatever precautions betaken,necessarily involves the unsettling of receivedopinions ; that though the views which may be putforward be in themselves innocent or true, yet10 INTRODUCTION.under the circumstances they will lead to Romanism,if only because the mind when once set inmotion in any direction finds it difficult to stop,and because the article of the Church has beenaccidentally the badge and index of that system ;that the discussions proposed are singularly unseasonableat this day, when our Church requires supportagainst her enemies, and must be defended bypractical measures, not by speculations upon hernature and historical pretensions, speculations unprofitablein themselves, and in fact only adding toour existing differences, and raising fresh partiesand interests in our already distracted communion,speculations which have never been anything butspeculations, never were realized in any age of theChurch ; lastly, that the pretended Via Media is butan eclectic system, dangerous to the religious temperof those who advocate it, as leading to arroganceand self-sufficiency in judging of sacredsubjects. This is pretty nearly what may besaid.Now it is obvious that these objections provetoo much. If they prove any thing, they go toshow that the article of the Holy Church Catholicshould not be discussed at all, not even as a pointof faith ; but that in its most essential respects,.as well as in its bearings and consequences, it maybedetermined and interpreted by the law of theland. This consideration in itself would be enoughto show, that there was some fallacy in them some-introduction.11where, even if we could not detect it. However,let us consider some of them in detail.One of the most weighty of these objections atfirst sight, is the danger of unsettling things established,and raising questions, which, whatever maybetheir intrinsic worth, are novel and excitingat the present day. When, for instance, the officeof Holy Scripture, or the judicial power of theChurch, or the fundamentals of faith, or the legitimatepower of the Roman see, or the principles ofProtestantism are discussed, it is natural to object,that since the Revolution of 1688 they have beenpractically cut short, and definitely settled by civilacts and precedents. It may be urged, that theabsolute subjection of the bishops, as bishops, to thecrown is determined by the deprivations of 1689 :the Church's forfeiture of her synodical rights bythe final measure of 1717 ; the essential agreementof Presbyterianism with Episcopacy by the unionwith Scotland in 1706-7; and our incorporation withdissenters, on the common ground of Protestantism,by the proceedings of the Revolution itself. It maybeargued that these measures were but the appropriatecarrying out of the acts of the Reformation ;that King William and his party did but completewhat King Henry began; and that we are bornProtestants, and though free to change our religionand to profess a change, yet, till we do so, Protestants,as other Protestants, we certainly are, thoughwe happen to retain the episcopal form; that our12 INTRODUCTION.Church has thriven upon this foundation in wealth,station, and usefulness ; that being a part of theconstitution, it cannot be altered without touchingthe constitution itself; and, consequently, that alldiscussions are either very serious or very idle.To all this I answer, that the constitution hasbeen altered, and not by us ; and the mere questionis, whether the constitution being altered, and theChurch in consequence, which is part of it, beingexposed to danger in her various functions, we mayallow those who have brought her into danger, toapply what they consider suitable remedies, withoutclaiming a voice in the matter ourselves. Arequestions bearing more or less upon the educationof our members, the extension of our communion,and its relations to Protestant bodies, to be decidedwithout us? Are precedents to be created whilewe sit by, which afterwards may be assumed as ouracknowledged principles ? It is our own concern ;and it is not strange if we think it will be betterlooked after by ourselves, than by our enemies orby mere politicians. We are driven by the pressureof circumstances to contemplate our ownposition, and to fall back upon first principles ; norcan an age, which prides itself on its powers ofscrutiny and research, be surprised if we do in self-defencewhat it does in wantonness and pride.We accepted the principles of 1688 as the Church'sbasis, while they remained, because we had receivedthem : they have been surrendered. If we nowINTRODUCTION. 13put forward a theory instead of them, all that canbe said against us is, that we are not so muchattached to them on their own account, as to consent,that persons, still more ignorant of our divinelyframed system than the statesmen of that era,should attempt, in some similar or worse form, torevive them. In truth, we have had enough, if wewould be wise, of mere political religion ; which,like a broken reed, has pierced through the handthat leaned upon it. While, and in proportion aswe are bound to it, it is our duty to submit, as theduties of the Jews lay in submitting to Nebuchadnezzar,as Jeremiah instructed them. We will notside with a reckless and destructive party, even inundoing our own chains, where there is no strongcall of duty to oblige us ; nay, we will wear them,not only contentedly but loyally ; we will be zealousbondsmen, while the state honours us in our captivity.It has been God's merciful pleasure, as ofold time, to make even those who led us awaycaptive to pity us. Those who might have beentyrants over us, have piously nursed the Church,and liberated her, as far as was expedient, in thespirit of him who " builded the city, and let go thecaptives not for price nor reward 1 ." And while thepowers of this world so dealt with us, who wouldnot have actively co-operated with them, from loveas well as from duty? And thus it was that the1 Is. xlv. 13.14 INTRODUCTION.most deeply learned, and most generous minded of ourdivines thought no higher privilege could befal themthan to minister at the throne of a prince like ourfirst Charles, who justified their confidence by dyingfor the Church a martyr's death. And I suppose, insimilar circumstances, any one of those who afterwardsbecame non-jurors, or of such persons at thisday as have the most settled belief in the spiritualpowers of the Church, would have thought himselfunworthy to be her son, had he not fallen in witha system which he had received and found so welladministered, whatever faults might exist in itstheory. This is the view to be taken of the conductof our Church in the seventeenth century,which we only do not imitate now, because we arenot allowed to do so, because our place of serviceand our honourable function about the throne aredenied us. And, as we should act as our predecessorswere we in their times, so, as we think, theytoo would act as we do in ours. They, doubtless,at a time when our enemies are allowed to legislateupon our concerns, and to dispose of the highestoffices in the Church, would feel that there wereobjects dearer to them than the welfare of the state,duties even holier than obedience to civil governors,and would act accordingly. It is our lot to see theresult of an experiment which in their days wasbut in process, that of surrendering the Churchinto the hands of the state. It has been tried andfailed ; we have trusted the world, and it has takenINTRODUCTION. 15advantage of us. While the event was doubtful, itwas the duty of her rulers to make the best ofthings as they found them : now that it is over,though we must undergo the evil, we are surely notbound to conceal it.These reflections would serve to justify inquiriesfar beyond the scope of the following Lectures, such,I mean, as bear upon our political and ecclesiasticalstate ; whereas those which will here come into considerationhave more reference to religious teachingthan to action, to the Church's influence on hermembers, one by one, rather than to her right ofmoving them as a whole. But the distinct portionsof the general subject so affect each other, that suchpoints as Church authority, Tradition, the Rule ofFaith, and the like, cannot be treated without seemingto entrench upon political principles, consecratedby the associations of the Revolution. It has ever requiredan apology, since that event, to speak the languageof our divines before it ; and such an apologyis now found in the circumstances of the day, inwhich all notions, moral and religious, are so unsettled,that every positive truth must be a gain.But, in answer to a portion of the foregoingremarks, it is not uncommon to urge what at firstsight seems to be a paradox ; that our enemies, orstrangers, or at least persons unacquainted with theprinciples of the Church, are better fitted than herproper guardians and ministers to consult for herwelfare ; that they are better friends to us than16 INTRODUCTION.ourselves, and in a manner often defend us againstourselves ; and the saying of a great and religiousauthor is quoted against us, that " clergymen understandthe least and take the worst measure ofhuman affairs of all mankind that can write andread 1 ." And so they certainly do, if their endin view be that which secular politicians imagine.If their end be the temporal aggrandisement ofthe Church, no greater or more intolerable visitationcould befal us than to be subjected to suchcounsellors as Archbishop Laud. But, perchancethe objects we have in view are as hidden from theman of the world, whether statesman, philosopher, orcourtier, as heaven itself from his bodily eyes ; andperchance those measures which are most demonstrablyheadstrong and insane, if directed towards apolitical end, may be most judicious and successfulin a religious point of view. It is an acknowledgedprinciple, that the blood of martyrs is the seedof the Church ; and if death itself may be a victory,so in like manner may worldly loss and trouble,however severe and accumulated.I am aware that professions of this nature increaserather than diminish to men of the worldtheir distaste for the conduct they are meant toexplain. The ends which are alleged to accountfor the conduct of religious men, remove the chargeof imprudence only to attach to them the more1 Clarendon's Life, vol. i. p. 74.INTRODUCTION. 17odious imputation of fanaticism and its kindredqualities. Pilate's feeling when he asked " Whatis truth ?" is a type of the disgust felt by men ofthe world at the avowal of Christian faith and zeal.To profess to act towards objects which to themare as much a theory and a dream as the scenesof some fairy tale, angers them by what they considerits utter absurdity and folly. " Miserablemen !" said the heathen magistrate on witnessingthe determination of the martyrs of Christ, " if yewill die, cannot you find precipices or halters !" lNor is this feeling confined to infidels or scorners ;men of seriousness and good intentions, and it isespecially to the purpose to observe this, feel thesame annoyance and impatience at certain parts ofthat Ancient Religion, of which the doctrine of theChurch is the centre, which profligate men manifesttowards moral and religious motives altogether. Totake an instance which will be understood by mostmen. Should a man, rightly or wrongly, for thatis not the question, profess to regulate his conductunder the notion that he is seen by invisible spectators,that he and all Christians have upon them theeyes of Angels, especially when in Church; shouldhe, when speaking on some serious subject, exhorthis friends as in their presence, nay, bid them attendto the propriety of their apparel in divineworship because of them, would he not at first be1 Tertull. ad Cap. 5.C18 INTRODUCTION.thought to speak poetically, and so excused ? next,when he was frequent in expressing such a sentiment,would he not become tiresome and unwelcome? and when he was understood to speakliterally, would not his views to a certainty be metwith grave, cold, contemptuous, or impatient looks,as idle, strained, and unnatural ? Now this is justthe reception which secular politicians give to religiousobjects altogether ; and my drift in noticingit is this, to impress on those who regard withdisgust the range of doctrines connected with theChurch, that it does not at all prove that thosedoctrines are strained and are uninfluential, becausethey are disgusted, unless indeed the offence whichthe infidel takes at the doctrine of the Cross be anargument that it also is really foolishness. Thesedoctrines may be untrue and unreasonable certainly; but if the surprise of those who first hearthem and have never acted on them, be a proofthat they are so, more will follow than would beadmitted by any of us ; for surely, no disagreeablefeeling, which they can experience, equals the scornwith which irreligious men hear of the blessed doctrinethat God has become man, no surprise oftheirs can equal the amazement and derision withwhich the pagans witnessed a saint contending evenunto bonds and death, for what they considered amatter of opinion.It does not follow, then, that doctrines are uninfluential,when plainly and boldly put forward,INTRODUCTION. 19because they offend the prejudices of the age atfirst hearing. Had this been true, Christianity itselfought not to have succeeded ; and it cannot beimagined that the respectable and serious men ofthis day who express concern at what they considerthe exaggerated tone of certain writers on the subjectof the Church, are more startled and offendedthan the outcasts to whom the Apostles preachedin the beginning. Truth has the gift of overcomingthe human heart, whether by persuasion or bycompulsion, whether by inward acceptance or byexternal constraint; and if what we preach be truth,it must be natural, it must be seasonable, it mustbe popular, it will make itself popular. It willfind its own. As time goes on, and its sway extends,those who thought its voice strange andharsh at first, will w r under how they could ever sohave deemed of sounds so musical and thrilling.The objection, however, which has led to theseremarks, takes another and more reasonable formin the minds of practical men, which shall now benoticed. A religious principle or idea, howevertrue, before it is realized in a substantive form, isbut a theory ; and since many theories are not morethan theories, and do not admit of being carried intoeffect, it is exposed to the suspicion of being oneof these, and of having no existence out of books.The proof of reality in a doctrine is its holding togetherwhen actually attempted. Practical men arenaturally prejudiced against what is new, on thisc220 INTRODUCTION.ground if on no other, that it has not had the opportunityof satisfying this test. Christianity wouldappear at first a mere literature, or philosophy, ormysticism, like the Pythagorean rule or Phrygianworship ; nor till it was tried, could the coherenceof its parts be ascertained. Now the class of doctrinesin question as yet labours under the samedifficulty. Indeed, they are in one sense as entirelynew as Christianity when first preached ; for thoughthey profess merely to be that foundation on whichit originally spread, yet as far as they represent aVia Media, that is, are related to extremes whichdid not then exist, and do exist now, they appearunreal, for a double reason, having no exact counterpartin early times, and being superseded nowby actually existing systems. Protestantism andPopery are real religions ; no one can doubt aboutthem; they have furnished the mould in whichnations have been cast : but the Via Media hasnever existed except on paper, it has never beenreduced to practice ; it is known, not positively butnegatively, in its differences from the rival creeds,not in its own properties ; and can only be describedas a third system, neither the one nor the other,partly both, cutting between them, and, as if witha critical fastidiousness, trifling with them both,and boasting to be nearer Antiquity than either.What is this but to fancy a road over mountainsand rivers, which has never been cut? Whenwe profess our Via Media, as the very truth of theINTRODUCTION. 21Apostles, we seem to be mere antiquarians orpedants, amusing ourselves with illusions or learnedsubtilties, and unable to grapple with things asthey are. We tender no proof to show that ourview is not self-contradictory, and if set in motion,would not fall to pieces, or start off in differentdirections at once. Learned divines, it may beurged, may have propounded it, as they have ; controversialistsmay have used it to advantage whensupported by the civil sword against Papists orPuritans ; but, whatever its merits, still, when leftto itself, to use a familiar term, it may not " work."And the very circumstance that it has been propoundedfor centuries by great names, and not yetreduced to practice, may be alleged as an additionalpresumption against its feasibility. To takefor instance the subject of Private Judgment ; ourtheory here is neither Protestant nor Roman ; andhas never been realized. Our opponents ask, whatis it ? Is it more than a set of words and phrases,of exceptions and limitations made for each successiveemergency, of principles which contradicteach other?It cannot be denied there is force in these considerations; it still remains to be tried whetherwhat is called Anglicanism, the religion of Andrews,Laud, Hammond, Butler, and Wilson is capable ofbeing professed, acted on, and maintained on alarge sphere of action and through a sufficientperiod, or whether it be a mere modification either22 INTRODUCTION.of Romanism or of popular Protestantism, accordingas we view it. It may be argued that whether theprimitive Church agreed more with Rome or withProtestants, and though it agreed with neither ofthem exactly, yet that one or the other, whichever itis, is the nearest approximation to the ancient modelwhich our changed circumstances admit; that eitherthis or that is the modern representative of primitiveprinciples ; that any professed third theory,however plausible, must necessarily be composedof discordant elements, and when attempted mustnecessarily run into Romanism or Protestantism,according to the nearness of the attracting bodies,and the varying sympathies of the body attracted,and its independence of those portions of itselfwhich interfere with the stronger attraction. Itmay be argued that the Church of England, as establishedby law, and existing in fact, has neverrepresented a certain doctrine or been the developmentof a principle, that it has been but aname, or a department of the state, or a politicalparty, in which religious opinion was an accident,and therefore has been various. In consequence,it has been but the theatre of contending religionists,that is, of Papists and Latitudinarians, softenedexternally, or modified into inconsistency by theirbirth and education, or restrained by their interestsand their religious engagements. Now all this isvery plausible, and is to the point, as far as this, thatthere certainly is a call upon us to exhibit our prin-introduction.23cipher in action ; and until we can produce diocese,or place of education, or populous town, or colonialdepartment, or the like, administered on our distinctiveprinciples, as the diocese of Sodom andMan in the days of Bishop Wilson, doubtless wehave not as much to urge in our behalf as we mighthave.This, however, may be said in favour of the independenceand reality of our view of religion, evenunder past and present circumstances, tbfat, whereasthere have ever been three principal parties in theChurch of England, the Apostolical, the Latitudinarian,and the Puritan, the two latter have beenshown to be but modifications of Socinianism andCalvinism by their respective histories when allowedto act freely, whereas the first, when it hadthe opportunity of running into Romanism, did notcoalesce with it ; which certainly argues some realdifferences in it from that system with which it ispopularly confounded. The Puritan portion of theChurch was set at liberty, as is well known, duringthe national troubles of the seventeenth century ;and in no long time prostrated the Episcopate,abolished the ritual, and proved itself by its actions,if proof was necessary, essentially Calvinistic. Theprinciple of Latitude was allowed considerablerange between the times of Charles II. and GeorgeII. and even under the pressure of the Thirty-nineArticles, possessed vigour enough to develope suchindications of its real tendency, as Hotly and his24 INTRODUCTION.school supply. The Apostolical portion of theChurch, whether patronised by the court, or wanderingin exile, or cast out of their native communionby political events, evinced one and the samefeeling of hostility against Rome. Its history atthe era of the Revolution is especially remarkable.Ken, Collier, and the rest had every adventitiousmotive which resentment or interest could supplyfor joining the Romanists ; nor can any reason begiven why they did not move on the one side, asPuritans and Latitudinarians had moved on theother, except that their Creed had in it an independenceand distinctness which was wanting inthe religious views of their opponents. If nothingmore has accrued to us from the treatment whichthese excellent men endured, this at least has providentiallyresulted, that we are thereby furnishedwith irrefragable testimony to the essential differencebetween the Roman and Anglican systems.But if this be so, if the English Church has themission, hitherto unfulfilled, of representing a theology,Catholic but not Roman, here is an especialreason why her members should be on the watchfor opportunities of bringing out and carrying intoeffect its distinctive character. Such opportunitiesperhaps have before now occurred in our history,and have been neglected, and may never return ;but, at least, the present unsettled state of religiousopinion among us furnishes an opening which maybeprovidentially intended, and which it is a dutyINTRODUCTION. 25to use. And there are other circumstances favourableto the preaching of the pure Anglican doctrine.In a former age, the tendency of mereProtestantism had not discovered itself with thefearful clearness which has attended its later history.English divines were tender of the otherbranches of the Reformation, and did not despairof their return to the entire Catholic truth. BeforeGermany had become rationalistic, and GenevaSocinian, Romanism might be considered as themost dangerous corruption of the gospel ; and thismight be a call upon members of our Church tomerge their differences with foreign Protestantismand Dissent at home, as if in the presence of a commonenemy. But at this day, when the connexionof Protestantism with infidelity is so evident, whatclaim has the former upon our sympathy ? and towhat theology can the serious Protestant, dissatisfiedwith his system, betake himself but to Romanism,unless we display our characteristic principles,and show him that he may be Catholic and Apostolic,yet not Roman ? Such, as is well known, wasthe service actually rendered by our Church to thelearned German divine, Grace, at the end of theseventeenth century, who, feeling the defects ofLutheranism, even before it had lapsed, was contemplatinga reconciliation with Rome, when, findingthat England offered what to a disciple of Ignatiusand Cyprian were easier terms, he conformed to hercreed, and settled and died in this country.26 INTRODUCTION.Again : though it is not likely that Romanismshould ever again become formidable in England; yetit may be in a position to make its voice heard, andin proportion as it is able to do so, the Via Mediawill do important service of the following kind. Inthe controversy which will ensue, Rome will notfail to preach far and wide the tenet which it neverconceals, that there is no salvation external to itsown communion. On the other hand, Protestantism,as it exists, will not be behind hand in consigningto eternal ruin all who are adherents of Romandoctrine. What a prospect is this ! two widelyspread and powerful parties dealing forth solemnanathemas upon each other, in the name of theLord ! Indifference and scepticism must be, insuch a case, the ordinary refuge of men of mild andpeaceable minds, who revolt from such presumption,and are deficient in clear views of the truth.I cannot well exaggerate the misery of such a stateof things. Here the English theology would comein with its characteristic calmness and caution, clearand decided in its view, giving no encouragementto lukewarmness and liberalism, but withholding allabsolute anathemas on errors of opinion, exceptwhere the primitive Church sanctions the use ofthem.Here we are reminded of one more objectionwhich may be made to the discussion of such subjectsas those contained in the following Lectures ;and with a brief notice of it I will conclude. ItINTRODUCTION. 27may appear, then, that there is that in the notionof inquiries into a doctrine but partly settled andreceived, and in the very name of a Via Media,adapted to foster a self-sufficient and scepticalspirit. The essence of revealed religion is thesubmission of the reason and heart to a positivesystem, the acquiescence in doctrines which cannotbe proved or explained. A realized system is presupposedas the primary essential, from the natureof the case. When, then, we begin by saying thatthe English doctrine is not embodied in any substantiveform, or publicly recognized in its details,we seem to reduce religion to a mere literature, tomake reason the judge of it, and to confess it to beamatter of opinion. And when, in addition tothis, we describe it as combining various portions ofother systems, what is this, it may be asked, but tosanction an eclectic principle, which of all others isthe most arrogant and profane ? When men chooseor reject from religious systems what they please,they furnish melancholy evidence of their want ofearnestness ; and when they put themselves aboveexisting systems, as if these were suited only to themultitude or to bigoted partizans, they are superciliousand proud ; and when they think they maycreate what they are to worship, their devotioncannot possess any high degree of reverence andgodly fear. Surely, then, it may be said, suchtheorizing on religious subjects is but to indulgethat undue use of reason, which was so pointedly28 INTRODUCTION.condemned in the commencement of these remarks.I would not willingly under-value the force ofthis representation. It might be said, however, inreply, that at the worst the evil specified wouldcease in proportion as we were able to realize thatsystem which is wanting. But after all the trueanswer to the objection is simply this, that thoughAnglicanism is not practically reduced to systemin its fulness, it does exist, in all its parts, inthe writings of our divines, and in good measureis in actual operation, though with varying degreesof consistency and completeness in differentplaces. There is no room for eclecticismin any elementary matter. No member of theEnglish Church allows himself to build on anyother doctrine than that found in our book ofCommon Prayer. That formulary contains the elementsof our theology ; and herein lies the practicalexercise of our faith, which all true religion exacts.We surrender ourselves in obedience to it : we actupon it : we obey it ever in points of detail wherethere is room for diversity of opinion. The Thirty-nineArticles furnish a second trial of our humilityand self-restraint. Again, we never forget that,reserving our fidelity to the Creed, we are bound todefer to Episcopal authority. Here then are trialsof principle on starting ; so much is already settled,and demands our assent, not our criticism. Whatremains to be done, and comes into discussion, areINTRODUCTION. 29secondary questions, such as these, How best tocarry out the rubrics of the Prayer-book ? how toapply its services in particular cases ? how to regardour canons of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries? how to reconcile the various portions of theritual ? how to defend certain formularies, or howto explain others? Another series of unsettleddifficulties arises out of the question of educationand teaching: What are the records, what therule of faith ? what the authority of the Church ?how much is left to Private Judgment ? what arethe objects and best mode of religious training?and the like. The subject of Church governmentopens another field of inquiries, which are more orless unanswered, as regards their practical perception,by our clergy. The Thirty-nine Articles supplyanother. And in all these topics we are not left toourselves to determine as we please, but have theguidance of our standard writers, and are bound toconsult them, nay, when they agree, to follow them;but when they differ, to adjust or to choose betweentheir opinions.Enough has now been said by way of explainingthe object of the following Lectures. It is proposedto offer helps towards the formation of arecognized Anglican theology in one of its departments.The present state of our divinity is asfollows : the most vigorous, the clearest, the mostfertile minds, have through God's mercy been employedin the service of our Church ; minds too as30 INTRODUCTION.reverential and holy, and as fully imbued withAncient Truth, and as well versed in the writingsof the Fathers, as they were intellectually gifted.This is God's great mercy indeed, for which wemust ever be thankful. Primitive doctrine hasbeen explored for us in every direction, and theoriginal principles of the gospel and the Churchpatiently and successfully brought to light. Butone thing is still wanting : our champions andteachers have lived in stormy times ; political andother influences have acted upon them variouslyin their day, and have since obstructed a carefulconsolidation of their judgments. We have a vastinheritance, but no inventory of our treasures. Allisgiven us in profusion ; it remains for us to catalogue,sort, distribute, select, harmonize, and complete.We have more than we know how to use ;stores of learning, but little that is precise and serviceable; Catholic truth and individual opinion,first principles and the guesses of genius, all mingledin the same works, and requiring to be discriminated.We meet with truths over-stated ormisdirected, matters of detail variously taken, factsincompletely proved or applied, and rules inconsistentlyurged or discordantly interpreted. Suchindeed is the state of every deep philosophy in itsfirst stages, and therefore of theological knowledge.What we need at present for our Church's wellbeing,is not invention, nor originality, nor sagacity,nor even learning in our divines, at least in theINTRODUCTION. 31first place, though all these gifts of God are in ameasure needed, and never can be unseasonablewhen used religiously, but we need peculiarly asound judgment, patient thought, discrimination, acomprehensive mind, an abstinence from all privatefancies and caprices and personal tastes, in a word,divine wisdom. For this excellent endowment, letus, in behalf of ourselves and brethren, earnestlyand continually pray. Let us pray, that He whohas begun the work for our Holy Mother with adivine exuberance, will finish it as with a refiner'sfire and in the perfectness of truth.Merely to have directed attention to the presentneeds of our Church, would be a sufficient objectfor writing the following pages. We require a recognizedtheology, and if the present work, insteadof being what it is meant to be, a first approximationto the required solution in one department ofa complicated problem, contains after all but aseries of illustrations demonstrating our need, andsupplying hints for its removal, such a result, it isevident, will be quite a sufficient return for whateveranxiety it has cost the writer to have employedhis own judgment on so serious a subject. And,though in all greater matters of theology there isno room for error, so prominent and concordant isthe witness of our great Masters in their behalf,yet he is conscious that in minor points, whetherin questions of fact or of judgment, there is roomINTRODUCTION.for difference or error of opinion ; and while he hasgiven his best endeavours to be accurate, he shall notbe ashamed to own a mistake, nor reluctant to bearthe just blame of it.LECTURE I.THE NATURE AND GROUND OF ROMAN AND ProtestantERRORS.ALL Protestant sects of the present day may besaid to agree with us and differ from the Romanists,in considering the Bible as the only standardof appeal in doctrinal inquiries. They differ indeedfrom each other as well as from us in the matterof their belief; but they one and all accept thewritten word of God as the supreme and sole arbiterof their differences. This makes their contest witheach other and us more simple; I do not say shorter,on the contrary, they have been engaged in it almostthree hundred years, as many of them, that is, asare so ancient, and there are no symptoms of itsending, but it makes the controversy less laborious.It narrows the ground of it ; it levels it to the intelligenceof all ranks of men ; it gives the multitudea right to take part in it ; it encourages all men,learned and unlearned, religious and irreligious, tohave an opinion in it, and to turn controversialists.D34 THE NATURE AND GROUND OF [Let.The Bible is a small book ; any one may possess it ;and every one, unless he be very humble, will thinkhe is able to understand it. And therefore, I say,controversy is easier among Protestants, because anyonecan controvert ; easier, but not shorter ; because,though all sects agree together as to the standardof faith, viz. the Bible, yet no two agree as to theinterpreter of the Bible, but each person makes himselfthe interpreter, so that what seemed at firstsight a means of peace, turns out to be a chief occasionor cause of discord. It is a great point tocome to issue with an opponent; that is, to discoversome position which oneself affirms and theother denies, and on which the decision of the controversywill turn. It is like two armies meeting,and settling their quarrel in a pitched battle, insteadof wandering to and fro, each by itself, andinflicting injury and gaining advantages where noone resists it. Now the Bible is this commonground among Protestants, and seems to have beenoriginally assumed in no small degree from a notionof its simplicity in argument. But, if this was thecase in any quarter, the hope has been frustratedby this difficulty, the Bible is not so written asto force its meaning upon the reader ; no two Protestantsects can agree together whose interpretationof the Bible is to be received ; and under suchcircumstances each naturally prefers his own ; hisown " interpretation," his own " doctrine," his owntongue," his own " revelation." Accordingly, acuteI.] ROMAN AND PROTESTANT ERRORS. 35men among them see that the very elementarynotion which they have adopted, of the Bible withoutnote or comment being the sole authoritativejudge in controversies of faith, is a self-destructiveprinciple, and practically involves the conclusion,that dispute is altogether hopeless and useless, andeven absurd. After whatever misgivings or reluctance,they seem to allow, or to be in the way toallow, that truth is but matter of opinion ; that thatis truth to each which each thinks to be truth, providedhe sincerely and really thinks it ; that thedivinity of the Bible itself is the only thing thatneed be believed, and that its meaning varies withthe individuals who receive it ; that it has no onemeaning to be ascertained as a matter of fact, butthat it may mean anything because it is said tomean so many things ; and hence that our wisdomand our duty lie in discarding all notions of theimportance of any particular set of opinions, anydoctrines, or any creed, each man having a rightto his own, and in living together peaceably withmen of all persuasions, whatever our private judgmentsand leanings may be. I do not say that theseconclusions need follow by logical necessity fromthe principle from which I have deduced them;but that practically they will follow in the longrun, and actually have followed where there wereno counteracting causes in operation. Nor do Iallow that they will follow at all in our own case,though we agree with Protestant sects in makingD236 THE NATURE AND GROUND OF [Let.Scripture the document of ultimate appeal in mattersof faith. For though we consider Scripture asufficient, we do not consider it our sole informantin divine truths. We have another source of informationin reserve, as I shall presently show.We agree with the sectaries around us so far asthis, to be ready to take their ground, which Romanistscannot and will not do, to believe that ourcreed can be proved entirely, and to be willing toprove it solely from the Bible. We are willing toargue with them with texts ; they may feel theforce of these or not ; we may convince them ornot, but we convince ourselves ; we do confutethem with the weapon they have assumed as theirown, and we know we do ; and we are able to convinceand convert others by means of it, thoughnot them ; which proves its cogency in our use ofit. We have joined issue with them, and done allthat can be done. The case is not as if we weresearching after some unknown and indefinite groundof proof which we were told they had, but wereuncertain about, and could not ascertain or circumscribe.We know their greatest strength, and wediscover it to be weakness. They have no argumentbehind to fall back upon ; we have examined anddecided against their cause.And they themselves, as I have observed, havedecided against it too ; their adoption of the latitudinariannotion that one creed is as good asanother, is an evidence of it. We on the contraryI.] ROMAN AND PROTESTANT ERRORS. 37should not be perplexed at hearing their interpretationsof Scripture, were they ever so positive andperemptory in maintaining them. Nay, we shouldnot waver even if they succeeded in weakening someof our proofs, taking the text of Scripture by itself,both as considering that in matters of conductevidence is not destroyed by being impaired, andbecause we rely on Antiquity to strengthen suchintimations of doctrine as are but faintly, thoughreally, given in Scripture.Protestant denominations, I have said, one andall profess to appeal to Scripture, whether they becalled Independents, or Baptists, or Unitarians, orPresbyterians, or Wesleyans, or by any other title.But the case is different as regards Romanists;they do not appeal to Scripture unconditionally ;they are not willing to stand or fall by mere argumentsfrom Scripture; and therefore, if we takeScripture as our ground of proof in our controversieswith them, we have not yet joined issue with them.Not that they reject Scripture, it would be veryunjust to say so ; they would shrink from doing so,or being thought to do so ; and perhaps they adhereto Scripture as closely as some of those Protestantbodies who profess to be guided by nothingelse ; but, though they admit Scripture to be theword of God, they conceive that it is not the wholeword of God, they openly avow that they regulatetheir faith by something else besides Scripture, bythe existing Traditions of the Church. They mainsTHE NATURE AND GROUND OF [Let.tain that the system of doctrine which they holdcame to them from the Apostles as truly and certainlyas their inspired writings ; so that, even ifthose writings had been lost, the world would stillhave had the blessings of a Revelation. Now, theymust be clearly understood, if they are to be soundlyrefuted. We hear it said, that they go by Tradition,and we fancy in consequence that there areacertain definite number of statements ready framedand compiled, which they profess to have receivedfrom the Apostles. One may hear the questionsometimes asked, for instance, where their professedTraditions are to be found, whether there is anycollection of them, and whether they are printedand published. Now though they would allow thatthe Traditions of the Church are in fact containedin the writings of its Doctors, still this questionproceeds on somewhat of a misconception of theirreal theory, which seems to be as follows. By Traditionthey mean the whole system of faith andordinances which they have received from the generationbefore them, and that generation againfrom the generation before itself. And in this senseundoubtedly we all go by Tradition in matters ofthis world. Where is the corporation, society, orfraternity of any kind, but has certain receivedrules and understood practices which are nowhereput down in writing? How often do we hear itsaid, that this or that person has " acted unusually,"that so and so " was never done before," that it isI.] ROMAN AND PROTESTANT ERRORS. 39against rule," and the like ; and then perhaps, toavoid the inconvenience of such irregularity infuture, what was before a tacit engagement, isturned into a formal and explicit order or principle.The want of a regulation must be discoveredbefore it is supplied ; and the virtual transgressionof it goes before its adoption. At thisvery time great part of the law of the land is administeredunder the sanction of such a Tradition ;it is not contained in any formal or authoritativecode, it depends on custom or precedent. Thereis no explicit written law, for instance, simply declaringmurder to, be a capital offence ; unless indeedwe have recourse to the divine command inthe ninth chapter of the book of Genesis. Murderersare hanged by custom. Such as this is theTradition of the Church; Tradition is uniformcustom. When the Romanists say they adhere toTradition, they mean that they believe and act asChristians have always believed and acted ; they goby the custom, as judges and juries do. And thenthey go on to allege that there is this importantdifference between their custom and all other customsin the world ; that the tradition of the law,at least in its details, though it has lasted for centuriesupon centuries, any how had a beginning inhumanappointments ; whereas theirs, though it hasabeginning too, yet, when traced back, has noneshort of the Apostles of Christ, and is in consentTHE NATURE AND GROUND OF [Let.quench of divine not of human authority, is trueand intrinsically binding as well as expedient.If we ask, why it is that these professed Traditionswere not reduced to writing, it is answered,that the Christian doctrine, as it has proceededfrom the mouth of the Apostles, is too varied andtoo minute in its details to allow of it. No oneyou fall in with on the highway, can tell you allhis mind at once ; much less could the Apostles,possessed as they were of great and supernaturaltruths, and busied in the propagation of the Church,digest in one Epistle or Treatise a systematic viewof the Revelation made to them. And so muchat all events we may grant, that they did not doso ; there being confessedly little of system or completenessin any portion of the New Testament.If again it be objected that this notion of anunwritten transmission of the Truth being supposed,there is nothing to show that the faith ofto-day was the faith of yesterday, nothing to connectthis age and the Apostolic, they maintain, onthe contrary, that over and above the corroborativethough indirect testimony of ecclesiastical writers,no error could have arisen in the Church withoutits being protested against and put down on thisfirst appearance ; that from all parts of the Churcha cry would have been raised against the novelty,and a declaration put forth, as we know was thepractice of the early Church, denouncing it. AndI.] ROMAN AND PROTESTANT ERRORS. 41thus they would account for the indeterminatenesson the one hand, yet on the other the accuracy andvariableness of their existing Tradition or unwrittenCreed. It is latent, but it lives. It issilent, like the rapids of a river, before the rocksintercept it. It is the Church's unconscious habitof opinion and feeling ; which she reflects upon,masters, and expresses, according to the emergency.We see then the mistake of asking for a completecollection of the Roman Traditions ; as well mightwe ask for a collection of a man's tastes and opinionson a given subject. Tradition in its fulnessis necessarily unwritten ; it is the mode in whicha society has felt or acted during a certain period,and it cannot be circumscribed any more than aman's countenance and manner can be conveyedto strangers in any set of propositions.Such are the Traditions to which the Romanistsappeal, whether viewed as latent in the Church'steaching, or as passing into writing and being fixedin the decrees of the Councils or amid the worksof the ancient Fathers.Now how do we of the English Church meetthese statements? or rather, I should say, how dothe Romanists prove them? For it will be observed,that what has been said hitherto, does notprove that their Traditions are such as they aver,but merely that their theory is consistent with itself.And as a beautiful theory it must, as a whole,ever remain. I do not deny indeed that to a certeTHE NATURE AND GROUND OF [Let.tain point it is tenable : but this is a very differentthing from admitting that it is so as regards thosevery tenets for which the Romanists would adduceit. They have to show not only that there wassuch a traditionary system, and that it has lastedto this day, but that their peculiarities are parts ofit. But to proceed ; how under such circumstancesought we to behave ourselves towards their pretensions?Shall we refuse to consider the subjectof Tradition at all, saying that the Bible containsthe whole of Divine Revelation, and that the doctrinesprofessedly conveyed by Tradition are onlyso far Apostolic as they are contained in Scripture?This will be saying what is true, but it will beassuming the point in dispute ; it will in no sense bemeeting the Romanists. We shall only involve ourselvesin great difficulties by so doing. For, let usconsider a moment ; a Christian does not like to dwellon the following question, but the Romanist will besure to ask it, and we shall have to answer it ; so wehad better consider it beforehand. I mean, how dowe know that Scripture comes from God ? It cannotbe denied that we of this age receive it upon generalTradition ; we receive through Tradition both theBible itself, and the doctrine that it is divinely inspired.That doctrine is one of those pious and comfortabletruths " which we have heard and known,and such as our fathers have told us," " which Godcommanded our forefathers to teach their children,that their posterity might know it, and the chili.]ROMAN AND PROTESTANT ERRORS. 43drew which were yet unborn ; to the intent thatwhen they came up, they might show their childrenthe same V The great multitude of Protestantsbelieve in Scripture precisely on the groundwhich the Romanists trust in behalf of their ownerroneous system, viz. because they have beentaught it. To deride Tradition therefore as somethingirrational or untrustworthy in itself, is toweaken the foundation of our own faith in Scripture,and is very cruel towards the great multitudeof uneducated persons, who are obliged to believewhat their instructors tell them. If, however, itbe said that pious Protestants have " the witnessin themselves," as a sure test to their own heartsof the truth of Scripture, the fact is undeniable;and a sufficient and consoling proof is it to themthat the doctrines in Scripture are true ; but itdoes not prove that the very book we call theBible was written, and all of it written, by inspiration; nor does it allow us to dispense with theexternal evidence of Tradition assuring us that itis so.But if, again, it be said that the New Testamentis received as divine, not upon the present traditionarybelief of Christians, but upon the evidenceof Antiquity, this too, even were it true, for surelythe multitude of Christians know nothing aboutAntiquity at all, yet this is exactly what the RotPsalm Lxxviii. 3 7.44 THE NATURE AND GROUND OF [Lucy.masts maintain of their unwritten doctrines also.They argue that their present Creed has beenthe universal belief of all preceding ages, as recordedin the writings of those ages, still extant.Suppose, I say, we take this ground in behalf ofthe divinity of Holy Scripture, that it is attestedby all the writers and other authorities of primitivetimes : doubtless we are right in doing so ; itis the very argument by which we actually doprove the divinity of the sacred Canon ; but it isalso the very argument which the Romanists putforward for their peculiar errors; viz. that whilereceived on existing Tradition, they are also provedby the unanimous consent of the first ages ofChristianity. If then we would leave ourselvesroom for proving that Scripture is inspired, wemust not reject the notion and principle of the argumentfrom Tradition and Antiquity as somethingin itself absurd and unworthy of Almighty wisdom.In other words, to refuse to listen to these informantsbecause we have a written word, is a self-destructivecourse, inasmuch as that written word isproved to be such mainly by these very informantswhich we reject as if to do honour to it. It is tooverthrow our premises with our conclusion. Thatwhich ascertains for us the divinity of Scripture,may convey to us other Articles of Faith also,unless Scripture has expressly determined in thenegative.But the sacred volume itself, as well as theI.] ROMAN AND PROTESTANT ERRORS. 45doctrine of its inspiration, comes to us by traditionalconveyance. The Protestant of the day asksthe Romanist, " How do you know your unwrittenword comes from the Apostles, received as it isthrough so many unknown hands through so manyages ? A book is something definite and trustworthy;what is written remains. We have theApostles' writings before us ; but we have nothingto guarantee to us the fidelity of those successiveinformants which stand between the Apostles andthe unwritten doctrines you ascribe to them." Butthe Romanist surely may answer by the counterinquiry, how he on his part knows that what heconsiders their writings are really such, and reallywhat the Fathers possessed and witness to betheirs : " You have a printed book," he may argue ;the Apostles did not write that ; it was printedfrom another book, and that again from another,and so on 1 . After going back a long way, youwill trace it to a manuscript in the dark ages,written by you know not whom, copied from someother manuscript you know not what or when, andthere the trace is lost. You profess, indeed, thatit runs up to the very autograph of the Apostles ;but with your rigorous notions of proof, it wouldbe more to your purpose to produce it than to giveprobable reasons for the fidelity of the copy. Tillyou do this, you are resting on a series of unknown1 Stillingfleet's Grounds, i. 7. 68. pp. 198202.46 THE NATURE AND GROUND OF [Let.links as well as we ; you are trusting a mere traditionof men. It is quite as possible for humanhands to have tampered with the written as withthe unwritten word ; or at least if corruption ofthe latter is the more probable of the two, the differenceof the cases is one of degree, and not anyessential distinction V Now whatever explanationsthe Protestant in question makes in behalf ofthe preservation of the written word, will be foundapplicable in the theory to the unwritten. For instance,he may argue, and irresistibly, that a numberof manuscripts of various, and some of veryearly times, are still extant, and these belongingto different places and derived from sources distinctfrom each other ; and that they all agree together.If the New Testament were practised upon, thismust have happened before all these families ofcopies were made ; which is to throw back thefraud upon such very early times as are a guaranteefor believing it to have been impracticable 2 . Orhe may argue that it was the acknowledged dutyof the Church to keep and guard the Scriptures,and that in matter of fact her various brancheswere very careful to do so ; accordingly that it isquite incredible that the authentic text should belost in spite of so many trustees, as they may becalled, and an altered copy or a forgery substituted.Miller's End of Controversy, Letter 9.2 Thorndike, part i. ch. 33.I.] ROMAN AND PROTESTANT ERRORS. 47Or again, he may allege that the early Fathers arefrequent in quoting the New Testament in theirown works ; and that these quotations accuratelyaccord with the copy of it which we at presentpossess.Such as these are the arguments we as well asthe ordinary Protestant use against the infidel inbehalf of the written word, and most powerfully ;but it must be confessed that they are applicablein their nature to traditionary teaching also ; theyare such as the Roman doctrines might possess asfar as the a priori view of the case is concerned.How then are we to meet the Romanists, seeingwe cannot join issue with them, or cut short thecontroversy, by a mere appeal to Scripture ? Wemust meet them, and may do so fearlessly, on theground of Antiquity, to which they betake themselves.We followed the Protestant's challenge,in arguing from mere Scripture in our defence ;we must not, and need not shrink from the invitationof the Romanist to stand or fall by Antiquity.Truth alone is consistent with itself; wearewilling to take either the test of Antiquity orof Scripture. As we accord to the Protestant sectary,that Scripture is the inspired treasury of thewhole faith, but maintain that his doctrines arenot in Scripture, so we agree with the Romanistin appealing to Antiquity as our great teacher,but deny that his doctrines are to be found in Antiquity.So far then is clear ; we do not deny the48 THE NATURE AND GROUND OF [Let.force of Tradition in the abstract ; we do not denythe soundness of the argument from Antiquity;but we challenge the Romanist to prove the matterof fact. We deny that his doctrines are in Antiquityany more than they are in the Bible ; and wemaintain that his professed Tradition is not reallysuch, that it is a Tradition of men, that it is notcontinuous, that it stops short of the Apostles, thatthe history of its introduction is known. On bothaccounts then his doctrines are innovations ; becausethey run counter to the doctrine of Antiquity,and because they rest upon what is historicallyan upstart Tradition.This statement is intelligible and clear, but itleads to this conclusion. The Bible indeed is asmall book, but the writings of Antiquity are voluminous; and to read them is the work of a life.It is plain then that the controversy with theRomanists is not an easy one, not open to everyoneto take up. And this is the case for anotherreason also. A private Christian may put whatmeaning he pleases on many parts of Scripture,and no one can hinder him. If interfered with,he can promptly answer that it is his opinion, andmay appeal to his right of Private Judgment. Buthe cannot so deal with Antiquity. History is arecord of facts ; and " facts," according to the proverb," are stubborn things." Ingenious men maymisrepresent them, or suppress them for a while ;but in the end they will be duly ascertained andI.] ROMAN AND PROTESTANT ERRORS. 49appreciated. The writings of the Fathers are fartoo ample to allow of a disputant resting in one ortwo obscure or ambiguous passages in them, andpermanently turning such to his own account, whichhe may do in the case of Scripture. For tworeasons, then, controversy with Romanists is laborious; because it takes us to ancient Church history,and because it does not allow scope to theoffhand or capricious decisions of private judgment.However, it must be observed, for the samereasons, though more laborious, it is a surer controversy.We are more likely to come to an end ;it does not turn upon opinions but on facts.This may be put in somewhat a different pointof view. You know that three centuries ago tookplace a great schism in the Western Church, whichthenceforth divided into two large bodies, the Romanistson one hand, the Protestants on the other.On the latter side it is usual to reckon our ownChurch, though really on neither : from which aftera time certain portions split off, and severally set upa religion and communion for themselves. Nowsupposing we had to dispute with these separatedportions, the Presbyterians, Baptists, Independents,or other Protestants, on the subject of theirseparation, they would at once avow the fact, butthey would deny that it was a sin. The elementarycontroversy between us and them would beone of doctrine and principle ; viz. whether separate50 THE NATURE AND GROUND OF [Let.tion was or was not a sin. It is far otherwise asregards the Romanists ; they as well as ourselvesallow, or rather maintain, the criminality of schism,and that a very great sin was committed at theReformation, whether by the one party, or by theother, or by both. The only question is, whichparty committed it ; the Romanists lay it at our door,we retort it, and justly, upon them. Thus we joinissue with them on a question of fact ; one whichcannot be settled without a sufficient stock oflearning on the part of the disputants. So againthe Calvinistic controversy is in great measuredependent on abstract reasoning and philosophicaldiscussion; whereas no one can determine by apriori arguments whether or not the Papacy be apersecuting power l .On the whole, then, it appears from what hasbeen said, that our controversies with the Protestantsare easy to handle, but interminable, beingdisputes about opinions ; but those with Romanistsarduous, but instructive, as relating rather tomatters of fact.These last remarks throw some light on thecharacteristic differences of system as well as ofargumentative basis between Protestantism andRomanism respectively. Our controversy with Romaniststurns more upon facts than upon first printVide some excellent remarks on the subject in the BritishMagazine for March, 1836, article Church Matters.I.] ROMAN AND PROTESTANT ERRORS. 51cipher ; with Protestant sectaries it is more aboutprinciples than about facts. This general contrastbetween the two religions, which I would not seemto extend beyond what the sober truth warrants,for the sake of an antithesis, is paralleled in thecommon remark of our most learned controversialists,that Romanism holds the foundation, or is thetruth overlaid with corruptions. This is saying thesame thing in other words. They discern in it thegreat outlines of primitive Christianity, but theyfind it all touched, if nothing worse, touched andtainted by error, and so made worthless or nearlyso to the multitude of men, worthless, except tomen of high and spiritual minds, who can undo theevil, arresting the tendencies of the system by theirown purity, and restoring it to the sweetness andfreshness of its original state. The very force ofthe word corruption implies this to be the peculiarityof Romanism. All error indeed of whateverkind may be called a corruption of truth ; still weproperly apply the term to such kinds of error asare not denials but perversions, distortions, or excessesof it. Such is the relation of Romanismtowards true Catholicity. It is the misdirection andabuse, not the absence of right principle. To takea familiar illustration ; rashness and cowardice areboth faults, and both unlike true courage ; butcowardice implies the absence of the principle ofcourage, whereas rashness is but the extravaganceof the principle. Again, prodigality and avariceE252 THE NATURE AND GROUND OF [Let.are both vices, and unlike true and wise liberality ;but avarice differs from it in principle, prodigality inmatters of detail, in the time, place, person, mannerof giving, and the like. On the other hand, prodigalitymay accidentally be the more dangerousextreme, as being the more subtle vice, the morepopular, the more likely to attract people, the morelike, a virtue. This is somewhat like the positionof Romanism, Protestantism, and Catholic Truthrelatively to each other. Romanism is an unnaturaland misshapen development of the Truth ;not the less dangerous because it retains traces ofits genuine features, and usurps its name, as viceborrows the name of virtue, as pride is often calledself-respect, or cowardice or worldly wisdom goesby the name of prudence, or rashness by that ofcourage. On the other hand, no one would evercall a miser liberal ; and so no one would call amere Protestant a Catholic, except an altogethernew sense was put on the word to suit a purpose.Romanism has the principle of true Catholicismperverted ; popular Protestantism is wanting in theprinciple. Lastly, virtue lies in a mean, is a point,almost invisible to the world, hard to find, acknowledgedbut by the few ; and so Christian Truth inthese latter ages, when the world has broken upthe Church, has been but a stranger upon theearth, and has been hidden and superseded bycounterfeits.The same view of Romanism is implied whenI ] ROMAN AND PROTESTANT ERRORS. 53we call our ecclesiastical changes in the sixteenthcentury a Reformation. A building has not beenreformed or repaired, when it has been pulled downand built up again ; but the word is used when ithas been left substantially what it was before, onlyamended or restored in detail. In like manner,we Anglicans do not profess a different religionfrom the Romanists, we profess their Faith oil buttheir corruptions '.Again, this same character of Romanism as aperversion, not a contradiction of Christian Truth,is confessed as often as members of our Church incontroversy with it contend, as they may rightlydo, that it must be judged not by the formal decreesof the Council of Trent, as its advocates arefond of doing, but by its practical working andits existing state in the countries which profess it.Romanists would fain confine us in controversy tothe consideration of the bare and acknowledgedprinciples of their Church ; we consider this to beanunfair restriction ; why ? because we conceivethat Romanism is far more faulty in its detailsthan in its formal principles, and that Councils, towhich its adherents would send us, have more todowith its abstract system than with its practicalworking, that the abstract system contains for themost part tendencies to evil, which the actual workingbrings out, thus supplying illustrations of that1 Vid. the Canons of 1603, No. 30, " The abuse of a thing,'&c.54- THE NATURE AND GROUND OF [LECT-evil which is really though latently contained inprinciples capable in themselves of an honest interpretation.Thus for instance, the decree concerningPurgatory might be charitably made almost toconform to the doctrine of St. Austin or St. Chrysostom,were it not for the comment afforded by thepopular belief as existing in those countries whichhold it, and by the opinions of the Roman schools.It is something to the purpose also to observe,that this peculiar character of Romanism, asbeing substantial Truth corrupted, has tended tostrengthen the popular notion, that it, or theChurch of Rome, or the Pope or Bishop of Rome,is the Antichrist foretold in Scripture. That thereis in Romanism something very unchristian, I fullyadmit, or rather maintain ; but I will observe herethat this strange two-fold aspect of the Romansystem seems in matter of fact to have had someshare in retaining for it that fearful title, and inthis way. When Protestants have come to lookat it closely, they have found truth and error unitedin so subtle a combination, (as is the case with allcorruptions, as with sullied snow, or fruit over-ripe,or metal alloyed) they have found truth so impregnatedwith error, and error so sheltered by truth,so much too adducible in defence of the system,which, from want of learning or other cause, theycould not refute without refuting their own faithand practice at the same time, so much in it ofhigh and noble principle, or salutary usage, whichthey had lost, and, as losing, were, in this respect, inI.] ROMAN AND PROTESTANT ERRORS. 55an inferior state, that for this very reason, as thereadiest, safest, simplest solution of their difficulties,not surely the fairest, but the readiest, ascutting the knot and extricating them at oncefrom their position, they have pronounced Romanismto be the Antichrist ; I say, for the very reasonthat so much may be said for it, that it is so difficultto refute, so subtle and crafty, so seductive, propertieswhich are tokens of the hateful and fearfuldeceiver who is to come 1 . Of course I do notmean to say that this perplexing aspect of Romanismhas originally brought upon it the stigma underconsideration; but that it has served to inducepeople indolently to acquiesce in it without examination.In these remarks, I have appealed to the commonopinion of the world ; which is altogether confirmedwhen we come actually to compare togetherthe doctrinal articles of our own and of the Romanfaith. In both systems the same Creeds are acknowledged.Among other points in common weboth hold, that certain doctrines are necessary tobe believed for salvation ; we both believe in thedoctrines of the Trinity, Incarnation, and Atonement; in original sin ; in the necessity of regeneration;in the supernatural grace of the Sacraments; in the Apostolical succession ; in the obli-1 Vide Mr. Bickersteth on Popery, ed. 5, pp. 1720. 52.56 THE NATURE AND GROUND OF [Let.nation of faith and obedience, and the eternity offuture punishment.In conclusion I would observe, that I have beenspeaking of Romanism, not as an existing politicalsect among us, but considered in itself, in its abstractsystem, and in a state of quiescence. Viewedindeed in action, and as realized in its present partizans,it is but one out of the many denominationswhich are the disgrace of our age and country.In temper and conduct it does but resemble thatunruly Protestantism which lies on our other side,and it bears without reluctance to be allied andto act with it towards the overthrow of a purerreligion. But herein is the difference of the oneextreme from the other ; the political Romanist ofthe day becomes such in spite of his fundamentalprinciples, the political Protestant in accordancewith his. The best Dissenter is he who is least ofa Dissenter; the best Roman Catholic is he whocomes nearest to a Catholic. The reproach of thepresent Romanists is that they are inconsistent ;and it is a reproach which is popularly felt to bejust. They are confessedly unlike the loyal menwho rallied round the throne of our first Charles,or who fought, however ill-advisedly, for his exileddescendants. The particular nature of this inconsistencywill be discussed in some following Lectures; meanwhile I have here considered Romani.]ROMAN AND PROTESTANT ERRORS. 57ism in its abstract professions for two reasons.First, I wo\4<i willingly believe, that in spite of theviolence and rancour of its public supporters, thereare many individuals in their communion of gentle,affectionate, and deeply religious minds ; and such abelief is justified when we find that the necessary differencebetween us and them is not one of essentialprinciple, that it is the difference merely of superstitionfrom religion, not of unbelief from religion.Next, I have insisted upon it, by way of showingwhat must be the nature of their Reformation, ifin God's merciful counsels a Reformation awaitsthem. It will be far more a reform of their popularusages and opinions, and ecclesiastical policy, or adestruction of what is commonly called Popery,than of their abstract principles and maxims. Onthe other hand, let it not be supposed because I havespoken without sympathy for popular Protestantismin the abstract, that this is all one with being harshtowards individuals professing it ; far from it. Theworse their creed the more sympathy is due to theirpersons ; chiefly to those, for they most demand andwill most patiently suffer it, who least concur intheir own doctrine, and are held by it in an unwillingcaptivity. Would that they would be taughtthat their religion, whatever it is, never can satisfytheir souls, and does not admit of reform, but mustcome to nought. Would that they could be persuadedto transfer their misplaced and most unrequitedaffection from the systems of men to the58 THE NATURE AND GROUND, &c.One Holy Spouse of Christ, the Church Catholic,which in this country manifests herself in the Churchcommonly so called as her representative ! Norneed we despair that as regards many of them thiswish may yet be fulfilled.LECTURE II.ON ROMANISM AS NEGLECTFUL OF ANTIQUITY.WE differ from the Romanists, as I have said, morein our view of historical facts than in principles ;but in saying this, I am speaking, not of theiractual system, nor of their actual mode of defendingit, but of their professions, professions, which intheir mouths are mere professions, while they aretruths in ours. The principles, professed by bothparties, are at once the foundation of our owntheology, and what is called an argumentum adhominem against theirs. They profess to appeal toprimitive Christianity; we honestly take theirground, as holding it ourselves; but when thecontroversy grows animated, and descends intodetails, they suddenly leave it and desire to finishthe dispute on some other field. In like mannerin their teaching and acting, they begin as if in thename of all the Fathers at once, but will be foundin the sequel to prove, teach, and conduct matters60 ON ROMANISM AS [Let.simply in their own name. Our differences from them,considered not in theory but in fact, are in no sensematters of detail and questions of degree. In truth,there is a tenet in their theology which assumesquite a new position in relation to the rest, whenwe pass from the abstract and quiescent theory tothe practical workings of the system. The infallibilityof the Church is then found to be its firstprinciple, whereas, before, it was a necessary, but asecondary doctrine. Whatever principles they professin theory, resembling, or coincident with ourown, yet when they come to particulars, when theyhave to prove this or that article of their creed,they supersede the appeal to Scripture and Antiquityby the pretence of the infallibility of theChurch, thus solving the whole question, by asummary and final interpretation both of Antiquityand of Scripture.This is what takes place in the actual course ofthe controversy. At the same time it is obviousthat, while they are as yet but engaged in tracingout their elementary principles, and recommendingthem to our notice, they cannot assign to thisinfluential doctrine the same sovereign place in theirsystem. It cannot be taken for granted as a firstprinciple in the controversy ; if so, nothing remainsto be proved, and the controversy is at an end, forevery doctrine is contained in it by implication, andno doctrine but might as fairly be assumed as afirst principle also. Accordingly, in order to makeII.- J NEGLECTFUL OF ANTIQUITY. 61a show of proving it, its advocates must necessarilyfall back upon some more intelligible doctrine ;and that is, the authority of Antiquity, to whichthey boldly appeal, as I described in my last Lecture.It follows that there is a striking dissimilarity,or even inconsistency between their systemas quiescent, and as in action, in its abstract principles,and its reasonings and discussions on particularpoints. In the Creed of Pope Pius not a word issaid expressly about the Church's infallibility; itforms no Article of faith there. Her interpretation,indeed, of Scripture is recognized as authoritative; but so also is the " unanimous consent ofFathers." But when we put aside the creeds andprofessions of our opponents for their actual teachingand disputing, they will be found to care verylittle for the Fathers, whether as primitive or asconcordant ; they believe the existing Church tobe infallible, and if ancient belief is at variancewith it, which of course they do not allow, but ifit is, then Antiquity must be mistaken ; that isall. Thus Romanism, which even in its abstractsystem, must be considered a perversion or distortionof the truth, is in its actual and public manifestationa far more serious error. It is then adisproportionate or monstrous development of atheory in itself extravagant. I propose now to givesome illustration of it, thus considered, viz., toshow that in fact it substitutes the authority of the/Church for that of Antiquity.62 ON ROMANISM AS [Let.First, let us understand what is meant by sayingthat Antiquity is of authority in religious questions.Both Romanists and ourselves maintain as follows :that whatever doctrine the primitive ages unanimouslyattest, whether by consent of Fathers, orby Councils, or by the events of history, or by controversies,or in whatever way, whatever may fairlyand reasonably be considered to be the universalbelief of those ages, is to be received as comingfrom the Apostles. This Canon, as it may becalled, rests upon the principle, which we act ondaily, that what many independent and competentwitnesses guarantee, is true. The concordant testimonyof the Church Catholic to certain doctrines,such as the Incarnation, is an argument in itsbehalf the same in kind as that for the being ofa God, derived from the belief of all nations in anintelligent Providence. If it be asked, why we donot argue in this way from the existing as well asfrom the ancient Church, we answer that Christendomnow differs from itself in all points exceptthose in which it is already known to have agreedof old ; so that we cannot make use of it if wewould. So far, then, as it can be used, it is butaconfirmation of Antiquity, though a valuableone. Besides, the greater is the interval betweena given age and that of the Apostles, and the moreintimate the connexion and influence of countrywith country, the less can the separate branches ofthe Church be considered as independent witnesses.II.] NEGLECTFUL OF ANTIQUITY. 63In the Roman controversy, then, the witness of alater age, would seldom answer to the notion ofa Catholic Tradition, inasmuch as the various partsof Christendom either would not agree together, orwhen they did, would not be distinct witnesses.Thus Ancient Consent is, practically, the only,or main kind of Tradition which now remainsto us.The Rule or Canon which I have been explaining,is best known as expressed in the words ofVincentius, of Lerins, in his celebrated treatise uponthe Tests of Heresy and Error 1 ; viz., that that isto be received as Apostolic which has been taught"always, everywhere, and by all." Catholicity,Antiquity, and Consent of Fathers, is the properevidence of the fidelity or Apostolicity of a professedTradition. Infant Baptism, for instance,must have been appointed by the Apostles, or weshould not find it received so early, so generally,with such a silence concerning its introduction.The Christian faith is dogmatic, because it has beenso accounted in every Church up to this day. Thewashing of the feet, enjoined in the 13th chapterof the Gospel according to St. John, is not a necessaryrite or a Sacrament, because it has never beenso observed ; did Christ or His Apostles intend1 This work, which is short, perspicuous, and eloquent, isnow in course of republication at Oxford with a translation.It will amply repay the pains of more than one perusal.64 ON ROMANISM AS [Let.otherwise, it would follow, (what is surely impossible,)that a new and erroneous view of our Lord's wordsarose even in the Apostles' lifetime, and was fromthe first every where substituted for the true. Again ;fabrics for public worship are allowable and fittingunder the Gospel, though our Lord contrasts worshippingat Jerusalem or Gerizim with worshippingin spirit and truth, because they ever have been soesteemed. The Sabbatical rest is changed from theSabbath to the Lord's-day, because it has neverbeen otherwise, since Christianity was a religion.It follows that Councils or individuals are ofauthority, when we have reason to suppose they aretrustworthy informants of Apostolical Tradition.If a Council is attended by many Bishops fromvarious parts of Christendom, and if they speakone and all the same doctrine, without constraint,and bear witness to their having received it fromtheir Fathers, that they never heard of any otherdoctrine, and that they verily believe it to be Apostolic,great consideration is due to its decisions.If, on the other hand, they do not profess to bearwitness to a fact, but merely to deduce from Scripturefor themselves, besides or beyond what theyreceived from their Fathers, whatever deference isdue to them, it is not of that peculiar kind whichis contemplated by the Rule of Vincentius. Inlike manner, if some great Christian writer, of highcharacter, extensive learning, and ample means ofinformation, attests the universality of a certainII.] NEGLECTFUL OF ANTIQUITY. 65doctrine, and the absence of all trace of its introductionshort of the Apostles' times, such a one,though an individual, yet as the spokesman of hisgeneration, would be entitled to especial deference.On the other hand, the most highly gifted andreligious persons are liable to error, and are notto be implicitly trusted where they profess to berecording, not a fact, but their own opinion.Christians know no Master on earth ; they defer,indeed, to the judgment, obey the advice, and followthe example of good men in ten thousandways, but they do not make their opinions part ofwhat is emphatically called the Faith. Christalone is the Author and Finisher of Faith in all itssenses ; His servants do but witness it, and theirstatements are, then, only valuable when they aretestimonies, not deductions or conjectures. Wherethey speak of themselves, about points of faith, andmuch more when they are at variance with CatholicAntiquity, we can bear to examine and even condemnthe uncertain or the erroneous opinion.Thus Pope Gregory might be an advocate for adoctrine resembling that of Purgatory ; St. GregoryNyssen may have used language available in defenceof Transubstantiation ; St. Ephraim may haveinvoked the Virgin ; St. Austin might believe inthe irrespective Predestination of individuals ; St.Cyril might afford a handle to Eutyches ; Tertullianmight be a Botanist ; Origen might deny theeternity of future punishment ; yet all such in-66 ON ROMANISM AS [Let.stances, whatever be their weight, from other circumstances,have no weight at all one way orother in the argument from Catholic Tradition.In like manner, Universality, of course, provesnothing, if it is traceable to an origin short ofApostolic, whether to present influences from without,or to some assignable point of time. Whateverjudgment is to be formed of a certain practice or doctrine,be it right or wrong, and on whatever grounds,at any rate, it is not part or adjunct of the Faith,but must be advocated on its intrinsic propriety, orusefulness, or, if tenable, is binding in duty onlyon particular persons or parties, ages or countries,if its history resembles that of the secular establishmentof the Church, or of Monachism, or ofputting to death for religious opinions, or ofsprinkling in Baptism, or the denial of the cup tothe laity, or of Ecclesiastical Liberty, subjects,which I do not, of course, put on a footing witheach other, but name together as being one and allexternal to that circle of religious truth which theApostles sealed with their own signature as theGospel Faith, and delivered over to the Churchafter them.But here it may be asked, whether it is possibleaccurately to know the limits of that Faith, fromthe peculiar circumstances in which it was firstspread, which hindered it from being realized inthe first centuries in its complete proportions. Itmay be conjectured, for instance, that the doctrineII.] NEGLECTFUL OF ANTIQUITY. 67of what is familiarly called " Church and King " isApostolic, except that it could not be developed,while a heathen and persecuting power was sovereign.This is true ; and hence a secondary argumentis derivable from Ancient Consent in anydoctrine, even when it does not appeal to traditionaryreception ; viz., on the principle thatwhat an early age held universally, must have beenunconsciously transmitted from the Apostles, andmust be the due expression of their mind and spirit,under changed circumstances, and therefore is bindingon us in piety, though not part of the Faith.The same consideration applies to the interpretationof Scripture ; but this is to enter on a distinctbranch of the subject, to which I shall advert hereafter.In the foregoing remarks I have not been attemptingany systematic discussion of the argumentsfrom Antiquity, which is unnecessary forour present purpose, but have said just so much asmay open a way for illustrating the point in hand,viz., the disrespect shown towards it by Romanists.In theory, indeed, and in their professions, as hasalready been noticed, they defer to the authorityof the Rule of Vincent as implicitly as we do ; andcommonly without much hazard, for Protestantismin general has so transgressed it, that, little as ittells for Rome, it tells still more against the wilddoctrines which go under that name. Besides,Romanists are obliged to maintain it by their veryF268 ON ROMANISM AS [Let.pretensions to be considered the One True Catholicand Apostolic Church. At the same time there isthis remarkable difference, even of theory, betweenthem and Vincentius, that the latter is altogethersilent on the subject of the Pope's Infallibility,whether considered as an attribute of his see, or asattaching to him in General Council. If Vincent'shad the sentiments and feelings of a modernRomanist, it is incomprehensible that, in a treatisewritten to guide the private Christian in matters ofFaith, he should have said not a word about thePope's supreme authority, nay, not even about theInfallibility of the Church Catholic. He refers theinquirer to a triple rule, difficult, surely, and troublesometo use, compared with that which is readyfurnished by Romanism. Applying his own ruleto his work itself, we may unhesitatingly concludethat the Pope's supreme authority in matters ofFaith, is no Catholic or Apostolic truth, becausehe was ignorant of it.However, Romanists are obliged by their professionsto appeal to Antiquity, and they thereforedo so. But enough has been said already to suggestthat, where men are indisposed towards suchan appeal, where they determine to be captious andtake exceptions, and act the disputant and sophistrather than the earnest inquirer, it admits of easyevasion, and may be made to conclude anything ornothing. The Rule of Vincent is not of a mathematicalor demonstrative character, but moral, andII.] NEGLECTFUL OF ANTIQUITY. 69requires practical judgment and good sense toapply it. For instance ; what is meant by beingtaught always ?" does it mean in every century,or every year, or every month ? Does " every where"mean in every country, or in every diocese ? Anddoes " the Consent of Fathers" require us to producethe direct testimony of every one of them ?How many Fathers, how many places, how manyinstances constitute a fulfilment of the test proposed? It is, then, from the nature of the case, acondition which never can be satisfied as fully as itmight have been ; it admits of various and unequalapplication in various instances ; and what degree ofapplication is enough must be decided by the sameprinciples which guide us in the conduct of life,which determine us in politics, or trade, or war,which lead us to accept Revelation at all, for whichwe have but probability to show at most, nay, tobelieve in the existence of an Intelligent Creator.This character, indeed, of Vincent's Canon, will butrecommend it to the disciples of the School ofButler, from its agreement with the analogy ofnature ; but it affords a ready loophole for such asdo not wish to be persuaded, of which both Protestantsand Romanists are not slow to availthemselves.Here, however, we are concerned with theRomanists. For instance : if some passage fromone of the Fathers contradicts their presentdoctrine, and it is then objected that what even70 ON ROMANISM AS [Let.one early writer has contradicted was not Catholicat the time he contradicted it, they unhesitatinglycondemn the passage as unsound and mistaken.And then follows the question, is the writer inquestion to be credited as reporting the currentviews of his age, or had he the hardihood thoughhe knew them well, to contradict, yet without sayinghe contradicted them ; and this can only bedecided by the circumstances of the case, which aningenious disputant may easily turn this way orthat. They proceed in the same way, though anumber of authorities be produced ; one is misinterpreted,another is put out of sight, a third isadmitted but undervalued. This is not said bywayof accusation here, though of* course it is aheavy charge against the Romanists, nor with theadmission that their attempts are successful, forafter all, words have a distinct meaning in spiteof sophistry, and there is a true and a false inevery matter. I am but showing how Romanistsreconcile their abstract reverence for Antiquitywith their Romanism, with their creed, and theirnotion of the Church's infallibility in declaring it ;how small their success is, and how great theirunfairness, is another question. Whatever judgmentwe form either of their conduct or its issue,such is the fact, that they extol the Fathers as awhole, and disparage them individually ; they callthem one by one Doctors of the Church, yet theyexplain away one by one their arguments, judgment,II.] NEGLECTFUL OF ANTIQUITY. 71and testimony. They refuse to combine theirseparate and coincident statements; they takeeach by himself, and settle with the first beforethey go on to the next. And thus their boastedreliance on the Fathers comes, at length, to this, toidentify Catholicity with the decrees of Councils,and to admit those Councils only which the Popehas confirmed.Such is that peculiarity of Romanism which isnow to be illustrated ; and with this purpose I willfirst quote one or two passages from writers ofauthority, by way of showing the abstract reverencein which Romanism holds the Fathers, and thenshow from others how little they carry it intopractice.Bossuet in his celebrated Exposition thus speaks:The Catholic Church, far from wishing to becomeabsolute mistress of her faith, as it is laid to hercharge, has, on the contrary, done every thing inher power to tie up her own hands, and to depriveherself of the means of innovation ; for she notonly submits to the Scripture, but in order tobanish for ever these arbitrary interpretations, whichwould substitute the whims of men for the Wordof God, she hath bound herself to interpret it, inwhat concerns faith and morality, according to thesense of the Holy Fathers, from which she professesnever to depart ; declaring by all herCouncils, and by all her professions of faith, thatshe receives no dogma whatever that is not72 ON ROMANISM AS [Let.conformable to the Tradition of all precedingages VMiller in his End of Controversy adopts thesame tone. " When any fresh controversy arisesin the Church, the fundamental maxim of theBishops and Popes, to whom it belongs to decideupon it, is, not to consult their own private opinionor interpretation of Scripture, but to inquire ' whatis and has ever been the doctrine of the Church,'concerning it. Hence, their cry is and ever hasbeen, on such occasions, as well in her Councilsas out of them, ' So we have received, so the UniversalChurch believes, let there be no new doctrine,none but what has been delivered down to us byTradition.' Again ; ' The infallibility . of ourChurch is not a power of telling all things, past,present, and to come, such as the Pagans ascribedto their oracles ; but merely the aid of God's HolySpirit, to enable her truly to decide what her faithis, and ever has been, in such articles as have beenmade known to her by Scripture and Tradition 2 .' "It seems from these passages, that the writings ofAntiquity are to be considered as limitations andsafeguards put upon the Church's teaching, recordsby which she is ever bound to direct her course,out of which she ascertains and proves those doctrinalstatements which, when formally made, areinfallible. The same view is contained in the folChap, xviii. 2 Letters xi. and xii.II.] NEGLECTFUL OF ANTIQUITY. 73lowing extracts from Bellarmine, except that, writing,not an Apology, but in controversy, he insistsless pointedly upon it. For instance : " We donot impugn, rather we maintain against impugners,that the first foundation of our faith is the Wordof God," that is, written and unwritten, " ministeredby Apostles and Prophets : . . only we add,that, besides this first foundation, another secondaryfoundation is needed, that is, the witness of theChurch. For we do not know for certain what Godhas revealed, except by the testimony of the Church 1 ."And in another place: "That alone is matter offaith, which is revealed by God, either mediatelyor immediately ; but divine revelations are partlywritten, partly unwritten. . . . The decrees ofCouncils and Popes, and the Consent of Doctors,. . then only make a doctrine an article of faith,when they explain the Word of God, or deduceany thing from it 2 ."Let us now proceed from the theory of theRoman Church to its practice. This is seen inthe actual conduct of its theologians, some of whomshall here be cited as a sample of the whole.First, I refer to the well known occasion ofBishop Bull's writing his " Defence of the NiceneFaith." He was led to do so by an attack uponthe orthodoxy of the Ante-Nicene Fathers from aquarter whence it was at first sight little to be1 De Verb. Dei Interior. hi. 10. 2 De Pure. i. 15.74 ON ROMANISM AS [Let.expected. The learned assailant was not an Arian,or Socinian, or Latitudinarian, but Petavius, a memberof the Jesuit body. The tendency of the portionof his great work on Theological Doctrineswhich treats of the Trinity is too plain to be mistaken.The historian Gibbon does not scruple topronounce that its " object, or at least, effect," wasto arraign," and as he considers, successfully, " thefaith of the Ante-Nicene Fathers ;" and it was usedin no long time by Arian writers in their ownjustification. Thus, Romanist, heretic, and infidel,unite with one another in this instance in denyingthe orthodoxy of the first centuries, just as at thismoment the same three parties are banded togetherto oppose ourselves. We trust we see inthis circumstance an omen of our own resemblanceto the Primitive Church, since we hold the sameposition with it towards these parties, and are inthe centre point, as of doctrine, so of attack. Butto return to Petavius. This learned author, in hiselaborate work on the Trinity, shows that hewould rather prove the early Confessors and Martyrsto be heterodox, than that they should existas a court of appeal from the decisions of his ownChurch ; and he accordingly sacrifices, without remorse,Justin, Clement, Irenseus, and their brethrento the maintenance of the infallibility of Rome.Or to put the matter in another point of view,truer, perhaps, though less favourable still toPetavius, he consents that the Catholic doctrineII.] NEGLECTFUL OF ANTIQUITY. 75of the Holy Trinity should so far rest on the meredeclaration of the Church, that before it was formallydefined, there was no heresy in rejecting it,provided he can thereby gain for Rome the freedomof making decrees unfettered by the recordedjudgments of Antiquity. This it was which excitedthe zeal of our great theologian, Bishop Bull,whom I will here quote, both in order to availmyself of his authority, and because of the forceand clearness of his remarks. In the introductionthen of his celebrated work, after enumerating certainheretical and latitudinarian attempts to disparagethe orthodoxy of the Ante-Nicene centuries,he speaks as follows of Petavius :But I am beyond measure astonished at thatgreat and profoundly learned man, Dionysius Pelagius;who, for all the reverence which he professesfor the Nicene Council, and his constantacknowledgment that the faith confirmed in itagainst the Arianss, is truly Apostolic and Catholic,yet makes them an admission, which, if it holds,goes the full length of establishing their heresy,and of disparaging, and so overthrowing the creditand authority of the Nicene Council ; namely, thatthe Rulers and Fathers of the Church before itsdate were nearly all of the very same sentimentsas Arius What was Petavius' view in sowriting, it is difficult to say. Some suspect thathe was secretly an Arian, and wished insidiouslyso to recommend the heresy to others. This was76 ON ROMANISM AS [Let.the opinion of Sanctus," the heretical writer, " whomI just now mentioned However, Petavius's ownwritings make it, I think, abundantly clear, thatthis pretender's supposition is altogether false. Ifsome underhand purpose must be assigned for hiswriting as he did, and it be not sufficient to ascribeit to his customary audacity and recklessness incriticising and animadverting on the Holy Fathers,I should give my opinion that this author, as beinga Jesuit, had in view the interests of Popery ratherthan of Arianism. For, granting the Catholic Doctorsof the first three centuries held nearly all ofthem that very error of doctrine, which the NiceneCouncil afterwards condemned in Arius as heresy,(which is Petavius' statement) two things willreadily follow : first, that little deference is to bepaid to the Fathers of the first three centuries, towhom reformed Catholics specially appeal, as if intheir time the chief articles of the Christian faithwere not yet sufficiently understood and developed ;next, that (Ecumenical Councils have the power offraming or (as Petavius speaks) of establishing andpublishing new articles of faith, which may fitlyserve to prepare the ground for those additions whichthe Fathers at Trent annexed to the Rule of Faithand obtruded on Christendom ; though even thiswill not be a sufficient defence of the Roman faith,since the meeting at Trent was anything but aGeneral Council. However, the masters of thatschool, it seems, feel no compunction at erectingII.] NEGLECTFUL OF ANTIQUITY. 77their own pseudo-catholic faith on the ruins of thatwhich is truly Catholic. The Divine oracles themselvesare to be convicted of undue obscurity, themost holy Doctors, Bishops, and Martyrs of theprimitive Church are to be charged with heresy;so that in one way or other the credit and authorityof the degenerate Roman Church may bepatched up and made good. At the same timethese sophists, to be sure, are the very men toexecrate us as brethren of cursed Ham, and scoffersand despisers of the venerable Fathers of the Church,and to boast that they themselves religiously followthe faith of the ancient Doctors, and hold theirwritings in highest reverence. That such a nefariouspurpose led to Petavius' statement, I do notdare say for certain, but leave the matter to theheart-searching God. Meanwhile, what the Jesuithas written, as it is most welcome to modern Arianss,(all of whom on that account revere and embracehim as their champion) so, as I would affirm confidently,it is manifestly contrary to truth, and mostinjurious and slanderous as well towards the NiceneFathers as the Ante-Nicene VSo remarkable an instance as this is not of everyday'soccurrence. I do not mean to say there havebeen many such systematic and profound attemptsas this on the part of Petavius, at what maybejustly called parricide. Rome even, steeled as1 Defend. Fid. Nice. Proem. 7, 8.78 ON ROMANISM AS [Let.she is against the kindlier feelings, when her interestsrequire, has more of tender mercy left than to bearthem often. In this very instance, the FrenchChurch showed their compunction at the crime, onBull's subsequent defence of the Nicene Anathema,by transmitting to him through Bossuet, the congratulationsof the whole clergy of France assembledat St. Germain's, for the service he had renderedto the Church Catholic. However, not eventhe Gallican Church, moderate as she confessedlyhas been, can side with Rome without cooling inloyalty towards the primitive ages ; as will appearby the following remarks extracted from the Benedictineedition of St. Ambrose. The Benedictinesof St. Mar are, as is well known, of a school ofRomanism distinct from the Jesuits, to whom belonged. So much so, that their editionof Bossuet's works is accused of Jansenism, at leastso I understand the English editor of his Exposition,who speaks of its being " infected with the spirit ofthat sect which disfigures everything that it touches."Their learning and candour are well known ; andone can hardly accuse those who spend their livesin an act of ministration towards the holy Fathers,of any intentional irreverence towards them. Thefollowing passage occurs in their introduction to oneof the works of St. Ambrose, on occasion of thatFather making some statements at variance with thepresent Roman views of the intermediate state.It is not indeed wonderful that Ambrose shouldJL] NEGLECTFUL OF ANTIQUITY. 79have written in this way concerning the state ofsouls ; but what seems almost incredible is theuncertainty and inconsistency of the holy Fatherson the subject, from the very times of the Apostlesto the Pontificate of Gregory XI. and the Councilof Florence ; that is, for almost the whole of fourteencenturies. For they not only differ from oneanother, as ordinarily happens in such questionsbefore the Church has defined, but they are eveninconsistent with themselves, sometimes allowing,sometimes denying to the same souls the enjoymentof the clear vision of the Divine Nature VIt may be asked, how it is the fault of the Benedictinesif the Fathers are inconsistent with eachother and with themselves in any point ; and whatharm there is in stating the fact, if it is undeniable? But my complaint with them would be ona different ground, viz. that they profess to knowbetter than the Fathers; that they, or rather thereligious system which they are bound to follow,consider questions to be determinable on whichthe early Fathers were ignorant, and suppose theChurch is so absolutely the author of our faith,that what the Fathers did not believe, we mustbelieve under pain of forfeiting heaven. WhetherRome be right or wrong, this instance contains anacknowledgment, as far as it goes, that her religionisnot that of the Fathers ; that her Creed is asAdmit. in Lib. de Bono Mortis.80 ON ROMANISM AS [Let.novel as those Protestant extravagances from whichin other respects it is so far removed.I proceed to select one instance more of thedisrespect shown by Romanists towards the Fathers,from Bellarmine's celebrated work on the Controversiesof Faith. The name of this eminent writeris familiar to most persons who have read ever solittle concerning Romanism ; but it brings with itless favourable associations than its owner deserves.The better the man individually, the worse thesystem that makes him speak uncandidly or presumptuously;and that both as a man and as awriter he has no ordinary qualities, will be clearfrom what is said of him by two English authorsof this day, who are far from agreeing either withhim or with each other. Bishop Marsh, in hisComparative View of the Churches of England andRome, calls him " the most acute, the most methodical,the most comprehensive, and at the sametime one of the most candid among the controversialistsof the Church of Rome V On the otherhand, a recent writer of very different religioussympathies from the Bishop, speaks of him in aspirit honourable both to himself and the object ofhis panegyric. " I cannot read," he says, " thepious practical works of Bellarmine, himself thegreat defender of Popery, and know that he said,upon account of the uncertainty of life it is most1 Chapter I.II.] NEGLECTFUL OF ANTIQUITY. 81safe to rely on Christ alone,' without hoping thathe was led before his death to renounce all confidencein anything but God's testimony concerningHis Son, and so became a child of our heavenlyFather, and an heir of our Saviour's kingdom VOthers may humbly trust he was all through hislife, as he had been first made in Baptism, ' a childof grace ;' but, however this be, the testimony affordedto Bellarmine's personal piety in this extractis express, and under the circumstancesremarkable.To these may be added the remarks of Moslemconcerning him : " His candour and plain dealingexposed him," he says, " to the censures of severaldivines of his own communion ; for he collectedwith diligence the reasons and objections of hisadversaries, and proposed them for the most partin their full force with integrity and exactness.Had he been less remarkable on account of hisfidelity and industry, had he taken care to selectthe weakest arguments of his antagonists, and torender them still weaker by proposing them in animperfect and unfaithful light, his fame would havebeen much greater among the friends of Romethan it actually is 2 "Let us turn then to the work of an author thuscandid as a theologian, thus highly endowed as aman.1 Bickersteth on Popery, p. 8. 2 Vol. iv. p. 206.GON ROMANISM AS [Let.In his treatise in defence of Purgatory, he usessevere language against Calvin, who represents theFathers as speaking doubtfully concerning thatdoctrine. " This," he says, " is intolerable hardihoodor ignorance ; for first, had they never mentionedPurgatory by name, yet their sentimentsabout it had been sufficiently plain from their distinctstatements that the souls of certain believersneed relief and are aided by the prayers of theliving. Next, there are the clearest passages inthe Fathers, in which Purgatory is asserted, ofwhich I will cite some few." Then follow extractsfrom twenty-two Fathers in evidence ; and so hebrings his proof to an end, and dismisses that headof his subject. Now will it be believed that in asubsequent chapter, in recounting the errors concerningPurgatory, he enumerates some of thesame Fathers, as holding them, nay, holding themin some of the very passages which he had alreadyadduced in proof of the tenet of his Church ! Heenumerates Origen, St. Ambrose, St. Hilary, Lac-xanthus,and St. Jerome, as apparently contraveningor wandering from the Tridentine doctrine. Ofthese he surrenders Origen altogether ; Jerome heexculpates, but rather by means of other extractsthan as clearing up what was objectionable in thepassage first quoted. As to the rest, he allowsthat they all " sound erroneous," but says thatthey may be understood" in an unexceptionablesense ; though after all, of one of the two bestII.] NEGLECTFUL OF ANTIQUITY. 83meanings which may be put upon their words, hecan but pronounce at most that he " neither affirmsnor condemns it."To explain the state of the question, it is necessaryto observe, that various early writers speculate onthe possibility of fire at the judgment constitutinga trial of the integrity of all believers, howeverhighly gifted in faith and holiness. This opinion,\ whatever be its value, differs from the notion ofPurgatory, not to mention other respects, in time,place, and subjects ; yet certain passages from theFathers containing it and other private notions,are enumerated by Bellarmine, first as instances inhis inductive proof, then as exceptions to the doctrinethereby established. The only alleviation ofthis strange inconsistency is that he quotes, not thevery same sentences both for and against his Church,but adjoining ones.Now, do I mean to accuse so serious and gooda man as Bellarmine of wilful unfairness in thisprocedure ? No. Yet it is difficult to enter intothe state of mind under which he was led into it.However we explain it, so much is clear, that theFathers are only so far of use in the eyes of Romanistsas they prove the Roman doctrines ; andin no sense are allowed to interfere with the conclusionswhich their Church has adopted ; that theyare of authority when they seem to agree withRome, of none if they differ. But if I may ventureto account in Bellarmine's own person forG284 ON ROMANISM AS [LKCT.what is in the controversy confessedly unfair, Iwould observe as follows, though what I say mayseem to border on refinement.A Romanist then cannot really argue in defenceof his doctrines ; he has too firm a confidence in theirtruth, if he is sincere in his profession, to enablehim critically to adjust the due weight to be givento this or that evidence. He assumes his Church'sconclusion as true ; and the facts or witnesses headduces are rather brought to receive an interpretationthan to furnish a proof. His highest aimis to show the mere consistency of his theory, itspossible adjustment with the records of Antiquity.I am not here inquiring how much of high butmisdirected moral feeling is implied in this stateof mind ; certainly as we advance in perception ofthe Truth, we all of us become less fitted to becontroversialists.If this be the true explanation of Bellarmine'sstrange error, the more it tends to exculpate him,the more deeply it criminate his system. Heceases to be chargeable with unfairness only inproportion as the notion of the infallibility of Romeis admitted to be the sovereign and engrossingtenet of his communion, the foundation-stone, or(as it may be called) the fulcrum of its theology.I consider, then, that when he first adduces theafore-mentioned Fathers in proof of Purgatory, hewas really but interpreting them ; he was teachingwhat they ought to mean, what in charity theyiII.] NEGLECTFUL OF ANTIQUITY. 85must be supposed to mean, what they might mean,as far as the very words went, probably meant, consideringthe Church so meant, and might be takento mean, even if their authors did not so mean,from the notion that they spoke vaguely, and, aschildren, really meant something besides what theyformally said, and that, after all, they were but thespokesmen of the then existing Church, which,though in silence, held that same doctrine whichRome has since defined and published. This isto treat Bellarmine with the same charity withwhich he has on this supposition treated the Fathers,and it is to be hoped with a nearer approachto the matter of fact. So much as to his first useof them ; but afterwards, in noticing what he considerserroneous opinions on the subject, he treatsthem not as organs of the Church Infallible, but asindividuals, and interprets their language by itsliteral sense, or by the context. The Fathers inquestion, he seems to say, held as modern Romeholds ; for if they did not, they must have dissentedfrom the Church of their own day ; for the Churchthen held as modern Rome holds. And the Churchthen held as Rome holds now, because Rome is theChurch, and the Church ever holds the same. Howhopeless then is it to contend with Romanists, asif they practically agreed to our foundation, howevermuch they pretend to it ! Ours is Antiquity,theirs the existing Church. Its infallibility is theirfirst principle ; belief in it is a deep prejudice quite86 ON ROMANISM AS [Let.beyond the reach of anything external. It is quiteclear that the combined testimonies of all theFathers, supposing such a case, would not have afeather's weight against a decision of the Pope inCouncil, nor would matter at all, except for theFathers' sake who had by anticipation opposed it.They consider that the Fathers ought to mean whatRome has since decreed, and that Rome knowstheir meaning better than they themselves did.That venturesome Church has usurped their place,and thinks it merciful only not to banish outrightthe rivals she has dethroned. By an act, as itwere, of grace, she has determined that when theycontradict her, though of no authority in so doing,yet as living in times of ignorance, they are not onthe other hand guilty of heresy, but are only heterodox; and she keeps them around her to ask theiradvice when it happens to agree with her own.Let us then understand the position of theRomanists towards us; they do not really arguefrom the Fathers though they seem to do so. Theymay affect to do so in our behalf, happy if by aninnocent stratagem they are able to convert us ;but all the while in their own feelings they aretaking a far higher position. They are teaching,not disputing or proving. They are interpretingwhat is obscure in Antiquity, purifying what isalloyed, correcting what is amiss, perfecting whatis incomplete, harmonizing what is various. Theyclaim and use all its documents as ministers andII.] . NEGLECTFUL OF ANTIQUITY. 87organs of that one infallible Church, which onceforsooth kept silence, but since has spoken ; whichby a divine gift must ever be consistent with itself,and which bears with it its own evidence of Divinity.I have said enough perhaps to illustrate thesubject in hand; yet various instances shall beadded, which are noticed by our divines in thiscontroversy.Stillingfleet supplies us with the followingspecimens, which must be looked at as a whole.,as marking the temper of Romanism, and its disrespectfulbearing towards the Fathers. " If St.Cyprian," he says, " speaks against Tradition, ' itwas,' saith Bellarmine, ' in defence of his error,and therefore no wonder if he argued after themanner of erroneous persons.' If he oppositeStephen, Bishop of Rome, in the business of re-capitation, ' he seemeth,' saith he, ' to have erredmortally in it.' . If St. Chrysostom saith, ' Thatit is better not to be present at the Eucharist, thanto be present and not receive it,' ' I say,' saith Bellarmine,* that Chrysostom, as at other times, wentbeyond his bounds in saying so.' If St. Augustineexpound a place of Scripture not to his mind, hetells him roundly, ' He did not thoroughly considerwhat he said.' Do not these things argue that duerespect they had for the Fathers ? So long as theythink they can make them serve their turns, thenwho but the Fathers ?' If they appear refractory,and will not serve as hewers of wood and drawers88 ON ROMANISM AS [Let.of water to them, then, * who are the Fathers ?'It is the Church's judgment they rely on, and notthe Fathers. . . Thus the price of the Fathers risesand falls according to their use, like slaves in themarket. If yet the Fathers seem to deliver theirjudgments peremptorily in a matter contrary to thepresent sense of their Church, then either theyspeak it ' in the heat of disputation,' or, if not, theywere ' contradicted by others as good as they ;'if many of them concur, yet, ' it was but their privatejudgment not the sense of the CatholicChurch which they delivered. Still we see therate the Fathers stand at is their agreement withthe present Roman Church ; if they differ fromthis, they were men like others, and might bedeceived ; only the Pope is infallible, or at leastthe present Roman Church. For if Hilary, GregoryNyssen, Chrysostom, Cyril, Augustine, andothers say, that Christ, when He said, ' Upon thisrock will I build my Church,' understood Peter'sconfession of Himself, saith Maldonate, ' Nothingcould be more incongruous than what they say.' . . .The same liberty he takes in very many otherplaces '."Bishop Taylor writes to the same effect in hisDissuasive: "What think we," he asks, "of thesaying of Cardinal Capstan, ' If you chance to meetwith any new exposition which is agreeable to thetext, &c. although, perhaps, it differs from that which1 Stillingfleet, Grounds, i. 5. 19. pp. 137, 138.II.] NEGLECTFUL OF ANTIQUITY. 89is given by the whole current of the Holy Doctors,I desire the readers that they would not too hastilyreject it.' And again ; ' Let no man, therefore,reject a new exposition of any passage of Scripture,under pretence that it is contrary to what theAncient Doctors gave.' What think we of thewords of Petavius ? ' There are many things bythe most Holy Fathers scattered, especially St.Chrysostom in his Homilies, which if you wouldaccommodate to the rule of exact truth, they willseem to be void of good sense.' And again; ' There isno cause why the authority of certain Fathers shouldbe objected, for they can say nothing but what theyhave learned from St. Luke ; neither is there anyreason, why we should rather interpret St. Lukeby them, than those things which they say by St.Luke.' " Presently Taylor adds, " Of late < knowledgeis increased,' at least many writers thinkso ; and though the ancient interpretations weremore honoured than new, yet Salmon says plainly,that the younger doctors are better sighted andmore perspicacious.' And the question being aboutthe conception of the blessed Virgin, withoutoriginal sin, against which a multitude of Fathersare brought : the Jesuit answers the argument withthe words in Exodus xxiii. ' Thou shalt not followa multitude to sin V "1 Taylor's Dissuasive, part 2, Intro. vol. x. p. 320. Vid.also, Usher's Answer to a Jesuit, ch. i.90 ON ROMANISM AS [Let.The learned controversialists I have been quoting,add the following instances, from such, and sovarious quarters, as make them fair samples of thesystem.Cardinal Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, who suffereddeath during the troubles in King Henrythe VIHth's reign, is a man, as readers of our historyknow, of no ordinary name. He is supposed tohave assisted Henry VIII. in his work againstLuther, and while in prison received a Cardinal'shat from the Pope. He surely is as fair a specimenof the Roman controversialist as could be taken.Now in one of his works against Luther, he thusspeaks on the subject of Indulgences and Purgatory,"There are many things, about which noquestion was agitated in the Primitive Church,which, by the diligence of posterity, when doubtshad arisen, have now become clear. No orthodoxbeliever, certainly, now doubts whether there be aPurgatory. Whoever will read the commentariesof the old Greeks, he will find no mention, as 1think, or as little as possible, concerning Purgatory.Nor did the Latins, all at once, and withouteffort, apprehend the truth of this matter. Forfaith, whether in Purgatory or in Indulgences, wasnot so necessary in the Primitive Church as now.For then love so burned, that every one was readyto meet death for Christ. Crimes were rare : andsuch as occurred, were avenged by the great severityof the Canons. Now, however, a good part ofII.] NEGLECTFUL OF ANTIQUITY. 91the people would rather burn Christianity itself,than bear the rigour of the Canons ; so that it wasnot without the especial providence of the HolySpirit, that after the lapse of so many years., beliefin Purgatory and the use of Indulgences wasgenerally received by the orthodox. As long asthere was no care of Purgatory, no one sought forIndulgences. For the consideration for Indulgencesdepends entirely on it. If you take away Purgatory,what is the use of Indulgences? for we shouldnot need these, but for it. By considering, then,that Purgatory was for some time unknown, andthen believed by certain persons, by degrees, partlyfrom revelations, partly from the Scriptures, andso at length, that faith in it became firmly andgenerally received by the orthodox Church, weshall most easily form our view of Indulgences."Medina, a Spanish Franciscan of the same century,well esteemed for his learning in the Fathersand Councils, when writing upon the subject ofEpiscopacy, is led to consider the opinion of St.Jerome, who is accused by many of expressinghimself incorrectly concerning it. This is not theplace to examine that Father's views ; Medinadoes examine them, and, in consequence, chargeshim with agreeing with the Adrian heretics. Notcontent with this, he proceeds to bring a similarcharge against Ambrose, Augustine, Sedulous, Primaries,Chrysostom, Theodore, Ecumenius, andTheophylact. This, in addition to its untenable92 ON ROMANISM AS [Let.nature, is, indeed, a startling accusation in themouth of one, who, according to the abstract professionof his Church, is bound to direct himselfby the judgment of Antiquity. The circumstanceof error in a single Father we could bear withoutany great surprise ; but should there be so manyof them upon one side, as he supposes in the casebefore him, perchance we are the heretics, and theythe witnesses of Catholic doctrine. To those, however,who rest upon the Church's Infallibility, thereis certainly no danger of such a misfortune. Medina,feeling himself in that position, and independentof all the Fathers brought together, thusremarks : " These men were otherwise most holy,and most thoroughly acquainted with the HolyScriptures; yet this opinion of theirs was condemnedby the Church, first in Arius, then in theWaldenses, lastly in Wickliffe." And presently,From respect to Jerome and those Greek Fathers,this opinion was in their case hushed up, or tolerated; but in the case of heretics, who in manyother points also dissented from the Church, it hasalways been condemned as heretical." It is fair toadd that Bellarmine, who quotes this passage torefute it, speaks of it with severity 1 .To the same purpose is the following remark ofanother Roman writer, quoted by Taylor. " In theold Catholic writers we suffer very many errors, and1 De Clericus, i. 15II.] NEGLECTFUL OF ANTIQUITY. 93extenuate and excuse them ; and finding out somecommentary, we feign some convenient sense, whenthey are opposed in disputations VIt is not surprising, with these sentiments, thatRomanists should have undertaken before now tosuppress and correct portions of the Fathers' writings.An edition of St. Austin published at Venice,contains the following most suspicious confession ;Besides the recovery of many passages by collationwith ancient copies, we have taken care to removewhatever might infect the minds of the faithful withheretical gravity, or turn them aside from theCatholic and orthodox faith 2 ." And a correctorof the press at Lyons, of the middle of the 16thcentury, complains that he was obliged by certainFranciscans to cancel various passages of St. Ambrose,whose works he was engaged upon 3 .The Council of Constance furnishes us with amemorable instance of the same disregard for Antiquity,to which the whole Roman Communion iscommitted, in the decree by which it formallydebars the laity from the participation of the Cup1 Taylor's Dissuasive, i. i. 1. vol. x. p. 136.2 " In quo, praeter decorum multum restitution secundumcollation veterum exemplary, corvinus remove iliaomnia, quae fidelity mentes heretics gravitate posset insincere,aut a catholic orthodox fide deviate." Vid. Taylor. Miss.Part ii. i. 6. vol. x. p. 497.3 " Qui pro auctoritate has omnes pains dispunxerunt, utvides, et ills substitute in locum priori curaverunt, praeteromnes liberum nostrum fidem." Ibid.94 ON ROMANISM AS [Let.in the Lord's Supper. There is no need of enteringinto the defence put forward by Romanists, as ifthe Church had a certain discretion committed toher in the Administration of the Sacraments, andused it in this prohibition, as in the substitution ofaffusion for immersion in Baptism. The questionsimply is, even allowing this, for argument's sake,is the spirit betrayed in the following language,one of reverence for Antiquity :Whereas," says the Council, " in certain partsof the world, some tenaciously presume to affirm,that the Christian people ought to receive the HolySacrament of the Eucharist, under both kinds ofbread and wine, and do everywhere make the laitycommunicate not only in bread but in wine also,and pertinaciously assert that communion shouldtake place after supper, or else not fasting, contraryto the laudable and reasonable custom of theChurch, which they damnably endeavour to reprobateas sacrilegious, this present holy General Councilof Constance, legitimately assembled in theHoly Ghost, being anxious to preserve the faithfulfrom this error, after mature deliberation of personsmost learned both in divine and human law,declares, decrees, and defines, that, though Christinstituted this venerable Sacrament after supper,and administered it to His disciples under bothkinds of bread and wine, yet, notwithstanding this,the laudable authority of the sacred Canons andthe approved custom of the Church has observedII.] NEGLECTFUL OF ANTIQUITY. 95and observes, that this Sacrament should not beconsecrated after supper, nor be received by thefaithful unless fasting, except in case of infirmityor other necessity conceded or admitted by right orthe Church ; and in like manner, that although in theprimitive Church the Sacrament was received by thefaithful under both kinds, yet for the avoiding somedangers and scandals, this custom has been reasonablyintroduced, that it be received by the consecratingpersons under both kinds, and by the laityonly under the bread ; since it is to be most firmlybelieved, and in no wise to be doubted, that theentire Body and Blood of Christ is truly containedas well under the bread as under the wine 1 ." Theprimitive Church, we can believe, has authority asthe legitimate Expositor of Christ's meaning ; sheacts not from her own discretion, but from Christand His Apostles. We communicate in the morning,not in the evening, though He did in the latter,because she, His work and pattern to us, was usedto do so. For the same reason we baptize Infants,and exclude the washing the feet from the numberof Sacraments, though His own words literally takencommand the latter far more strongly than theformer observance. But, what is to be thoughtof a theology which, on its own authority, on meregrounds of expedience, to avoid dangers and scandals,reverses what itself confesses to be the cussPerceval on the Roman Schism, pp. 144 146.96 ON ROMANISM AS [Lscr.torn of that Church which came next to the Apostles?Such was the conduct of the Council of Constance.Cardinal Casa justifies its decree in a passagewhich shall be next quoted. He may be takenas the representative of two great parties in theChurch in the fifteenth century. He was presentat the Council of Basil, being an upholder of therights of a General Council above the Pope. Afterwardshe joined the Pope who was then censured,and assisted at Florence, but without modifying hisformer opinions. With this double claim upon ournotice, he speaks as follows in defence of the refusalof the cup to the laity. " If the Church, or if thePope, that is the virtual Church, do expound anyevangelical sense contrary to what the current senseand practice of the Catholic Primitive Church did,not that, but this present interpretation must betakenfor the way of salvation, for God changesHis judgment as the Church does VLastly, I quote the words of Cornelius Missus,Bishop of Bitonto, who assisted at the Council ofTrent : " I for my part, to speak candidly, would1 Ep. ii. p. 833, as quoted by Bishop Taylor. (Dissuasive,Works, vol. x. p. 485.) He does not give the Latin in thenote, but Stillingfleet (on the Council of Trent, Works, vol. vip.451.) quotes from the same Epistle an equivalent passage :Scriptures esse ad tempus adaptatas et varie intellects, itaut uno tempore secundum current universal Ritum ,mutato Rite iterum sententia mutaretur."II.] NEGLECTFUL OF ANTIQUITY. 97rather credit one Pope in matters touching thefaith, than a thousand Augustines, Jerome, orGregorian VBefore concluding, I would briefly remark, thatinstances such as the foregoing, altogether exposethe pretence of some Romanists 2 , that the silenceof Antiquity on the subject of their peculiaritiesarises from a disciplina arcana, as it has been called,or rule of secrecy, practised in the early Church,which forbad the publication of the more sacredarticles of faith to the world at large. For it hasnow been seen that according to the avowed orimplied conviction of their most eminent Divines,there is much actually to censure in the writingsof the Fathers, much which is positively hostileto the Roman system. No rule of secrecy couldlead honest men to make statements diametricallyopposite to their real belief, statements which arenow the refuge of those who resist what the Romanistsconsider the real opinion of the men whomade them.I am led to this remark, because apprehensionshave been felt, I would say causelessly, lest thosewho admit the existence of this primitive rule, orrather usage, were thereby making some dangerousconcession to the Romanists ; which it cannot be,if, as the latter avow, the Fathers, not merely fail1 Stillingfleet. Grounds, i. 5. 19. p. 137.2 Pagi Ann. 118. n. 9.H98 ON ROMANISM AS [Let.to mention, but actually contradict the Romanpeculiarities. But were they only silent respectingthem, so as just to admit of the hypothesis of a ruleof secresy such as these apologists would have it, atleast this would be inconsistent with Bossuet's boastof the " conditions and restrictions" under whichthe Church has ever exercised her gift of infallibility." Far from wishing," he says in a passagealready quoted, but which will be now more justlyestimated after the specimens since given of hisChurch's reckless conduct towards the primitiveFathers, " far from wishing to become absolutemistress of her faith, as is laid to her charge, shehas on the contrary done every thing in her power totie up her own hands, and deprive herself of the meansof innovation ; for she not only submits to Scripture,but in order to banish for ever those arbitraryinterpretations, which would substitute the whimsof man for the word of God, she hath bound herselfto interpret it, in what concerns faith and morality,according to the sense of the holy Fathers, from whichshe professes never to depart" That is, she implicitlyobeys, an authority which, even on themore favourable supposition, enjoins nothing, andwhich, as we hare found the fact really to be, earnestlyprotests against the course which she venturesto pursue.I make one remark more. Enough has beensaid to show the hopefulness of our own prospectsin the controversy with Rome. We have her ownII.] NEGLECTFUL OF ANTIQUITY. 99avowal that the Fathers ought to be followed, andagain that she does not follow them ; what morecan we require than her witness against herselfwhich is here supplied us ? If such inconsistencyis not at once fatal to her claims, which it wouldseem to be, at least it is a most encouraging omenin our contest with her. We have but to remainpertinaciously and immoveable fixed on the groundof Antiquity ; and, as truth is ours, so will thevictory be also. We have joined issue with her, andthat in a point which admits of a decision, of adecision, as she confesses, against herself. Abstractarguments, original views, novel interpretations ofScripture, may be met by similar artifices on theother side ; but historical facts are proof againstthe force of talent, and remain where they werewhen it has expended itself. How mere Protestants,who rest upon no such solid foundation, areto withstand our common adversary, is not so clear,and not our concern. We would fain make thempartakers of our vantage ground ; but since theydespise it, they must take care of themselves, andmust not complain if we refuse to desert a positionwhich promises to be impregnable, impregnableboth as against Romanists and against themselves.H2LECTURE III.DOCTRINE OF INFALLIBILITY MORALLY CONSIDERED.ENOUGH perhaps was said in the last Lecture toshow that Romanism, however it may profess areverence for Antiquity, does not really feel andpay it. There are in fact two elements in operationwithin the system. As far as it is Catholicand Scriptural, it appeals to the Fathers ; as far asit is a corruption, it finds it necessary to supersedethem. Viewed in its formal principles and authoritativestatements, it professes to be the championof past times ; viewed as an active and politicalpower, as a ruling, grasping, ambitious principle,in a word, what is expressively called Popery,it exalts the will and pleasure of the existingChurch above all authority, whether of Scriptureor Antiquity, interpreting the one and disposing ofthe other by its absolute and arbitrary decree.We must take and deal with things as they are,not as they pretend to be. If we are induced tobelieve the professions of Rome, and make ad-infallibilityMORALLY CONSIDERED. 101dances towards her as if a sister or a motherChurch, which in theory she is, we shall find toolate that we are in the arms of a pitiless andunnatural relative, who will but triumph in thearts which have inveigled us within her reach. No ;dismissing the dreams which the romance of earlyChurch history and the high theory of Catholicismwill raise in the guileless and inexperienced mind,let us be sure that she is our enemy, and will dous a mischief when she can. In saying and actingon this conviction, we need not depart from Christiancharity towards her. We must deal with heras we would towards a friend who is visited byderangement; in great affliction, with all affectionatetender thoughts, with tearful regret anda broken heart, but still with a steady eye and afirm hand. For in truth she is a Church besideherself, abounding in noble gifts and rightful titles,but unable to use them religiously ; crafty, obstinate,wilful, malicious, cruel, unnatural, as madmenare. Or rather, she may be said to resemblea demoniac; possessed with principles, thoughts,and tendencies, not her own, in outward form andin outward powers what God made her, but ruledwithin by an inexorable spirit, who is sovereignin his management over her, and most subtleand most successful in the use of her gifts. Thusshe is her real self only in name, and, till God vouchsafeto restore her, we must treat her as if she werethat evil one which governs her. And in saying102 DOCTRINE OF INFALLIBILITY [LBCT.this, I must not be supposed to deny that thereis any real excellence in Romanism even as it is,or any really excellent men adherents to it. Satanever acts on a system ; various, manifold, and intricate,with parts and instruments of different qualities,some almost purely evil, others so unexceptionable,that in themselves and detached from theend to which all is subservient, they are reallyAngels of light," and may be found so to be atthe last day. In Romanism there are some thingsabsolutely good, some things only just tainted andsullied, some things corrupted and some things inthemselves sinful ; but the system itself so called,as a whole, and therefore all parts of it, tend toevil. Of this evil system the main tenet is theChurch's infallibility, as on the other hand theprinciple of that genuine theology out of whichit has arisen, is the authority of Catholic Antiquity.In this and the following Lecture, I shall observeupon some of the characteristics of this main error,as we may consider it, viewing it first morally, aridthen what may be called politically. The points towhich I wish to direct attention, as involved inthe doctrine of Infallibility, are such as the following:That Romanism considers unclouded certaintynecessary for a Christian's faith and hope ;That it considers doubt incompatible with practicalabundance in the truth ; That it aims at forminga complete and consistent theology ; That informingit, it neglects authority, and rests uponIII.] MORALLY CONSIDERED. 103abstract arguments : That it criticizes and disposesof the Christian scheme on antecedent grounds ;and that it substitutes a technical and formal obediencefor the spirit of love. I notice these peculiaritiesin order to draw intelligible lines ofdemarcation between Romanists and ourselves; andfirst will treat of them in a moral point of view.1. The doctrine of the Church's Infallibility is madeto rest upon the notion that any degree of doubtabout religious truth is incompatible with faith,and that an external infallible assurance is necessaryto exclude doubt. " Proof \" or certainty ofthe things believed, is secured upon two conditions ;if there be a God, " who cannot lie," as the sourceof Revelation, and if the Church be Infallible toconvey it. Otherwise, it is urged, what is calledfaith is merely opinion, as being but partially orprobably certain. To this statement it is sufficientto reply here, that according to English principles,faith has all it needs in having only the former ofthese two secured to it, in knowing that God isour Creator and Preserver, and that He may, if itso happen, have spoken. This indeed is its trialand its praise, so to hang upon the thought ofHim, and desire Him, as not to wait till it knowsfor certain from infallible informants whether orno He has spoken, but to act in the way which1 Heb. xi. 1. Bella. de Gratia, vi. 3.104 DOCTRINE OF INFALLIBILITY [Let.seems on the whole most likely to please Him.If we are asked, how Faith differs from Opinion,we reply, in its considering His being, governance,and will as a matter of personal interest and importanceto us, not in the degree of light or darknessunder which it perceives these truths. Whenwe are not personally concerned, even the highestevidence does not move us ; when we are concerned,the very slightest is enough. Though weknew for certain that the planet Jupiter were inflames,we should go on as usual ; whereas eventhe confused cry of fire at night rouses us fromour beds. Action is the criterion of faith, as determiningaccurately whether we connect thethought of God with the thought of ourselves,and regard Him otherwise than we regard thesolar system. And as well might we say that theman who acts upon a letter from a friend does notbelieve his friend because he is not infallibly surethe letter is not forged, as deny that such menhave real faith as hear the Church and obey, thoughthey have no assurance that in reporting God'swords, she cannot err. Nay, doubt may even besaid to be implied in a Christian's faith. Not thatinfallible certainty would take away all trial of ourhearts and force us to obey, nor again as if nothingwere clearly told us by Revelation, for much is ;but that the greater the uncertainty, the fullerexercise there is of our earnestness in seeking thetruth, and of our moral sagacity in tracing andIII.] MORALLY CONSIDERED. lOofinding it. As reasonably then might fear, despondency,dulness of mind, or heaviness of spiritbe judged inconsistent with faith as doubt. Imperfectionof every kind, moral and natural, is atrial or temptation, and is met by striving andacting against it. Scripture is full of instances inpoint as regards faith. It has been remarked, thatour Saviour scarcely once declared to inquirers thatHe was the Christ; though their impatience onmany occasions showed how hard they felt it toflesh and blood to act without an infallible assurance.He left them to gather the great truth forthemselves how they could, with whatever degreeof certainty, sometimes referring them to His miracles,sometimes to the types or prophecies of theLaw, sometimes to His forerunner the Baptist,sometimes urging them to make trial of the truthin practice and so to find it. When St. Thomasdoubted of His resurrection, far from justifyinghis demand for an infallible witness, He declaredthat He was but diminishing His blessedness bygiving him a higher evidence of the miracle thanhe had already received. On one occasion, indeed,He did publicly declare Himself to be the Christ,but, as we shall find, it was not in love but inwrath. It was in answer to the adjuration of theHigh Priest, whom He forthwith awfully consignedto the destiny of those miserable beings, who beingtotally estranged from their Maker, do but believeand tremble. And, as is His conduct during His106 DOCTRINE OF INFALLIBILITY [Let.ministry, such is the uniform doctrine of the wholeof Scripture, summed up, as it is, in the expressivewords of the Prophet, " Who is among you thatfeareth the Lord, who heareth the voice of Hisservant, who walketh in darkness and hath nolight ? Let him hope in the name of the Lord, andstay upon his God V This is only parallel to whatwe see in the course of nature ; the proofs of thebeing of a God are not written on the sun and sky,nor the precepts of morality spoken from a Urimand Thummim. To require such definite and clearnotices of truth, is to hanker after the Jewish Law,a system of less mysterious information as well asless generous faith.2. This leads me to notice an important peculiarityof Romanism, to which such a temper gives rise.According to its theory, the Church professes toknow only what the Apostles knew, to have receivedjust what they delivered, neither more nor less.But in fact, she is obliged to pretend to a completeknowledge of the whole Dispensation, such as theApostles had not. Unless we know all of anysubject we must have difficulties, and where thereare difficulties so far there is no infallible knowledge.To know some things infallibly, impliesthat we know all things. Or, to put the mattermore clearly, where there is knowledge of but aportion of a system, one part of what is known is1 Isaiah 1. 10.III.] MORALLY CONSIDERED. 107more plain and certain to us than another part, andcan be spoken of more confidently ; thus the clearnessof our view will be indefinitely varied, butthere are no degrees in Infallibility. Now partialand incomplete knowledge must be an inseparableattendant on a theology which reveals the wondersof heaven. The human mind cannot measure thethings of the Spirit. Christianity is a supernaturalgift, originating in the unseen world and only extendinginto this. It is a vast scheme, running outinto width and breadth, encompassing us roundabout,not embraced by us. No one can see theform of a building but those who are external toit.We are within the Divine Dispensation ; wecannot take it in with the eye, ascertain its proportions,pursue its lines, foretell their directionsand coincidences, or ascertain their limits. Wesee enough for practice, but not even as much asthis with an equal degree of clearness ; but onepart more clearly than another. These detachedportions of a complicated system necessarily vary inthe precision and definiteness with which they cometo the mind. That which is set before it in manyof its relations is more fully understood and graspedthan that which is only just revealed. When themind knows a certain part of a system, it cannotascertain the limits of its knowledge ; as theeye when fixed on any object cannot determinehow much it indirectly sees all around it. Surelythe Apostles themselves, though infallibly sure of108 DOCTRINE OF INFALLIBILITY [Let.the greater truths, could not determine the limitsof their infallibility. To know the lesser truthsas they knew the main ones, had been to open afresh field of knowledge beyond, in the way ofdeduction and implication. It would have beenlike moving the eye to a new object, which bringsit into a new range of vision. Thus, I say, to knowall that is revealed with equal clearness, impliesthat there is nothing not revealed. Agreeablywith this anticipation, the Church of Rome in factis led to profess to know not only infallibly butcompletely. She begins by claiming the power ofinfallibly determining whatever the Apostles knew,of accurately stating all such lesser matters as theywould not be able to realize to themselves as certain,of rendering equally vivid all those marvelloustraces of things invisible which in the first inspiredteachers would gradually melt from distinctness intheir outlines into dim distance or into minuteintricacy of detail. And, in consequence, she isled on from this profession of uniform clearnessto a profession of universal knowledge.This then is a second and not the least perniciouspeculiarity of Romanism. It professes to be a completetheology. It arranges, adjusts, explains, exhaustsevery part of the Divine Economy. It maybesaid to leave no region unexplored, no heightsunattempted, rounding off its doctrines with a neatnessand finish which is destructive of many of themost noble and most salutary exercises of mind inIII.] MORALLY CONSIDERED. 109the individual Christian. That feeling of aweand piety which the mysteriousness of the Gospelshould excite fades away under this fictitious illuminationwhich is poured over the entire Dispensation.Criticism, we know, is commonly consideredfatal to poetical fervour and imagination ; and inlike manner this technical religion destroys thedelicacy and reverence of the Christian mind. Solittle has actually been revealed to us in a systematicway, that the genuine science of the Gospel,carried to its furthest limits, has no tendencyto foster a spirit of rationalism. But Rome wouldclassify and number every thing ; she would settleevery sort of question, as if determined to detectand compass by the reason what runs out into thenext world or is lost in this. Revelation so meltsinto Providence that we cannot draw the line betweenthem. Miraculous events shade off intonatural coincidences, visions into dreams, typesinto resemblances ; Inspiration has before nowspoken among Idolaters and Pagans ; the Churchitself gradually fades away into the world. Whateversubject in religion we examine accurately,we shall find full of difficulties. Whether miracleshave ceased, and, if so, at what date ? how longCatholic doctrine was preserved from human additions? how far Gospel privileges are extended toseparatists ? how much must be believed by individualsin order to salvation ? what is the state ofunbaptized Infants ? what amount of temporal110 DOCTRINE OF INFALLIBILITY [Let.punishment must be set against the sins of acceptedChristians ? what sort of change takes placein the consecration of the Eucharist ? all these arequestions which man cannot determine, yet suchas these Romanists delight to handle. Not contentwith what is revealed, they are ever intrudinginto things not seen as yet, and growing familiarwith mysteries ; gazing upon the ark of God overboldly and long, till they venture to put out thehand and to touch it. But, not to dwell upon thispart of the subject, which is painful, it is sufficientlyevident what an opening is given by a theology of soambitious a character to pride and self-confidence.It has been said that knowledge is power ; and atleast it creates in us the imagination of possessingit. This is what makes scientific and physicalresearches so intoxicating ; it is the feeling theyinspire of perfect acquaintance with the constitutionof nature. He who considers himself fully tounderstand a system, seems to have sway over it.Astronomers can predict the motions of the heavenlybodies, with an accuracy which in their ownfancy places them above them. Now religion isthe great chastiser of human pride; nor would Isay, that however perverted, it ever can cease tobe so ; yet it is plain that when thus turned intoan intellectual science, even polytheism answerssuch a purpose better than it.I have been speaking in general language ; it willtend to explain my meaning to take an instanceIII.-] MORALLY CONSIDERED. HIof this venturesome speculativeness in Romanism,and suppression of more reverent, wondering,and expectant thoughts. With this view, let usconsider their doctrine of Satisfaction ; which Iwill describe as briefly as the intricate nature ofthe subject will allow.No questions in religion are more painfully interestingto the awakened mind than those relatingto the forgiveness of its sins. Revelation has answeredsome of the main obscurities of the subject,but has left others. It asserts the doctrine ofeverlasting punishment to the finally impenitent,and it proclaims pardon and salvation to all whorepent, believe, and obey. Further it declares thatthe death of Christ upon the cross has put awaythe wrath of God from us, and reconciled Him tous: that this precious Atonement is applied toevery individual on his Baptism, and that it isrealized in his soul and body in a peculiar way inthe holy Eucharist ; lastly, that its virtue flows invarious indirect and indefinite ways by means ofthe ministrations of the Church, to whom also theseSacraments are entrusted. But this is nearly allthat is told us. We do not know how the deathof Christ operates to our salvation ; we do notknow why it was required, or what is its full designand effect. We do not know what it effects forthe heathen ; we do not know whether or how itinfluences the state of Infants dying unbaptized.Coming to questions more nearly interesting us, weDOCTRINE OF INFALLIBILITY [Let.do not know what will be the future destiny, whetherof happiness or misery, of the body of baptized persons,who certainly seem to live and die in anunchristian way. We do not know the measureof punishment due for particular sins, or if therebe any measure. We do not know how far sinscommitted after Baptism are forgiven, i. e. whatpermanent disadvantages remain after forgiveness,what diminution of rewards otherwise attainable,or the like. We do not know what the effect ofprior services may be, in those who sin deeply, andafterwards repent, but without much subsequentfruit. We do not know how far the Eucharisticrite avails to their pardon, or to whose pardon itavails, and under what circumstances. We do notknow how and when the intercession of othersoperates towards our repentance and pardon. Norcan we cast the balance between the outward advantagesand disadvantages of any one individualand his works or failings, or decide upon his statein God's sight. Nor do we know when forgivenessis formally conveyed to individual Christians whohave lapsed into sin, whether in this life, or upondeath, or during the intermediate state, or at theday of judgment. All these are " secret thingswith the Lord our God," things not lightly to bespokenof, not dreams of our own, which, as notexisting, have no answer, but such as have ananswer one way or the other, though we do notknow which way, and it is presumptuous to inquire.III.] MORALLY CONSIDERED. 113Now, while impatience of doubt leads the Protestantof this day to treat all such questions as inherentlyfanciful, creations of the mind, and not questionsof fact, the same impatience leads the Romanist toanswer them.Their answers are of the following kind '.They consider with us that Baptism is a plenaryand absolute remission of all sin whatever, originaland actual, with which the baptized person is laden.Then, as to sin committed after Baptism, theyproceed to divide it into two kinds, venial andmortal. Mortal sins are such as throw the soulout of a state of grace, and deserve eternal punishment,such as murder, adultery, or blasphemy.Venial sins deserve a punishment short of eternal,a punishment, (that is,) in time, or before the dayof judgment. These are such either in kind ordegree; an idle word, excessive laughter differ inkind from perjury or adultery ; but a sudden andpassing anger is but in degree different from indulgedand lasting wrath, which is mortal. Forvenial sins there is no formal means of Absolution,or Sacrament, dispensed by the Church ; their punishment,whatever it is, but any how at most temporalonly, remains to be endured, or to be averted1 " Turn Villeins, fideliter sane, ut scientists, nihil tarn verens,quam ne dubitare aliqua de re videretur, tanquam modo exDecorum consilio, et ex Epicure interments descendisset ; Au-dite,inquit, non futiles commentitiasque sententia, &c." Cic.de Nat. Dear. i. 8.I114 DOCTRINE OF INFALLIBILITY [Let.by certain expedients, some of which shall presentlybe noticed.Mortal sin deserves not a mere temporal retribution,though this it incurs also, but an eternalpunishment; in other words, it incurs a punishmentboth before and after the day of judgment.Upon repentance the eternal punishment is forgiven,and that through the Sacrament of Penance,and then the temporal punishment alone remains,which that Sacrament does not reach. It seemsthen, that according to the Roman doctrine, a soulin a state of grace, though rescued from all eternalconsequences of his sins, or from any hazard in theday of judgment, remains liable to a certain temporalpunishment in two ways, for venial sins andfor mortal sins forgiven as to their eternal consequences.This distinction between the temporaland eternal consequences of sin, its advocatesillustrate in David, who, though expressly forgivenhis adultery and murder, so far as not todie," yet had a heavy temporal chastisement putupon him in this life. They consider there is acertain fixed correspondence between sins of whateverkind and the punishment of them : so thatevery Christian will have a definite quantity of punishmentto undergo before the coming of Christ tojudge the world and to take him to his eternal rest.The time of suffering this punishment, or ofexpiating his sins in their temporal respects, isthe interval between their commission and theIII.] MORALLY CONSIDERED. 115day of judgment ; and since each sin has its specificmeasure of suffering, if he does not exhaust it inthis life, he must complete it in the intermediatestate, and the more he sustains here the lesshe will have to sustain there. And, since thislife is a state of grace, and suffering here is farless severe than suffering in the intermediatestate (i. e. in Purgatory) it is his interest, as far asmay be, to expiate his sins here. Hence theutility of penances, either imposed by the Churchor voluntary in the offender, with a view of satisfyingthe punishment due to his sins. Hence toothe advantage of abounding in good works, whichin the regenerate man, besides availing to eternallife, are considered to have an inherent efficacy inthe expiation of sin. A like efficacy, but proceedingimmediately from the great Atoning Sacrifice,is considered to lie in the Eucharistic Offering.Even this is not the limit to which they carrytheir systematic account of the pardon of sin. Afterall appliances, whether by penances, good works, orthe holy Sacrifice of the Altar, it is considered thatthe multitude of Christians leave this life with aconsiderable debt of temporal punishment standingagainst them, and are certainly destined to sufferin Purgatory. On the other hand it is conjecturedthat certain great Saints leave this world after anoverplus of temporal suffering, whatever their sinsmay have been. Men like Jeremiah or John theBaptist, sanctified as they were from their mother'si 2116 DOCTRINE OF INFALLIBILITY [Let.womb, singularly holy and useful, and uniformlysuffering until their martyrdom, have more thansatisfied divine justice for such venial offences ashave overtaken them, and render up to God togetherwith their obedience a store of sufferingswhich have, as far as they are concerned, answeredno purpose. Considering then the virtue and propertiesof that mysterious Communion which existsbetween all Christians, that they are all but onebody, and have all things common, it is concludedthat what is done or suffered over and above bythe Saints, may be put to the score of the souls inPurgatory; and that the Church, represented inher ministers and especially in the Pope, is theagent in this sacred interchange. To the Pope,then, is committed the key of this treasure house ofthe merits of the Saints, together with those of ourLord Jesus Christ ; and he dispenses it accordingto his discretion. This benefit is called an Indulgence,which is an application of the merits of theSaints in lieu of a certain penance in this life or ofan equivalent suffering in Purgatory.The importance of the subject under review,must be my excuse for the length of what has beenbut an illustration. Enough perhaps has now beensaid to show the bold exactness of Romanism indetermining theological points, and this in consequenceof its claim of Infallibility, which leadsit to be positive and complete, so soon as it mentionsthem at all.III.] iMORALLY CONSIDERED. 1173. Another and distinct evil, and of a very seriouscharacter, which follows from the doctrine of Infallibility,is of the following kind. The practiceof systematizing necessarily leads to a decisionconcerning the relative importance of doctrines.Every system has its principal and its secondaryparts, and views one in connection with another,as bearing together with more or less influenceupon the whole, or upon some main portion whichit considers essential and supreme. Of coursereligion has its greater and its lesser truths ; butit is one thing to receive them so far as Scripturedeclares them to be so, quite another to decideabout them for ourselves by the help of our ownreasonings. However, it is not wonderful thatRomanism should claim authority over the workof its own hands; it has framed the system andit proceeds to judge of it. But this is not all.They who are resolved that the Divine counselsand appointments should be cognisable by thehuman intellect, are naturally tempted to assignsome visible and intelligible object as the scopeof the whole Dispensation ; or, in other words, theymake in some shape or other worldly expediencythe measure of its excellence and wisdom. I donot say they are forced, but they are easily betrayedinto doing this. They ask what is the useof this doctrine, what the actual harm of thaterror ; as if the experience of results were necesseDOCTRINE OF INFALLIBILITY [Let.say before condemning the one and sanctioningthe other. This, as is obvious, is strikingly instancedin the religion popular among us at thepresent day, in which only so much of the highdoctrines of the Gospel is admitted, as is seen andfelt to tend to our moral improvement. Accordingto it, the most striking and persuasive proof ofthe divine origin of Christianity, lies in the harmoniousadjustment and correspondence, and theevident meaning of its parts. One of the ablestdefenders of this view, at the close of a popularEssay, even ventures to speak as follows : " It hasbeen my object," he says, " to draw the attentionof the reader to the internal structure of the religionof the Bible, first, because I am convincedthat no man in the unfettered exercise of his understandingcan fully and cordially acquiesce inits pretensions to divine inspiration, until he seesin its substance that which accords both with thecharacter of God and with the wants of man ; andsecondly, because any admission of its divine original,if unaccompanied with a knowledge of itsprinciples, is absolutely useless 1 ." Here, unlessI am unjust to the writer, it is plainly asserted thatthe understanding has a right to claim an insightinto the meaning and drift of the matter of Revelation; nay, that faith is not available unless actErskine's Internal Evidence.III.] MORALLY CONSIDERED. 1 19companied by this knowledge ; principles surelywhich would have justified Abraham when calledfrom his native country, to have refused to go, till hewas told whither he was being carried. Yet suchprinciples are now in repute; and much is popularlysaid about the beauty of the Christian system,the unity of its aim, the simplicity of its contrivancefor the conversion of the soul, its originality,its correlative and corresponding portions, and themanifestation of the divine character contained init. Such is the main subject of the Treatise to whichI have been referring, and the same views are repeatedagain and again in the Sermons l of a Divineof the sister Establishment, who is never to bementioned without respect and sympathy. Suchis the popular Protestantism of the day. Now onemight have hoped that Romanism would have beenclear of the fault into which the rival system hasbeen betrayed. One might have trusted beforehandto its very propensity to enlarge on the secretsof heaven, as at least a guarantee that no one end,and still less a visible end, would be proposed by itscontroversialists as a measure of gospel excellenceand truth. Yet, strange to say, as if to show theagreement of temper and character between theone and the other creed as actually administered,we find one of the latest advocates of Rome claimingthe privilege of criticising and applauding the1 Dr. Chalmers' Sermons at the Tron Church.120 DOCTRINE OF INFALLIBILITY [Let.Gospel as a system. He observes that there issomething in Romanism " beautifully contrasted,to the eye of the philosopher, with the manifestimperfections of" what he calls the Protestantsystem. There is a natural and obvious beautyin the simplicity of this basis, which at once givesstability and unity to conviction." In anotherplace he observes, " the end of every rule and law,and consequently of every rule of Faith," is "tobring men into a unity of principle and action ;"that " the rule proposed by others is proved byexperience to lead to exactly opposite results ; inother words, that it removes men farther fromthat union towards which it must be intended tobring them, for it leads them to the most contradictoryopinions, professing to be supported andproved by precisely the same principle of Faith ;"whereas " the principle" of Romanism is " fullyequal to those objects for which the rule wasgiven 1 ." Now, I am far from denying there issoundness and truth in the argument, as used bothby the Roman and the Scotch Divines ; the processis sound when used under limitations, the conclusionis in a measure true. But both the one party andthe other, evidently put forth their respective viewsas convincing and decisive proofs, as independentand substantive evidences ; and that they are notsuch, is shown, if in no other way, at least in this,1 Dr. Wiseman's Lectures, vol. i. pp. 17. 76.III.] MORALLY CONSIDERED. 121that they are adduced by their respective advocatesin order to prove contradictories. Now what leadsto opposite conclusions is no real test of truth. However,we are here concerned merely with the factof this mischievous peculiarity of Romanism, whichit has in common with some other modern systems,its subjecting divine truth to the intellect, andprofessing to take a complete survey and to makea map of it.4. One more remark shall be made, though as itis often urged in controversy, a few words on thesubject will suffice. Romanism by its pretence ofInfallibility, lowers the standard and quality ofGospel obedience as well as impairs its mysteriousand sacred character; and this in various ways.When religion is reduced in all its parts to a system,there is hazard of something earthly being madethe chief object of our contemplation instead of ourMaker. Now Romanism classifies our duties andtheir rewards, the things to believe, the things todo,the modes of pleasing God, the penalties andthe remedies of sin, with such exactness, that anindividual knows (so to speak) just where he isupon his journey heavenward, how far he has got,how much he has to pass, and his duties become amatter of calculation. It provides us with a sortof graduated scale of devotion and obedience, andengrosses our thoughts with the details of a meresystem, to a comparative forgetfulness of its professedAuthor, But it is evident that the purest122 DOCTRINE OF INFALLIBILITY [Let.religious services are those which are done, not byconstraint, but voluntarily, as a free offering toAlmighty God. There are certain duties whichare indispensable in all Christians, but their limitsare undefined, to try our faith and love. For instance,what portion of our worldly substance weshould devote to charitable uses, or in what waywe are to fast, or how we are to dress, or whetherwe should remain single, or what revenge we shouldtake upon our sins, or what amusements are allowable,or how far we may go into society; theseand similar questions are left open by Inspiration.Some of them are determined by the Church, andsuitably, with a view to public decency and order,or by way of recommendation and sanction to hermembers. A command from authority is to a certainpoint a protection to our modesty, though beyondthis it would but act as a burden. For instance,at this very time, when the practice offasting has become so unpopular, in spite of theChurch's rule, it would be a great comfort to individualswho wish to observe it, yet dread singularityin so doing, did the custom exist, as I believeit did once, of pastoral letters at the beginning ofLent, enforcing it from authority. But in mostmatters of the kind, certainly when questions ofdegree are concerned, the best rule seems to be toleave individuals free, lest what otherwise would beaspontaneous service in the more zealous, shouldbecome a compulsory enactment upon all. This isHI.] MORALLY CONSIDERED.the true Christian liberty, not the prerogative ofobeying God, or not, as we please, but the opportunityof obeying Him more strictly without formalcommandment. In this way, too, the delicacy andgenerous simplicity of our obedience is consulted,as well as our love put to trial. Christ loves anopen-hearted service, done without our contemplatingor measuring what we do, from the fulnessof affection and reverence, while the mind is fixedon its Great Object without thought of itself. Nowexpress commands lead us to reflect upon and estimateour advances towards perfection, whereastrue faith will mainly contemplate its deficiencies,not its poor attainments, whatever they be. Itdoes not like to realize to itself what it does; itthrows off the thought of it ; it is carried on andreaches forward towards perfection, not countingthe steps it has ascended, but keeping the endsteadily in its eye, knowing only that it is advancing,and glorying in each sacrifice or service whichit is allowed to offer, as it occurs, not rememberingit afterwards. But in Romanism there would seemto be little room for this unconscious devotion.Each deed has its price, every quarter of the landof promise is laid down and described. Roads arecarefully marked out, and such as would attain toperfection are constrained to move in certain lines,as if there were a science of gaining heaven. Thusthe Saints are cut off from the Christian multitudeby certain fixed duties, not rising out of it by the124 DOCTRINE OF INFALLIBILITY [Let.continuous growth and flowing forth of serviceswhich in their substance pertain to all men. AndChristian holiness, in consequence, loses its freshness,vigour, and comeliness, being frozen (as itwere) into certain attitudes, which are not gracefulexcept when unstudied.The injury resulting to the multitude from thesame circumstance, is of a different but not lessserious nature. While, of those who aim at themore perfect obedience, many are made self-satisfiedand still more formal, the mass of Christiansare either discouraged from attempting or countenancedin neglecting it. It requires very littleknowledge of human nature, to perceive how readilya doctrine will be embraced and followed whichsanctions a secondary standard of holiness, or whichallows the performance of certain duties to makeupfor the disregard of others. If, indeed, there isone offence more than the rest characteristic ofRomanism, it is this, its indulging the carnal tastesof the multitude of men, setting a limit to theirnecessary obedience, and absolving them from theduty of sacrificing their whole lives to God. Andthis serious deceit is in no small degree the necessaryconsequence of that completeness and minutenessin its theology to which the doctrine of Infallibilitygives rise.The foregoing remarks are not intended as anysufficient discussion of the subject under consider-iii.]MORALLY CONSIDERED. 125action, but are made with a view of discriminatingbetween Romanism and our own creed. In theformer Lectures it was observed that the abstractand professed principles of both systems were oftenthe same, but that in practice, the question of theChurch's Infallibility created a wide and serious differencebetween them. We now see, in a measure,in what this difference consists, viz., in Romanismadopting a minute, technical, and imperative theology,which is no part of Revelation, and whichproduces a number of serious moral evils, which isshallow in philosophy, as professing to excludedoubt and imperfection, and dangerous to theChristian spirit, as encouraging us to ask for morethan is given us, as fostering irreverence and presumption,confidence in our reason, and a formalor carnal view of Christian obedience. What furtherevils arise from the political character ofthese same peculiarities, shall be reserved for aseparate Lecture.LECTURE IV.DOCTRINE OF INFALLIBILITY POLITICALLYCONSIDERED.IF the object of Rome be to teach moral Truth inits highest or purest form, like a prophet or philosopher,intent upon it more than upon those whomshe addresses, and by the very beauty of holiness,and the unconscious rhetoric of her own earnestness,drawing up souls to her, rather than by anyelaborate device, certainly she has failed in thatend, as was shown in my last Lecture. But if herone and supreme end is to rule the human mind,if man is the object of her thoughts and efforts,and religion but the means of approaching him, ifearth is to be the standard, and heaven the instrument,then we must confess that she is most happyin her religious system. What is low in the scaleof moral truth, may be the perfection of worldlywisdom ; or rather, principles of action which standfirst in the school of rhetoric, or politics, are necessePOLITICALLY CONSIDERED. 127warily unworthy the ethical teacher. Now theChurch of Rome is a political power ; and, if shestunts, or distorts the growth of the soul in spiritualexcellence, it is because, whether unconsciouslyor not, she has in view political objects, visiblefruits, temporal expediency, the power of influencingthe heart, as the supreme aim and scope of hersystem; because she considers unity, peace, thepublic confession of the truth, sovereignty, empire,the one practical end for which the Church isformed, the one necessary condition of those otherand unknown benefits, whatever these be, whichlie beyond it in the next world. I am nowto illustrate this peculiarity; and in order thatthere may be no mistake, I will briefly say whatI am to do. I do not attempt to prove that Romanismis a political power ; so well known a factmay be taken for granted ; but I wish to showthat those same principles, involved in the doctrineof Infallibility, which distinguish it from our owncreed, morally, conduce to that special politicalcharacter, which also distinguishes it from our own ;that, what is morally a disadvantage, is a politicalgain : I mean their neglect of the Fathers, their abstractreasonings, and their attention to system.1. Now, first, their political temper is the causeof their treating the Ancient Fathers with theripeness and recklessness which has been instanced,me acts, like men of keen and impetuous minds,128 DOCTRINE OF INFALLIBILITY [Let.in their dealings with the old or infirm ; she supersedesthem because they are hard of hearing, areslow to answer, are circuitous in their motions, andgo their own way to work. The most vigorous' and commanding intellects, through the interposingmedium of centuries, will pour but a feeble andA^uncertain ray, compared with their original lustre ;and Rome considers it better to supersede themwith fresh luminaries, than doubtingly and painfullyto use them. Emergencies have happened,notions have been circulated, changes have beeneffected in the Christian Church, which were notcontemplated, even in fancy, and can but be indirectlymet by the Fathers ; which, moreover, ascreating exceptions to some general rules, and obliteratingexceptions to others, have given theirwritings an interpretation, which they were neverintended to bear. Thus while the highest truthsremain in them immutable, to develope and applythem duly in particulars, is the work of much delicacy,and gives an opening to ingenious perversionsof their meaning. Here, then, is a second reasonwhy Romanists have been jealous of the Fathers,over and above the weakness of their own cause.They have dreaded the range and complication ofmaterials thus made the body of proof, which fromthe nature of the case might as easily be made ahandle for the errors of others, as a touchstone oftheir own. Bent upon action, not speculation, theyIV.] POLITICALLY CONSIDERED. 129are unwilling to allow to heretical sophistry theopportunities of so large a field, and are ready togo great lengths to hinder it.The difficulty in question is ours as well as theirs,but we do not make it a difficulty. We, for ourpart, have been taught to consider that faith in itsdegree as well as conduct, must be guided by probabilities,and that doubt is ever our portion in thislife. We can bear to confess that other systemshave their unanswerable arguments in matters ofdetail, and that we are but striking a balance betweendifficulties existing on both sides ; that wearefollowing as the voice of God, what on thewhole we have reason to think such. We arenot bent (to God be the praise !) on proselyting,organizing, and ruling as the end of life and thesummum bonum of a Christian community, but havebrought ourselves to give our testimony " whethermen will hear, or whether they will forbear,"and then to leave the matter to God. And, whilewe are keen and firm in action, we would ratherdo so according to the occasion, and because it isright to be so, than as connecting our separateefforts into one whole, and contemplating ulteriormeasures. We would rather act as a duty towardsGod, the Great Author and Object of their faith,than with unclouded and infallible apprehension ofthe subject-matter which He sets before us, with avigorous will, creating for ourselves those realitieswhich the external world but faintly adumbrates,K180 DOCTRINE OF INFALLIBILITY [Let.but which we know we ought to discern in it.Those who are thus minded, will be patient underthe inconveniences of an historical controversy.Perceiving that on the whole facts point to certaindefinite conclusions, and not to their contraries,they will act upon those conclusions unhesitatingly ;illuminate what, though true, is obscure, by actingupon it ; call upon others to do the same ; and leavethem to God if they will refuse. But it will beotherwise with the man of ardent political temper,and prompt and practical habits, the sagacious andaspiring man of the world, the scrutinizer of theheart, and conspirator against its privileges andrights. Such a one will understand that the multituderequires a strong doctrine; that the argument" it is because it is," a hundred times repeatedhas more weight with them than the most delicate,ably connected, and multiplied processes of proof ;and that, (as is undeniable), investigations into thegrounds of our belief, do but blunt and enfeeblethe energy of those who are called upon to act.He will feel all this, and instead of opening himselfto its influence, so far only as Revelation has sanctioned,and dispensing with inquiry within theexact limits in which it is mercifully superseded,he will impatiently complete what he considersto have been left imperfect. He will not be contentto take moral truth as it comes to him ; buthe will drug it, as vintners do their wines, to suitthe palate of the many. Accordingly, I couldIV.] POLITICALLY CONSIDERED. 131almost believe that the advocates of Romanismwould easily be reconciled to the loss of all theFathers, (should such a mischance happen), asthinking with a barbarian conqueror, that as far asthey agreed with Rome, they were superfluous, andwhere they disagreed, dangerous. Certainly itwould much simplify the theory of their religionto be rid of them. Of course I speak only ofhardened controversialists, not of Romanists ingeneral, among whom, I doubt not, are manywhose names are written in heaven, minds ashigh, as pure, and as reverential as any of thoseold Fathers, whose writings are in question ; loyallyattached to them, jealous of their honour, in thatsame noble English spirit, as it may be called,which we have already seen exemplified in BishopBull. I am but speaking of the Papist as foundon the stage of life, and amid the excitement ofcontroversy, stripped of those better parts of hissystem, which are our inheritance as well as his ;and so contemplating him, surely I may assertwithout breach of charity, that he would, undercircumstances, destroy the Fathers' writings, as heactually does disparage their authority-just as heconsents to cut short dispute, by substituting theVulgate for the original inspired Text, and bylodging the gift of Infallibility in the Pope ratherthan in a General Council.2. The same feeling which leads the Roman disputantto shrink from a fair appeal to the Fathers,K2132 DOCTRINE OF INFALLIBILITY [Let.however loudly he may profess it in the outset andin general terms, will also cause him to preferabstract proof to argument from fact. Facts, indeed,are confessedly troublesome, and must be avoidedas much as possible, by any one who is bound byhis theory to decide as well as dispute, much moreif he professes himself infallible. Those who haveto command, should either give no reason for theirmovements, or reasons which cannot successfullybe gainsay ed. To appeal to facts is to put thecontroversy out of their own hands, and to lodgethe decision with the world at large. If they mustargue, they should confine themselves to abstractproofs and to matters of opinion. Abstract argumentsare but an expression of their will. Besides,they lie in very little compass, and any one canlearn and use them, whether to remind and instructhimself, or in disputation. Not without reason,then, are the proofs of the Romanists such as weactually find them in the controversy, antecedentinferences from premisses but partially true, or parallelsand analogies assumed, or large principlesgrounded on single instances, or fertile expositionsof single texts of Scripture. Now here let me beclearly understood. I do not say that such reasoningis necessarily, inconsequential, or unfair. Ofseveral independent meanings, which may be givento the sacred text, each may be separately possible,though one alone can be the true one. It does notfollow, then, that a certain interpretation is notIV.] POLITICALLY CONSIDERED. 133sound, because neither the wording nor the contextforce us into it. Principles do often lie hid insingle instances, resemblances argue connexions,and abstract truths admit of development. Imerely say that such a line of proof, whatever itsmerits, is safe, is necessary for the Romanist.When Innocent III., for instance, claimed to reignover the kings of the earth, because the sun ruledthe day, and the moon the night, his argumentmight be invalid, but it might also be valid, andcould not be confuted. King John, or the Emperor,might refuse to acknowledge it ; but it wasenough for the Pope that he felt it himself. Buton the other hand, had he, in proof of his pretensions,alleged that St. Peter trod upon Nero'sneck, he might have still made and enforced them,but he would have unnecessarily subjected himselfto an external tribunal. Whether, then, abstractarguments be sound or not, in the particular case,at least, they are unanswerable, and for that reasonare peculiarly necessary for a power that claimsinfallibility. But, after all, serviceable as they maybe,in religious controversy, they are plainly presumptuous,when they depend on nothing beyondthemselves. Religion is too serious a subject tobe made rest on our own inferences and examinations,when there is any other possible way; andmuch less when we are settling authoritatively thereligion of others. It is quite fair, indeed, or rathera duty to deduce truths from Scripture for DOCTRINE OF INFALLIBILITY [Let.selves, when we have no other guide; but toenforce such deductions upon others is plainlyunjustifiable. The case is different where we haveclear authority, beyond our own, for such inferences.Thus, sanctioned by our Saviour, we mayorrather are bound to discern the doctrine of theResurrection in God's words to Moses in the bush ;and under St. Matthew's guidance to preach theImmaculate Conception from the seventh chapterof Isaiah, whatever becomes of the criticism on theHebrew word conveying the doctrine. Again, theunanimous tradition of the early Church authorizesus to maintain and enforce the doctrine that Christis the Son of God, in the sense of His being consubstantialwith Him. On the other hand, a man may,indeed, fairly and profitably argue from the eighthchapter of Genesis that the curse on the earth wasreversed after the flood, and yet he is not allowedto consider it a matter of faith. I say this for fearof misconception ; and now, for the sake of definiteness,let me illustrate the point in hand, whichI will do from the same general head of doctrineto which I drew attention in my last Lecture, thedoctrine of Indulgences.This doctrine, as drawn out by Bellarmine, willbe found to be as gratuitous in its proof, as it isin itself untrue. Bellarmine begins by proving,that "there is in the Church a treasure of thesatisfactions of Christ and the Saints, which is applicableto those who, after the remission of theIV.] POLITICALLY CONSIDERED. 135guilt in the Sacrament of Penance, are still liableto the payment of temporal punishment." Withthis purpose he lays down certain propositions ;first, that " to the good deeds of just men a doublevalue or price is assignable, viz., of desert and ofsatisfaction." For instance, it seems that the graceof charity at once recommends us favourably toGod, and tends to make up for former offences ;and it performs each of these functions distinctlyand completely. He quotes Scripture in proof, asthe text in Tobit iv., "Almsgiving delivers fromall sin, &ndfrom death" and St. Chrysostom and St.Cyprian to the same effect ; and, on the other hand,our Lord's words, " Receive the kingdom preparedfor you from the beginning of the world, for I wasan hundred and ye gave Me meat" &c. And to showthat one and the same act may be both expiatory andmeritorious, he maintains that good deeds are capableof a twofold quality, they are painful, and theyare fruits of love ; considered as fruits of love theyare pleasing to God ; considered as painful theyare a compensation for past sin. Again, he refersto the parallel of fasting and prayer ; in a word, ofall penitential exercises, which, in St. Cyprian'slanguage, tend not only to gain "pardon for theregenerate, but a crown" to blot out past sin, andto obtain a heavenly reward. The same doctrinemight be argued from the instance of Intercession,which does good to others while it is in itself pleasingto Almighty God.136 DOCTRINE OF INFALLIBILITY [Let.Again, in human affairs the same acts sometimesgain both a return of payment, and a reward.As a soldier gains at once pay and honour by hisservice, so the Christian Evangelist at once is"worthy of his hire," yet receives "a crown ofglory that facets not away." Moreover, that thepunishment of sin is paid off by measure, he arguesfrom the words of Moses \ " according to his fault,by a certain number " of stripes ; whereas rewardplainly goes on a distinct principle.His next proposition is that " a good work, consideredas deserving, cannot be applied to another ;but can, considered as a satisfaction." The firstpart of this proposition he almost takes for granted,there being a contradiction in the idea that the excellenceand desert of one man should be the excellenceof another. The latter part is proved fromthe nature of a debt, which we all know one personcan pay for another.After laying down, in the third place, that " thereis in the Church an infinite and inexhaustible treasureof Satisfactions, from the sufferings of Christ ;"he proceeds to maintain " that to this treasure ofoverflowing satisfactions pertain also the sufferingsof the blessed Virgin Mary, and of all other Saints,who have suffered more than their sins" (in a temporalway) " required." He proves it, because, theVirgin Mary, having no actual sin, needed no satisDeut. xxv. 2.IV.] POLITICALLY CONSIDERED. 187factions for herself, and yet suffered much. Thesame may be said in their respective measure of*St. John the Baptist, the Prophets, the Apostles,the Martyrs, and Ascetics.Having in this way proved the existence of aTreasure of Satisfactions for the temporal punishmentof sins, he proceeds after the same methodto show that the Church is the dispenser of it toindividuals; but enough, surely, has already beensaid. He does not even attempt to detect his doctrinein the writings of the Fathers.3. Thus the practice of abstract reasoning, as wellas the neglect of the Fathers, are measures ofpolitical expediency in Romanism ; the same willbe found to be the case as regards the completenessand consistency of its system. It is not onlythe necessary result, as has already been observed,but it is also the main evidence of its Infallibility.Rome claims to be infallible ; she dispenses withthe Fathers, and relies upon abstract reasoning,because she has this special gift ; but how does she ^i^-y/^*t^* r j 'prove she has it ? To speak simply, she does not ^^ fprove it at all. At least, she does not prove it argusmeditatively, but she acts upon the assumption, sheacts as if she were infallible, and in this way persuadesthe imaginations of men into a belief of her reallybeing so. Perhaps it may be asked, why she formallyclaims to be infallible at all, since she cannotprove it why she is not satisfied with acting uponit ? And it may be urged with some plausibility at138 DOCTRINE OF INFALLIBILITY [Lscx.first sight, that this is the practice of orthodox Protestantism,(as it is called) which imposes dogmaticcreeds and anathematizes dissentients as well asRomanism, and so really exercises an infallibility,which it evades the difficulty of maintaining inwords. As far as this remark is aimed againstourselves, it will be answered in its place ; at presentlet us confine ourselves to the subject ofRomanism. I answer then, that it is true ; nothingis gained to the intellect, rather somethingis lost by this venturous claim ; but much is gainedthereby as regards impression, and Rome is contentto sacrifice reason to secure practical influence.Men act, not because they are convinced,but because they feel; the doctrine in questionappeals to their imagination not to their intellect.The mind requires an external guide ; Protestantism,in its so-called orthodox forms, furnishes oneindeed, but is afraid to avow it. Romanism avowsit, and that in the most significant and imposingmanner. It uses the doctrine of Infallibility as asort of symbol or strong maxim bringing hometo the mind the fact that the Church is the divinelyappointed keeper and teacher of the truth.This may be illustrated by our Saviour's mode ofteaching. He said, " Whoso shall smite thee on thyright cheek, turn to him the other also." Now,without daring to limit or impair this sacred precept,or assuming the power of determining whatit means, or why it is so worded, so much at firstIV.] POLITICALLY CONSIDERED. 139sight is conveyed in the sentence, whatever else iscontained in it, a great principle, the duty of meeknessexpressed typically or emblematically. Christhas the prerogative of choosing His own words, andhas His own deep scope in them, and an aptnessin the very letter ; if Rome tries to imitate Himin His mode of speech, it is without His permissionor the ability to do so. Yet there seems such anattempt in her doctrine of Infallibility ; it symbolizesand brings out strongly, as in a figure, the officeof the Church 'as the one appointed teacher, andthat, in ages of the Gospel when the prevalence oflicence and free inquiry has called for some forcibleprotest in behalf of Revelation. It is an effort,though presumptuous and unwarranted, as well asfounded to error, to stem the tide of unbelief. Itscarcely then affects to produce a formal proof of itsown truth, being rather a dogma serviceable in practice,though extravagant in theory, as legal fictions,such as " the king can do no wrong," which vividlyexpress some great and necessary principle, yetare not subject to argumentative proof. Nor doesit require any serious argument to recommend sucha doctrine to the multitude. The human mindwishes to be rid of doubt in religion ; and a teacherwho claims infallibility is readily believed on hissimple word. We see this constantly exemplifiedin the case of individual pretenders among ourselves; in Romanism the Church pretends to it.And probably this is not the least persuasive argusDOCTRINE OF INFALLIBILITY [Let.ment to a Romanist in behalf of the Infallibilityof Rome, that she alone of all Churches dare claimit ; as if a secret instinct and involuntary misgivingsrestrained those rival communions, which go so fartowards affecting it 1 .Under these circumstances, all that is incumbenton the Church of Rome by way of proof of herpretensions, is to act as if she were infallible, toact with the decision and uniformity which sucha claim requires. Her consistent carrying out ofher assumed principle forms a sufficient argumentthat she has a right to it. Here then that diversified,minute, and finished system of doctrine whichI have already spoken of, dangerous as it is in its1 " It then remains, that Church can only beThe guide, which owns unfailing certainty ;Or else you slip your hold, and change your side,Relapsing from a necessary guide.But this annexed condition of the crown,Immunity from errors, you disown ;Here then you shrink, and lay your weak pretensionsdown.For petty royalties you raise debate,But this unfailing universal stateYou shun, nor dare succeed to such a glorious weight.And for that cause those promises detest,With which our Saviour did His Church invest ;But strive to evade, and fear to find them true,As conscious they were never meant for you ;All which the mother Church asserts her own,And with unrivalled claim ascends the throne," &c.Dryden, Hind and Panther, Part ii.IV.] POLITICALLY CONSIDERED. 141own excess to the simplicity and sanctity of theChristian, subserves her political purposes. It isbut fulfilling her theory ; it is but making a showof doing what she professes. Had she the gift ofInfallibility, her various judgments, however unpremeditated,would be consistent with each other ;she acts then as false witnesses are obliged to do,dresses up a statement in hopes that the artificialshow of consistency will be taken in evidence oftruth. But, besides this, there is that in thevery appearance of order and system which impressesus with the notion that something morethan accidental and foreign causes are concernedin their production. The regularity of nature, forinstance, has led certain philosophers to ascribe it,not to an external design, but to an innate lifeand reality as its principle ; and, in like manner,the orderly system of Rome serves to impress theimagination as if it were the ever-acting energy ofher Infallibility, instead of a mere theology framedwith a studied attempt at completeness and consistency.And hence it happens, that the furtherher pretended revelations are carried, the moreminutely she investigates, and the more boldly shedecides, in short, the more she outrages commonsenseand reason by her extreme audacity and peremptoriness,the more successful are her attemptsupon the heart and the imagination of the many.She developed her system till it seems self-supported,each part answering for another, and herDOCTRINE OF INFALLIBILITY [Let.very claim, as I have said, guaranteeing her rightto make it. Moreover, she has had the addressso to complete the revealed notices of truth, asthereby to increase her own influence. It is admittedthat some of the most interesting questionsto the human mind, as the state of the soul immediatelyupon death, are left in obscurity byAlmighty God. Here Romanism comes in andcontrives to throw the mind upon the Church, asthe means by which its wants may be supplied,and as the object of its faith and hope, and thusmakes her the instrument of a double usurpation,as both professing to show how certain objects maybeattained, and next as presenting herself as theagent in obtaining them.It would be too large a work to illustrate theseremarks adequately from the Roman theology, andit has often been done already. Two or three instancesmay suffice as a specimen. For example :there is no plenary absolution of sin under the^ Gospel, such as Baptism is, after Baptism, untilthe day of Judgment ; Romanism adds the doctrinesof Penance, Purgatory, and Indulgences.Christ is the Saviour from the eternal consequencesof sin ; Christ in His saints is, according to Rome,the Saviour from the temporal. In Baptism Hismerits are applied; in Indulgences the merits ofthe Saints. He saves from hell ; the Virgin Maryrescues from Purgatory. His Sacrifice on theCross avails for the sins of the world ; His SacrificeIV.] POLITICALLY CONSIDERED. 143in the Mass for the sins of the Church. Again,there are six precepts of the Church, three counsels,twelve fruits of the Holy Ghost, six sins againstthe Holy Ghost, seven works of mercy, seven deadlysins, four sins which cry for vengeance, four receptaclesof souls departed. There is one Sacramentfor infancy, another for childhood, a third as foodfor mature age, a fourth for spiritual sickness, anda fifth for the increase of mankind, a sixth fortheir government in society, and a seventh fordeath. I am not condemning the principle itselfof so arranging what is divinely given us; itis only when it is applied in excess or withoutfoundation, as it is by the Church of Rome, thatit is reprehensible. And, without being able todraw the line between its use and abuse, yet wemay clearly see that in her case it actually doessubserve her ambitious and secular views.One more instance shall be given from a modernIrish work, published " with the approbation ofSuperiors," for the direction of the Christian Doctrineand Purgatory Societies, and which containsan account of the Indulgences granted by variousPopes to those Societies, and to all the faithful,and in particular to the Province of Leinster. Thisaccount, of which the following are extracts, illustratethat two-fold character of Romanism describedin the last and present Lecture, which is so foreignat once to Antiquity and to our own communion,viz. its lowering the dignity and perfection of DOCTRINE OF INFALLIBILITY [Let.rats, its limiting by defining our duties, in orderto indulge human weakness, and to gain influenceby indulging it. For instance : " The prayers" it isobserved, " usually said to gain an Indulgence, arethe Lord's Prayer,' ' Hail Mary,' and ' Glory beto the Father,' repeated five times, in honour ofthe five most adorable wounds of our Lord JesusChrist, from whence all grace, merit, and indulgenceproceed to our souls, and one Pater and Avefor the pious intentions of the sovereign Pontiffand for the wants of the Church."A plenary Indulgence is granted on the firstSunday of each month to all the faithful of theseDioceses, who approach the Holy Sacrament, visitany of the Parochial Churches, and devoutly prayfor the propagation of the Catholic Faith, and forthe other pious intentions of the sovereign Pontiff."The Indulgence of seven years and seven quarantine(40 days) is granted each time to those whodevoutly recite the theological acts of faith, hope, andcharity ; and if daily recited, a plenary Indulgenceonce a month, applicable to the souls of the faithfuldeparted, provided they approach the HolySacraments of Penance and Communion, and prayfor the wants of the Church and pious intentionsof the Pope." ." The Indulgence of a hundreddays is granted each time the ' Angelus,'or the Angelof the Lord, is said, morning, noon, and evening, anda plenary Indulgence once a month for those whorecite it daily, fulfilling the above conditions. Note,IV.] POLITICALLY CONSIDERED. 145to gain this Indulgence it is prescribed to be saidkneeling on week days, but standing on Sundays andduring Paschal time." " The Indulgence of sevenyears and seven quarantine is granted to the faithful,who practise meditation or mental prayer forhalf an hour, or at least for a quarter, and also tothose who teach this pious exercise to others." . . .A plenary Indulgence is granted to the faithfulin the hour of death, who have frequently duringlife invoked the most sacred name of Jesus, and dopiously call on Him at that awful hour at least inaffection of heart." "The Indulgence of 300days is granted to those who devoutly repeat thethree following ejaculations : ' Jesus, Mary, and Joseph,I offer you my heart and soul ; Jesus, Mary,and Joseph, assist me in my last agony; Jesus,Mary, and Joseph, may I breathe forth my soulunto you in peace.' "Whether such a Theology is calculated to deadenthe conscience, and even (as it is sometimes urgedagainst it) to encourage crime, I do not decide.Much may be said on both sides ; it takes fromthe Romanist the fear of hell altogether, and itgives him the certainty of Purgatory. The questionthen depends upon another, whether men are moredeterred from sinning by the definite prospect ofPurgatory any how, or by the vague threat (as mostmen receive it) of eternal punishment. But sofaris certain, that such statements, whether or notthey encourage the sinner, lower the idea and stand146 DOCTRINE OF INFALLIBILITY. [Let.dard of moral truth; and, whether or not they avail tocomfort the penitent and fearful, at least they arrestattention and gain influence by engaging to doso.4. Enough has now been said to show how thecompleteness and consistency of the Roman systemtend to create a belief in its Infallibility. Thisbeing the case, it is very remarkable, that after allthese very characters are wanting to it in some importantrespects. Not only is the doctrine of Infallibilitywanting in proof, it is wanting even as atheory in two main points, and with a brief referenceto these I will bring this Lecture to an end.Romanism, though claiming for the Church thegift of Infallibility, cannot tell us how individualsare to know for certain that it is infallible ; nor inthe next place where the gift resides, supposing itto have been vouchsafed. It neither determineswho or what is infallible, or why.As to the first point, its advocates insist on thenecessity of an infallible guide in religious mattersas an argument that it has really been accorded.Now it is obvious to inquire how individuals areto know with certainty that Rome is infallible ; bywhich I do not mean, what is the particular groundon which her infallibility rests, but how any groundcan be such as to bring home to the mind infalliblythat she is infallible, what conceivable proofamounts to more than a probability of the fact ; andwhat advantage is an infallible guide, if those whoIV.] POLITICALLY CONSIDERED. 147are to be guided have, after all, no more than an opinion,as the Romanists call it, that she is infallible ?They attempt to solve this difficulty by boldlymaintaining that Christians do receive such an unerringperception of the whole circle of their doctrines,and that, conveyed in the Sacrament of Baptism.And this is worth noticing, were it but for theinstance it affords of their custom of making internalconsistency stand in the place of external proof;for to assert that Baptism gives infallible assuranceof the Infallibility of Rome, is only saying thatthose who discern it do discern it, though thosewho do npt discern it do not. It is not an argumenttending to prove the point in dispute. Weknow there are individuals among Protestants whoconsider themselves to be infallibly taught by adivine light, but such a claim is never taken as aproof that they are favoured in the way they suppose.To consider that Baptism gives this infalliblediscernment of the infallible guide, is to shiftthe difficulty, not to solve it. And by so considering,not even the consistency of the system isreally preserved ; for since the professed object ofInfallibility is to remove doubt and anxiety, howdoes it practically help a perplexed Romanist, totell him that his Baptism ought to convey to himan infallible assurance of the external Infallibility,when the present sense of his uncertainty evidencesto him that in matter of fact it does not ? If suchinward infallibility be requisite, it were a moreL2148 DOCTRINE OF INFALLIBILITY [Let.simple theory, like enthusiasts, to dispense withthe external.This abstract difficulty, however, is small comparedwith that attendant on the seat of the Infallibilityclaimed by Romanism. Little room as thereis in the Roman controversy for novelty or surprise,yet it does raise fresh and fresh amazement,the more we think of it, that Romanists shouldnot have been able to agree among themselveswhere that Infallibility is lodged which is the keystoneof their system. Archbishop Bramhall 1 reckonsno less than six distinct opinions on the subject ;some Romanists lodging the gift in the Pope speakingex Cathedra, others in the Pope in Council ofCardinals, others in the Pope in General or ProvincialCouncil, or in the General Council without thePope, or in the Church Diffusive, that is, the wholecompany of believers throughout the world. Bellarmine2 observes, by way of meeting this difficulty,that all Romanists are agreed on two points ; first,that wherever the Infallibility lies, at least that allRomanists agree that the Pope in General Councilis infallible ; next, that even out of Council when hespeaks ex Cathedra, he is to be obeyed (for safety'ssake,) whether really infallible or not. And no Englishtheologian can quarrel with so wise and practicalmode of settling the difficulty ; but then letit be observed, that so to settle it is to deviate from1 Works, p. 39. Vide Leslie, iii. p. 396. 2 De Rom. Pont. iv. 2.IV.] POLITICALLY CONSIDERED. 149the high infallible line which Rome professes towalk upon in religious questions, and to descendto Bishop Butler's level, to be content to proceednot by an unerring rule, but by those probabilitieswhich guide us in the conduct of life. After allthen the baptismal illumination does not securethe very benefit which occasions Romanists to referto it. They claim for it a power which in truth,according to their own confession, does nothing atall for them.Nor is this all : granting that Infallibility residesin the Pope in Council, yet it is not a matter olfaith, that is, it has not been formally determinedwhat Popes have been true Popes ; which of themany de facto, or rival Popes, are to be acknowledged;nor again which of the many professedGeneral Councils are really so. A Romanist mightat this moment deny the existing Pope to be St,Peter's successor without offending against anyarticle of the Creed. The Gallican Church receivesthe Councils of Basil and Constance wholly,the Roman Church rejects both in part. Thelast Council of Lateran condemns the Council ofBasil. The Council of Pisa is, according to bellarmine,neither clearly approved nor clearly rejected.The Acts of other Councils are adulteratedwithout any attempt being made to amend them.Now I repeat, such uncertainty as to the limitsof Divine Revelation, is no antecedent objection tothe truth of the Roman system ; it might be the150 DOCTRINE OF INFALLIBILITY [Let.appointed trial of our faith and earnestness. Butit is a great inconsistency in it, being what it is,that is, engaging as it does to furnish us with infallibleteaching and to supersede inquiry.Unless it seemed like presumption to interpretthe history of religion by a private rule, one mightcall the circumstance under consideration evenprovidential. Nothing could b better adaptedthan it to defeat the counsels of human, wisdom,or to show to thoughtful inquirers the hollownessof even the most specious counterfeit of divinetruth. The theologians of Romanism have beenable dexterously to smoothe over a thousand inconsistencies,and to array the heterogeneous precedentsof a course of centuries in the semblanceof design and harmony. But they cannot completetheir system in its most important and essentialpoint. They can determine in theory the nature,degree, extent, and object of the Infallibility whichthey claim ; they cannot agree among themselveswhere it resides. As in the building of Babel, theLord hath confounded their language ; and thestructure stands half finished, a monument at onceof human daring and its failure.But, whether we dare call it providential or not,except so far as all things must be so accounted,it at least serves to expose the pretensions of Romanism.The case stands as follows ; Romanismfirst professes a common ground with ourselves,a readiness to stand or fall by Antiquity. WhenV.] POLITICALLY CONSIDERED. 151we appeal to Antiquity accordingly, it shifts itsground, substituting for Ancient Testimony abstractarguments. If we question its abstract arguments,it falls back upon its Infallibility. If we ask forthe proof of its Infallibility, it can but attempt tooverpower the imagination by its attempt at system,the boldness, decision, consistency, and completenesswith which it urges and acts upon itsclaim. Yet in this very system, thus ambitious ofcompleteness, we are able to detect one or twoserious flaws in the theory of the very doctrinewhich that system seems intended to sustain.Such are some of the outlines of the theologyby which Rome supersedes the teaching of theearly Church. Her excuse, it seems, lies in this,that the Church now has lost the strength and persuasivenessit once had. Unanimity, uniformity,mutual intercourse, strict discipline, the freshness ofTradition, and the reminiscences of the Apostlesare no more ; and she would fain create by an artificialprocess what was natural in Antiquity. Thisis what can be said for her at best ; and there isconfessedly a difficulty in the theory of the Church'spresent authority ; though no difficulty of coursecan excuse fraud and falsehood. How we meetthe difficulty, comes next into consideration.LECTURE V.ON THE USE OF PRIVATE JUDGMENT.BY the right of Private Judgment in matters ofreligious belief and practice, is meant the prerogative,considered to belong to each individual Christian,of ascertaining and deciding for himself fromScripture what is Gospel truth, and what is not.This is the principle maintained in theory, as a sortof sacred possession or palladium, by the Protestantismof this day. Romanism, as is equally clear,takes the opposite extreme, and maintains thatnothing is left to individual judgment ; that is, thatthere is no subject in religious faith and conducton which the Church may not pronounce a decision,such as to supersede the private judgment, andcompel the assent, of every one of her members.The English Church takes a middle course betweenthese two. It considers that on certain definitesubjects private judgment upon the text of Scripturehas been superseded, but not by the mereON THE USE OF PRIVATE JUDGMENT. 153authoritative sentence of the Church, but by itshistorical testimony delivered down from the Apostles'time. To these subjects nothing more canbe added, unless, indeed, new records of primitiveChristianity, or new uninterrupted traditions of itsteaching were discoverable.The Catholic doctrines, therefore, of the Trinity,Incarnation, and others similar to these, are thetrue interpretations of the notices contained inScripture of those doctrines respectively. Butthe mere Protestant considers that on these aswell as on other subjects, the sacred text is left tothe good pleasure or the diligence of private men ;while the Romanist, on the contrary, views it asin no degree submitted to individual judgment,except from the accident of the Church havingnot yet pronounced here or there an authoritativeand final decision.Now these extreme theories and their practicalresults are quite intelligible ; whatever be theirfaults, want of simplicity is not one of them. Wesee what they mean, how they work, what theyresult in. But the middle path adopted by theEnglish Church cannot be so easily mastered bythe mind, first because it is a mean, and has inconsequencea complex nature, involving a combinationof principles, and depending on multipliedconditions ; next, because it partakes of that indeterminatenesswhich, as has been already observed,is to a certain extent a characteristic of English154 ON THE USE OF [LBCT.theology ; lastly, because it has never been realizedin any religious community, and thereby broughthome to the mind through the senses. What hasnever been fairly brought into operation, fairly liesopen to various objections. It is open to the suspicionof being incapable of it, that is, of beingwhat is commonly understood by a mere theory orfancy. And besides, a mean system really is oftennothing better than an assemblage of words ; andalways looks such, before it is proved to be somethingmore. For instance, if we knew only of thecolours white and black, and heard a descriptionof brown or grey, and were told that these wereneither white nor black, but something like both,yet between them, we should be tempted to conceiveour informant's words either self-contradictoryor altogether unmeaning ; as if it were plainthat what was not white must be black, and whatwas not black must be white. This is daily instancedin the view taken by society at large ofsuch persons, now (alas !) a comparatively smallremnant, who follow the ancient doctrines and customsof our Church, who hold to the creeds andSacraments, keep from novelties, and are regularin their devotions, and are, what is sometimes calledalmost in reproach, " orthodox." Worldly men,seeing them only at a distance, will class themwith the religionists of the day ; the religionistsof the day, with a like superficial glance at them,call them worldly and carnal. Why is this ? becauseV.] PRIVATE JUDGMENT. 155neither party can fancy any medium between itselfand its opposite, and each connects them with theother, because they are not its own.Feeling, then, the disadvantage under which theAnglican doctrine of Private Judgment lies, anddesirous to give it something more of meaning andreality than it popularly possesses, I shall attemptto describe it, first, in theory, and then as if reducedto practice.1. Now, if man is in a state of trial, and his triallies in the general exercise of the will, and thechoice of religion is an exercise of will, and alwaysimplies an act of individual judgment, it follows thatsuch acts are in the number of those by which he istried, and for which he is to give an account hereafter.So far, all parties must be agreed, that withoutprivate judgment there is no responsibility ; andthat in matter of fact, a man's own mind, and nothingelse, is the cause of his believing or notbelieving, and of his acting or not acting upon hisbelief. Even though an infallible guidance beaccorded, a man must have a choice of resisting itor not ; he may resist it if he pleases, as Judas wastraitor to his Master. Romanist, I consider, agreeswith Protestant so far ; the question in disputebeing, what are the means which are to direct ourchoice, and what is the due manner of usingthem. This is the point to which I shall directmy attention.The means which are given us to form our ON THE USE OF [Lucy.ment by, exclusively of such as are supernatural,which do not enter into consideration, are various,partly internal, partly external. The internal meansof judging are common sense, natural perception ofright and wrong, the affections, the imagination,reason, and the like. The external are such asScripture, the existing Church, Tradition, Catholicity,Learning, Antiquity, and the National Faith.Popular Protestantism would deprive us of allthese external means, except the text of HolyScripture; as if, I suppose, upon the antecedentnotion that, when God speaks by inspiration, allother external means are superseded. But this isan arbitrary decision, contrary to facts ; for unlessinspiration made use of an universal language,learning at least must be necessary to ascertain themeaning of the particular language selected ; andif one external aid be adopted, of course all antecedentobjection to any other vanishes. This notion,then, though commonly taken for granted, must bepronounced untenable, nay, inconsistent with itself;yet upon it the prevailing neglect of external assistances,and the exaltation of Private Judgment,mainly rest. Discarding this narrow view of thesubject, let us rather accept all the means whichare put within our reach, as intended to be used,as talents which must not be neglected ; and, as soconsidering them, let us trace the order in which theyaddress themselves to the minds of individuals.Our parents and teachers are our first informantsV.] PRIVATE JUDGMENT. 157concerning the next world ; and they elicit andcherish the innate sense of right and wrong whichacts as a guide co-ordinate with them. By degreesthey resign their place to the religious communion,or Church, in which we find ourselves,while the inward habits of truth and holiness whichthe moral sense has begun to form, react upon thatinward monitor, enlarge its range, and make itsdictates articulate, decisive, and various. Meantimethe Scriptures have been added as fresh informants,bearing witness to the Church and to themoral sense, and interpreted by them both. Lastof all, where there is time and opportunity for researchinto times past and present, Christian Antiquity,and Christendom, as it at present exists,become additional informants, giving substance andshape to much that before existed in our minds butinoutline and shadow.Such are the means by which God conveys toChristians the knowledge of His will and Providence; but not all of them to all men. To someHe vouchsafes all, to all some ; but, according tothe gifts given them, does He make it their dutyto use them religiously. He employs these gifts asHis instruments in teaching, trying, converting,advancing the mind, as the Sacraments are Hisimperceptible means of changing the soul. To thegreater part of the world He has given but three ofthem, Conscience, Reason, and National Religion; toa great part of Christendom He gives no external158 ON THE USE OF [Let.guidance but through the Church; to others only theScriptures ; to others both Church and Scriptures.Few are able to add the knowledge of ChristianAntiquity ; the first centuries of Christianity enjoyedthe light of Catholicity, an informant whichis now partially withdrawn from us. The leastportion of these separate means of knowledge, issufficient for a man's living religiously; but themore of them he has, the more of course he has toanswer for ; nor can he escape his responsibility, asmost men attempt in one way or other, by hidinghis talent in a napkin.Most men, I say, try to dispense with one orother of these divine informants ; and for thisreason, because it is difficult to combine them.The lights they furnish, coming from various quarters,cast separate shadows, and partially intercepteach other ; and it is pleasant to walk withoutdoubt and without shade, than to have to choosewhat is best and safest. The Romanist wouldsimplify matters by removing Reason, Scripture,and Antiquity, and depending mainly upon Churchauthority; the Calvinist relies on Reason, Criticism,and Scripture, to the disparagement of theMoral Sense, the Church, Tradition, and Antiquity ;the Latitudinarian relies on Reason, with Scripturein subordination ; the Mystic on the feelings andaffections, or what is commonly called the heart ;the Politician takes the National Faith as sufficient,and cares for little else ; the man of the world actsV.] PRIVATE JUDGMENT. 159by common sense, which is the oracle of the careless;the popular Religionist considers the authorizedversion of Scripture to be all in all. Butthe true Catholic Christian is he who takes whatGod has given him, be it greater or less, despisesnot the lesser because he has received the greater,yet puts it not before the greater, but uses all dulyand to God's glory.I just now said that it was difficult to combinethese several means of gaining Divine Truth, andthat their respective informations do not altogetheragree. I mean that at first sight they do notagree, or in particular cases; for abstractedly, ofcourse, what comes from God must be one and thesame in whatever way it comes ; if it seems todiffer from itself, this arises from our weakness.Even our senses seem at first to contradict eachother, and an infant may have difficulty in knowinghow to avail himself of them, yet in time helearns to do so, and unconsciously makes allowancefor their apparent discordance ; and it would beutter folly on account of their differences, whateverthey are, to discard the use of them. Inlike manner, Conscience and Reason sometimesseem at variance, and then we either call whatappears to be reason sophistry, or what appearsto be conscience weakness or superstition. Or, themoral sense and Scripture seem to speak a distinctlanguage, as in their respective judgments concerningDavid ; or Scripture and Antiquity, as regards"160 ON THE USE OF [Let.Christ's command to us to wash each other's feet ;or Scripture and Reason as regards miracles, or thedoctrines of the Trinity and Incarnation ; or Antiquityand the existing Church, as regards immersionin Baptism ; or the National Religion and Antiquity,as regards the Church's power of jurisdiction ;or Antiquity and the propensities of Nature, asregards the usage of celibacy; or Antiquity andscholarship, as at times perhaps in the interpretationof Scripture.This being the state of the case, I make thefollowing remarks ; which, being for the sake ofillustration, are to be taken but as general ones,without dwelling on extreme cases or exceptions.That Scripture, Antiquity, and Catholicity cannotreally contradict one another :That when the Moral Sense or Reason seems tobe on one side, and Scripture on the other, wemust follow Scripture, except Scripture anywherecontained contradictions in terms, or prescribed undeniablecrimes, which it never does :That when the sense of Scripture, as interpretedby Reason, is contrary to the sense given to it byCatholic Antiquity, we ought to side with thelatter :That when Antiquity runs counter to the presentChurch in important matters, we must follow Antiquity; when in unimportant matters, we mustfollow the present Church :That when the present Church speaks contraryV.] PRIVATE JUDGMENT. 161to our private notions, and Antiquity is silent, orits decisions unknown to us, it is pious to sacrificeour own opinion to that of the Church :That if, in spite of our efforts to agree with theChurch, we still differ from it, Antiquity beingsilent, we must avoid causing any disturbance,recollecting that the Church, and not individuals,has authority in controversies of faith."I am not now concerned to prove all this, butam illustrating the theory of Private Judgment, asI conceive the English Church maintains it. Andnow let us consider it in practice.2. It is popularly conceived that to maintain theright of Private Judgment, is to hold that no onelias an enlightened faith who has not, as a pointof duty, discussed the grounds of it and made uphis mind for himself. But to put forward suchdoctrine as this, rightly pertains to infidels andsceptics only, and if great names may be quotedin its favour, and it is often assumed to be thetrue Protestant doctrine, this is surely because itsadvocates do not weigh the force of their ownwords. Every one must begin religion by faith,not by reasoning ; he must take for granted whathe is taught and what he cannot prove ; and it isbetter for himself that he should do so, even if theteaching he receives contains a mixture of error.If he would possess a reverent mind, he must beginby obeying; if he would cherish a generous anddevoted spirit, he must begin by venturing someON THE USE OFwhat on uncertain information ; if he would deservethe praise of modesty and humility, he must represshis busy intellect, and forbear to scrutinize. Thisis a sufficient explanation, were there no other, forthe subscription to the Thirty-nine Articles, whichis in this place exacted of those who come hitherfor education. Were there any serious objectionsto those Articles, the case would be different ; werethere immorality or infidelity inculcated in them,or even imputed to them, we should have a warrantfor drawing back; but even those who do notagree with them, will not say this of them. Puttingaside then the consideration that they containin them chief portions of the ancient Creeds, andare the form in which so many pious men in timespast have expressed their own faith, even the circumstanceof their constituting the religion underwhich we are born is a reason for our implicitlysubmitting ourselves to them in the first instance.As the mind expands, whether by education oryears, a number of additional informants will meetit, and it will naturally, or rather it ought, accordingto its opportunities, to exercise itself upon allof these, by way of finding out God's perfect truth.The Christian will study Scripture and Antiquity,as well as the doctrine of his own Church ; and mayperhaps, in some points of detail, differ from it ;but, even if eventually he differs, he will not thereforeput himself forward, wrangle, protest, or separatefrom the Church. Further, he may go onV.] PRIVATE JUDGMENT. 163to examine the basis of the authority of Scriptureor of the Church ; and if so, he will do it, not (as issometimes irreverently said) " impartially" and " candidly,"which means sceptically and arrogantly, asif he were the centre of the universe, and all thingsmight be summoned before him and put to task athis pleasure, but with a generous confidence inwhat he has been taught ; nay, not recognizing, aswill often happen, the process of inquiry whichis going on within him. Many a man supposesthat his investigation ought to be attended witha consciousness of his making it ; as if it werescarcely pleasing to God unless he all along reflectsupon it, tells the world of it, boasts of it asaright, and sanctifies it as a principle. He saysto himself and others, ' I am examining, I am scrutinizing,I am judging, I am free to choose or reject,I am exercising the right of Private Judgment.'What a strange satisfaction ! Does itincrease the worth of our affections to reflect uponthem as we feel them ? Would our mourning forafriend become more valuable by our saying, " Iam weeping ; I am overcome and agonized for thesecond or third time ; I am resolved to weep ?"What a strange infatuation, to boast of our havingto make up our minds ! What ! is it a great thingto be without an opinion? is it a satisfaction tohave the truth to find? Who would boast thathe was without worldly means, and had to getthem as he could ? Is heavenly treasure less 164 ON THE USE OF [Let.pious than earthly ? Is it anything inspiring orconsolatory to consider, as such persons do, thatAlmighty God has left them entirely to their ownefforts, has failed to anticipate their wants, has letthem lose in ignorance at least a considerable partof their short life and their tenderest and mostmalleable years ? is it a hardship or a yoke, on thecontrary, to be told that what is put before themto believe in the order of Providence, whetherabsolutely true or not, is in such sense from Him,that it will improve their hearts to obey it, andconvey to them many truths which they otherwisewould not know, and prepare them perchance forthe communication of higher and clearer views ?Yet such is a commonly received doctrine of thisday ; against which, I would plainly maintain, notthe Roman doctrine of Infallibility, which even iftrue, would be of application only to a portion ofmankind, for few comparatively hear of Rome, butgenerally that, under whatever system a man findshimself, he is bound to accept it as if infallible, andto act upon it in a confiding spirit, till he finds a better,or in course of time has cause to suspect it.To this it may be replied by the Romanist, that,granting we succeed in persuading men in the firstinstance to exercise this unsuspicious faith in whatis set before them in the course of Providence, yet, ifthe right of free judgment upon the text of Scriptureis allowed at last, it will be sure, whenever itis allowed, to carry them off into various discordantV. ] PRIVATE JUDGMENT. 165opinions; that individuals will fancy they havefound out a more Scriptural system even than thatof the Church Catholic itself, should they happento have been born and educated in her pale. ButI am not willing to grant this of the Holy Scriptures,though Romanists are accustomed to assume it.There have been writers of their communion, indeed,who have used the most disparaging termsof the inspired volume, as if it were so mere aletter that it might be moulded into any meaningwhich the reader chose to put upon it. Some oftheir expressions and statements have been noticedby our divines ; such as, that " the Scriptures areworth no more than Esp's fables without theChurch's authority ;" or that " they are like a noseof wax which admits of being pulled and mouldedone way and another VIn contradiction to these expressions, it surelymay be maintained, not only that the Scriptureshave but one direct and unchangeable sense, butthat it is such as in all greater matters to make aforcible appeal to the mind, when fairly put beforeit, and to impress it with a conviction of itsbeing the true one. Little of systematic knowledgeas Scripture may impart to ordinary readers,still what it does convey may surely tend in onedirection and not in another. What it impartsmay look towards the system of the Church and1 Stillingfleet. Grounds, i. 5. 2. p. 138.166 ON THE USE OF [Let.of Antiquity, not oppose it. Whether it does so ornot, is a question of fact which must be determinedas facts are determined ; but here let us dwell foramoment on the mere idea which I have suggested.There is no reason why the Romanistshould startle at the notion. Why is it more incongruousto suppose that our minds are so constitutedas to be sure to a certain point of the truemeaning of words, than of the correctness of anargument ? yet Romanists do argue. If it is possibleto be sure of the soundness of an argument,there is perchance no antecedent reason to hinderour being as sure that a text has a certain sense.Men, it is granted, continually misinterpret Scripture; so are they as continually using bad arguments;and, as the latter circumstance does notdestroy the mind's innate power of reasoning, soneither does the former show it is destitute of itsinnate power of interpreting. Nay, the Romaniststhemselves continually argue with individuals fromScripture, even in proof of this very doctrine ofthe Church's Infallibility, which would be out ofplace unless the passages appealed to bore theirown meaning with them. What I would urge isthis ; the Romanists of course confess that the realsense of Scripture is not adverse to any doctrinetaught by the Church ; all I would maintain inaddition is, that it is also the natural sense, as separablefrom false interpretations by the sound-judging,as a good argument is from a bad one. AndV.] PRIVATE JUDGMENT. 167as so believing, we think no harm can come fromputting the Scripture into the hands of the laity,allowing them, if they will, to verify by it, asfar as it extends, the doctrines they have beenalready taught.They will answer that all this is negatived byexperience, even though it be abstractedly possible;since, in fact, the general reading of the Bible hasbrought into our country and Church all kinds ofheresies and extravagances. Certainly it has ; butit has not been introduced under those limitationsand provisions, which I have mentioned as necessaryattendants on it, according to the scheme designedby Providence. If Scripture reading hasbeen the cause of schism, this has been becauseindividuals have given themselves to it to the disparagementof God's other gifts ; because they haverefused to throw themselves into the external systemwhich has been provided for them, becausethey have attempted to reason before they acted,and to prove before they would be taught. If ithas been the cause of schism in our country, it isbecause the Anglican Church has never had theopportunity of supplying adequately that assistancewhich is its divinely provided complement ; becauseher voice has been feeble, her motions impeded,and the means never given her of impressing uponthe population her own doctrine ; because the Reformationwas set up in disunion, and theories moreProtestant than hers have, from the first, spoken168 ON THE USE OF [Let.with her, and blended with, and sometimes drownedher voice. If Scripture reading has, in England,been the cause of schism, it is because we are deprivedof the power of excommunicating, which, inthe revealed scheme, is the formal antagonist andcurb of Private Judgment. But take a Church,nurtured and trained on this model, claiming theobedience of its members in the first instance,though laying itself open afterwards to their judgment,according to their respective capabilities forjudging, claiming that they should make a generousand unsuspicious trial of it before they objectedto it, and able to appeal confidently for its doctrinesto the writings of Antiquity; a Church whichtaught the Truth boldly and in system, and whichseparated from itself or silenced those which opposedit, and I believe individual members would bevery little perplexed ; and, if men were still fount!to resist its doctrine, they would not be, as now,misguided persons, with some good feelings, andright views, but such as one should be glad to berid of. One chief cause of sects among us is, thatthe Church's voice is not heard clearly and forcibly;she does not exercise her own right of interpretingScripture ; she does not arbitrate, decide, condemn ;she does not answer the call which human naturemakes upon her. That all her members would inthat case perfectly agree with each other, or withherself, I am far from supposing ; but they woulddiffer chiefly in such matters as would not forfeitV.] PRIVATE JUDGMENT. 169their membership, nor lead them to protest againstthe received doctrine. If, even as it is, the greatbody of Dissenters from the Church during the lastcenturies remained more or less constant to theCreeds, except in the article which was compromisedin their Dissent, surely much more fully andfirmly would her members then abide in the fundamentalsof faith, though Scripture was ever sofreely put into their hands. We see it so at thisdaw. For on which side is the most lack at thistfmoment ? in the laity in believing ? or the Churchin teaching? Are not the laity every where willingto treat their pastors with becoming respect;nay so follow their guidance as to take up theirparticular views, according as they may be of aCatholic or private character, in this or that place?Is there any doubt at all that the laity would thinkalike, if the Clergy did ? and is there any doubtthat the Clergy would think alike, as far as theformal expression of their faith went, if they hadtheir views cleared by a theological education, andmoulded by a knowledge of Antiquity ? We haveno need to grudge our people the religious use ofPrivate Judgment; we need not distrust theiraffection, we have but to blame our own waveringand differences.The free reading of Scripture, I say, when theother parts of the Divine System are duly fulfilled,would lead, at most, to diversities of opinion onlyin the adjuncts and details of faith, not in fundsON THE USE OF [Let.Vmental. Men differ from each other at present,first from the influence of the false theories of PrivateJudgment which are among us, and whichmislead them ; next from the want of external guidance.They are enjoined, as a matter of duty, toexamine and decide for themselves, and the Churchbut faintly protests against this proceeding, orsupersedes the need of it. Truth has a force whicherror cannot counterfeit ; and the Church, speakingout that Truth, as committed to her, would cause acorresponding vibration in Holy Scripture, such asno other notes, however loudly sounded, can drawfrom it. If, after all, persons arose, as they wouldarise, disputing against the fundamentals, or separatingon minor points, let them go their way ;they went out from us, because they were not ofus." They would commonly be " men of corruptminds, reprobate concerning the faith l ;" I do notsay there never could be any other, but for suchextraordinary cases no system can provide. Ifthere were better men, who, though educated inthe Truth, ultimately opposed it openly, they, aswell as others, would be put out of the Church fortheir error's sake, and for their contumacy ; andGod, who alone sees the hearts of men, and howmysteriously good and evil are mingled together inthis world, would provide in His own inscrutableway for anomalies which His revealed system didnot meet.1 2 Tim. iii. 8.V.] PRIVATE JUDGMENT. 171I consider, then, on the whole that, howeverdifficult it may be in theory to determine when wemust go by our own view of Scripture, when bythe decision of the Church, yet in practice therewould be little or no difficulty at all. Withoutclaiming infallibility, the Church may claim theconfidence and obedience of her members ; Scripturemay be read without tending to schism ;minor differences allowed, without disagreement infundamentals ; and the proud and self-willed disputantdiscarded without the perplexed inquirersuffering. If there is schism among us, it is notthat Scripture speaks variously, but that the Churchof the day speaks not at all ; not that Private Judgmentis rebellious, but that the Church's judgmentis withheld.I do really believe that, with more of primitivesimplicity and of rational freedom, and far moreof Gospel truth than in Romanism, there would befound in the rule of Private Judgment, as I havedescribed it, as much certainty as the doctrine ofInfallibility can give. As ample provision wouldbe made both for the comfort of the individual,and for the peace and unity of the body ; whichare the two objects for which Romanism professesto consult. The claim of Infallibility isbut an expedient for impressing strongly uponthe mind the necessity of hearing and of obeyingthe Church. When scrutinized carefully, itwill be found to contribute nothing whatever172 ON THE USE OF PRIVATE JUDGMENT.towards satisfying the reason, as was observedin another connection ; since it is as difficult toprove and bring home to the mind that the Churchis infallible, as that the doctrines it teaches aretrue. Nothing, then, is gained in the way of conviction; only of impression, and, again, of expedition,it being less trouble to accept one doctrineon which all the others are to depend, than anumber. Now this external impressiveness andpractical perspicuity, as far as they are lawful andsalutary, may, I say, be gained without thisclaim; it may be gained in God's way, withoutpresumptuous additions to the means of influencewhich He has ordained, without a tenet, fictitiousin itself, and, as falsehood ever will be, deplorablein many ways in its results.LECTURE VI.ON THE ABUSE OF PRIVATE JUDGMENT.I MUST not quit the subject of Private Judgment,without some remarks on the popular view of it ;which is as follows, that every Christian has theright of making up his mind for himself what heis to believe, from personal and private study of theScriptures. This, I suppose, is the fairest accountto give of it ; though sometimes Private Judgmentis considered rather as the necessary duty thanthe privilege of the Christian, and a slur is castupon hereditary religion, as worthless or absurd ;and much is said in praise of independence of mind,free inquiry, the resolution to judge for ourselves,and the enlightened and spiritual temper whichthese things are supposed to produce. But thisnotion is so very preposterous, there is somethingso very strange and wild in maintaining that everyindividual Christian, rich and poor, learned andunlearned, young and old, in order to have an174 ON THE ABUSE OF [Let.intelligent faith, must have formally examined,deliberated, and passed sentence upon the meaningof Scripture for himself, and that in the highestand most delicate and mysterious matters of faith,that I am unable either to discuss or even to imputesuch an opinion to another, in spite of thelarge and startling declarations which men makeon the subject. Rather let us consider what iscalled the right of Private Judgment ; by which ismeant, not that all must, but that all may searchScripture, and determine or prove their Creed fromit : that is, provided they are duly qualified, for Isuppose this is always implied, though persons maydiffer what the qualifications are. And with thislimitation, I should be as willing as the most zealousProtestant to allow the principle of PrivateJudgment in the abstract ; and it is somethingto agree with opponents even in an abstractprinciple.At the same time, to speak correctly, thereseems a still more advisable mode of speaking ofPrivate Judgment, than either of those which havebeen mentioned. It is neither the duty of allChristians, nor the right of all who are qualified,but the duty of all who are qualified ; and as suchit was spoken of in the last Lecture. However,whether it be a duty or a right, let us considerwhat the qualifications are for exercising it.To take the extreme case : inability to read willbe granted to be an obstacle in the exercise of it ;VI.] PRIVATE JUDGMENT. 175that is, a necessary obstacle to a certain extent, formore need not be assumed, and perhaps will not beconceded by all. But there are other impediments,less obvious, indeed, but quite as serious. I shallinstance two principal ones ; prejudice, in thelarge sense of the word, whether right or wrongprejudice, and whether true or false in its matter,and inaccuracy of mind. And first of the latter.1. The task proposed is such as this, to determinefirst whether Scripture sets forth any dogmaticfaith at all ; next, if so, what it is ; then, if it benecessary for salvation ; then, what are its doctrinesin particular ; then, what is that exact idea of each,which is its essence and its saving principle. Forinstance ; a man may think he holds the doctrineof the Atonement ; but, when examined, may beconvicted of having quite mistaken the meaningof the word. This being considered, I think itwill be granted me, by the most zealous opponent,that the mass of Christians are inadequate to sucha task ; I mean, that if the Gospel be dogmatic,for that I am here assuming, if it be of the natureof the Articles of the Creed, or the Thirty-ninearticles, the great proportion even of educatedsons have not the accuracy of mind requisite fordetermining it. The only question is, whether anyaccurate Creed is necessary for the private Christian,which orthodox Protestants always maintain.Consider, then, the orthodox Protestant doctrines ;those relating to the Divine nature, and the Eco-176 ON THE ABUSE OF [Let.nome of Redemption ; or those, again, arising fromthe controversy with Rome, and let me ask thepopular religionist, Do you really mean to say,that men and women, as we find them in life, areable to deduce these doctrines from Scripture, to"determine how far Scripture goes in implying them,the exact weight of its terms, and the danger ofthis or that deviation from them ? What even isso scarce, in the multitude of men, as the power ofstating any simple matter of fact as they witnessedit ? How rarely do their words run with theirmemory, or their memory with the thing in question! With what difficulty is a speaker or a writerunderstood by them, if he puts forward anythingnew or recondite ! What mistakes are there circulatingthrough society about the tenets of individualsof whatever cast of opinion ! What interminableconfusions and misunderstandings incontroversy are there among the most earnestmen ! What questions of words instead of things !View the state of the case in detail. For instance;let it be proposed to one of the common run ofmen, however pious and well meaning, to determinewhat is the true Scripture doctrine aboutoriginal sin, whether Adam's sin is or is not imputed;or again, about the Holy Eucharist, howto interpret our Lord's words ; or again, whetherwe are justified by works, or by faith, or by faithonly, what answer can he be expected to give ? Ifit be said, in answer, that he may gain religiousVI.] PRIVATE JUDGMENT. 177impressions and practical guidance from Scripture,without being able to solve these questions ; Igrant that this, thank God, is, through His blessing,abundantly possible ; but the question is,whether Gospel doctrine, the special " form of soundwords " which is called the Faith, whatever it be,can be so ascertained. I say " whatever it be," forit matters not here whether it be long or short,intricate or simple ; if there be but one dogma, asit is called, one truth in the shape of a declarationor proposition, such as, " Christ is God," or " we arejustified by faith only," I say this is enough to putthe problem of proving it from Scripture beyondthe capacity of so considerable a number of persons,that the right of Private Judgment will be confinedto what is called in this world's matters, an exclusivebody, or will be a monopoly. Aud I repeat,it does seem as if reflecting men would grant asmuch as this ; only they would deny that the Gospelneed be conveyed in any but popular propositions,it being a matter of the heart, not of creeds,not of niceties of words, not of doctrines necessaryto be believed in order to salvation. They wouldmaintain that it was enough to accept Christ as aSaviour, and to act upon the belief; and this, theywould say, might be obtained from Scripture byAny earnest mind.Now here it may be asked me in turn, whetherthere are not a number of Christians who on eithersupposition, whether the creed is given them by theN178 ON THE ABUSE OF [Let.Church, or whether they have to find it in Scripturefor themselves, yet cannot get beyond thatvague notion of the Gospel which has just beenmentioned. I do grant it ; but then I maintain,that every Christian is bound to have as accuratenotions as he can, and that many a man is capableof receiving more accurate notions than he cangather for himself from the Bible. It is one thingto apprehend the Catholic doctrines ; quite anotherto ascertain how and where they are implied inScripture. Most men of fair education can understandthe sacred doctrine debated at Nice, asfully as a professed theologian ; but few have mindstutored into patient inquiry, attention, and accuracysufficient to prove it aright from Scripture. Scriptureis not so clear in God's providential arrangement,to which we submit as to hinder ordinarypersons, who read it for themselves, from beingRebellions, or Independents, or Wesleyans. I donot deny, I earnestly maintain that orthodoxy inits fullest range is the one and only sense of Scripture; nor do I say that Scripture is not distinctenough to keep the multitude from certain grossforms of heterodoxy, as Socinianism ; nor do I presumeto limit what God will do in extraordinarycases; much less do I deny that Scripture willplace any earnest inquirer in that position of mindwhich will cause him to embrace the Catholiccreed, when offered, as the real counterpart andcomplement of the view which Scripture has givenVI.] PRIVATE JUDGMENT. 179him ; but I deny that the mass of Christians, perusingthe Scripture merely by themselves, will besecured from Sabellianism in Germany or America,from Pelagianism in Geneva, or from undervaluingthe Sacraments in Scotland. All that can be objectedis that Sabellianism, and Pelagianism, andlow notions of the Sacraments, are not injurious,where the heart is warm and the feelings (what isimproperly called) spiritual.But it may be said that at least the common runof people can see what is not in Scripture, ever be their defect of accuracy ; and that thus inaPopish country they may obtain clear views ofthe Gospel from Scripture, when the Church hascorrupted it. To a certain point they may ; but anaccuracy, which they have not, will be necessaryto teach them where to stop in their retrenchmentsof faith. What is to secure their stopping at thevery point we wish ? Is all that really is in Scriptureclearly stated, and may all that is but impliedbe rejected ? What is to hinder the multitude ofmen who have been allowed to reject the doctrineof Transubstantiation because they do not find itin Scripture, from rejecting, also, the divinity of theHoly Ghost, because He is no where plainly calledGod ? No ; such Private Judgment is a weaponwhich destroys error by the sacrifice of truth.From all this I conclude that persons who maintainthat the mass of Christians are bound to drawthe orthodox faith for themselves from Scripture,N 2180 ON THE ABUSE OF [Let.hold an unreal doctrine, and are in a false position ;that, to be consistent, they must go further oneway or the other, either cease to think orthodoxynecessary, or allow it to be taught them.2, In the next place, let us consider what forceprepossessions have in disqualifying us from searchingScripture dispassionately for ourselves. Themass of men are hindered from forming their ownviews of doctrine, not only from the peculiar structureof the sacred Volume, but from the externalbias which they ever receive from education andother causes. Without proving the influence ofprejudice, which would be superfluous, let us considersome of the effects of it. For instance ; oneman sees the doctrine of absolute predestinationin Scripture so clearly, as he considers, that hemakes it almost an article of saving faith ; anotherthinks it a most dangerous error. One man maintains,that the civil establishment of religion iscommanded in Scripture, another that it is condemnedby it. Such instances do not show thatScripture has no one certain meaning, but that itis not so distinct and prominent, as to force itselfupon the minds of the many against their variousprejudices. Nor do they prove that all prejudiceis wrong ; but that some particular prejudices arenot true ; and that, since it is impossible to bewithout some or other, it is expedient to impressthe mind with that which is true ; that is, with thefaith taught by the Church Catholic, and ascer-VI.] PRIVATE JUDGMENT. 181tenable as a matter of fact beyond the influenceof prejudice.Again : take the explanations in detail given byProtestants of particular texts of Scripture ; theywill be found to be made with an inconsistency andwant of intelligible principle, which shows how impossibleit is for the mass of men to contemplateScripture without imparting to it the colouringwhich they themselves have received in the courseof their education. Nothing is more striking, inpopular interpretations and discussions, than theamplitude of meaning which is sometimes allowedto the sacred text, compared with its assumednarrowness at other times. In some places it isliberally opened, at others it is kept close shut ;sometimes a single word is developed into an argument,at another it is denied to mean anything specificand definite, anything but what is accidentaland transient. At times the commentator is sensitivelyalive to the most distant allusions, at timeshe is impenetrable to any ; at times he decides thatthe sacred text is figurative, at other times only literal; without any assignable reason except that theparticular religious persuasion to which he belongsrequires such inconsistency. For instance, whenChrist said to the Apostles, " Drink ye all of this,"He is considered to imply that all the laity shouldpartake the cup ; yet, when He said to them, " Receiveye the Holy Ghost," He spoke to the originalApostles exclusively. When St. Paul speaks of182 ON THE ABUSE OF [Let.the man of sin," he meant a succession of sinners; but when Christ said, " I give unto thee thekeys of the kingdom of heaven," He does not meana line of Apostles. When St. Paul says of theOld Testament, " All Scripture is given by inspirationof God," he includes the New ; yet when hesays, " We are come to the city of the living God,"he does not include the Church militant. " Afountain shall be opened for sin," does not provebaptismal grace ; but " Christ is unto us righteousness,"proves that He fulfils the law insteadof us. " The fire must prove every man'swork," is said to be a figure ; yet, " Let no manjudge you in meats and drinks," is to be taken tothe letter as an argument against fasting. " Dothis in remembrance of me," is to be understoodas a command ; but, " Ye also ought to wash oneanother's feet," is not a command. " Let no manjudge you in respect of a holyday, or of the Sabais an argument not against the Sabbath,but against holy-days. " Search the Scriptures,"is an argument for Scripture being the rule offaith ; but " hold the Traditions," is no argumentin favour of Tradition. " Forbidding to marry" is aproof that Rome is Antichrist ; but, " It is goodfor a man not to marry," is no argument in favourof celibacy. The Sermon on the Mount containsno direction to Protestants to fast ; but the secondCommandment is plainly against Image Worship.The Romanist in using prayers in an unknownVI. I PRIVATE JUDGMENT. 183tongue contradicts the 14th chapter of St. Paul's firstEpistle to the Corinthians ; but the Protestant, in hisexposition of justification by faith only \ may be indulgedin contradicting St. James without agreeingwith St. Paul. Let me not be supposed to implythat all these interpretations are equally true andequally false ; that some are not false and othersnot true ; it will be plain to any one who examinesthem that this is not my meaning. I am but showingthe extreme inconsistency which is found in thepopular mode of interpreting Scripture ; men professto explain Scripture by itself and by reason,yet go by no rule, nor can give any account of theirmode of proceeding. They take the most difficultpoints for granted, and say they go by commonsensewhen they really go by prejudice. DoubtlessScripture is sometimes literal and sometimesfigurative ; it need not be literal here, because itis literal there ; but, in many cases, the only way ofdetermining when it is one and when the other, isto see how the early Church understood it. Thisis the Anglican principle; we do not profess tojudge of Scripture in greater matters by itself, butby means of an external guide. But the popularreligion of the day does ; and it finds itself unequalto its profession. It rebels against the voice ofAntiquity, and becomes the victim of prejudice and1 For the true sense of this doctrine in the English Church,vide Bishop Bull's Harmonia ; whom the Author has attemptedto follow in his Sermons, Volume iii. Seem. 6.184 ON THE ABUSE OF [Let.a slave to Traditions of men. It interprets Scripturein a spirit of caprice, which might be made,and is made by others, to prove Romanism quite aswell. And from all this I infer, not that Scripturehas no one meaning in matters of doctrine, or thatwe do not know it, or that a man of high qualificationsmay not elicit it, but that the mass of men,if left to themselves, will not possess the faculty ofreading it naturally and truly.But more may be said in illustration of thissubject. It is very observable how a latent prejudicecan act in obscuring or rather annihilatingcertain passages of Scripture in the mental vision,which are ever so prominently presented to thebodily eyes. For instance, a man perhaps is inthe habit of reading it for years, and has no impressionwhatever produced on his mind by such portionsof it as speak of free grace, and the need ofspiritual aid. These are suddenly and forciblybrought home to him ; and then perhaps he changeshis religious views altogether, and declares thatScripture has hitherto been to him nothing betterthan a sealed book. What security has he thatin certain other respects it is not still hidden fromhim, as it was heretofore as regards the portionswhich have now unsettled him ? Anglican divineswill consider him still dark on certain otherpoints of Scripture doctrine. Or, again, I wouldask him what satisfactory sense he puts to ourLord's words, " Verily, thou shalt in nowise comeVI.] PRIVATE JUDGMENT. 185out thence till thou hast paid the very last farthing?" or, " Stand fast and hold the Traditions ?"or, " Let them pray over them, anointing themwith oil in the name of the Lord ?" and whethera Romanist might not as fairly accuse him of neglectingthese still, as he now makes certain others,to which he was before blind, the sum and substanceof his religion ?Or, to take another and more painful illustration.The (so-called) Unitarians explain away the mostexplicit texts in behalf of our Lord's divinity.These texts do not affect them at all. Let usconsider how this is. When we come to inquire,they have, it would seem, a preconceived notionin their minds that the substance of the Gospellies in the doctrine of the Resurrection. This doctrineis their Christianity, their orthodoxy ; it containsin it, as they think, the essence of the revelation.When then they come to the texts inquestion, such as " Christ, who is over all, God,blessed for ever ;" or, " The Word was God ;" theyhave beforehand made up their minds, that, whateverthese words mean, they can have no importantmeaning, because they do not refer to the Resurrection; for that alone they will allow to be important.So, when they are pressed with them inargument, they are vexed and annoyed at havingto explain what they mean, when they cannot satisfactorily; without, however, feeling shame and mistsON THE ABUSE OF Elect.giving from their appearing to tell against them.Rather, they think the objection idle, not serious,but troublesome. It is in their view almost as ifwe asked them the meaning of any merely obscurepassage, such as " baptizing for the dead ;" andwould not let them read the chapter through inwhich it occurs, till they had explained it. Insuch a case they would of course urge that wewere acting very unfairly ; that, when the drift ofthe whole was so plain, it was mere trifling to stopthem at one half sentence, which after all theywere ready to confess they did not understand.This is what they actually do feel towards thesolemn texts lately cited. They consider themobscurities ; they avow they do not understandthem ; and they boldly ask, what then ? that theyare but a few words, half a sentence perhaps, in achapter otherwise clear and connected ; and theydo not feel themselves bound down to explainevery phrase or word of Scripture which may meetthem. If then, at any time, they undertake toexplain them, it is not as if they laid any particularstress on such explanations. They are not confident,they are not careful, about their correctness ;they do not mind altering them. They put forwardwhatever will stop or embarrass their opponent,nothing more. They use some anomalouscriticism, or alter the stopping, or amend the text,and all because they have made up their mindsVI.] PRIVATE JUDGMENT. 187already what the Gospel is, that some other doctrineis the whole of it, and that in consequencethe question in dispute is very unimportant.Is this state of mind incredible? Yet, fromwhatever cause, they undeniably do contrive toblind themselves to what Scripture says concerningthe Trinity and Incarnation, which is all thatconcerns us here. It shows that Scripture doesnot teach doctrine as the Athanasian Creed teachesit ; the prejudices which are too great for the one,are not too great for the other. But after all it isnot so incredible, ourselves being witnesses ; as willdirectly appear. As Socinians take the Resurrectionto be the whole of the Gospel, so do otherstake the Atonement to be the whole of it. Thissacred doctrine is most essential, as essential as theResurrection, but it is nowhere said to be thewhole of Christianity; nowhere is it so presentedto us as to sanction us in neglecting the rest. Yet,as Socinians make the Resurrection everything, andoverlook the Incarnation, so again there are verymany Christians who agree with them as far asthis, in a like indulgence of theory and prejudice,making, as they do, the doctrine of the Atonementnot only an essential but the whole of the Gospel.This then is their orthodoxy. For instance ; St.Paul says, " God was manifested in the flesh ;" Sociniansspass over these words, or explain them anyhow; but what are the words immediately beforethem? They stand thus: "The Church of the188 ON THE ABUSE OF L^ECT.living God, the pillar and ground of the Truth."Now, I do not ask what these words mean ; I donot ask in what sense the Church is a pillar ;but merely this, has not many a man who callshimself orthodox, and is orthodox so far as not tobe a Socinian, passed over these words again andagain, either not noticing them or not thinking itmattered whether he understood them or not ?And when his attention is called to them, is henot impatient and irritated, rather than perplexed ;fully confident that they mean nothing of consequence,yet feeling he is bound in fairness toattempt some explanation of them? and does henot in consequence drive to and fro, as if to burstthe net in which he finds himself, giving first onesolution of the difficulty, then another, alteringthe stopping, or glossing over the phrase, as willmost readily answer his immediate purpose ? Andso, in like manner, many a man insists on thewords, " Thou art the Christ, the Son of the livingGod," who will not go on to our Lord's answer,Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will buildMy Church." Let us, then, no longer wonder atSocinian : the mass of Christians bring their prejudicesand impressions to the written word, aswell as they, and find it easier to judge of the textby the spontaneous operation of habit and inclination,than by the active and independent exerciseof their reason ; in other words, they think inaccuratelybut they judge and feel \>y prejudice.VI.] PRIVATE JUDGMENT. 189Here then we have two serious disqualificationsin the case of the multitude of men, which mustdiscourage those who are in any measure humbleand cautious, from attempting to rely on their ownunassisted interpretation of Scripture, if they canavoid it. Scripture is not so distinct in its announcements,as readers are morally or intellectuallyslow in receiving them. And if any onethinks that this avowal is derogatory to Scripture,I answer that Scripture was never intended to teachdoctrine to the many ; and if it was not given withthis object, it argues no imperfection in it that itdoes not fulfil it.I repeat it ; while Scripture is written by inspiredmen/with one and one only view of doctrine in theirhearts and contemplations, even the Truth whichwas from the beginning, yet being written not toinstruct in doctrine, but for those who were alreadyinstructed in it, not with direct announcements butwith intimations and implications of the faith, thequalifications for rightly apprehending it are so rareand high, that a prudent man, to say nothing ofpiety, will not risk his salvation on the chance ofhis having them ; but will read it with the aid ofthose subsidiary guides which ever have been suppliedas if to meet our need. I would not denyas an abstract proposition that a Christian maygain the whole truth from the Scriptures, but wouldmaintain that the chances are very seriously againsta given individual. I would not deny, but rather190 ON THE ABUSE OF [LBCT.maintain that a religious, wise, and intellectuallygifted man will succeed : but who answers to thisdescription but the collective Church ? There, indeed,such qualifications might be supposed toexist ; what is wanting in one member being suppliedby another, and the contrary errors of individualseliminated by their combination. TheChurch truly may be said almost infallibly to interpretScripture, though from the possession of pasttradition, and amid the divisions of the time present,perhaps at no period in the course of theDispensation has she had the need and the opportunityof interpreting it for herself. Neitherwould I deny that individuals, whether fromheight of holiness, clearness of intellectual vision,or the immediate power of the Holy Ghost, havebeen and are able to penetrate through the sacredtext into some portions of the divine system beyondwithout external help ; though since that help hasever been given, as to the Church, so to the individual,it is difficult to prove that the individual-hasperformed what the Church has never attempted.None, however, it would seem, but acomplete and accurately moulded Christian, suchas the world has never or scarcely seen, wouldbe able to bring out harmoniously and perspicuouslythe full divine characters which lie hidfrom mortal eyes within the inspired letter of therevelation. And this, by the way, may be takenas one remarkable test, or at least characteristic ofVI.] PRIVATE JUDGMENT. 191error, in the various denominations of religionwhich surround us ; none of them embraces thewhole Bible, none of them is able to interpretthe whole, none of them has a key which willrevolve through the entire compass of the wardswhich lie within. Each has its favourite text,and neglects the rest. None can solve the greatsecret and utter the mystery of its pages. Onemakes trial, then another : but one and all inturn are foiled. They retire, as the sages ofBabylon, and make way for Daniel. The ChurchCatholic, the true Prophet of God, alone is ableto tell the dream and its interpretation.3. But it may be objected that full justice has notyet been done to the arguments of the popular religion.A widely extended shape of Protestantismin this country, and that which professes to be themost religious of all, maintains that, though Scripturemay seem to mean any thing in matters offaith to unassisted reason, yet that under the guidanceof divine illumination it speaks but one doctrine,and is thus the instrument of the Holy Ghostin converting the soul. Starting from this fundamentalarticle, its advocates speak as follows :that Scripture is the only divine instrument givenus; that every thing else is human ; that the Churchis human; that rites and sacraments are human; thatteachers are human ; that the Fathers are but falliblemen ; that creeds and confessions, primitive faith,Apostolical Traditions, are human systems, and ON THE ABUSE OF [Doctrinesof men ; that there is no need of proving thisin particular instances, because it is an elementaryprinciple, which holds good of them all; and thattill we acknowledge and accept this principle wearestill in the flesh. It follows that to inquireabout the early Church, the consent of Fathers,unbroken testimonies, or Councils, to inquire whenthe Church first became corrupt, or to make theprimitive writers a comment upon the inspiredtext, are but melancholy and pernicious follies.The Church, according to this view of it, is not,and never was, more than a collection of individuals.Some of those individuals have, in everyage, been, through God's mercy, spiritually enlightened,and may have shed a radiance roundthem, and influenced the Christian body even foragesafter them; but, true religion being alwaysrare, and the many being always evil, an appeal liesas little with Antiquity as with modern times. TheApostolic Church was not better than the present,nor is of more weight and authority ; it was a humansystem, and an aggregate of fallible men, and suchis the length and the breadth of the whole matter.In the eyes of such religionists the very subject ofthese Lectures is irrelevant and nugatory, and thetime and attention required to hear or to writethem are but squandered upon earthly subjects,which supply no food for the hungry soul, no lightfor the wandering feet, no stay or consolation inthe hour of death or the day of judgment.VI.] PRIVATE JUDGMENT. 193I trust this is, on the whole, a fair view of whatmany thousands (alas !) of serious and well-meaningpersons hold at this present time among us ; andare so sure they are right, that they consider thatno one is a real Christian who does not assent toit,and that no one can have once seen and acknowledgedit, but must for ever profess it as somethingmore heavenly and comfortable than any doctrinehe ever maintained before. And this feeling,which their conduct evidences, perhaps accountsfor the state in which they leave the theory inquestion, which is as follows. It is perfect as atheory ; I mean, it is consistent with itself, it beingquite conceivable that Providence might have actedin the way it represents, might have called thepredestined few, or tried the earnestness of all, bywhat is at first sight a various and intricate volume.But secondly, I observe that, whether it be true orfalse, no part of the foregoing account goes towardsthe proof of it, nor is any serious attempt madethat way by its advocates. As Baptismal grace issupposed by the Romanists to convey to individualsthe evidence of their Church's Infallibility,so a similar divine influence, but not in Baptism,is supposed, according to this popular religion, toassure the soul without proof that the Bible is theonly source of divine knowledge.The only semblance of argument in the primefacie statement as above drawn out, lies in this,that the majority being always evil, its faith is noo194 ON THE ABUSE OF [Let.presumption of truth. Something has been saidin former Lectures which will serve to explain thisobjection, and something will be said in one soon tofollow. Here I will but observe that the multitudemay witness for truth and yet act against it ; thatit is the very peculiarity of the world that it killsthe Prophets of God and builds their sepulchres,the very charge against it that " knowing the judgmentof God, that they which commit such thingsare worthy of death," yet it " not only does thesame, but has pleasure in them that practise them ;"and that this inconsistency in its conduct wasnever considered to interfere with the value of itswitness. When men witness against themselves,this surely affords no presumption that they witnessfalsely. Does " the corruption that is in theworld through lust " invalidate or corroborate itsunanimous testimony to the being of a moral Governorand Judge, and again to the sovereignty ofthe moral law and to the guilt and pollution ofsin ? Surely then the concordant assent of Christendomto doctrines so severe and high as theChristian Mysteries, is a stronger argument in favourof their Apostolic origin, than if they weremore pleasing and acceptable to the nature of man.Is there any thing in the doctrine of the Trinity toflatter human pride ? or in that of the Incarnationto encourage carnal tastes and appetites ? or in thatof the Spirit's abundance within us to make us easyand irreverent ? or in the Atonement to make usVI.] PRIVATE JUDGMENT. 195think lightly of sin ? Fallible men then may conveytruth infallible ; human systems may be instrumentsof heaven. And he who feels his ignorancewill seek for light wherever he can obtain it ; he willnot prescribe rules to God's providence; he willnot say " inform me by inspired oracles or not atall." If indeed full information had been promisedto individuals from private study of the text of theScriptures, this indeed might be a reason for dispensingwith Antiquity, whatever was its value.But even could it be proved without value, as fullyas the persons in question desire, still it must berecollected this would not go one step towardsproving that such a promise of guidance from readingScripture has been given ; and it happens mostremarkably, as I have already hinted, that satisfied,I suppose, with the simplicity of their theory, theyhave chiefly employed themselves in assailing theChristian Fathers, without proving what far morenearly concerns them, their own doctrine of thesufficiency of Scripture for teaching the faith ; whichfailing, the Fathers are their sole, even though aninsufficient resource. In conclusion, then, I willreview the chief arguments, if they must so becalled, adducible in defence of this main principle ofpopular Protestantism.Now, if its advocates are asked on what groundsthey conceive that Scripture is, under God's grace,the one ordained informant in saving truth, I supposethey will refer to such texts as our Lord'so2196 ON THE ABUSE OF [Let.words to the Jews, " Search the Scriptures ;" or toSt. Paul's, " All Scripture is given by inspirationof God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof,for correction, for instruction in righteousness, thatthe man of God may be perfect, throughly furnishedunto all good works ;" or to St. Luke's accountof Christ's " opening" His Apostles' " understanding,that they might understand the Scriptures;" or to St. James's telling us " to ask forwisdom of God, who giveth liberally;" or to ourLord's assurance, " Ask, and it shall be given you ;"or to St. Paul's statement, that " the natural manreceived not the things of the Spirit of God ;"or to our Lord's promise to the twelve, that theHoly Ghost the Comforter " should guide them intoall truth ;" or to the prophet Isaiah's prediction,All thy children shall be taught of the Lord ;" orto St. John's declaration, " Ye have an unction fromthe Holy One, and ye know all things." Yet afterall, can any one text be produced, or any comparisonof texts, to establish the very point in hand,that Scripture is the sole necessary instrument ofthe Holy Ghost for guiding the individual Christianinto saving truth ? for it may be very true thatwe ought to search the Scriptures, and true thatScripture contains all saving doctrine, and true thatwe cannot understand it without the Holy Spirit,and true that the Holy Spirit is given to all whoask, and true that all perfect Christians do understandit, and yet there may not be such connexionVI.] PRIVATE JUDGMENT. 197between these separate propositions as to make ittrue that men are led by the Holy Spirit into savingtruth through the Scriptures. We may be boundto search the Scriptures, yet not to find saving doctrines,but chiefly to be throughly " furnished untoall good works ;" it may contain all saving doctrine,yet so deeply lodged there, that " those who areunlearned and unstable may wrest it unto their owndestruction ;" the Holy Ghost may be promised toall Christians, yet not in order to teach them thefaith through Scripture, but in order to impressScripture on their hearts, and to teach them thefaith through whatever sources. Let us inspectsome of the foregoing texts more narrowly.First, there are texts which bid us ask wisdomof God, and promise that it will be granted ! . Itis true, but this does not show that the privatereading of Scripture is the one essential requisitefor gaining it. If such texts are taken by themselves,they would rather prove that no externalmeans at all is necessary, not even Scripture, forScripture is not mentioned. To be consistent, weought to call the Scripture an outward form aswell as the Church, and to say that " asking,"in other words, prayer, is alone necessary. Ifthen one external means of information is admittedas intervening between the Holy Ghostand the soul, though it is not mentioned, why not1 Matt. vii. 7. James i. 5.198 ON THE ABUSE OF [LBCT.another ? When Christ says, " Ask, and ye shallfind," He does not specify the mode of seeking ; Hemeans, as we may suppose, by all methods which arevouchsafed to us, and are otherwise specified. Heincludes the Church, which is called " the pillarand ground of the Truth." Our Service appliesthe promise to seeking God in Baptism, and asit may include the use of the Sacraments, so may itinclude the use of Catholic teaching.Again, no Christian can doubt that without divinegrace we cannot discern the sense of Scriptureprofitably; but it does not follow from this thatwith it we can gain every thing from Scripture.The grace of God seems to be promised us chieflyfor practical purposes, for enabling us to receivewhat we receive, whatever it is, doctrine or preceptorfrom whatever quarter, profitably, with a livelyfaith, with love and zeal. If it supersedes Creeds,why should it not supersede Sacraments? it actsthrough Sacraments, and in like manner it actsthrough Creeds. Sacraments, without the presenceof the Holy Ghost, would sink into mere Jewishrites ; and Creeds, without a similar presence, arebut a dead letter. The appointment of Sacramentsis in Scripture, and so is the proof of the Creed ;yet Scripture is no more a Creed than it is a Sacrament.By continuous Tradition we have receivedthe Sacraments embodied in a certain definiteform ; and by a like Tradition we have receivedthe doctrines also ; Scripture may justify both theVI.] PRIVATE JUDGMENT. 199one and the other when given, without being sufficientto lead individuals to frame and observe them,before they are given. Besides, if the Holy Spiritilluminates the word of God to the individual in allthings, then of course as regards unfulfilled prophecyalso ; which we know is not the case. Asthen, for all that the Spirit is given, yet the eventis necessary to interpret prophecy, so in like mannera similar external fact may be necessary forunderstanding doctrine. True then though it bethat " the natural man discerned not the thingsof the Spirit of God;" it does not; therefore followthat the spiritual man discerned spiritual thingsthrough Scripture only, not through Creeds.Lastly : there are texts which recite the variouspurposes for which Scripture is useful ; but it doesnot follow that no medium is necessary for itsbecoming useful to individuals. Scripture may beprofitable for doctrine, instruction, and correction,that the man of God may be perfect, without therebydetermining at all whether or not there are instrumentsfor preparing, dispensing, and ministering theword for this or that purpose which it is to effect.Certainly Christ says, " Search the Scriptures,"but He is speaking to the Jews about their Scriptures,and about definite prophecies ; how does itfollow that because it was the duty of the Jewsto examine documents as prophecies, which professto be prophecies, that therefore we are meantto gather our doctrines from documents which do200 ON THE ABUSE OF [Let.not profess to be doctrinal ? Besides, when Christtold them to search the Scriptures for notices ofHimself, He had vouchsafed already to presentHimself before them ; He was a living commenton those Scriptures to which He referred. WhatHe was to be, was not understood before He appeared.The case is the same with Christian doctrinenow. The Creed confronts Scripture, andseems to say to us, " Search the Scriptures, forthey testify of me." But if we attempt to gain thetruth of doctrine without the Creed, perchance weshall not be more successful in our search thanwere the Jews in seeking Christ before He came,yet under circumstances different from theirs, inwhich knowledge is necessary to salvation, anderror is a sin.Enough has now been said on the theory ofPrivate Judgment. I conclude then that there isneither natural probability, nor supernatural promise,that individuals reading Scripture for themselves,to the neglect of other means when theycan have them, will, because they pray for a blessing,be necessarily led into a knowledge of the trueand complete faith of a Christian. 1 conclude that-thepopular theory of rejecting all other helps andreading the Bible only, though commonly maintainedthrough ignorance, is yet in itself presumptuous.I make but one remark in conclusion. One mainreason of the jealousy, with which Christians of thisage and country maintain the notion that truth ofVI. J PRIVATE JUDGMENT. 201doctrine can be gained from Scripture by individuals,is this, that they are unwilling, as they say,to be led by others blindfold. They can possessand read the Scriptures ; whereas of Traditionsthey are no adequate judges, and they dread priestcraft.I am not here to enter into the discussionof this feeling, whether praiseworthy or the contrary.However this be, it does seem a reasonfor putting before them, if possible, the principalworks of the Fathers, translated as Scripture is ;that they may have by them what, whether usedor not, will be a check upon the growth of an unduedependence on the word of individual teachers, andwill be a something to consult, if they have reasonto doubt the Catholic character of any tenet towinch they are invited to accede.LECTURE VII.INSTANCES OF THE ABUSE OF PRIVATE JUDGMENTI PROPOSE now to follow up the remarks last madeupon the Abuse of Private Judgment, with someinstances in which it has been indulged, and inwhich, as might be expected antecedently, it hasbeen productive of error, more or less serious, butnever insignificant. These instances shall, on thewhole, be such as no orthodox Protestant shall beable to look at with any satisfaction, and some ofthem shall be taken from the history of Romanismitself.Without further preface I enter upon the subject,viz. what are the chief precedents, which pastages afford modern Protestants, of the exercise ofPrivate Judgment upon the text of Scripture tothe neglect of Catholic Tradition, and what is theircharacter ?1. First might be instanced many of the errorsin matters of fact connected with the Scripturehistory, which got current in early times, and, beingABUSE OF PRIVATE JUDGMENT. 203mentioned by this or that Father, now improperlygo by the name of Traditions, whereas they seemreally to have originated in a misunderstanding ofScripture. Such, for instance, is the report recordedby Irenseus, and coming, as he conceived, ongood authority, that our Saviour lived to be fortyor fifty. Such is Clement's statement that St. Paulwas married ; such is that of Clement and Justin,that our Lord was deformed in person. These makeout no claim to be considered Apostolical, whereasthey do singularly coincide severally with certaintexts in Scripture which admit of being distortedso as to countenance them l . Such again probablyin no slight degree are the early opinions concerningthe Millennium ; certainly in Egypt in the thirdcentury they seem to have had their origin in amisconstruction of Scripture 2 .If these various opinions did really thus arise, itis a very curious circumstance that they shouldnow be imputed to Tradition, nay, and adduced, asthey are popularly, as if palmary refutations of itsclaims ; whereas they really arose from the circumstanceof either going solely by Scripture, or withbut scanty and insufficient guidance from Tradition.But even though they were not mere deductionsfrom Scripture, still such local rumours about mattersof fact cannot be put on a level with CatholicTradition concerning matters of doctrine.1 John viii. 57. 1 Cor. ix. 5. Is. lii. 14. liii. 2.2 Euseb. Hist. vii. 24.204 INSTANCES OF THE ABUSE [Let.2. The controversy about Baptism in which St.Cyprian was engaged, and in which, according toour own received opinion, he was mistaken, is aclearer and more important instance in point.Cyprian maintained that persons baptized byheretical clergy, must, on being reconciled to theChurch, be re-baptized, or rather that their formerBaptism was invalid. The Roman Church of theday held that confirmation was sufficient in suchcases, as if that ordinance, on the part of the trueChurch, recognized and ratified the outward act,already administered by heretics, and applied the inwardgrace bound up in the Sacrament, but hithertonot enjoyed by the parties receiving it. And sherested her doctrine simply on Apostolical Tradition,which by itself might fairly be taken as a sufficientwitness in such a point. Cyprian did not professany Apostolical Tradition on his side, but he arguedfrom Scripture against the judgment of the RomanSee. His argument and that of his countrymenwas of the following kind : " 'There is but oneLord, one Faith, one Baptism ;' the heretics havenot the one Faith, therefore they have not the oneBaptism." Again, " ' There is one Body, one Spirit,one Baptism ;' the one Baptism of the one Spiritis in the one Church, therefore there is no Baptismout of it." " Christ has said, ' He who is not withMe, is against Me,' and St. John, that they who goout from us are antichrists ; how can they conferthe grace of Baptism ?" " There are not two Bap-vii.]OF PRIVATE JUDGMENT. 205tims; he who recognizes that of heretics, invalidateshis own." " ' No one can receive any thing butwhat is given him from heaven ;' if heresy, then, befrom heaven, the, and then only, can it conferBaptism." " ' God heareth not sinners ;' a hereticis a sinner ; how then can his Baptism be acknowledgedby God l ?" Such are the texts with whichthe African Church defended themselves in Cyprian'sdays ; and who will not allow, with greatspeciousness ? Cyprian himself says in like manner," Usage is of no force where reason is againstit 2 ;" nor is it, where reason is clear and usage ismodern. Yet, after all, however this be, here is acase, where the mere arguing from Scripture withoutreference to Tradition, (whether voluntarilyneglected or not), led to a conclusion which Protestantsnow will grant to be erroneous.3. Again, all members of the English Church atleast consider Arianism to be a fatal error ; yet, whenits history is examined, this peculiarity will befound respecting it, that it appealed only to Scripture,not to Catholic Tradition. I do not mean tosay, it allowed that no one ever held it, before itshistorical rise ; but that it did not profess, nay, itdid not care to have the Church Universal on itsside. It set itself against what was received, and1 Tertull. de Baptism 15. Concil. Carthage. apud Cyprian,pp. 230240.2 Cypr. ad Quint. Ep. 71. ed. Bend.206 INSTANCES OF THE ABUSE [Let.owed its successes to the dexterity with which itargued from certain texts of the Old and NewTestament. I will not enlarge on what is notorious.Arianism certainly professed in its day tobe a scriptural religion.4. Another opinion, which, though not an heresy,will be granted by the majority of Protestants to beanerror, is the tenet with which the great St. Austin'sname is commonly connected. He, as is generallyknown, is, among the ancient Fathers, the Masterof Predestinarianism, that is, of the theological opinionthat certain persons are irreversibly ordainedto persevere unto eternal life. He was engaged incontroversy with the Pelagians, and it is supposed,that in withstanding them he was hurried into theopposite extreme. Now it is remarkable that in histreatises on the subject, he argues from Scripture,and never appeals to Catholic Tradition. For instance,in his work on the Gift of Perseverance hespeaks as follows :The enemy of grace presses on, and urges inall ways to make it believed that it is given accordingto our deserts, and so * grace should no longerbe grace ;' and are we loth to say what with thetestimony of Scripture we can say? I mean, do wefear, lest, if we so speak, some one may be offended,who cannot embrace the truth ; and not rather fearlest, if we are silent, some one who is able to embraceit, may be embraced by error instead ? Foreither Predestination is so to be preached, as HolyVII.] OF PRIVATE JUDGMENT. 207Scripture plainly reveals it, that in the predestinedthe gifts and calling of God are without repentance,or we must confess that the grace of God is givenaccording to our deserts, as the Pelagians consider."Here it is curious indeed to see, how closely hefollows St. Cyprian's pattern, in his mode of conductinghis argument, viz., a reference to certaintexts of Scripture, and (if I may say it of such holymen) a venturesome, a priori, or at least abstract,course of reasoning. But now let us see how hetreats the objection which was made to him, thathis doctrine " was contrary to the opinion of theFathers and the Ecclesiastical sense." He speaksas follows :Why should we not, when we read in commentatorsof God's word, of His prescience, and of thecalling of the elect, understand thereby this samePredestination? For, perhaps, they preferred theword prescience because it is more easily understood,while it does not oppose, nay, agrees withthe truth which is preached concerning the Predestinationof grace. Of this I am sure, that no onecould have disputed against this Predestination, whichwe maintain, according to the Holy Scriptures, withoutan error. Yet I think those persons who askfor the opinions of commentators on this subject,ought to have been contented with those holy men,celebrated every where for Christian faith and doctrine,Cyprian and Ambrose, whose clear testimonyINSTANCES OF THE ABUSE [Let.nies we have given. They ought to have takenthem as sufficient authorities both for believingthoroughly, and preaching thoroughly, as is fitting,that the grace of God is free ; and also for consideringthat preaching is quite consistent with exhortingthe indolent and rebuking the wicked: inasmuchas of these two Saints, the one says concerningGod's grace, ' We must boast of nothing, for nothingis our own,' and the other, ' our heart andour thoughts are not in our power,' and yet theydo not cease to exhort and rebuke, in behalf of thedivine precepts." After quoting some additional passagesfrom these two Fathers, he proceeds, " Whatdo we seek clearer from commentators of the wordof God, if it be our pleasure to hear from them, whatis plain in the Scriptures f However, to these two,who ought to be enough, we will add a third, St.Gregory, who witnesses that both faith in God andthe confession of that faith, are God's gift, in thesewords : ' Confess, I beseech you, the Trinity of theone Godhead, or (if you prefer to say it), the onenature; and God shall be implored to vouchsafeyou voice to confess what you believe. He willgive, doubtless ; He who gave what comes first,will give what comes second;' He who gave tobelieve, will give to confess VWhat makes the failure of this appeal to theprevious belief of the Church still more remarkable,1 De dono Persevere. 40, 41. 48, 49. Prose. ad Aug. Ep. 225.VII.] OF PRIVATE JUDGMENT. 209iis the clear view St. Austin possesses of the value ofCatholic Tradition, and the force with which he canurge it against an adversary on a proper occasion.Here, then, we are furnished with a serious lessonof the mischief of deducing from the sacred textagainst the authority of Tradition. If the doctrineof irrespective Predestination has done harm, andcreated controversy in the Church, let it not beforgotten that this has arisen from exercising privatejudgment upon Scripture, to the neglect ofthe Catholic sense.5. My next instance shall be the Roman doctrineof Purgatory. All Protestants are sufficientlyalive to the seriousness of this error. Now I thinkit may be shown that its existence is owing to thesame indulgence of human reason and of privatejudgment upon Scripture, in default of CatholicTradition. That it was no received opinion duringthe first ages of the Gospel, has often been shown,and need not be dwelt on here. Hardly one ortwo short passages of one or two Fathers for sixcenturies can be brought in its favour, and those,at the most, rather suggesting than teaching it.In truth, the doctrine seems to have occurred tothem, as it has been received generally since, firstfrom the supposed need of such a provision in therevealed scheme, from (what may be called) itsnaturalness in the judgment of reason; and next inconsequenceof the misinterpretation of certaintexts ; as I propose to explain at some length.p210 INSTANCES OF THE ABUSE [Let.How Almighty God will deal with the mass ofChristians, who are neither very bad nor very good,is a problem with which we are not concerned, andwhich it is our wisdom, and may be our duty, to putfrom our thoughts. But when it has once forceditself upon the mind, we are led, in self-defence,with a view of keeping ourselves from dwellingunhealthy on particular cases which come underour experience, and perplex us, to imagine modes,not by which God does, (for that would be presumptionto conjecture), but by which He maysolve the difficulty. Most men, to our apprehensions,are too unformed in religious habits eitherfor heaven or hell ; yet there is no middle state,when Christ comes in judgment. In consequenceit was obvious to have recourse to the intervalbefore His coming, as a time during which this incompletenessmight be remedied ; a season, not ofchanging the spiritual bent and character of thesoul departed, whatever that be, for probation endswith mortal life, but of developing it into a moredeterminate form, whether of good or of evil.Again, when the mind once allows itself to speculate,it would discern in such a provision, a meanswhereby those, who, not without true faith at bottom,yet have committed great crimes ; or thosewho have been carried off in youth, while stillundecided ; or who die after a barren though notan immoral or scandalous life, may receive suchchastisement as may prepare them for heaven, andVII.] OF PRIVATE JUDGMENT. 211render it consistent with God's justice to admitthem thither. Again, the inequality of the sufferingsof Christians in this life, compared one withanother, would lead the unguarded mind to thesame speculations ; the intense suffering, for instance,which some men undergo on their deathbed,seeming as if but an anticipation, in their case,of what comes after death upon others, who withoutgreater claims on God's forbearance, have livedwithout chastisement and die easily. I say, themind will inevitably dwell upon such thoughts,unless it has been taught to subdue them byeducation or by the experience of their dangerousness.Various suppositions have, accordingly, beenmade, as pure suppositions, as mere specimens ofthe capabilities, (if one may so speak,) of the DivineDispensation, as efforts of the mind, reaching forwardand venturing beyond its depth, into the abyssof the Divine Counsels. If one supposition couldbe produced to satisfy the problem, ten thousandothers were conceivable; unless, indeed, the resourcesof God's Providence are exactly commensuratewith man's discernment of them. Religiousmen, amid these searchings of heart, have naturallygone to Scripture for relief; to see if the inspiredword any where gave them any clue for their inquiries.And hence, and from the speculationsof reason upon what was there found, various notionshave been hazarded at different times ; for212 INSTANCES OF THE ABUSE [Let.instance, that there is a certain momentary ordealto be undergone by all men after this life, more orless severe according to their spiritual state ; orthat certain gross sins in good men will be thusvisited, or their lighter failings and habitual imperfections; or that the very sight of Divine Perfectionin the invisible world will be in itself apain, while it constitutes the purification of theimperfect but believing soul ; or that, happinessadmitting of various degrees of intensity, penitentslate in life, may sink for ever into a state blissful asfar as it goes, but more or less approaching to unconsciousness; infants dying after Baptism may beas gems paving the courts of heaven, or as the livingwheels in the Prophet's vision ; while maturedSaints may excel in capacity of bliss, as well as indignity,the highest Archangels. Such speculationsare dangerous when indulged; the eventproves it ; from some of them, in fact, seems tohave resulted the doctrine of Purgatory.Now the texts to which the minds of the primitiveChristians seem to have been principallydrawn, and from which they ventured to argue inbehalf of these vague notions, were these two :The fire shall try every man's work," &c., and " Heshall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and withfire." These texts, with which many more werefound to accord, directed their thoughts one way,as making mention of fire, whatever was meant bythe word, as the instrument of trial and purification.]OF PRIVATE JUDGMENT. 213tion ; and that, at some time between the presenttime and the judgment, or at the judgment.And accordingly, without, perhaps, having any distinctor consistent meaning in what they said, orbeing able to say whether they spoke literally orfiguratively, and with an indefinite reference to thislife as well as to the intermediate state, they sometimesnamed fire as the instrument of recoveringthose who had sinned after their Baptism. Thatthis is the origin of the notion of a Purgatorial fire,I gather from these circumstances ; first, that theydo frequently insist on the texts in question ; next,that they do not agree in the particular sense theyput upon them. That they quote them, shows theyrest upon them ; that they vary in explaining them,that they had no Catholic sense to guide them.Nothing can be clearer, if these facts be so, thanthat the doctrine of the Purgatorial fire in all itssenses, as far as it was more than a surmise, and wasrested on argument, was the result of private judgment,exerted, in defect of Tradition, upon the textof Scripture.A few extracts will at once show the discordanceof the Fathers with each other, on this subject,and their dissent, more or less, from modernRome.The Psalmist observes," says Hilary, " that it isdifficult, and most perilous to human nature, to desireGod's judgments. For, since no one living is clean214 INSTANCES OF THE ABUSE [Let.in His sight, how can His judgment be an object ofdesire ? Considering we shall have to give accountfor every idle word, shall we long for the day ofjudgment, in which we must undergo that everythingfire, and those heavy punishments for cleansing thesoul from its sins ? Then will a sword pierce the soulof Blessed Mary, that the thoughts of many heartsmay be revealed. If that Virgin, which could compassGod, is to come into the severity of the judgment,who shall venture to desire to be judged ofGod ? Job, when he had finished his warfare withallcalamities of man, and had triumphed, who, whentempted, said, ' The Lord gave,' &c., confessed himselfbut ashes when he heard God's voice from thecloud, and determined that he ought not to speakanother word. And who shall venture to desireGod's judgments, whose voice from heaven neitherso great a Prophet endured, nor the Apostles either,when they were with the Lord in the Mount 1 ?"Acanthus says, " When He judges the just, Heshall try them in the fire. Then they whose sinsprevail in weight or number, will be tortured inthe fire, and burnt in the extremities ; but they,who are mature in righteousness and ripeness ofvirtue, shall not feel that flame, for they havesomewhat of God within them, to repel and throwoff the force of it. Such is the power of innocence,1 Tract in Ps. xviii. 3 12.VII.] OF PRIVATE JUDGMENT.that from it that fire recoils without harm, ashaving received a mission from God to burn theirreligious, to retire from the righteous VAugustine, who approaches more nearly to thepresent Roman doctrine, speaks thus doubtfully : -Such a suffering, too, it is not incredible, may happenafter this life, and it is a fair question, whetherit can be settled or not, whether some Christians,according to their love of the perishing goods ofthis world, attain salvation more slowly or speedilythrough a certain purgatorial fire 2 ?"As this doctrine, thus suggested by certain strikingtexts, grew into popularity and definiteness,and verged towards its present Roman form, itseemed a key to many others. Great portions ofthe books of Psalms, Job, and the Lamentations,which express the feelings of religious men undersuffering, would powerfully recommend it by theforcible, and most affecting and awful meaningwhich they received from it. When this was oncesuggested, all other meanings would seem tameand inadequate.To these must be added various passages fromthe prophets ; as that in the beginning of the3rd chapter of Malachi, which speaks of fire asthe instrument of judgment and purification whenChrist comes to visit His Church.Moreover, there were other texts of obscure and1 Div. Instit. vii. 21. 3 Enchir. 69.216 INSTANCES OF THE ABUSE [Let.indeterminate bearing, which seemed on this hypothesisto receive a profitable meaning; such asour Lord's words in the Sermon on the Mount,Verily I say unto thee, thou shalt by no meanscome out thence, till thou hast paid the uttermostfarthing ;" and St. John's expression in the Apocalypse,that " no man in heaven, nor in earth,neither under the earth, was able to open thebook VFurther, the very circumstance that no secondinstrument of a plenary and entire cleansing fromsin was given after Baptism, such as Baptism, ledChristians to expect that that unknown means, whenaccorded, would be of a more painful nature thanthat which they had received so freely and instantaneouslyin infancy ; und confirmed, not only thetext already cited, " He shall baptize you with theHoly Ghost and with fire;" but also St. Haul'sannouncement of the " judgment and fiery indignation"which await those who sinned after havingbeen once enlightened, and Christ's warning tothe impotent man to sin no more, " lest a worsething come unto him."Lastly : the universal and apparently Apostolicalcustom of praying for the dead in Christ, called forsome explanation, the reasons for it not havingcome down to posterity with it. Various reasonsmay be supposed quite clear of this distressing docsMatt, v, 26. Rev. v. 3.VII.] OF PRIVATE JUDGMENT.trine ; but it supplied an adequate and a most constrainingmotive for its observance, to those whowere not content to practise it in ignorance.I do not wish to frame a theory, but anyhow sofarseems undeniable, whatever becomes of therest, and it is all that it concerns me to show, thatthere was no Catholic Tradition for Purgatory inearly times, and that, instead of it, certain texts ofScripture, interpreted by individuals, were put forwardas the proof of the doctrine.6. One more instance shall be adduced from thehistory of the Church, of an error introduced professedlyon grounds of Scripture without the safeguardof Catholic Tradition, the doctrine of thePope's universal Bishoprick ; though in treating itI shall be obliged to touch on a large subject in acursory way, which is scarcely desirable amid thepresent popular misapprehensions about it.That St. Peter was the head of the Apostles andthe centre of unity, and his successors are thehonorary Primates of Christendom, in the samegeneral sense in which London (for instance) is thefirst city in the British Empire, I neither affirmnor deny, for to make a clear statement and thento defend it, would carry us away too far from ourmain subject. But for argument's sake I will heregrant that the Fathers assert it. But what thereis not the shadow of a reason for saying that theyheld, what has not the faintest pretensions of beinga Catholic truth, is this, that St. Peter or his INSTANCES OF THE ABUSE [Let.censors were and are universal Bishops, that theyhave the whole of Christendom for their one diocesein a way in which other Apostles and Bishopshad and have not, that they are Bishops of Bishopsin such sense as belongs to no other Bishop; infact, that the difference between St. Peter and thePopes after him, and other Bishops, is not one ofmere superiority and degree, but of kind, not of rank,but of class. This the Romanists hold ; and theydo not hold it by Catholic Tradition ; by what then ?by private interpretation of Scripture.They will say that the texts in their favour areso very strong, that it is not wonderful that theyshould quote them. If so, Protestants who rely onwhat they think strong texts, must see to that ; Iam not here engaged in refuting the Romanists ;I am taking for granted they are wrong ; and addressingthose who know they are wrong, who knowand are sure that their texts do not prove theirpoint, even supposing they look strong, but who yetdo not see how best to meet them. To such persons,I would point out, before going into the considerationof these texts at all, that they have been gainedby using that mischievous but very popular principleamong us, that in serious matters we mayinterpret Scripture by Private Judgment, whetherthe judgment of the individual, or of the day, or ofthe age, or of the country, or of the civil magistrate,or of the science in fashion, or of carnal criticism,(for it matters not which it may be, they are allVIL] OF PRIVATE JUDGMENT.one) and not by Catholic Tradition. And this Iwill say, that if the Romanists make converts inthis country, it will be more by the bold misinterpretationof one or two strong texts, which Protestantshave superciliously put aside or explainedaway, than by any broad recommendations or well-connectedarguments which they can produce.The texts, I need not say, are such as these,Blessed art thou, Simon Baron, for flesh andblood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Fatherwhich is in heaven. And I say also unto thee, thatthou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build myChurch, and the gates of hell shall not prevailagainst it. And I will give unto thee the keys ofthe Kingdom of Heaven ; and whatsoever thoushalt bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven ; andwhatsoever thou shalt loose on earth, shall be loosedin heaven."Again. " Simon, Simon, behold, Satan hath desiredto have you, that he may sift you as wheat ;but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not ;and when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren."And again. " Simon, son of Jonas, lowest thoume more than these ? He saith unto Him, Yea,Lord, Thou knowest that I love Thee. He saithunto him, Feed My lambs." And He repeatstwice, " Feed My sheep," with the same questionbefore it.From these passages, the Romanists argue, thatSt. Peter, with the Popes after him, is the rock or220 INSTANCES OF THE ABUSE [Let.foundation of the Church, as Christ's representative; that all Christians, including the Apostles, arecommitted to him and them as sheep by our Lordand Saviour ; and that he is especially the keeperand preserver of his brethren's faith.Now, that no pretence of Catholic Tradition hasled to the establishment of this doctrine, I willshow from the testimony of two Popes, of verydifferent ages, the one of the sixth, the other ofthe fifteenth century ; the former of whom shallwitness that it was not a Catholic doctrine, thelatter that it was founded on the wrong interpretationof Scripture.The evidence of the former of these, St. Gregory,surnamed the Great, is continually used inthe controversy ; yet it is so striking that I willhere introduce it, using for that purpose the wordsof Leslie. ' The Pope,' says that able writer,not being content with that primacy which bythe constitution of the Western Church had beenaffixed to his see, for the better and more easyregulation and carrying on the commerce and correspondence,and managing the jurisdiction of theEpiscopal College, and which was granted to himonly jure ecclesiastics" by ecclesiastical right, " didset up for an universal and unlimited supremacy,and that jure damno? by divine right, " over all hiscolleagues, the Bishop of the whole Catholic Church;making all their authority depend upon him alone,and thereby resolving the power of the whole EpiscopalCollege into the single see of Rome. This isVII.] OF PRIVATE JUDGMENT.one of the new doctrines of Rome. It was notknown there in the days of Gregory the Great,Bishop of Rome, who died in the seventh century.Then it first began to be set up by John, Bishopof Constantinople, after the seat of the empire wastranslated thither. And Gregory the Great wroteseverely against it ; he calls it a novel doctrine, whichhad never been known at Rome, or pretended tobyany of her Bishops ; that it was against thedoctrine of the Gospel, against the decrees of theCanons, against the rights of all other Bishops andof all Churches ; a horrible injury and scandal tothe whole universal Church ; that the Bishops werethe stars of God, and whoever sought to advancehis throne above them, did in that imitate the prideof Lucifer, and was the forerunner of Antichrist ;whose times, he said, he then saw approaching, bythis most wicked and tyrannical usurpation of oneBishop above all the rest of his colleagues, and tostyle himself Patriarch of almost the whole EcumenicalChurch.' . . . And Gregory does not onlythus severely inveigh against this usurpation, butgives excellent reasons against it ; he says, ' If oneBishop be called universal, the universal Churchfalls, if that universal Bishop falls.' ' But,' says he,let that blasphemous name be abhorrent to thehearts of all Christians, by which the honour of allBishops is taken away, while it is madly arrogatedby one to himself 1 .' '1 Leslie. Case of the Regale et Pontificate, 16.INSTANCES OF THE ABUSE [Let.Such is the witness of that great prelate to whomwe owe the line of our own primates to this day ;so little did he think of claiming that power overus which his successors exercised. Nearly ninecenturies after his time, Aeneas Sylvius was consecratedBishop in his see, under the title of PiusII. ; and he, in a work written before he was Pope,had spoken as follows, as Leslie quotes him : " Itis the opinion of all that are dead, if that can becalled a mere opinion which is fortified with sufficientauthorities, that the Pope of Rome is subject tothe universal Church ; neither dare those who nowlive deny it. But it is made a doubt among somewhether he be subject also to a General Council ;for there are some, whether out of singularity, orthat they expect the rewards of their flattery, havebegun to spread new and strange doctrines, and arenot afraid to exempt the Pope from the jurisdictionof the Holy Council ; for ambition has blindedthem ; from whence not only this modern, but allschisms to this day have arisen. . . . These poormen do not consider that these things they say arebut the words either of Popes who would extendtheir power, or of their flatterers ; and because suchsayings are easily answered, they straight run to theGospel, and interpret the words of Christ, not accordingto the meaning of the Holy Ghost, but by theirprivate judgment. And they make much of thatwhich was said to Peter, ' Thou shalt be called Ce-has;' by which they make him head of the Church ;and, ' I will give unto thee the keys of the king-vii.]OF PRIVATE JUDGMENT.dom of heaven ;' and, ' Whatsoever thoti kindestupon earth ;' and, * I have prayed for thee, Peter,that thy faith fail not ;' and, ' Feed My sheep ;'and, ' Launch out into the deep ;' and, * Fear not,thou shalt henceforth catch men ;' and that Christcommanded Peter alone, as Prince of the Apostles,to pay tribute for himself and for Him ; and becausePeter drew the net to shore full of great fishes ;and that Peter alone drew his sword in defence ofChrist. All which things these men after a strangemanner do refine upon, wholly neglecting the expositionsof the Holy Doctors VEnough has now been said in illustration oferrors arising from the exercise of Private Judgmenton the text of Scripture. The practical conclusionis obvious. Let those whom it concernsbe cautious how they countenance a procedurewhich has led, not only to Arianism, but to tenetswhich Protestants of every denomination will agreein condemning, Purgatory and the Pope's Supremacy.1 Leslie, Ibid.LECTURE VIII.THE INDEFECTIBILITY OF THE CHURCH CATHOLIC.LET us now return to the subject of ChurchAuthority, from which the discussion of PrivateJudgment has diverted us. As I have alreadyimplied *, Private Judgment and Church Authority,in matters of faith, do not, in principle, interferewith each other. The Church enforces, on her own responsibility,what is an historical fact, and ascertainableas other facts, and obvious to the intelligenceof inquirers, as other facts ; viz., the doctrine of theApostles ; and Private Judgment has as little exercisehere as in any matters of sense or experience.It may as well claim a right of denying that theApostles existed, or that the Bible exists, as thatthat doctrine existed and exists. We are not freeto sit at home and speculate about every thing ;there are things which we look at, or ask about, if1 Lecture V.INDEFECTIBILITY OF THE CHURCH CATHOLIC.we are to know them. Some things are mattersof opinion, others of inquiry. The simple questionis, whether the Church's doctrine is Apostolic, andhow far Apostolic. Now if we could agree in ouranswer, from examining Scripture, as we one andall agree about the general events of life, it wouldbe well ; but since we do not, we must have recourseto such sources as will enable us to do so, ifthere be such ; and such, I would contend, is EcclesiasticalAntiquity. There is, then, no intricacyand discordance of claims between the Church andPrivate Judgment in the abstract ; the Churchenforces a fact Apostolical Tradition as the doctrinalkey to Scripture, and Private Judgmentexpatiates beyond the limits of that Tradition ;both the one and the other on its own responsibility.I have said the Church's Authority in enforcingdoctrine extends only so far as that doctrine isApostolic, and therefore true ; and that the evidenceof this is in kind the same as that on whichwe believe the Apostles lived, laboured, and suffered.But this leads to a further and higher viewof the subject, to which I shall devote the presentLecture.Not only is the Church Catholic bound to teachthe Truth, but she is ever divinely guided to teachit ; her witness of the Christian Faith is a matterof promise as well as of duty ; her discernment of itis secured by a heavenly as well as a human rule.QTHE INDEFECTIBILITY OF [Let.She is indefectible in it, and therefore not onlyhas authority to enforce, but is of authority in declaringit. This, it is obvious, is a much moreinspiring contemplation than any I have hithertomentioned. The Church not only transmits thefaith by human means, but has a supernatural giftfor that purpose ; that doctrine, which is true, consideredas an historical fact, is true also becauseshe teaches it.In illustration of this subject, I shall first considertwo passages in our received formularies.First ; in the 20th Article we are told that theChurch has " authority in controversies of faith."Now these words certainly do not merely meanthat she has authority to enforce such doctrines ascan historically be proved to be Apostolical. Theydo not speak of her power of enforcing truth, or ofher power of enforcing at all, but say that she hasauthority in controversies ;" whereas, if this authoritydepended on the mere knowledge of anhistorical fact, and much more if only on her persuasionin a matter of opinion, any individual ofcompetent information has the same in his placeand degree. The Church, then, according to thisArticle, has a power which individuals have not ;a power, not merely as the ruling principle of asociety, to admit and reject members, not simplya power of imposing tests, but simply " authority incontroversies of faith." But how can she have thisauthority unless she be certainly true in her declaim.]THE CHURCH CATHOLIC. 227rations ? She can have no authority in declaringa lie. Matters of doctrine are not like matters ofusage or custom, founded on expedience, and determinableby discretion. They appeal to the conscience,and the conscience is subject to Truthalone. It recognizes and follows nothing but whatcomes to it with the profession of Truth. To saythe Church has authority, and yet is not true, asfar as it has authority, were to destroy liberty ofconscience, which Protestantism in all its formsholds especially sacred ; it were to substitute somethingbesides Truth as the sovereign lord of conscience,which would be tyranny. If this Protestantprinciple is not surrendered in the Article,which no one supposes it to be, the Church is to acertain point there set forth as the organ or representativeof Truth, and its teaching is identifiedwith it.Our reception of the Athanasian Creed is anotherproof of our holding the infallibility of the Church, assome of our Divines express it, in matters of savingfaith. In that Creed it is unhesitatingly said, thatcertain doctrines are necessary to be believed inorder to salvation ; they are minutely and preciselydescribed ; no room is left for Private Judgment ;none for any examination into Scripture, with theview of discovering them. Next, if we inquirethe ground of this authority in the Church, theCreed answers, that she speaks merely as the organof the Catholic voice, and that the faith thus wite228 THE INDEFECTIBILITY OF [ LRCT.nessed, is, as being thus witnessed, such, that whosodoes not believe it faithfully, cannot be saved. " Catholic,"then, and " saving" are taken as synonymousterms ; in other words, the Church Catholic is pronouncedto have been all along, and by implication,as destined ever to be, the guardian of the pureand undefiled faith, or to be indefectible in thatfaith,If it be inquired whether this doctrine does notentrench upon the prerogative of Scripture, as containingall things necessary to salvation, I answer,no ; for else, one portion of our formularies wouldbe inconsistent with another. And, in truth, thereis obviously no inconsistency whatever in saying,first, that Scripture contains the Saving Faith;and, next, that the Church Catholic has everpreached it; though, doubtless, it would be inconsistentto say, first, that the Church Catholichas ever preached the Saving Faith; next, thateach individual is intended to draw it for himselffrom Scripture; but this our formularies do notWe do not, therefore, set up the Church againstScripture, but we make her the keeper and interpreterof Scripture. And Scripture itself conveysto the Church the charter of her office tobe so.Out of a number of texts, bearing more or lessonthe subject, I select the following :The Church of the Living God, the pillar andVIII.] THE CHURCH CATHOLIC.round of the Truth." " He gave some Apostles,and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, andsome Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting ofthe Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for theedifying of the body of Christ, till we all come inthe unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of theSon of God unto a perfect man, unto the measureof the stature of the fulness of Christ, in orderthat we henceforth be no more children, tossed toand fro, carried about with every wind of doctrine"Again, "As for Me, this is My Covenant withthem, saith the Lord, My Spirit that is upon thee,and My words which I have put in thy mouth, shallnot depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouthof thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed's seed,saith the Lord, from henceforth and for ever VIn these passages, let it be observed, the Churchis declared to be the great and special support ofthe Truth, her various functionaries are said to bemeans towards the settlement of diversities anduncertainty of doctrine, and securing unity of faith;and a direct promise is vouchsafed her that theword of Truth committed to her shall never be lost,and that, in consequence of the ever-present careand guidance of the Holy Ghost. How Protestantsectaries understand these passages, I know not ;how, for instance, the first cited is understood atall, by those who deny a visible Church. On the1 1 Tim.iii. 15. Eph. iv. 1114. Is. lix. 21.230 THE INDEFECTIBILITY OF [Let.other hand, if a visible Church only can be a stayand maintenance of the Truth, and if therefore avisible Church is spoken of in it, let us reflect howhigh an office, how august and magnificent a privilegeis there assigned her ! Did not St. Paul speakin these words, of a something existing in his day ?Does not what he then spoke of, still exist in thesame sense in which the children of Israel, who wereonce called out of Egypt, now exist ? and wouldit not be just as extravagant to say that the threatsuttered upon Israel in Scripture, were not fulfilledin the Israel we see, as to deny that the promisesmade to the Church Catholic in Scripture, are notfulfilled in the Church we see ? Surely, then, theSpirit of Almighty God is expressly pledged to herfor the maintenance of the one Faith, from generationto generation, even to the end !Such is the doctrine of our most considerableDivines, and such the grounds of it, both in Scriptureand in our formularies ; but here we encountera difficulty. Romanists and Protestant sectariescombine in resisting our interpretation of the foregoingtexts. Both parties agree as far as this,that such passages either mean a great deal morethan we make them, or nothing at all. The Protestantof the day considers them to mean nothing;the Romanist sees in them the doctrine of theChurch's Infallibility : but both parties unite incharging us with taking up an interpretation onno principle; with stopping where* we stop withoutVIII.] THE CHURCH CATHOLIC. 231meaning ; with adopting a middle, timid path ; withreceiving the promises only so far as we dare, andare constrained ; confessing them when we arepressed by argument, and retracting our confessionwhen the need is over ; committing ourselves to allthe odium of the Roman view, without what evenits enemies own to be its redeeming points ; beingarrogant without pretension, and ambitious withoutan object. Accordingly they call upon us toretreat, or, since we have gone so far, to go further.The Protestant sectary alleges that we differ fromthe Romanist only in minute and unintelligiblepoints ; the Romanist retorts, on the other hand,that in heart we are Protestants, but are obligedin controversy to raise our tone in order to evadethe force of his arguments from Antiquity. Suchis the position of the Via Media.We are accused, it seems, of drawing fine, andover-subtle distinctions ; as if, like the Semi-arianof old, we were neither on the one side nor theother. The following remarks on the general subjectof the promises made to the Church Catholic,are made with the hope of showing that our distinctivepeculiarities are not matters of words andnames, but are realities.The texts above quoted are considered by theRomanist to prove the Infallibility of the Churchin all matters of faith, and general morals. Theycertainly will bear so to be interpreted, it cannotbe denied : and if this be so, why, it may be asked,232 THE INDEFECTIB1LITY OF [Let.do we not interpret them as the Romanists do?I answer by referring to the parallel of the MosaicLaw. God's favour was promised to the Israelitesfor ever, but has been withdrawn from them.Has God's promise, therefore, failed? or, rather,was it not forfeited by neglect on the part of Hispeople, to perform the conditions on which it wasgranted ? Surely we so account for the rejectionof the nation when Christ came. Even supposing,then, for argument's sake, that the promises to theChristian Church be in themselves as ample as theRomanists pretend, perchance they have beensince forfeited, or suspended in their measure,by our disobedience 1 . I will explain what Imean.We Anglicans say, that the Church Catholic willever retain what is called in Scripture " the Faith,"the substance or great outlines of the Gospel astaught by the Apostles, (whatever they are, whichis not the question at present,) and that in consequenceof the Scripture promise that the word ofGod shall never depart out of her mouth. Romanistssay that she is pure and spotless in allmatters great and small, that she can never decidewrongly on any point of faith and morals, but inevery age possesses and teaches explicitly or implicitlythe whole truth as it was held by St. Paulor St. John, in spite of all deficiencies in written1 Leslie. Works, vol. iii. p. 25 28.Vii] THE CHURCH CATHOLIC. 233documents or errors in particular writers and periods.Now, I do not see any antecedent reasonwhy such a fulfilment of the prophecy should nothave been intended, though it has not taken place.It is more reasonable indeed, and more modest, inthe first instance to put only a general sense uponthe words of the promise, and to view it rather inits great outlines than in detail; yet there is nothingin Scripture or elsewhere to limit it, there is norule assignable for determining how much it meansand what it cannot mean. So solemn are the promisesmade to the Church, so ample is the gracepledged to her, so intelligible are the human provisionsappointed for their fulfilment, that theresurely is no antecedent reason why Almighty Godshould not have designed to bestow on the Churchthat perfect purity which the Romanist claims forher. All through the inspired history, we have tracesof divine intentions mysteriously frustrated. It waspurposed that the Jewish people should receive,preach, and dispense-the Gospel ; it was not fulfilled.It was announced beforehand to the ChristianChurch, that " her people should be all righteous,"whereas iniquity has abounded. " The wolfwas to dwell with the lamb, and the leopard to liedown with the kid ;" and there have been endlesswars and fightings. God's promises depend onman's co-operation for their fulfilment in detail ;and though they are ever fulfilled in such measureas to satisfy the formal wording of them, they have234 THE INDEFECTIBILITY OF [Let.a large or a small extent of blessing, they expandor. contract according to our reception of them, andoften admit of more meaning than the event elicitsfrom them. The promise that the word of truthshould not depart out of the mouth of the Church,is satisfied in what we see fulfilled at this day, viz.in the whole Church in all its branches having evermaintained the faith in its essential outlines ; nay,it might be satisfied even in a much scantier fulfilment,for instance, though this were all, (whichmany think to be its highest meaning) that thereshould always be in the Church some true believers.This, I say, might be enough ; still, supposing it,yet perchance the promise may have originallymeant more than what the letter requires, viz. asmuch as has actually been fulfilled ; and, if so, perhapseven more than that. God's thoughts aredeeper than human words; they cannot be exhausted.The more you ask, the higher you aim,the more faithfully you expect, the more diligentlyyou co-operate, the fuller return you obtain. Theman of God was angry with Josh, king of Israel,for smiting on the ground but thrice, and then staying; and he said, " Thou shouldest have smitten fiveor six times, then hadst thou smitten Syria tillthou hadst consumed it ; whereas now thou shaltsmite Syria but thrice V If the Christian Churchwas intended to come on earth in the power and1 2 Kings xiii. W.VIII.J THE CHURCH CATHOLIC. 235spirit of Christ Himself, her Lord and Defender, ifshe was to manifest Him mystically before the eyesand in the souls of men who is on the right hand ofGod, if her glory was to be like that of heaven,though invisible, her reign eternal, and her kingdomuniversal, if she was destined to compel the nationswith an irresistible sway, smiting and witheringthem if rebellious, though not with earthly weapons,and shedding upon the obedient overflowing peace,and the holiest and purest blessings, it is not extravagantto suppose that she was also destinedto an authoritative ministry of the word which hasnever been realized. And that these prospectshave been disappointed, may be owing, as in thecase of the Jews, to her misconduct. She may haveforfeited in a measure her original privileges.Nay, the parallel of Judaism is a positive argumentin favour of such a supposition ; for surely,with the history of Israel before us, and the actualrecorded sins of the Christian Church, we may pronounceit improbable that those sins have forfeitednothing at all, that they have not influenced hersubsequent fortunes, or impaired her invisible, asthey undeniably have curtailed her visible powers.Any one who maintains that the Church is all thatChrist intended her to be, has the analogy of Judaismfull against him. As well may we imagine itwas God's intention that the temple should beburned and the Jews should go into captivity, asthat Christendom should be what we see it is at236 THE INDEFECTIBILITY OF [LKCT.this day. Nor will it avail to argue, that of knowledgeat least there was a gradual increase in theJewish Church, not a diminution, as time went on,so that the parallel does not hold in the point forwhich I bring it ; for this increase was by means offresh revelations, which God imparted rather inspite of the existing Church, and against it, thanthrough it ; by the mouth of the Prophets, not ofthe Priests. And moreover, these successive revelationswere in their turn forgotten in course oftime, or withdrawn in consequence of the people'ssins. By the time of Josiah the book of the Lawwas lost ; by the time of Christ's coming the Evangelicalprophecies had been overlaid with PharisaicalTraditions.I have said, that arguing from the history ofJudaism, it is not improbable antecedently, ratherthe reverse, that the Christian Church has forfeiteda portion of the promises ; but we shall find,I think, in the New Testament that the promiseto her was suspended more or less upon a conditionwhich for many centuries she has actuallybroken. This condition is Unity, which is madeby Christ and His Apostles, as it were, the sacramentalchannel through which all the gifts of theSpirit, not the least that of purity of doctrine, arederived to the Church. It is not necessary to domore than allude to the abundant evidence whichthe New Testament furnishes on this subject.Unity may be called the especial badge of Christ'sVIII.] THE CHURCH CATHOLIC. 237disciples and the tenure of their privileges. " Bythis," He says, " shall all men know that ye are Mydisciples, if ye have love one to another." Again,Where two or three are gathered together in Myname, there am I in the midst of them." He praysfor His Apostles, and through them for all believers," that they may be One," as He is in HisFather ; or, as His own words stand, " that theyall may be One, as Thou, Father, art in Me, and Iin Thee, that they also may be One in Us. . . Theglory which Thou gayest Me, I have given them,that they may be One, even as We are One, I inthem, and Thou in Me, that they may be madeperfect in One, that the world may know that Thouhast sent Me." In these words, a visible unity, aunity such as the world could recognize, whateverdepths it has besides, is made the token, or thecondition, as we view it, of that glory in which theChurch was to be clad.Again : consider the following passages from St.Paul's Epistles. It will be found that the grace ofthe two Sacraments, the faith of the Gospel, therenewal of the heart, all the privileges given us,are there represented as in connection with unity ;whether as cause, or as effect, or collaterally, mattersnot to our present purpose. " By One Spirit arewe all baptized into One Body ; . . .' and have beenall made to drink into One Spirit." " There is OneBody, One Spirit, One Faith." " Stand fast inOne Spirit, with one mind striving together forTHE INDEFECTTBILITY OF [Let.the Faith of the Gospel." " Is Christ divided ?was Paul crucified for you ? or were ye baptized inthe name of Paul ?" "As many of you as havebeen baptized into Christ, have put on Christ . . .ye are all One in Christ Jesus." " Ye have puton the new man, which is renewed in knowledge,after the image of Him that created him ; wherethere is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision noruncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free ;but Christ is all and in all. Put on therefore, asthe elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercies,kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering,forbearing one another and forgiving oneanother, if any man have a quarrel against any ;even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye. Andabove all these things put on charity, which is thebond of perfectness ; and let the peace of God rulein your hearts, to the which also ye are called inOne Body."Surely these passages of Scripture express moststrongly the dependence, nay, considering our Lord'swords, the essential dependence of the privileges ofthe Gospel upon a visible as well as a moral unity.The one image of Christ, the seal of the covenant,which must be impressed on all who would besaved, is then only stamped upon His discipleswhen they are brought together or viewed in one,and by their separation and discord, it is brokenasunder. The instances recorded in the Acts ofthe Apostles, do but corroborate this doctrine.VIII.] THE CHURCH CATHOLIC.The Holy Ghost originally descended, when theApostles " were all with one accord in one place ;"and, on another occasion, when " they lifted up theirvoice to God with one accord" " the place was shakenwhere they were assembled together, and they wereall filled with the Holy Ghost, and spake the wordof God with boldness." In like manner, in theirsynodical letter to the Churches, they speak of itsseeming good to the Holy Ghost and to them,"after they were " assembled with one accord VAnd the very passages in the Prophets whichhave led to these remarks, tend to the same conclusion.The promises therein contained are madeto the Church as One, not to two, or three, or adozen bodies ; and here we may make use of thevery argument commonly urged by Romanistsagainst us. They ask triumphantly, " which is theOne true and Infallible Church?" implying thatif Scripture names but one, it must be theirs ; butwe may answer that since the Church is now notone, it is not infallible ; since the one has becomein one sense many, the full prophetical idea is notnow fulfilled ; and, with the idea, is lost the full description,and the attribute of Infallibility in particular,supposing that were ever included in it.This then is the conclusion we arrive at ; thatthe Church Catholic, being no longer one in thefullest sense, does not enjoy her predicted privileges1 Acts ii. 1. iv. 2431. xv. 25. 28.240 THE INDEFECTIBILITY OF [Let.in the fullest sense. And that purity of doctrineis one of the privileges thus infringed, is plainfrom the simple fact that the separate branches ofthe Church do disagree with each other in thedetails of faith; discordance among witnesses ofthe truth, which once was not, being the visibleproof of its being impaired, as well as the sacramentalcause of it. Further it may be remarked,that since the duty of unity admits of fuller orscantier fulfilment, it does not follow, though it hasbeen broken in its higher sense, that therefore it isaltogether lost, and its privileges with it ; or again,that it is lost in the same sense by every kind ofinfringement, or in the same degree in every place.The meeting of " two or three" private men inChrist's name, is one kind of fulfilment, and in defaultof higher opportunities, may be attended underany circumstances with a portion of divine blessing.Again, the unity of the ministerial succession maybethe tenure on which the sacred mysteries offaith are continued to us, as seems probable bothfrom the history of the Church, and from the circumstancethat both to that Ministry and to thatfundamental Faith continuance is promised to theend of the world. Higher measures of truth maybeattached to a unity of jurisdiction and externalorder ; while the highest of all, amounting to acontinual Infallibility, were it ever intended, mightrequire the presence of a superhuman charity andpeace which has never been witnessed since theVIII.] THE CHURCH CATHOLIC.time when the disciples " continued stedfastly inthe Apostles' doctrine and fellowship, and in breakingof bread, and in prayers," arid " had all thingscommon, selling their possessions and goods, andparting them to all men, as every man had need,and continued daily with one accord in the temple,"and ate their celestial food " with gladness andsingleness of heart, praising God, and having favourwith all the people VIf this view of the subject be in the main correct,it would follow that the Ancient Church willbe our model in all matters of doctrine, till it brokeup into portions, and for Catholic agreement substitutedpeculiar and local opinions ; but that sincethat time the Church has possessed no fuller measureof the truth than we see it has at this day, viz.merely the fundamental faith. And such appearsto be the principle adopted by our own writers, intheir disputes concerning those questions in thesuperstructure of faith in which our Church differsfrom her sisters elsewhere. They refer to thosetimes when the Church spoke but one language ;they refer to Antiquity, as the period when allChristians agreed together in faith. And thus weshall be able to answer the question commonly putto us by Romanists concerning the date of theircorruptions. They consider it fair to call upon usto show when their doctrines, supposing them errors,1 Acts i : . 4247.R242 THE INDEFECTIBILITY OF [Lscr.were introduced, as if the impossibility of our doingthis accurately, would be a proof that they werenot introductions. They challenge us to draw theline between the pure and corrupt ages of theChurch ; and, when we reply discordantly, they triumphin what they consider a virtual refutationof our charge. They argue that what betrays nosigns in history of being introduced was never introduced,but is part of the original Gospel ; andwhen we object the silence of Antiquity concerningthe Roman doctrines, they retort upon us whatthey allege to be a similar silence in history concerningtheir rise. Now, let us apply to this argumentthe foregoing considerations on the subjectof unity. Are not Christians for certain dividednow ? as Romanists themselves will be the first toacknowledge; then must there have been a timewhen they began to be divided ; even though theyear and the day cannot be pointed out, and wediffer one with another in determining it. Now,it is upon this very fact of the schism that I groundthe corruption of doctrine ; the one has taken placewhen and so far as the other has taken place, thoughthe history of both the one and the other be unknown.If asked, then, for the point of time whenChristian truth began to be impaired, I leave it forRomanists to answer, when Christian unity beganto be compromised. We are not bound to assignit. It is a question of degree and place, not tomention the imperfection of historical documents.Vii] THE CHURCH CATHOLIC. 243Who can trace the formal acts of schism runningthrough the whole Church, and combining, as theearrings in some material body, to split it intofragments ? Let us then clearly understand whatis meant by this question. We disclaim the notionthat there was any one point of time, at which theChurch suddenly sunk into the gulf of error ; wedo not say she ever so sunk as not to be in a truersense not sunken ; and we think it trifling to askus for the first rise or the popular introduction ofthe doctrines we condemn. Granting there aredistinct grounds for suspecting them, this is a purehistorical question ; and, if unanswered, is but anhistorical obscurity, not a theological difficulty. Itis enough if we do just so much as we are able todoin respect to the divisions of the Church, whenwe point out the formal and public acts of schismand their age and place. To quarrel with us becausewe do no more, nay, or because we differamong ourselves in a question of dates, is as preposterousas it would be to object to the receivedinterpretation of Jeremiah's prophecy of the seventyyears because three separate commencementsmay be assigned to the period, or to deny thatDaniel's of the seventy weeks was fulfilled inChrist's coming, on account of the difficulties whichattend its nice adjustment in detail.Until, then, Romanists maintain that their Churchhas not quarrelled with others, as well as kept thefaith incorrupt, they gain no triumph in provingR2244 THE INDEFECTIBILITY OF [Let.differences among our Divines in what is merely apoint of history. Till their Church maintains herown Infallibility as regards matters of fact, theymay well bear the errors of individuals among usin a question of that nature. For it is little morethan this ; since the greater number of our writers,whether they say the Church's faith was first impairedat the end of the fourth century, or in theeighth, still agree in the principle of appealing tothose ages which they respectively consider to liewithin the period of peace and union ; and whenthey seem to differ they are often but speaking ofdifferent stages of the long history of error, of itsfirst beginnings, or its establishment, or the publicprotests against it, of the earlier time, when truthwas universally maintained, or of the later, whenerror was universal.Thus, Bishop Ken, for instance, takes in the wholetract of centuries, up to the disunion of the Eastand West, that is nearly 800 years. Bishop VanMilder says nearly the same, expressing his beliefthat " until the great schism between the Easternand Western Churches, and the full establishmentof the Papal usurpation," the Fathers kept beforethem the duty of contending for the faith and guardingit against heretical innovations 1 . ArchbishopBramhall names 500 years, that is, up to Pope Gregory'smission to England. Bishop Jewell, again,1 Bsmpt. Lcct. iv. p. 97.VIII.] THE CHURCH CATHOLIC. 245challenges the Romanists to adduce authority intheir favour from the first six centuries. Bishop Halladopts the same period 1 . The directions given to theBishops from the Lords of the Council in the year1582, with a view to their disputations with Jesuitsand seminary Priests, observe the same rule, enjoiningthem, if the latter " shall show any groundsof Scripture and wrest it to their sense," to callfor " the interpretation of the old Doctors, such aswere before Gregory I., for that in his time beganthe first claim of the supremacy by the Patriarchof Constantinople, and shortly after was usurpedby the Bishop of Rome 2 ." Hammond and Stilling-fleetare ready to stand by the first six GeneralCouncils, which lie between 325 to 680 3 . The actof the first year of Elizabeth especially names thefirst four, (A.D. 325 451) not however to the exclusionof the fifth and sixth, for which and forothers it expressly leaves an opening, but from thegreat importance of the former, which Pope Gregory,though living after the fifth, compares in their owndepartment to the four Gospels. In like mannerfour or five centuries are named by other of ourwriters, not as rejecting thereby a more extendedspace, but from the notion that in granting it afield of controversy was opened as large as Romanistscould desire. And I suppose they could allow,Cone, ad Cherub. 2 Brett, on Tradition, 1.Hammond, vol. i. p. 551. Stillingfleet, vol. vi. p. 650.246 THE INDEFECTIBILITY OF [Let.that if the age of true Catholicism be extended asfar as the end of the fourth century, they wouldgain little by the addition of the fifth or sixth. Ifthe voluminous remains of that era, including theworks of Ambrose, Austin, Jerome, Chrysostom,Basil, Gregory Nyssen, Gregory Nazianzen, Athanasius,and Cyril of Jerusalem, will not afford astandard of Catholic doctrine, there seems littleprofit to be gained from Antiquity at all. ThusArchbishops Laud *, and Usher by implication 2 , specify" four or five hundred years ;" while BishopStillingfleet 3 , still proceeding by the test of unity asalready explained, dates the rise of the schism, andtherefore of corruption, from the Councils of Constantinopleor Chalcedony, that is, places it betweenA.D. 381 and 451. And in like manner, Water-landspecifies the three or four first centuries 4 ; andBeveridge also 5 , assigning the same reason.Such is the agreement in principle, such the immaterialdiscrepancies of our Divines, in determiningthe limit of that period to which we give thename of Antiquity. The principle is clear, thefact obscure. Different judgments may be formedof the date when the East and West fell into schism,but that " love is the bond of perfectness " will be1 On Tradition, p. 53. 15.2 Answer to Jesuit, ch. i.3 Stilling. Grounds, pp. 38, 39.4 Waterman, on Eccles. Antic. 5. 9.5 Beveridge Proem, ad Can.VIII.] THE CHURCH CATHOLIC. 247admitted on all hands. Thus much is clear, thatthe termination of the era of purity cannot be fixedmuch earlier than the Council of Sardica, A.D.347, which an historian of the next century namesas the commencement of the division ! , nor so lateas the second Nicene or seventh General Council,which was held A.D. 787. Indeed this latterCouncil has various marks of error upon it, as ifthey were intended to draw our attention to its wantof authority. It was the Council which decreedthe worship of images ; but this I do not hereassume to be a corruption, that being the point indispute between ourselves and the Romanists. Butthat it really was a corruption, over and above itsvariance with Scripture, is proved from the fact,which is historically certain, that it was the meeting,not of the whole Church, but of a mere partyin it, and thus has no pretensions to be consideredan organ of the Catholic world. Thirty years before,nearly as many Bishops as then assembled,had condemned in Council the usage which it enforced.Seven years after it, a greater number ofBishops assembled in Council at Frankfort, andprotested against its decision, which was not fullyacknowledged in the West for four hundred yearsafterwards. Moreover, at this very time, it is notreceived by the Greeks 2 , though they receive the1 Sodom. Hist. iii. 13. 2 Mosheim. Cent. 8. ii. 3.12. Spanheim. Ann. Eccles. Cent. 8.218 THE INDEFECTIBILITY OF [Let.six first Councils as we do. Moreover, this sameCouncil has upon it what we may fairly considerother marks of error, and in which it has also beena precedent for the after innovations of Rome.It was the first general Council which professedto ground its decrees, not on Scripture sanction,but mainly on Tradition; and it was the firstwhich framed as an article of faith, what, whethertrue or false, was beside and beyond the articles ofthe Apostles' Creed 1 . So closely did grievousmistakes in ecclesiastical principle, as they will beshown to be in the succeeding Lectures, follow onthe breach of Catholic unity. Without insisting thenon its decree in favour of image worship, which isthe error which especially attaches to it, here aretwo separate violations of principle incurred inmaking it. A point of doctrine is made necessaryto salvation, on the one hand, without Scripturewarrant, on the other, beyond the Articles of theCreed. Lastly, it may be remarked, that in thecourse of the controversy about Images, the Popesdisowned the authority of the Emperor, and thus involvedthemselves in a distinct sin, which led theway to many of those peculiarities by which theirmonarchical rule was afterwards distinguished.But whenever the fatal deed took place, it islong done and past, and its effects live to thisday. Century after century the Church Catholic has1 Stilling. vol. vi. p. 450.VIII.] THE CHURCH CATHOLIC. 049become more and more disunited, discordant, andcorrupt. Under these circumstances it is a greatprivilege to know that certain promises are irrevocablymade to her ; that a gift of perpetuity ispledged to her under all disorders, of unbrokensuccession to her ministry, of grace " without repentance,"to her ordinances, and (as we humblytrust) of indefectibility to her faith. That originalCreed, which St. Paul committed to Timothy, andthe first ages considered as the fundamental faith,still remains to us, and to all Christians all overthe world ; the gates of hell have not prevailedagainst it. Whatever might formerly have beenpossessed, of a strictly traditionary nature ; whateverof rich, but unsorted and catalogued treasures; whatever too sacred, or too subtle to recordin words, whether comments on Scripture, or principlesof interpreting them, or Apostolic usages ;still we have the essentials of faith : and that wehave as much as this, considering the numberlesshazards to which it has been exposed, is at once amost gracious and a most marvellous appointmentof Divine Providence. To the enemies of theChurch it is a sign which they " are not able togainsay nor resist ;" and to us an encouragementthat, in what we do for her sake, her Maker andSaviour will be with us.On this subject I am led to quote an impressivepassage from the Hampton Lectures of Bishop VanMilder, who enforces the main principle under250 THE INDEFECTIBILITY OF [Let.consideration, though treating it more as a factthan as a doctrine.If a candid investigation," he says, " be madeof the points generally agreed upon by the ChurchUniversal, it will probably be found, that at noperiod of its history has any fundamental or essentialtruth of the Gospel been authoritatively disowned.Particular Churches may have added manysuperstitious observances and many erroneous tenets,to these essential truths ; and in everyChurch, particular individuals, or congregations ofindividuals, may have tainted large portions ofthe Christian community with pestilential heresies.But as far as the Church Catholic can bedeemed responsible, the substance of sound doctrinestill remains undestroyed, at least, if not unimpaired.Let us take, for instance, those articles offaith which have already been shown to be essentialto the Christian Covenant the Doctrines of theTrinity, of our Lord's Divinity and Incarnation, ofHis Atonement and Intercession, of our Sanctificationby the Holy Spirit, of the terms of acceptance,and the Ordinances of the Christian Sacramentsand Priesthood. At what period of theChurch have these doctrines, or either of them,been by any public act disowned or called in question? We are speaking now, it will be recollected,of what in the language of Ecclesiastical History,is emphatically called THE CHURCH ; that, whichhas from age to age borne rule, upon the groundVIII.] THE CHURCH CATHOLIC. 251of its pretensions to Apostolical Succession. Andto this our inquiry is necessarily restrictedBut view now, on the other hand, the labours ofthose who endeavoured to subvert any of thesefundamental truths. Observe the parties withwhom they originated, and the estimation in whichthey were hoi den. No age of the Church has everbeen entirely free from attempts to spread perniciouserrors. Yet at what period have they everreceived its authoritative sanction ? Did the Churchin primitive times yield one iota of essential doctrineto the Gnostic Heretics? Did it afterwardsadopt either the Sabellian, the Arian, or the Macedoniantenets? Did the wild enthusiasm ofManes, or Montague, and their followers, inany respect influence its Creed? And in latertimes, when and where have the Socinian notionsbeen recognized as any legitimate authority ? Or,what proof can evn the disciples of Calvin produce,that his doctrine of arbitrary and irrespectivedecrees was ever the received persuasion of theCatholic Church? To say nothing of the multitudeof lesser divisions of religious opinion, or ofthose ephemeral productions, of each of which, asof their authors, it might be said, ' in the morningit flourished and groweth up, in the evening it iscut down and withered.' Surely here is somethingto arrest reflection ; something which they who sincerelyprofess Christianity, and are tenacious of theinviolability of its doctrines, must contemplate with252 THE INDEFECTIBILITY OF [Let.sentiments of awe and veneration Howhave they withstood the assaults of continued opponents;opponents, wanting neither talents norinclination to effect their overthrow ? If theseconsiderations be deemed insufficient, let the adversarypoint out by what sure tokens we shalldiscover any Christian community, duly answeringthe Apostle's description, that it is * built upon thefoundation of the Apostles and Prophets, JesusChrist Himself being the chief Corner Stone l ?' "I have said enough, I hope, in the course ofthis Lecture, by way of distinguishing betweenour own and the Roman theology, and of showingthat neither our concessions to them are reluctantlymade, nor our differences subtle and nugatory, asis objected by opponents. Whether we be right orwrong, our theory of religion has a meaning, and thatreally distinct from Romanism. Both we and Romanistshold that the Church Catholic is unerring inits declarations of faith, or saving doctrine ; but wediffer from each other as to what is the faith, andwhat is the Church Catholic. They maintain thatfaith depends on the Church, we that the Church isbuilt on the faith. By Church Catholic we mean theChurch Universal, as descended from the Apostles ;they those branches of it which are in communionwith Rome. They consider the see of St. Peter,to have a promise of permanence, we the Church1 Bapt. Let., viii.VIII.] THE CHURCH CATHOLIC. 253Catholic and Apostolic. Again, they understandby the Faith, whatever the Church at any timedeclares to be faith ; we what it has actually sodeclared from the beginning. We hold that theChurch Catholic will never depart from those outlinesof doctrine which the Apostles formally published; they that she will never depart in any ofher acts from that entire system, written and oral,public and private, explicit and implicit, whichthey received and taught ; we that she has a giftof fidelity, they of discrimination.Again, both they and we anathematize thosewho deny the Faith ; but they extend the condemnationto all who question any decree of the RomanChurch ; we apply it to those only who denyany article of the original Apostolic Creed. Thecreed of Romanism is ever subject to increase ;ours is fixed once for all. We confine our anathemato the Athanasian Creed ; Romanists extendit to Pope Pius's. They cut themselves off fromthe rest of Christendom ; we cut ourselves off fromno branch, not even from themselves. We are atpeace with Rome ; but she tolerates us as little asany sect or heresy. We admit her Baptism andher Orders; her custom is to re-baptize and re-ordain our members who chance to join her.These distinctions are sufficient for my presentpurpose, though they are only a few out of various,differences which might be pointed out. They aresurely portions of a real view, which, while it re-254 INDEFECTIBILITY OF THE CHURCH CATHOLIC.lives the mind of those burdens and perplexitieswhich are the portion of the mere Protestant, isessentially distinct from Romanism. Some furtherdifferences will be considered in my next Lecture.LECTURE IX.ON THE ESSENTIALS OF THE GOSPEL.IT may have been observed, that in the last severalLectures, I have frequently spoken of greater truthsand lesser truths, of the essential parts of the Gospel,of the saving faith, and the like. I have saidthat the Church was indefectible in the faith, or inthe fundamentals of revealed religion, and that inconsequenceshe superseded Private Judgment sofar,and enforced her authoritative declarations ofChristian truth ; in other words, that she imposeda certain faith as a condition of communion withher, inflicting anathemas on those who denied it.Yet, I have not as yet said what that Faith is, orhow we ascertain it. Here then, a very importantsubject is opened upon us, which I shall considerin this and the following Lecture ; viz. what arethe essential doctrines of the Gospel ; on determiningwhich will depend the terms of communion,256 ON THE ESSENTIALS [Let.the range of Private Judgment, and the characterof the Church's indefectibility. What are thosepoints, if there are such, which all branches of theChurch hold, ever have held, and ever shall hold ;and which every individual must profess, in orderto be considered a member of the Church ?The Romanists have no difficulty in answeringthis question. Unscrupulousness commonly makesa clear way. Considering the Church to be infallible,and the faith to depend on the Church, notthe Church to be built on the faith, they maintain,as I have already said, that whatever the Churchimposes, is fundamental and essential, be it greateror less, except that what it has once imposed, it cannotof course reverse. But we Anglicans certainlyhave a difficulty in the matter, as aiming at truth, asdealing with facts, with the history of 1800 years,and not framing a theory at our pleasure.For instance, Romanists ask us, how we determinewhat are the essential parts of the Gospeland what not ? If we answer, that we consider allisessential which Scripture expressly teaches, theyask in reply how we draw the line, and who is todraw it, amid the present variety of creeds, andconsidering the peculiar structure of the inspiredVolume.Again, if we attempt to decide, antecedently, whatis essential and what is not, to judge, criticise, andanalyze the Revelation, we fairly expose ourselvesto the charge of exalting our own reason inconsis-IX.] OF THE GOSPEL. 257gently with the very notion of faith, and with dangerto its essential characteristics in ourselves.Once more ; if we appeal to Antiquity, which isthe most advisable proceeding, then we have todetermine whether all that Ancient Consent hastaught is essential, and if so, how to ascertain itall ; or, on the other hand, if we select a portion, wearebound to say why we select it, and pass overthe rest. In consequence of these difficulties, manyProtestants have taken refuge in the Latitudinariannotion that there are no essentials at all, no orthodoxfaith, as it is called, that all anathemas, alldamnatory clauses," as in one instance they arenamed, are encroachments upon Christian liberty ;and that the reception of the Bible, nay, even meresincerity, is enough, so that we live morally andreligiously. Now then let us turn to the considerationof this difficulty; in the course of which Ishall have the opportunity of pointing out some ofthe serious exceptions which lie against the Romanmode of solving it.And, first, let it be clearly understood what ismeant by the word " fundamentals " or " essentials."I do not mean by it what is " necessary to bebelieved for salvation by this particular person orthat." No one but God can decide what compassof faith is required of given individuals, though theRoman Church claims to do so. The necessaryCreed varies, for what we know, with each individualto whom the Gospel is addressed ; one is bound258 ON THE ESSENTIALS [Lizcr.to know and believe more, or more accurately, anotherless. Even the minutest and most precisedetails of truth may have a claim upon the faith ofa theologian ; whereas the peasant or artisan maybeaccepted on a vague and rudimental faith,which is like seeing a prospect at a distance, suchas a child has, who accepts the revealed doctrinein the letter, contemplating and embracing itsmeaning, not in its full force, but as far as hiscapacity goes. I do not then enter into thequestion how much is essential, and how accurately,in the case of a given individual. This isnot, strictly speaking, a question of Theology ;for Theology is ever concerned with doctrines,principles, abstract truths, not with their application.Still, though the clearness or keenness of visionmay vary in individuals, there may be some oneobject, some circle of sacred truths, which theyone and all must see, whether faintly or distinctly,whether in their fulness or in outline, doctrinesindependent and external, which may be emphaticallycalled the Gospel, which have been committedto the Church from the first, which she is boundto teach as saving, and to enforce as the terms ofcommunion ; doctrines, accordingly, which are necessaryin themselves for what may be called an abstractChristian, putting aside the question of moreor less, of clearness or confusion, doctrines whichhe must receive in their breadth and substance, inIX.] OF THE GOSPEL. 259order to be accounted a Christian, and to be admittedinto the Church.It is plain, indeed, from what has led to this discussion,that to examine the state of this or thatgiven individual would be quite beside our purpose,which is to determine merely this, what doctrinesthe Church Catholic will teach indefeasible, whatdoctrines she must enforce as a condition of communion,what doctrines she must rescue from thescrutiny of Private Judgment ; in a word, whatdoctrines are the foundation of the Church. TheRomanists challenge us to produce them, thinkingwe cannot, and implying thereby that we cannoton our principles maintain a visible Church at all ;for it stands to reason that a Church cannot existeven in theory without some revealed faith as itsprinciple of life, whether that be a supernaturaldoctrine, or a claim to supernatural power.What, then is the Church's deposit of faith, andhow is it ascertained ? Now I might answer, inthe first place, that the event has determined it.If the Church Catholic is to be indefectible in faith,we have but to inquire what that common faith iswhich she now holds every where as the originaldeposit, and we shall have ascertained what we seek.If we adopt this course, we shall find what is commonlycalled the Creed, to be that in which allbranches of the Church agree ; and, therefore, thatthe fundamental or essential doctrines are thosewhich are contained in the Creed. This conclusion,s2260 ON THE ESSENTIALS [Let.thus inferred from the prime facie state of the case,is proved to be correct from the following historicalconsiderations.It is known to all who are acquainted withChristian Antiquity, that at Baptism the candidatemade a confession of his faith, before he was admissibleto it. Here, then, we have one of our inquiriesanswered at once. Whatever that confession mightcontain, it was, by the force of the terms, the primitivecondition of communion, or fundamentalfaith. Now this confession was what we now callthe Creed. At first, indeed, that is, during thefirst years of the Apostles, while the Church itselfwas forming, the Creed was but partially developedtoo ; nor, indeed, was there any imperative necessity,that any part of the system should be reducedto rule, while infallible guides were present. Thebaptismal confessions recorded in the Acts are of thisnature : " I believe that Jesus is the Son of God ;"I believe in Jesus Christ," and the like. Butthis elementary confession, thus brief and incompleteas far as the express words went, seems evenbefore the Apostles' death, to have been expandedand moulded into form, and in that form or typeit has remained up to this day in the BaptismalService. I say this was done in the Apostles' days;because history bears witness to the fact, calling itthe Creed," " the Apostles' Creed," the treasureand legacy of faith which the Apostles had left totheir converts, and which was to be preserved inIX.] OF THE GOSPEL. 261the Church to the end. Indeed, St. Paul in hisfirst epistle to the Corinthians, so speaks of it,when quoting part of it, viz., as that which hadbeen committed to him, and which he had committedin turn to his converts 1 .Further, the early Church considered it to be unalterable;and here, again, in accordance with whatappears to be St. Jude's account of it, as " the faithonce for all committed unto the Saints." Thesetwo points, viz., that the essential doctrines of theGospel, (those which must be professed as the conditionof communion,) were comprised in the Creed ;next that they were regarded as unalterable, canhardly be disputed ; but it may be useful toadduce one or two authorities by way of illustration.It was for this reason that the Creed was commonlycalled the Symbol or Badge, being a mark,such as a uniform or watchword is in the case ofsoldiers, distinguishing Christians from infidels.In like manner it was called the Regula Fidei,or Rule of Faith, as the formulary, by which allstatements of doctrine made in the Church, wereto be measured and estimated.The terms in which the early Fathers speak of itare consistent with these high titles. For instance ;St. Irenseus, who is but one step removed fromSt. John himself, says, " The Church, though prosl Cor. xv. 3.262 ON THE ESSENTIALS [Let.painted throughout the whole world, unto the endsof the earth, has received from the Apostles andtheir disciples the belief in One God, the FatherAlmighty, Maker of heaven and earth, the seas andall that is therein ; and in One Jesus Christ, theSon of God, incarnate for our salvation, and in theHoly Ghost, who proclaimed by the Prophets the mercifuldispensation, and the advent, birth of a Virgin,passion, resurrection from the dead, and ascensioninto heaven in our flesh, of His beloved Son, ChristJesus, our Lord, and His coming again from heavenin the glory of the Father, to gather together allthings in one, and raise from the dead all flesh ofhuman kind ; that, to Christ Jesus our Lord andGod, and Saviour and King, according to the goodpleasure of the Invisible Father, every knee shouldbow, of things in heaven and things in earth,and things under the earth, and that every tongueshould confess to Him, and that He may exercisejust judgment upon all, and send into everlastingfire wicked spirits, and transgressing and apostateangels, with all ungodly, unrighteous, lawless, andprofane men ; but upon the just and holy, who havekept His commandments and persevere in His love,whether serving Him from the first or turning byrepentance, may bestow immortality by the freegift of life, and secure for them everlasting glory.This message, and this faith, which the Churchhas received, as I have said, though disseminatedthrough the whole world, she diligently guards, asIX.] OF THE GOSPEL.though she dwelt but in one place; believes asuniformly as though she had but one soul andone heart ; and preaches, teaches, hands down toposterity, as harmoniously as though she had butone mouth. True it is, the world's languages arevarious, but the power of the Tradition is one andthe same. There is no difference of Faith or Tradition,whether in the Churches of Germany, or inSpain, or in Gaul, or in the East, or in Egypt, orinAfrica, or in the more central parts of the world;but as the sun, God's creature, is one and the samein all the world, so also the preaching of the Truthshines every where, and lighted every one who willcome to the knowledge of the Truth. Among theRulers of the Church, neither he who is all powerfulin word speaks other doctrine, (for no one canbe above his Master), nor does the weak in worddiminish the Tradition. For, whereas the Faithis one and the same, neither he who has much tosay concerning it, hath anything over, nor he whospeaketh little, any lack."Tertullian, in like manner, who was contemporarywith Irenseus, gives his testimony in various places,that " the Rule of faith is altogether one, sole, unalterable,unchangeable, viz., that of believing inOne God Almighty, Maker of the world, and HisSon Jesus Christ, born of the Virgin Mary, crucifiedunder Pontius Pilate, raised from the dead thethird day, received into heaven, and now sittingat the right hand of the Father, and to come to264 ON THE ESSENTIALS [Let.judge quick and dead, by the resurrection of theflesh."And so, again, in the Apostolical Constitutions,which is a collection of usages of the EasternChurch, compiled about the end of the fourth century,we read that " when the Catechumen hasgone through his preparatory course, and is aboutto be baptized, let him be told how to renounce thedevil, and how to dedicate himself to ChristThus : ' I renounce Satan, and his works, and hispomps,' &c. After this renunciation, let him enrolhimself among Christ's disciples, saying, ' I devotemyself to Christ, and believe and am baptized intoOne unbegotten, the only True God Almighty, theFather of Christ, Creator and Maker of all things,of whom are all things ; and in the Lord Jesus, theChrist, His only begotten Son, the first-born of everycreature, &c Who came down from heavenand took flesh on Him, and was born of the HolyVirgin Mary, &c And was crucified underPontius Pilate, &c. &c And I am baptizedinto the Holy Spirit, which is the Comforter, whichhas wrought in all Saints from the beginning, andat length was sent by the Father to the Apostles,&c and after the Apostles to all who inthe Holy Catholic Church believe in the resurrectionof the flesh, . . . and the life of the world to1 Iron. Her. i. 10. Tertull. de Vel. Vir. i. Const. Post.vii. 40, 41.IX.] OF THE GOSPEL. 265These are some out of many passages, and thoseseparate and independent, in which we have distinctlyplaced before us, as the substance of theCatholic faith, what is now called the Creed ; astaught in all places, and as required by everyChristian on his admission into the Church. Wefind it digested in form, limited in its topics, circumscribedin its range, one and the same everywhere:We find, moreover, what I have as yettaken for granted, as being almost self-evident, butwhich the Romanist disputes, and which thereforeit is necessary to prove, that the fundamentals offaith, or Creed of admission, was also the rule ofteaching subsequently to admission. The Romanistwould maintain that the Baptismal creed wasbut a portion of the sacred deposit committed tothe Church's keeping. But with the passages alreadycited before us, which expressly call theCreed the rule of teaching, is it possible to conceivethat that teaching then comprised anythingthat did not naturally rise out of it, or was an explanationof it ? Even granting there were articlesof faith which as yet lay, amid the general traditionaryteaching, undefined and unrecognized inpublic formularies, such as the Divinity of theHoly Ghost, is it not plain that they still musthave been implied and virtually contained in theCreed, if the Creed had any title to the name of aSymbol, or Rule, or Summary of Christian doctrine? Would the Fathers so have called it, had266 ON THE ESSENTIALS [Let.it not been the substance and centre, the measureand analysis of the whole counsel of God, so thatnothing could be added really, because there wasnothing to add but what bore and depended uponit ? If there had been secret doctrines, essentiallydistinct from these articles, yet necessary parts ofthe Faith, such as the expedience of Image-worship,would the Fathers have ventured to say thatthe Creed contained all they taught? or can anyreason be assigned why Image-worship should havebeen kept secret, and yet the doctrine of Baptismexpressed in an Article ? To take a parallel case :supposing in the writings of several of our owndivines, we found what professed to be an abstractof the Thirty-nine Articles, is it conceivable thatone and all should omit every allusion to thoseArticles which treat of the controversy between usand the Romanists ? is it conceivable they shouldsay, " the English Church binds all her ministerson entering the Church to subscribe their assentto the doctrines of the Trinity, Incarnation, OriginalSin, Election, and the Sacraments ; this is allshe exacts of them, in every diocese ?" Would anyonesay such an account would do justice to theprominence which the Articles give to the Romancontroversy? and could any number of distinctwriters coincide in giving it ? I think not ; andthis is precisely parallel to what is supposed byRomanists of the Primitive Fathers, viz. that theywere in the habit of excluding from their abstractIX.] OF THE GOSPEL. 267or table of essential and vital truths, those which,if Romanism be true, were some of the most essential,the most prominent, practical, and influential,or rather, I may say, the engrossing doctrines ; thatthey asserted that to be the whole which after allwas but a part ; that a silence which would beunnatural in us who deny, is conceivable in thosewho enforced these doctrines as saving.But perhaps it will be granted, that these doctrineswere not part of the formal teaching of theearly Church ; but still maintained that they werefloating opinions, commonly received, and true,though unrecognized as true, mixed with error inindividuals, and undefined; but that, when the necessityarose, they were sifted, accurately determinedand enforced, and so became an additionto the Rule of Faith. Nay, but we are expresslytold by the Fathers that this rule does not admitof increase ; it is " sole, unalterable, unreasonable ;"not a hint being given us of the Church's powerover it. To guard and to transmit it, not to remodelit, is her sole duty, as St. Paul has determinedin his 2nd Epistle to Timothy. What acontrast to passages such as the foregoing, what aviolation of them is the Creed of Pope Pius, whichwas the result of the^proceedings of Trent ! whetheror not its articles be true, which is a distinct question.Irenseus, Tertullian, and the rest cite theApostles' Creed and say, " this is the faith whichmakes a Christian, the essentials of revelation, the268 ON THE ESSENTIALS [Let.great truths of which the Gospel consists, thesaving doctrine, the treasure committed to theChurch;" but in the Creed of Pope Pius, afteradding to it the recognition of the seven Sacraments,Transubstantiation, Purgatory, the Invocationof Saints, Image worship, and Indulgences,the Romanist declares, " This true Catholic Faith,out of which no one can be saved, which I at presentfreely profess and truly hold, this same do I promise,vow, and swear by God's assistance most constantlyto retain and confess, whole and inviolate, to the lastbreath of life." Now, I repeat, the question atpresent is, not whether these additions are true orfalse, but whether they are so clearly revealed andso powerfully and persuasively recommended tothe convictions of individual Christians, as to beportions of the necessary and saving Catholic Faith.Are we to understand that the words " out ofwhich no one can be saved," attaches to every oneor any one of those additions ? if so, whence is theRoman Church's or the Church Catholic's powerto add to that essential faith which St. Jude declares,and the Fathers witness, to be once for alldelivered to the Saints ?But here we are met with this objection, thatRomanists have but acted in the spirit of the NiceneCouncil in their additions to their Creed ; thatthe Council added the celebrated word Homoou-sins, or, " of one substance with the Father," whenour Lord's divinity was denied by the Arianss, andIX.] OF THE GOSPEL. 269that they have added twelve articles as protestsagainst the heresies of the sixteenth century. Towhich I answer by asking, is there no differencebetween adding a word and adding a doctrine, betweenexplaining what is in the Creed and insertingwhat was not in it ? Surely it was not inconsistentwith the reverence due to it, for the ChurchCatholic, after careful deliberation, to clear upi anyambiguity which, as time went on, might be foundto exist in its wording. The words of the Creedwere not inspired ; they were only valuable as expressinga certain sense, and if they were founddeficient in expressing that sense, there was aslittle interference with things sacred, as little realchange, in correcting or supplying what was needful,as in completing the lines of a chart or mapby the original. That original was the one universallyreceived faith, which was in the minds andmouths of all Christians without variation or ambiguity.When the early Christians used the word,Son of God," they did not use a dead letter ;they knew what they meant by it, and they oneand all had the same meaning. In adding, then,the explanation " consubstantial with the Father,"they did but fix and perpetuate that meaning, asit had been held from the beginning, when anattempt had been made to put a new sense uponit.And this view of the subject will account forsuch variations in the separate articles of the Creed,270 ON THE ESSENTIALS [Let.as occurred anciently in different Churches. Theone faith, cast into one type, was from the firstdeveloped in this or that place with varieties inthe detail, according to accidental or other circumstances.As in the first preaching of the Gospel,one convert was admitted to Baptism on confessingJesus to be the Christ, and another onconfessing Him to be the Son of God, not as if theone confession excluded the other, but because theone and the other were but different symbols, indications,or specimens of the same and only truedoctrine ; so in the formal symbol which the Apostlesafterwards adopted and bequeathed to theChurch, in one place a certain article might beadded, in another omitted, without interfering withits substantial identity, or its accuracy as a summaryor sketch of the faith once delivered. Thusthe Roman Creed speaks of " the forgiveness ofsins," the Eastern, of the " one baptism for theremission of sins," and the African, of " forgivenessof sins through the Holy Church ;" yet all of themspeak of but one and the same great and blesseddoctrine, variously described and developed. Again,the Roman Creed speaks of Almighty God asMaker of heaven and earth ;" the Eastern adds,and of all things visible and invisible ;" while inthe African the words run, if Tertullian gives themexactly, " who produced all things out of nothingby His word." These variations were as far fromevidencing any real difference between these .]OF THE GOSPEL. 271salaries, as the headings of chapters in separateeditions of the Bible argue difference in thosechapters ; and interfere as little with the integrityand oneness of the Catholic Creed, as the variationsin the Lord's Prayer, as delivered to us bySt. Matthew and St. Luke, prevent our consideringit one and the same form.Accordingly, we must consider the Nicene andthe Apostles' Creed as identical ; the latter theCreed of the West, the former of the East, fromthe beginning ; and, as it differs as received in thosetwo divisions of Christendom in immaterial points,so in turn in the separate countries of East andWest, it varies from itself in similar details. Andto this day, as the Creed called Apostles' is usedin Baptism throughout the West, (as among ourselves,)so is the Nicene used on the same occasionin the Greek Church ] . And thus we gainperhaps a truer view of what was done at Nicaea,than at first sight is apt to be taken. The assembledFathers did not so much add to the Creed,as consolidate, harmonize, and make uniform thevarious formularies of the East. The phrases " Godfrom God, Light from Light," and the like, werenot the framing of the Council, but were such ashad already been in use here or there, and mightbe adopted to advantage everywhere. Accordingly,the word " Homoousion" or con substantial, is per-1 Wall on Baptism, part ii. 9. 13.272 ON THE ESSENTIALS [Lethaps the only word which can be considered asreally an addition, and this even was no novel term,but one of long standing in Christendom, havingbeen publicly and solemnly professed by the greatChurches of the East, South, and West, and introducedat this time, as I have said, merely in explanationof a great article of faith, held from thefirst, but needing, from circumstances, a more accuratewording.It is well, moreover, to observe the honourablejealousy, (as it may be called), which even thisaddition, unexceptionable and needful as it was,excited in the Western Church '. Even at thisday, as I have already remarked, it does not occurin our Creed of Baptism. After its adoption, atNicsea, new heresies as to our Lord's nature arose;but in spite of them, Athanasius, its illustriouschampion, was firm against the attempt, whichwas made by some parties, to add further explanationsto the Creed. He was not even movedby the rise of the Macedonians, who denied thedivinity of the Holy Ghost, to develope the articlerelating to that doctrine of faith. Not, of course,that he would concede one jot or tittle to theirheresy, but he might consider that, under thecircumstances, the maintenance of the true doctrine,could be better consulted by the unanimousvoice of the Church diffusive, than by riskingV Taylor, Dissuasive, part ii. 1. 4.IX.] OF THE GOSPEL. 273the disturbances which might follow upon a secondexplanation of the Creed in Council. This is shownby his conduct in the Council held at Alexandriaupon Julian's death. A rumour had been spreadthat at a largely attended Council held some yearsafter the Nicene (viz. at Sardica), some additionhad been made to the Creed on the subject of theDivine Nature. On occasion of this he proposedat the Council referred to the following resolution,which is found in that Council's letter to the Churchof Antioch. " As to the paper which some speakof, as having been drawn up in the Council ofSardica respecting the faith . . . that Council determinednothing of the kind. It is true that therewere persons, who, on the plea that the NiceneCouncil was deficient, urged additions to the faith,and that in a headstrong way ; but the Holy Councilwas indignant, and determined that no additionsshould be made, the Nicene Creed being sufficientlest a pretext should be afforded to those whodesired to make frequent definitions of the faith."Influenced by the same feelings he desired no additionto the Creed in order to meet the hereticaltenets of the Apollinaris ; and all through hiswritings no point is urged more constantly, earnestly,and decidedly than this, that the NiceneFaith is sufficient to confute all heresies on thesubject of the Divine Nature. The second GeneralCouncil, indeed, after his death, supplied with greatT274 ON THE ESSENTIALS [Let.caution, and probably from existing Creeds, somewords declaratory of the Divinity of the Holy Spirit ;but this being done, the Creed was finally closedand sealed once for all. Subsequent Councils mightindeed profitably record their unanimous Traditionsof its sense, or of doctrines collateral, but the baptismalConfession, the Creed of the Church, remainedunalterable. At the third General Council(A.D. 432.) it was expressly determined that " itshould not be lawful for any to publish or composeanother Faith or Creed than that which was definedby the Nicene Council, and that whosoever shoulddare to compose or offer any such to any personswilling to be converted from Paganism, Judaism,or heresy, if they were Bishops or clergy, theyshould be deposed ; if laymen, they should be excommunicated."The fourth General Council, nineteenyears after, confirmed this decree, declaringthat " the faith formerly determined should, at nohand, in no manner, be shaken or moved any more."Nor was there from that time any interferencewith the Creed till the era of the Council of Trent ;when the Creed of Pope Pius, embodying the decreesthere made, was imposed as a test of ourselvesand other Protestants.Athanasius's rule, as has been incidentally observed,was to restrain heresy rather by the existingCreed and the witness of the Church Catholicinterpreting and enforcing it, than by adding toIX.] OF THE GOSPEL. 375its articles even in explanation ; to adhere to theCreed and to anathematize its opposers ] . So reluctantwas he to perplex scrupulous and hesitatingminds, as even to admit to communion the existingSemi-arian of his day, who repudiated the Homo-fusionwith an unaccountable violence ; influenced,that is, by the notion that the individuals reallybelieved in accordance with the Church Catholic,and only scrupled at the word. At the same timehe would not consent to their holding any office inthe Church, as conceiving that an error which wasbut verbal in their case and the result of somepeculiarity of mind, would be real and perilous inthe mass of those who were submitted to theirteaching, especially when the point in controversyhad been once stirred.Athanasius then considered the doctrine of theTrinity sufficiently developed in the Creed, as wenow have it, for all practical purposes ; at the sametime his enforcement of the Homoousion shows herecognized the principle of such explanation. Inlike manner, then, had the need arisen and discretionrecommended, he would have been preparedto clear up by the voice of the Church1 p.r)()ev 7r\ov ctTrctir^enjre Trap' avraiv, r;p.ev rrfv 'Apeiaj/j/v cupecrtv, bpoXoyelv Se Trjv Traps TWV dytwi>Trarepwv ojuoyoXr/felorav kv Nifccu'^t Trianv. dvadefiaTi^eiy SEKCU TOVQ \iyovTOLQ KTifffJia lii'at TO irvevpa TO ayiov. K. r. X.Hath. torn, ad Antioch. 3. This practice formed a curiousnegative comment on the Creed as time went on.T 2276 ON THE ESSENTIALS [Let.Catholic, those other articles which have pomedown to us in their primitive simplicity. Had, forinstance, any heresy spread far and wide in hisday, denying the powers of the Church, it wouldhave been in accordance with the precedent ofNicsea, to have taken into the Catholic formularythe African article already quoted of " forgivenessof sins through the Holy Church? as a witness orpreservative against the error. Again, Pelagius'srejection of the doctrine of Original Sin had indeedbeen condemned from the first by the same articleas it now stands ; but, had circumstances permitted,I suppose the occasion would have justified theaddition of the words " both original sin and actual,"to the article " forgiveness of sins." Thedoctrine of the Atonement is already declared inthe Nicene and implied in the Roman, or Apostles'Creed; but, had a Socinus then arisen, itmight have been more pointedly expressed, undersanction of a General Council, by way of fixingand perpetuating the Church's meaning. Nay,such an explanation of the original wording mightbe made, I conceive, even now, if the whole ofChristendom agreed together in the explanation,and in its expressing the constant sense of theChurch Catholic, and in its expediency. At thesame time the Church necessarily has less powerover the Creed now than anciently ; for at first itwas but a form of sound words, subservient to afaith vividly and accurately engraved on the heartIX.] OF THE GOSPEL. 277of every Christian, and so of secondary value ; butnow that the living power of truth has declined,it is a witness of the primitive instead of beinga mere summary of existing faith. Since traditionaryteaching has been impaired, it has becomealmost sacred from being the chief remains left usof Apostolical truth ; as the likeness of a friend,however incomplete in itself, is cherished as thebest memorial of him, when he has been takenfrom us.If then, as we have seen, a more accurate delineationof the articles of the Creed was not to beattempted but with great caution even by the earlyChurch Catholic, what can be said in defence ofthe Romanists, who created at Trent a new Creed,and published anathemas against all objectors ? orinwhat assignable way does the introduction ofthe Homoousion into the Creed, in explanation ofan existing article, justify the addition at Trentof essentially distinct doctrines, of articles aboutlinage-worship, the Invocation of Saints, and theauthority of Tradition, and this on the sanction ofbut a portion of the Church Catholic then in Councilrepresented ?And now enough has been said by way of showingwhat the Faith is which was once delivered tothe Saints, that Faith which is ever to remain inthe world, which is the treasure and the life of theChurch, the qualification of membership, and thede of its teaching. The Creed commonly so called,278 ON THE ESSENTIALS [Let.not in its mere letter but in its living sense, is thisFaith, " the engrafted word, which is able to saveour souls ;" to deny or resist which, is no lawful useof Private Judgment, but heresy or scepticism.We find it declared to be all this by the Church inthe beginning ; we find it actually maintained byall its branches even in this day of division. Trueit is that in the Roman communion other articlesare enforced also ; but the very circumstance, beingirreconcilable with the doctrine of the early Fathers,is our principal ground of complaint againstthat Church. She has " cursed those whom Godhas not cursed, and defied those whom the Lordhas not defied."Before concluding, I will briefly notice a similarobjection which superficial persons have urged bywayof retort against ourselves. It is argued thatthe English Church, having drawn up articles andimposed them on the Clergy and others, has in factcommitted the same fault which her advocatesallege against Rome, viz. of adding without authorityto the necessary faith of a Christian.But this is surely a great misconception of thestate of the case. The Thirty-nine Articles areArticles of religion? not of "faith" We do notconsider the belief in them necessary to salvation,except so far as they embody in them the articlesof the Creed. They are of no divine authority,except so far as they embody these and similarportions of Apostolical Tradition; but they comeIX.] OF THE GOSPEL. 279to us on ecclesiastical sanction ; and they have aclaim on us over and above this, first because theyhave been adopted by the Saints of our Church forsome centuries ; secondly, because we think themscriptural ; thirdly, because we have subscribedthem. Further, they are not necessary terms ofcommunion in our Church, being imposed, not onall our members, but principally on the Clergy.In truth, their imposition in its first origin wasmuch more a political than an ecclesiastical act ;it was a provision of the State rather than of theChurch, though the Church co-operated. I mean,that the jealousy of Rome entertained by the CivilPower, was the principle of the Reformation, consideredhistorically ; and that the outward form intowhich our religion was cast, has depended in noslight measure on the personal opinion and wishesof laymen and foreigners. Thus, our Articles were,in the first instance, a test; a test, whether theClergy of the Church Catholic in England werewilling to exercise their ministry on certain conditions,with the stipulation on the other hand that, ifso, they should be protected not persecuted, and alegal recognition extended to those rights and privilegeswhich from the beginning have been charteredto them by God Himself. But the ChurchCatholic knows nothing of tests, beyond the Baptismaltest, if it must so be called ; so that ourArticles, far from being an addition on our part tothe necessary faith, were in the first instance butindirectly connected with the Church at all.280 ON THE ESSENTIALS [Liscx.I say the Church is unversed in the use of tests,not as if she may not adopt them as a matter ofexpedience, if she thinks fit, but because they arebut the resort of authority when it is weak. Webind men with oaths when we can secure theirfidelity in no other way ; but the Church Catholicis inherently strong, can defend herself, and fearsnothing. Ignorance of her own power is her onlyweakness. She admits her members on the professionof their being Christians, and if in the eventthey become heretical, she ejects them as she admitted.The power of the keys is the antagonistof Private Judgment. But when, from circumstances,she suspends her use of that power, beingdeprived of her natural defence, she needs others ;she makes " alliances," so called, or appeals to hercivil rights ; and in like manner declarations andpledges on the part of her members may become asuitable, as well as necessary expedient, for securingherself against the encroachments of heresy.Accordingly the English Church co-operates withthe State in exacting subscription to the Thirty-nineArticles, as a test, and that not only of theClergy, but also of the governing body in ourUniversities, a test against Romanism ; but, whileso doing, she has, after her manner, modified andelevated their original scope in a way well worthyof our gratitude.The faulty principle, involved in the decrees ofTrent, is, not the mere publication of doctrines,which lay hid in the Creed, but the enforcement ofIX.] OF THE GOSPEL. 281them as necessary points of faith. To collect,systematize, and set forth the Traditions of theChurch, is surely a most edifying and importantwork, and great is our debt to Councils, modern orancient, in proportion as they have attempted this ;even though the direct Apostolical origin of everyphrase or view of doctrine they adopt, be not certain.Now the Articles of our Church must beconsidered as doing this for us in their place anddegree. It is no valid objection to them, whether thefact be so or not, that they are but partially drawnfrom Traditionary sources, or that the individualauthors of them are unknown, or the state of feelingand opinion in the writers at the moment of theirwriting them, or that they were inclined to whatis now called either Calvinism, or Armenians, orsome of them to the one, some to the other. Suchobjections, however popular, are very superficial.The Church is not built upon individuals, norknows individuals. We do not receive the Articlesfrom individuals, however justly celebrated, but asrecommended to us by our Church itself; andwhether we judge of the Church's meaning in imposingthem by the consent of her Divines sincetheir imposition, or by the intention of that Convocation! , which immediately ratified them, weshall come to this conclusion, that whatever havebeen the designs or feelings of individuals, she in-1 Waterman on Ecclesiastical Antiquity, 8.282 ON THE ESSENTIALS [Let.tends us to receive them as portions of Catholicteaching, as expressing and representing that AncientReligion, which of old time found voice andattained consistency in Athanasius, Basil, Augustine,Chrysostom, and other primitive Doctors.This is plain, I say, to a demonstration, from thewords of the Convocation of 1571 ; which, whenimposing the Thirty-nine Articles, also injoinedby Canon, that preachers " should be careful, thatthey never teach aught in a sermon, to be religiouslyheld and believed by the people, except thatwhich is agreeable to the doctrine of the Old andNew Testament, and which the Catholic Fathers andAncient Bishops have collected from that very doctrine."It is evident that the Divines who drewup this Canon, did not dream, (to use a commonphrase), of the Thirty-nine Articles in any degreesuperseding or interfering with the Ancient Catholicteaching, or of their burdening us with the noveltiesof any modern school. Nor is there any thing intheir " literal and grammatical sense," of which theKing's Declaration speaks, inconsistent with thisAncient Teaching, whatever obscurities may hangover their origin historically, a subject, which thatDeclaration renders unimportant.The Thirty-nine Articles, then, are adopted byour Church in a sense equally remote from thepresumptuous dogmatism of Rome, and from thecold and narrow feeling which a test implies. Theyare neither enforced as necessary for communionIX.] OF THE GOSPEL. 283nor lowered to the mere negative purpose of excludingerror ; but they are instruments of teaching,of Catholic teaching, being, as far as they go,heads, as it were, of important chapters in revealedtruth. And it is under this view of them that we putthem before the young, not by way of ascertainingtheir Churchmanship, but as the particular formsunder which we teach the details of faith, the basison, and out of which, the superstructure of theologymay be most conveniently raised.Such, then, seems to be the light in which we areto regard our Articles ; and till they are imposed onall our members as terms of communion, they arequite consistent with the doctrine held, as we haveseen, by Antiquity concerning the Apostolic Creed,quite distinct from the tyrannical enforcement ofthe Tridentine Articles on the part of Rome.LECTURE X.ON THE ESSENTIALS OF THE GOSPEL.I TRUST that the foregoing Lectures have disposedus to take a more cheerful view of what the Protestantismof the day considers a hardship. Itconsiders it a hardship to have anything clearlyand distinctly told it in elucidation of Scripturedoctrine, an infringement on its right of doubting,and mistaking, and labouring in vain. And theviolent effort to keep itself in this state of ignorance,this unnatural " stopping of its ears," andthrowing dust into the air," after the pattern ofthose Jews who would not hear the voice of Apostlesand Martyrs, all this it dignifies by the titleof defending the sacred right of Private Judgment,calls it a holy cause, a righteous battle, and otherlarge and senseless epithets. But I trust that wehave learned to glory in that which the world callsa bondage. We do boast and exult in bearingChrist's yoke, whether of faith or of obedience ;ON THE ESSENTIALS OF THE GOSPEL. 285and we consider His Creed, not as a tyrannicalinfliction, (God forbid !) or a jealous test, but asaglorious privilege, which we are ready to battleand to suffer for, yea, much more ready, (so be it !through His grace), than they for their low, carnal,and despicable licence to reject it.And as they are eager to secure their liberty inreligious opinions as the right of every individual,so do we make it every individual's prerogative tomaintain and defend the Creed. They cannot allowmore to the individual in the way of variety ofopinion, than we do in that of professorship. Thehumblest and meanest among Christians may defendthe faith against the whole Church, if theneed arise. He has as much stake in it and asmuch right to it, as Bishop or Archbishop, and hasnothing to limit him but his intellectual capacityof doing so. The greater his attainments the moreserviceably of course and the more suitably will heenter into the dispute ; but all that learning has todofor him is to ascertain the fact, what is the meaningof the Creed in particular points, since matter ofopinion it is not, any more than the history of therise and spread of Christianity itself. No persons properlyqualified, whatever their own opinion may be,can doubt, for instance, in what case the articles ofthe Creed concerning the Son of God, are contradicted; all that can come into dispute is, whetherthose articles are necessary or essential to the Gospel.Now then, having considered in general what the286 ON THE ESSENTIALS [Let.saving faith is, let us proceed to examine some ofthe principal objections which are taken to us.1. First then, it may be urged, that the Creed,which I have stated to be the abstract of savingfaith, does not include all doctrines which areessential ; especially it does not include any acknowledgmentthat Scripture is the word of God.It has been asked of us, is belief in Scripture a fundamentalof faith or not ? if it is, it follows thatthere are fundamental doctrines besides the articlesof the Creed; if it is not, what becomes of thepopular notion that the Bible, and the Bible only,is the religion of Protestants? I answer as follows:If the Romanist asks, whether belief in Scriptureis an essential part of the faith, which he isapt to do, I ask him in turn, whether the Infallibilityof the Church is or is not in his system anarticle of faith. It is nowhere so declared ; howthen is it less defective in Romanism to omit socardinal a doctrine, than in our own system to omitthe inspiration and canonicity of the Scriptures?Whatever answer he gives in his own behalf, willserve for us also. If he says, for instance, that thewhole of Romanism implies and is built upon theprinciple of Infallibility, that the doctrines whichit holds as fundamental could not be such, werenot the Church an infallible oracle, that every truthmust have some truth beyond it until we come tothe ultimate principles of knowledge, that a CreedX.] OF THE GOSPEL. 287never could recount all the previous steps by whichit became a Creed, and that after all the doctrinein question is at least indirectly expressed in PopePius's Creed, I answer that much the same pleasmay be offered in defence of Scripture not beingrecognized in the Apostolic Creed. It may besomething more than a fundamental of faith ; itmay be the foundation of the fundamentals, andmay be passed over in the Creed, as being presupposedand implied in it. This might be said inexplanation. But in truth it is really recognizedin it as the standard of appeal ; viz. in those articleswhich, after St. Paul's pattern, speak of our Lord'sresurrection as being " according to the Scriptures."What happens to be expressed in one instanceis a kind of index of what is tacitly signifiedthroughout. This, indeed, is no proof to a Romanist,who denies that the Bible was consideredby the original framers of the Creed, as the fundamentalrecord of the Gospel: but it goes as faras this, to show the Bible may have been so consideredby them, to show that our doctrine is consistentwith itself. As far as the facts of the casego, that may be, which we say really is. The indirectmanner in which Scripture is alluded to inthe Creed, while agreeable to the notion that theCreed contains all the fundamentals, seems also toimply that Scripture is their foundation.This is no singular case. I refer to the parallelof Romanism, not as a mere argumentum ad hominesON THE ESSENTIALS [Let.nem, but as a specimen of a general principle.Surely it might be asked, with just as much, andjust as little reason, whether belief in a Revelationbe a fundamental of faith ; whereas the fact of itsbeing granted is properly a truth prior to thefundamentals, for without a revelation there wouldbe nothing to believe in at all. Now what isthe Bible, if it is worth while to pursue the argument,but the permanent voice of God, the embodiedand continuous sound, or at least the specimenand symbol of the message once supernaturallydelivered? By necessary faith, is not meant allthat must be believed, but all that must be immediatelybelieved, what must be professed on comingfor admittance into the Church, what must be proclaimedas the condition of salvation ; it is quiteanother question whether there be certain necessaryantecedents, and of what nature. It is impossible,for instance, to accept the Creed, or tocome for Baptism, without belief in a MoralGovernor, yet there is not a word on the subjectin the Creed, nor is it to be looked for there.Again, the candidate for Baptism must feel theneeds and misery of his nature, the guilt of disobedience,his own actual demerits and danger, andthe power, purity, and justice of God, if Baptismis to be profitable to him ; yet these convictionsare preparatives, not parts of Baptismal faith ; notparts of that act of the mind by which the candidaterealizes things invisible, surveys the GospelX.] OF THE GOSPEL. 289Economy, embraces it, submits to it, appropriatesit, and is led to confess it. Faith is of many kinds,and these have their respective objects. Repentanceinvolves faith ; yet is always considered distinctfrom justifying faith notwithstanding. Noone can come to God without believing " that Heis, and is the rewarder of them that diligently seekHim," but, we know, Calvinists and others considerthat the faith that justifies is the mere looking toChrist's Atonement; so that they at least willunderstand the distinction here insisted on. I say,belief in the Scriptures may be requisite for aChristian, but still as little be included in the Baptismalfaith, as the faith which " cometh to God,"or the faith implied in repentance.But I will go further, and venture to deny thatbelief in the Scriptures, is, abstractedly, necessaryto Church communion and salvation. It does notfollow from this that any one, to whom they areactually offered, may without mortal sin rejectthem; but in the same way a man is bound tobelieve all truth which is brought home to him,not the Creed only. Still it may be true that faithin Scripture is not one of the conditions whichthe Church necessarily exacts of candidates forBaptism ; and that it is not, is, I suppose, sufficientlyclear. Heathen nations have commonlybeen converted, not by the Bible, but by Missionaries.If we insist that formal belief in the Canonof Scripture, as the inspired Word of God, has beenu290 ON THE ESSENTIALS [Let.a necessary condition of salvation, we exclude fromsalvation, as far as our words go, (which happily is,not at all,) multitudes even in the earliest ages ofthe Gospel, to say nothing of later times. A well-knownpassage of St. Irenaeus is in point, in whichhe says ; " Had the Apostles left us no Scriptures,doubtless it had been a duty to follow the courseof Tradition, which they gave to those whom theyput in trust with the Churches. This procedureis observed in many barbarous nations, such asbelieve in Christ, without written memorial, havingsalvation impressed through the Spirit in theirhearts, and diligently preserving the Old TraditionVThe Creed, indeed, can be proved from Scripture,which in this sense is its foundation, but it does nottherefore follow that it must be so proved by everyonewho receives it. Scripture is the foundation ofthe Creed ; but belief in Scripture is not the foundationof belief in the Creed. It is not so in matterof fact, even at this day, in spite of the extended circulationof the Scriptures. It is not true in fact, andnever will be, that the mass of serious Christians derivetheir faith for themselves from the Scriptures.No ; they derive it from Tradition, whether true orcorrupt ; and they are intended by Divine Providenceto derive it from the true, viz., that whichthe Church Catholic has ever furnished ; but how1 Her. iii. 4.X.] OF THE GOSPEL.they derive it, whether from Scripture or Tradition,is in no case a necessary point of faith to be askedand answered before their admittance into theChurch. Suffice that they believe in the blesseddoctrines of the Trinity, Incarnation, and the otherparts of the Gospel, however they have learnedthem ; as to Scripture, they either do already believeit to be God's word, if they have been properlycatechized, or they shortly will, but its divinity,though a necessary and all-important, is only a collateraltruth.But, if this be so, how very extravagant is theopposite notion, now so common, that belief in theBible is the sole or main condition for a man beingconsidered a Christian ! how very unchristian thetitle by which many men delight to designate themselves,turning good words into bad, as Bible-christians!We are all of us Bible-Christians inone sense; but the term as actually used is unchristian,for the following reason. Directly it isassumed that the main condition of communion isthe acceptance of the Bible as the word of God,doctrines of whatever sort become of but secondaryimportance. They will practically become mattersof mere opinion, the deductions of Private Judgmentfrom that which alone is divine. This principlethen, of popular Protestantism, is simplyLatitudinarian ; and tends by no very intricateprocess to the recognition of Socinians and Pelagianssas Christians. Men who hold it and yetu2292 ON THE ESSENTIALS [Leer.attempt to hold definite essentials of faith, are inafalse position, which they cannot ultimately retain; as the history of the last three centuriesabundantly shows. They must either give up theirmaxim about the Bible and the Bible only, or theymust give up the Nicene formulary. The Bibledoes not carry with it its own interpretation.When pressed to say why they maintain fundamentalsof faith, they will have no good reason togive, supposing they do not receive the Creed alsoas a first principle. Why, it is asked them, shouldthose who equally with themselves believe in theBible, be denied the name of Christians, becausethey do not happen to discern the doctrine of theTrinity therein? If they answer that Scriptureitself singles out certain doctrines as necessary tosalvation, and that the Trinity is one of them, this,indeed, is most true, but avails not to persons committedto so untrue a theory. It is urged againstthem, that, though the texts referred to may implythe Catholic doctrine, yet they need not ; that theyare consistent with any one out of several theories ;or, at any rate, that other persons think so ; thatthese others have as much right to their opinionas the party called orthodox to theirs ; that humaninterpreters have no warrant to force upon themone view in particular; that Private Judgmentmust be left unmolested ; that man must not close,what God has left open ; that Unitarians (as theyare called) believe in a Trinity, only not in theX.] OF THE GOSPEL. 293Catholic sense of it ; and that, where men are willingto take and profess what is written, it is notfor us to be " wise above what is written ;" especiallywhen by such a course we break the bonds ofpeace and charity. This reasoning, granting thefirst step, is resistless ; I do not mean that it convincesthose against whom it is directed, for theirhearts happily are far better than their professedprinciples, and keep them from acting upon them.They, more or less, believe in the doctrines of theTrinity and Incarnation, not as mere deductions, butas primary truths, objects of their faith, embracedand enjoyed by their spiritual sight, though theyuse language which implies that they have gainedthem by a process of reasoning 1 . But thoughcertain individuals are not injured by the principlein question ; the body of men who profess it are,and ever must be injured. For the mass of men,having no moral convictions, are led by reasoningand by mere consistency of argument; and legitimatelyevolve heresy from principles which to theNothing that is here said is inconsistent with the doctrinethat Scripture does admit of inferences from its text, and thatthe orthodox inferences are the true ones. Indeed this is whatis meant by a text ; a wording which may be rested in andvariously applied. It is only maintained that inferences willbe more useful in teaching our own people, than in convincingour opponents as to the points in question. Vid. a valuablecollection of Tracts " on Scripture Consequences," lately editedby the Rev. Vaughan Thomas.294 ON THE ESSENTIALS [Let.better sort of men may be harmless. And nowlet us proceed to a second objection which may beadvanced against the doctrine of fundamentals, as Ihave maintained it.2. It may be urged, then, that at least the Creeddoes not contain the rudiments of the whole revealedtruth, even though it contain all its mainelements ; so that the charge which was brought inthe last Lecture against the Romanists, of consideringit only an initiatory formulary, and not anabstract of the whole Gospel, lies against us also ;else what is the meaning of our Articles, whichundeniably contain doctrines, not developed out ofthe Creed, but added to it? These doctrines, itmay be urged, either are Apostolical, or they arenot ; if they are, they must be binding ; if they arenot, they ought not to be taught. If true, theymust be necessary ; we cannot choose but believethem ; they have claims upon our acceptance in thenature of things, and the idea of receiving them ornot, as we please, is self-contradictory. Now Iwould maintain, on the contrary, that there arewhat may be called minor points, which we mayhold to be true without imposing them as necessary;and, as I have already considered thosewhich are of first importance, let me now directattention to those which are secondary.Doctrines may be secondary from two reasons ;in their nature and in their evidence. Evidencewhich may be strong enough to make it safer toX.J OF THE GOSPEL. 295believe and act than to remain uninfluenced, mayyet be insufficient to enable us to preach and imposewhat it attests. I may believe, for instance,that infant baptism is an Apostolic usage, and thinkmen very mistaken and unhappy who think otherwise,and yet not feel authorised to say, that todisbelieve it is to throw oneself out of the pale ofsalvation. The highest evidence of Apostolical Traditionis where the testimony is not only everywhereand always, but where it has ever been recognizedas tradition, and reflected upon and professedlydelivered down as saving, by those who hold it.Such is the Creed, and such, in the way of ordinances,are the Sacraments, and certain other ritesand usages. The next are those doctrines whichare delivered as tradition, but not as part of thefaith. Next may be placed consent of Fathers,without apparent consciousness of agreement, asin the interpretation of Scripture. Other doctrinesagain, may come on such comparatively slenderevidence, as to be but probable, as interpretationsof prophecy. For all these reasons it may be rightin many cases to teach without enforcing; andagain, it may be safe or pious to believe, whereit cannot be pronounced absolutely necessary, or bemade a condition of communion.Again, the matter of the doctrine may be of anature not to demand enforcement ; mere facts arean instance in point. It is certain that David wasking of Israel ; and that St. Paul was martyred ;296 ON THE ESSENTIALS [Let.yet it would be unmeaning to say belief in suchfacts was necessary to salvation. Again, certaindoctrines may be true only under circumstances,or accidentally, or but expedient, or developmentsof the truth relatively to a given state of things ;such as the duty of the union of Church and State.Or they may be comparatively unimportant, asthe duty of women covering their heads in Church ;or they may be but protests against the errors of aparticular day.Such are most of those doctrines in our Articleswhich go beyond the doctrine of the Creed ; suchare many of the decrees of Roman and other Councils.All of these, whether true or false, are at anyrate no part of necessary truth ; as for instancethe doctrine of the soul's consciousness in the intermediatestate, of the indirectly divine characterof Paganism, of the person and reign of Antichrist,of the just limits of the Pope's power, ofthe time of keeping Easter, of the duty of bearingarms, of the lawfulness of oaths, of the use of theCross, of the design of the Jewish Law, of theindefectibility of the Church, and an indefinitemultitude of others. But it may be better to treatthe subject historically, though at the risk of somerepetition.I say, then, that the Creed is a collection ofdefinite articles set apart from the first, passingfrom hand to hand, rehearsed and confessed atBaptism, committed and received from Bishop toX.] OF THE GOSPEL. #97Bishop, forced upon the attention of each Christian,and demanding and securing due explanation ofits meaning. It is received on what may fitly becalled, if it must have a distinctive name, EpiscopalTradition. Besides, it is delineated and recognizedin Scripture itself, where it is called theHypothesis, or " outline of sound words ;" andagain, in the writings of the Fathers, as in someof the passages cited in the last Lecture. But independentlyof this written evidence in its favour,we may observe that a Tradition, thus formally andstatedly enunciated and delivered from hand tohand, is of the nature 1 of a written document, andhas an evidence of its Apostolical origin the samein kind with that for the Scriptures. For the samereason, though it is not to the purpose here to insiston it, rites and ceremonies too are something-morethan mere oral Traditions, and, as being so,carry with them a considerable presumption inbehalf of the things signified by them. And allthis, let it be observed, is independent of the questionof the Catholicity of the rites or doctrineswhich are thus formally sealed and handed down ;a property which also attaches to both of them, andbecomes an additional argument for their Apostolicalorigin.Such then is Episcopal Tradition ; to be receivedaccording to the capacity of each individual mind.But besides this, there is what may be called propheticalTradition. Almighty God placed in His298 ON THE ESSENTIALS [Let.Church first Apostles, or Bishops, secondarily Prophets.Apostles rule and preach, Prophets expound.Prophets or Doctors, are the interpreters of the revelation; they unfold and define its mysteries, they illuminateits documents, they harmonize its contents,they apply its promises. Their teaching is a vastsystem, not to be comprised in a few sentences, notto be embodied in one code or treatise, but consistingof a certain body of Truth, permeating theChurch like an atmosphere, irregular in its shapefrom its very profusion and exuberance ; at timesseparable only in idea from Episcopal Tradition,yet at times melting away into legend and fable l ;partly written, partly unwritten, partly the interpretation,partly the supplement of Scripture, partlypreserved in intellectual expressions, partly latentin the spirit and temper of Christians ; poured toand fro in closets and upon the housetops, in liturgies,in controversial works, in obscure fragments,in sermons. This I call Prophetical Tradition, existingprimarily in the bosom of the Church itself,and recorded in such measure as Providence hasdetermined in the writings of eminent men. This1 E. g. The Catholic interpretation of certain portions ofScripture, as Rom. vii. comes close upon the highest kind ofTradition ; on the other hand, the Tradition of facts is veryuncertain, often apocryphal, as that St. Ignatius was the childwhom our Lord took in His arms and blessed, which, however,even if untrue, indirectly confirms certain truths, viz. that St.Ignatius was closely connected with the Apostles, &c.X.] OF THE GOSPEL. 299is obviously of a very different kind from the EpiscopalTradition, yet in its origin it is equally Apostolical,and equally claims our zealous maintenance.Keep that which is committed to thy charge," isSt. Paul's injunction to Timothy, and for this reason,because from its vastness and indefiniteness it is especiallyexposed to corruption, if the Church fails invigilance. This is that body of teaching which is offeredto all Christians even at the present day, thoughin various forms and measures of truth, in differentparts of Christendom, partly being a comment,partly an addition upon the articles of the Creed.Now what has been said has sufficed to show,that it may easily happen that Prophetical Traditionmay have been corrupted in details, in spiteof its general accuracy and its agreement withEpiscopal ; and if so, there will be lesser points ofdoctrine as well as greater points, whatever betheir number and limit, from which a person maypossibly dissent, as doubting their Apostolical origin,without incurring any anathema or public censure.And this is supposed on the Anglican theoryactually to be the case ; that though the PropheticalTradition comes from God, and ought to havebeen religiously preserved, and was so in great measureand for a long time, yet that no such especialmeans were taken for its preservation as thosewhich have secured to us the Creed ; that it wasmore what St. Paul calls " the mind of the Spirit,"the thought and principle which breathed in the300 ON THE ESSENTIALS [Let.Church, her accustomed and unconscious mode ofviewing things, and the body of her received notions,than any definite and systematic collection ofdogmas elaborated by the intellect. Partially, indeed,it was fixed and perpetuated in the shape offormal articles or doctrines, as the rise of errors orother causes gave occasion ; and it is preserved toa considerable extent in the writings of the Fathers.For a time the whole Church agreed inone and the same account of it ; but in the courseof centuries, love waxing cold and schisms abounding,her various branches developed them out ofthe existing mass for themselves, and, accordingto the accidental influences which prevailed at thetime, was the work done well or ill, rudely or accurately.It follows, that these developed andfixed truths are entitled to very different degreesof credit, though always to attention. Those whichare recognized by the Church at an early date,are of more authority than such as are determinedat a later; those which are made by the joint assentof many independent Churches, than those whichare the result of some preponderating influence ;those that are sanctioned dispassionately, than thosewhich are done in fear, anger, or jealousy. Accordingly,some Councils speak far more authoritativelythan others, though all which appeal toTradition, may be presumed to have some elementof truth in them. And this view, I would takeeven of the decrees of Trent. They pretend indeedX.] OF THE GOSPEL. 301to be Apostolic; but the very lightest judgmentwhich can be passed on them is, that they are theruins and perversions of Primitive Tradition.What has been here maintained, that there arematters of doctrine, true yet not necessary, is thejudgment of the Fathers ; as the following authoritiessuffice to show.The first instance I shall take is an extraordinaryone ; yet that does not make it less cogent.It is Athanasius's conduct towards the Semi-arian.Even the article of the Homoousion, which from itswide acceptance in former centuries, justified theNicene Fathers in admitting it into the CatholicCreed, was not imposed by them on those who hadbeen admitted into the Church before their decreewas made. It was exacted, indeed, at once of theClergy, as being teachers, but not of the laity. Onthe other hand, anathemas were levelled againstthose who openly professed any other doctrine.Here then we have three classes of persons broughtbefore us ; the ministers of the Church bound toteach after her rule, contumacious opposers excommunicated,and the mass of Christians left as theywere before, neither pledged as if teachers, norexpelled as if heretics. " What has been said,"says Athanasius in one place, " is sufficient for therefutation of those who altogether reject the Council.But as for those who receive its whole Creedexcept the word Homoousion, but doubt about it,we must not regard them as enemies ; for our ON THE ESSENTIALS [Let.position to them is not as if we thought themArianss and impugners of the Fathers, but we conversewith them as brothers with brothers, whohold the same sense as we do, only hesitate aboutthe word."To the same purpose are the following passagesfrom Vincentius of Lerins. " It is necessary," hesays, " that the heavenly sense of Scripture beexplained according to this one rule, the Church'sunderstanding of it, principally in those questionsonly on which the foundations of the whole Catholicdoctrine rest." Again, he says, " The ancientconsent of the Holy Fathers is to be diligentlyascertained and followed, not in all the lesser questionsof the Divine Law, but only or at least principallyas regards the Rule of Faith." And again,in the following passage, he tacitly allows the rightof Private Judgment in lesser matters, that is, thenecessity and duty of judging on our own responsibilitypiously and cautiously, so that our conclusionsbe not pertinaciously urged, for then our Judgmentis no longer Private in any unexceptionablesense of the word. " Whatever opinion has beenheld beyond or against the whole Church, howeverholy and learned be the author of it, let it be separatedfrom common, public and general opinionswhich have authority, and included among peculiar,secret, and private surmises V1 Than. de Syn. 41. Vincent. Common. 39. 41.X.] OF THE GOSPEL. 3033. That there are greater truths, then, and lessertruths, points which it is necessary, and pointswhich it is pious to believe, Tradition Episcopaland Tradition Prophetical, the Creed and theDecrees of Councils, seems undeniable. But hereanother objection obviously calls for consideration ;viz., how the line is to be drawn between them.It has been above confessed that the doctrine ofthe Creed runs into the general Prophetical Tradition; how much, then, or how little doctrine iscontained in the Creed ? what extent and exactnessof meaning must be admitted in its Articles bythose who profess it ? what in fact, after all, is thatFaith which is required of the candidates for Baptism,since it is not to be an acceptance of themere letter of the Creed, but of a real and livingdoctrine ? For instance, is the doctrine of originalsin to be accounted part of the Creed ? or of justificationby faith ? or of election ? or of the Sacraments? If so, is there any limit to that faith whichthe Creed represents ?I answer, there is no precise limit ; nor is itnecessary there should be. Let this maxim belaid down concerning all that the Church Catholicholds, to the full extent of her Prophetical Tradition,that her members must either believe or silentlyacquiesce in the whole of it. Though the meaningof the Creed be extended ever so far, it cannot gobeyond our duty of obedience, if not of activefaith ; and if the line between the Creed and the304 ON THE ESSENTIALS [LRCT.general doctrine of the Church cannot be drawn,neither can it be drawn between the lively apprehensionand the submission of her members inrespect to both the one and the other. Whetherit be apprehension or submission, it is faith in oneor other shape, nor can individuals themselves distinguishbetween what they spiritually perceive,and what they accept upon authority. It is theduty of every one either to believe and love whathe hears, or to wish to do so, or at least, not tooppose, but to be silent.This distinction between openly opposing andpassively submitting to the Tradition of the ChurchCatholic, is recognized by Vincentius in the last ofthe foregoing extracts ; and rests upon grounds whichhave come under notice in former Lectures, andwhich easily recommend themselves to the mind.Take the case of the Ethiopian Eunuch, whomPhilip baptized. Philip did not oblige him tocontemplate, accept, and profess, the doctrine ofeternal punishment, yet surely the Eunuch wasnot at liberty to oppose it. He did not, couldnot teach him at once every thing that was tobe learned ; yet was he at liberty, when once aChristian, to sift, criticise, and prove for himselfPhilip's teaching before he accepted it ? Whetheror not this case is precisely parallel to that underconsideration, it shows all that I bring it to show,that there is a medium conceivable between confessingall truth from the first, and having a rightX.J OF THE GOSPEL. 305of opposing it from the first ? Such opposition,or again, even a resolute disbelief without openopposition, would be the token of an arrogantmind, as certainly as wilful acts of impurity arguea carnal mind ; and as a fornicator or adultererwould be an unfit subject for Church communion,so would a disturber of the Church's Tradition.He is excluded on a moral offence ; not onlybecause he believes amiss, but because he actspresumptuously. The Church Catholic is morelikely to be right than he.Such is the moral state, and such the punishmentof those who presumptuously resist theChurch ; but it does not follow because a man doesnot oppose a certain article that therefore he firmlyholds it. There is surely a middle state of mindbetween affirming and denying ; and that in manyforms, and in one or other of them, it is the portion,in a measure, of all of us. Either we areignorant, or we are undecided, or we are in doubt,or we are in inquiry, or we take secret exceptionsin one or other part of that extended system whichhas existed more or less all over the Church, andwhich I have called the Prophetical Tradition.The state of the case then seems to be asfollows :The Primitive Church recollected she was institutedfor the sake of the poor and ignorant. " Tothe poor the Gospel is preached." She was simpleand precise in her fundamentals to includexON THE ESSENTIALS [LBCT.all classes, to suggest heads of belief, to assist thememory, to save the mind from perplexity. However,while thus considerate, she has not forgottenher high office, as the appointed teacher of herchildren. She is " the pillar and ground of thetruth ;" of all truth, Christian Truth in all its developments,in the interpretation of Scripture, inthe exposition of doctrine, in the due appointmentof ordinances, in the particular application and adjustmentof the moral law. She is called a superstructure,as being built upon the great rudimentsof the Gospel Doctrine ; a pillar and ground asbeing the expounder of it. And, in consequence,such being her office towards her children, they arebound, if they would remain her children, as far astheir minds embrace her doctrine, to take it on theground of her Catholicity.I say, " as far as their minds embrace it," for fewof us indeed have the opportunity of acquaintingourselves with the whole system of truth which ispreserved in the Church. Every word of revelationhas a deep meaning. It is the outward formof a heavenly truth, and in this sense a mystery orSacrament. We may read it, confess it ; but thereis something in it which we cannot fathom, whichwe only, more or less, as the case may be, not perfectly,enter into. Accordingly when a candidatefor Baptism repeats the Articles of the Creed, he isconfessing something incomprehensible in its depth,and indefinite in its extent. He cannot know atX.] OF THE GOSPEL. 307the time what he is binding on himself, whither heis letting himself be carried. It is the temper ofreverent faith to feel this ; to feel that in comingto the Church, it stands before God's representative,and that, as in her Ordinances, so in her Creed,there is a something supernatural and beyond us.Another property of faith is the wish to conceiverightly of sacred doctrine, as far as it can conceiveat all ; and, further, to look towards the Churchfor guidance how to conceive of it. This is faith,viz., submission of the reason and will towardsGod, wistful and loving meditation upon His message,childlike reliance on the guide which isordained by Him to be the interpreter of it. TheChurch Catholic is our mother ; if we attend tothis figure, we shall have little practical difficultyin the matter before us. A child comes to hismother for instruction ; she gives it. She does notassume infallibility, nor is she infallible ; yet itwould argue a very unpleasant temper in the childto doubt her word, to require proof of it beforeacting on it, to go needlessly to other sources ofinformation. Sometimes, perhaps, she mistakes inlesser matters, and is set right by her child ; yetthis neither diminishes her prerogative of teaching,nor his privilege of receiving dutifully. Nowthis is what the Church does towards her children,according to the primitive design. She puts beforethem, first of all, as the elements of her teaching,nothing but the original Creed ; her teaching willx2308 ON THE ESSENTIALS [Let.follow in due time, but as a privilege to childrennecessarily ignorant, not as a condition of communion,as a privilege which wilt be welcomedby them, and accepted joyfully, or they would bewanting in that temper of faith which the verycoming for Baptism presupposes.Thus, then, we meet the difficulty of drawingthe line between essentials and non-essentials.The Church asks for a dutiful and simple-heartedacceptance of her message growing into faith, andthat variously, according to the circumstances ofindividuals. And, if this be the principle on whichthe Catholic Church anciently acted, we see howwell it was adapted to try the humility of her children,without imposing any yoke upon them, afterthe manner of Rome, or of repressing the elastic orcreative force of their minds. She makes her wayby love, she does not force a way by violence. Allshe asks is their confidence, which will practicallypreserve them from all difference from her, exceptin minor matters. Thus, she allows for a variationin the evidence itself of her full doctrines, and in theimpression conveyed by this or that part of herCreed, in the case of particular minds. She isgentle, holds back, watches her time, and is persuasiveaccording to the opportunity. She securesto herself the power of accommodating her communicationsto the circumstances, ranks, and ages ofher children ; of consulting for their ignorance, oreven waywardness ; of keeping silence when itX.] OF THE GOSPEL. 309would be inexpedient or unkind to urge truth inits fulness, or, where men are unworthy of it ; ofletting the reason range, and then bringing it round.She exacts the great rudiments of the Gospel fromall, she requires teachableness, she is severe withscepticism, but she is tender and affectionate amidher zeal and loyalty towards God. She does notstrive nor cry," nor " quench the smoking flax ;"but retires into the sanctuary, dispensing her message,not lavishly, or by necessity, but on thosewho care to follow her. She has that confidence inthe truth of her doctrine, and in the sovereignty oftruth, that she can be long-suffering towards error ;that faith in her spiritual powers, that she is slowto display them. She can bear with the frowardor the obstinate within bounds, knowing her giftboth in the word and in the sacraments, when thetime comes for displaying it. She has too generousa temper to rule by engagements, but like anabsolute monarch, is familiar with her childrenwithout jealousy, because God is with her. Butsupposing they are hopelessly contumacious, resisther word, oppose and preach against her, she hasno desire, nay, no warrant to retain them, and suffersor compels them to depart, lest the rest shouldbe injured. Yet after all, even when she stripsthem of her glorious privileges, she does not therebyabsolutely pronounce on the spiritual state in God'ssight, or future destiny of the given individuals sovisited. She is as little concerned with such ON THE ESSENTIALS [Let.tons as if they were heathens. She surrendersthem to that Master, "to whom they stand orfall ;" doing her part, and leaving the rest toHim.4. It is time to bring this Lecture to an end,but one objection, and not the least important,remains, which shall be treated with as muchbrevity as the nature of it admits. It will be saidthat even if the above theory of Fundamentals isconsistent, yet, after all, it is but a theory ; a mereshadowy, baseless, ingenious theory, since the divisionof the East and West, and still more so sincethe great schism of the North and South. " Youspeak," it may be urged against me, " of theChurch Catholic, of the Church's teaching, and ofobedience to the Church. What is meant by theChurch Catholic at this day ? where is she ? whatare her local instruments and organs? how doesshe speak ? when and where does she teach, forbid,command, censure? how can she be said toutter one and the same doctrine every where, whenwe are at war with all the rest of Christendom, andnot at peace at home ? In the Primitive Churchthere was no difficulty, and no mistaking ; then allChristians every where spoke one and the samedoctrine, and if any novelty arose, it was at oncedenounced and stifled. The case is the same, indeed,with the Roman Church now ; but for Anglicansso to speak, is to use words without meaning,to dream of a state of things long past awayX.] OF THE GOSPEL. 31 1from this Protestant land. The Church is nowbut a mere abstract word ; it stands for a generalizedidea, not the name of any one thing really existing; which if it ever was, yet ceased to be, whenChristians divided from each other, centuries uponcenturies ago. Rome and Greece, at enmity witheach other, both refuse communion to England,and anathematize her faith. Again, in the EnglishChurch by itself may be found differences as greatas those which separate it from Greece or Rome ;Calvinism and Armenians, Latitudinarianism andOrthodoxy, all these sometimes simply such, andsometimes compounded together into numberlessvarieties of doctrine and school ; and these notmerely each upholding itself as true, but, with fewexceptions, denouncing all the rest as perilous, ifnot fatal errors. Such is its state even amongits appointed ministers and teachers. Where, then,in the English Church is that one eternal voice ofTruth ; that one witness issuing from the Apostles'times, and conversant with all doctrine, the expounderof the Creed, the interpreter of Scripture,and the instructed of the people of God ?"Whatever truth there is in these remarks, still Icannot allow that what I have been above drawingout is therefore a mere tale of other times, when addressedto those who are really bent on serving Godas well as they can, and who consult what is mostlikely to please Him. The very difficulty of applyingit, will be a test whether we earnestly desire312 ON THE ESSENTIALS [L E cr.to do His will or not. Those who do not, will gladlyseize tha excuse that it was difficult to find it.Common experience of life shows us clearly enoughhow men evade what they do not like. They findreasons for pleasing themselves, real unanswerablereasons, such as cannot be met or exposed, butwhich after all do not deceive us for an instant asto the real motives which influence them. Thetwo things are quite distinct and quite compatible,neither interfering with the other or arguing itsabsence, the motive for an act and the excuse forit. The excuse which is urged to defend it, doesnot obscure in any degree the motive which it argues.We know quite well that if their heart hadbeen in the business, they would have found atleast an approximation and made an attempt towardsthat which they have passed over ; as is evenplain from the proverb, " Where there is a will,there is a way." Now, we have no reason to suppose,that God will accept in our conduct towardsHim excuses which we see through when directedagainst ourselves ; and, if so, the difficulty of obediencemay be a trial of our motives, not a subjectfor argument. The servant who hid his talent andmade excuses, did not find his account in makingthem.It being kept in view, then, what kind of obedienceGod requires of us, viz. such as we can pay,not the alternative of the highest conceivable, ornone at all, of the very letter, or else not the spirit,X.] OF THE GOSPEL. 813let us see, whether even amid our present confusionsthere be any such insuperable obstacle inobeying the Church, as is pretended. Now, inspite of differences within and without, our ownbranch may be considered among us as the voice ofher who has been in the world ever one and thesame since Christ came. Surely, she comes up tothe theory ; she transmits the ancient Catholic Faithsimply and intelligibly. Not the most unletteredof her members can miss her meaning. She speaksin her formularies and services. The Daily Prayer,the Occasional Offices, the Order of the Sacraments,the Ordination Services, presents one andthe same strong, plain, edifying language to richand poor, learned and unlearned, and that not asthe invention of this Reformer or that, but as thewitness of all Saints from the beginning. The verytitles of the Prayers and Creeds show this ; such as,the Apostles' " and " the Nicene Creeds," " theCreed of St. Athanasius," " the Catholic Faith,"the Catholic Religion," a " Prayer of St. Chrysostom,"and the like. It is undeniable, that astranger taking up the Prayer-book would feel itwas no modern production ; the very Latin titlesto the Psalms and Hymns would prove it. Itclaims to be Catholic ; nor is there any one of anyparty to deny, that on the whole it is. To followthe Church, then, in this day, is to follow thePrayer-book, instead of following preachers, whoare but individuals. Its words are not the acci-314 ON THE ESSENTIALS [Let.dental out-pouring of this or that age or country,but the joint and accordant testimony of that innumerablecompany of Saints, whom we are boundto follow. They are the accents of the ChurchCatholic and Apostolic as it manifests itself inEngland. Surely, if we did but proceed on thegreat principle above described, of acting towardsduties which we cannot fulfil exactly, did we takewhat is given us, and use it not grudgingly, nor ofnecessity, but with a cheerful obedience, did wereceive the Creed as our Gospel, embrace and actupon the doctrine of our Services, and if anywherewe differed, differ in silence, we should of ourselveswithout effort revive all those visible tokens of theChurch's sovereignty, the want of which is ourpresent excuse for disobedience. Surely, " the kingdomof God is within us ;" we have but to recognizethe Church in faith, and it rises before our eyes.Nor is there any thing in the profession of thesects around us to disturb us. They contradicteach other, or rather themselves. They pretend tono Antiquity, they have no stability, no consistency ;they do not interfere with our doctrine and ourpretensions at all, no more than the schools of philosophyand science. They have taken a differentline and occupy a different province. As wellmight it be said that astrologers interfere withprophecy ; as those who out of their own judgmentconjecture the doctrine of Christ, with its traditionarydelivery through His appointed stewards.X.] OF THE GOSPEL. 315The only real difficulty in our path arises fromthe pretensions of the Romanists who are amongus. They profess to be the Church and to teachthe Catholic Faith as well as we, but not as we do.Which then is to be believed ? but even here thereis no such difficulty in our path as opponents wouldbe glad to create. Assuming, as our present argumentleads us to do, that they and we are bothbranches of the one Catholic Church, I say thedifference of doctrine between Rome and us is littleof a practical difficulty in our following the Church,or of a drawback upon our certainty and comfortin the Anglican communion. Indeed, the tworival systems, agreeing amid their differences inpoints which they each hold to be the highesttruths, and which sectaries more or less undervalue,afford a remarkable attestation to the Apostolicalorigin of these. Both profess the Apostles'Creed. Both use substantially the same commonPrayer, ours indeed being actually but a selectionfrom theirs. It is nothing to the purpose in thisplace what and hqw great the errors of Romanismare in practice. We know they are very serious ;but I am speaking of its professions, with whichalone at this instant I am concerned. But thedoctrines of Three Persons in One indivisible DivineNature ; of the union of two Natures, Divineand Human, in the One Person of Christ ; of theimputation of Adam's sin in his descendants ; of thedeath of Christ to reconcile God the Father to us316 ON THE ESSENTIALS [Let.sinners ; the application of His merits through externalrites ; the singular efficacy and mysteriousnessof Sacraments ; the Apostolical ministry ; theduty of unity ; the necessity of good works ; theseand other doctrines are maintained, and maintainedas the chief doctrines of the Gospel, both by us andthem. And our very differences in other matters,and our hostility towards each other increase, Isay, the force of our unanimity where it exists.On the other hand, the very fact of those differencesthrows a corresponding uncertainty over thosepoints which Rome maintains by herself; such asthe existence of Purgatory, the supremacy of theRoman see, and the Infallibility of the Church.If, in answer to this statement, it be urged thatthe peculiar claim set up by Rome to be the trueChurch to the exclusion of ourselves, is so seriousas to perplex the inquirer, and almost to lead himto join himself to her communion as the safestcourse, whatever be the identity of doctrine betweenthe two systems on greater points, let it be consideredwhether there be not some peculiaritieshanging about her, which are sufficient from thesame prudential motives to keep us at a distancefrom her. Our Lord said of false prophets, " Bytheir fruits shall ye know them ;" and, however themind may be entangled theoretically, yet surelyit will fall upon certain marks in Rome which seemintended to convey to the simple and honest inquirera solemn warning to keep clear of her, whileX.] OF THE GOSPEL. 317she carries them about her. Such are her denyingthe cup to the laity, her idolatrous worship of theBlessed Virgin, her Image-worship, her recklessnessin anathematizing, and her schismatical andoverbearing spirit. I conceive, then, on the whole,that while Rome confirms by her accordant witnessour own teaching in all greater things, shedoes not tend by her novelties, and violence, andthreats, to disturb the practical certainty of Catholicdoctrine, or to seduce from us any sober andconscientious inquirer.And here I end, at last, my remarks on Fundamentals,in which I have been unavoidably led,partly to repeat, partly to take for granted, someportions of the preceding Lectures.LECTURE XLON SCRIPTURE AS THE RECORD OF FAITH.IT will perhaps be questioned, whether the foregoingview of Catholic Tradition and the Fundamentalsof the Church, is consistent with the supremacyof Holy Scripture in questions of faith. Thatit is not consistent with present popular notions onthe subject I am quite aware ; but it may be thatthose notions are wrong, and that the foregoing view,which, is received from and maintained by our greatdivines, is right. If it could be proved contrary toany thing they have elsewhere maintained, thiswould be to accuse them of inconsistency, which Ileave to our enemies to do. However, I will notcontent myself with a mere appeal to authority,but will argue the question on grounds of reason.In this, then, and the two following Lectures, Ipropose to discuss the question of what is sometimescalled " the Rule of Faith ;" and to show,that nothing that has gone before is inconsistentON SCRIPTURE AS THE RECORD OF FAITH. 319with the reverence, gratitude, and submission withwhich we should receive Scripture.The sixth Article speaks as follows : " HolyScripture contained all things necessary to salvation,so that whatsoever is not read therein, normay be proved thereby, is not to be required ofany man, that it should be believed as an article ofthe faith, or be thought requisite or necessary tosalvation."Now, this statement is very plain and clear exceptin one point, viz. who is to be the judge whatis and what is not contained in Scripture. OurChurch is silent on this point, very emphaticallyso. This is worth observing; in truth, she doesnot admit, strictly speaking, of any judge at all, inthe sense in which Romanists and Protestants contendfor one ; and in this point, as in others, holdsa middle course between extreme theories. Romanism,as we all know, maintains the existenceof a Judge of controversies, nay, and an infallibleone, that is, the Church Catholic. It considers,that the Pope, in General Council, can infalliblydecide on the meaning of Scripture, as well as infalliblydiscriminate between Apostolic and spuriousTraditions. Again, the multitude of Protestantsalso maintain the existence of a judge ofScripture doctrine, but not one and the same toall, but a different one to each individual. Theyconsider every man his own judge ; they hold thatevery man may and must read Scripture for ON SCRIPTURE AS [Let.self, and judge about its meaning, and make uphis mind for himself; nay, is, as regards himself,and practically, an infallible judge of its meaning ;infallible, certainly, for were the whole new creationagainst him, Bishops, Doctors, Martyrs, Saints,the Holy Church Universal, the very companions ofthe Apostles, the unanimous suffrage of the mostdistinct times and places, and the most gifted andholiest men, yet according to the popular doctrine,though he was aware of this, he ought ultimatelyto rest in his own interpretations of Scripture,and to follow his Private Judgment, howeversorry he might be to differ from such authorities.Thus both Protestantism and Romanism hold theexistence of an authoritative judge of the sense ofScripture ; whereas our Article preserves a significantsilence about it ; which agrees with our modeof treating the subject in other passages of ourformularies. For, in truth, we neither hold thatthe Catholic Church is an infallible judge of Scripture,nor that each individual may judge for himself;but that the Church has authority, and thatindividuals may judge for themselves outside therange of that authority. This is no matter ofwords, but a very clear and practically importantdistinction, as will soon appear.The Church is not & judge of the sense of Scripturein the common sense of the word, but a witness.If indeed, the word judge be taken to meanwhat it means in the Courts of Law, one vestedXL] THE RECORD OF FAITH. 321with authority to declare the received appointmentsand usages of the realm, and with power toenforce them, then the Church is a judge, but notof Scripture, but of Tradition. On the contrary,both Protestant sectaries and Romanists considertheir supposed judge to be a judge not merely ofpast facts, of precedents, custom, belief, and thelike, but to have a direct power over Scripture,to contemplate questions of what is true and false inopinion, to have a special gift by divine illumination,a gift guaranteed by promise, of discerning the Scripturesense without perceptible human Media, toact under a guidance, and as if inspired, thoughnot really so. Whether any such gift was once destinedfor mankind or not, it avails not to inquire ;we consider it is not given in fact, and both Romanistsand Protestants hold it is given. We, onthe other hand, consider the Church as a witness,a keeper and witness of Catholic Tradition, and inthis sense invested with authority, just as in politicalmatters, an ambassador, possessed of instructionsfrom his government, would speak with authority.But, unless in such sense as attaches to anambassador, the Church, in our view of her office, isnot a judge. She bears witness to a fact, that suchand such a doctrine, or such a sense of Scripture,has ever been received and came from the Apostles; the proof of this lies first in her own unanimitythroughout her various branches, next in thewritings of the Ancient Fathers ; and she acts uponY322 ON SCRIPTURE AS [Let.this her witness as the executive does in civilmatters, and is responsible for it ; but she does notundertake of herself to determine the sense ofScripture, she has no immediate power over it,she but alleges and submits to what is ancientand Catholic. The mere Protestant, indeed, andthe Romanist may use Antiquity ; but it is as amere material by which the supreme judge, thespiritual mind, whether collective or individual,forms his decisions, as pleadings in his court, hebeing above them, and having an inherent rightof disposing of them. We, on the contrary, considerAntiquity and Catholicity to be the real guides,and the Church their organ. For instance, in the20th Article, a distinction is made between ritesand doctrines, and it is affirmed the Church haspower over the one, but not over the other ; " theChurch hath power to decree rites and ceremonies,and authority in controversies of faith." Again, inthe Canon of 1571, the rule of deciding these controversiesis given : " Preachers shall be careful notto preach aught to be religiously held and believedby the people, except what is agreeable to the doctrineof the Old or New Testament, and collectedfrom that very doctrine by the Catholic Fathers andancient Bishops."The Act of Queen Elizabeth, though proceedingfrom the laity and since repealed, expresses theopinion of the age which imposed the Articles, andit speaks to the same purport as this Canon. ItXL] THE RECORD OF FAITH. 323determines that " such matter and cause" onlyshall be adjudged to be heresy, as heretofore hasbeen adjudged to be so, " by authority of the CanonicalScriptures, or by some of the first four GeneralCouncils, or by any other General Councilwherein the same was declared heresy by the expressand plain words of the said Canonical Scriptures."The present Church, then, in our view of heroffice, is not so much a judge of Scripture as awitness of Catholic Truth delivered to her in thefirst ages, whether by Councils, or by Fathers, orinwhatever other way.And if she does not claim any gift of interpretationfor herself, in the high points in question,much less does she allow individuals to pretend toit.Explicit as our Articles are in asserting thatthe doctrines of faith are contained and must bepointed out in Scripture, yet they give no hint thatprivate persons may presume to search Scriptureindependently of external help, and to determinefor themselves what is saving. The Church hasaprior claim to do so, but even the Church assertsit not, but hands over the office to Catholic Antiquity.In what our Articles say of Holy Scriptureas the document of proof, exclusive referenceis had to teaching. It is not said that individualsare to infer the faith, but that the Church is to proveit from Scripture ; not that individuals are to learnY2ON SCRIPTURE AS [Let.it, but are to be taught it. The Church is boundever to test and verify her doctrine by Scripturethroughout her course of instruction. She must takecare to show her children that she keeps Scripturein mind, and is ruling, guiding, steadying herselfby it. In Sermons and Lectures, in catechisingand controversy, she must ever appeal to Scripture,draw her arguments from Scripture, explore anddevelope Scripture, imitate Scripture, build up herform of doctrine on Scripture rudiments. Thesole question, I say, in the Articles is how theChurch is to teach. Thus, in the sixth it is said,that nothing but what is contained in Scripture, ormay be proved by it, is to be " required of any manthat it should be believed as an article of thefaith." And the 20th still more clearly : " It isnot lawful for the Church to ordain any thing thatis contrary to God's word written, neither may itso expound one place of Scripture that it be repugnantto another. Wherefore, although the Churchbe a witness and a keeper of Holy Writ, yetas it ought not to decree anything against thesame, so besides the same ought it not to enforceanything to be believed for necessity of salvation."It does not say what individuals maydo, but what the Church may not do. In likemanner, the Canon of 1571 is concerning theduty of preachers ; the question whether individualsmay exercise a right of Private Judgment on theXI.J THE RECORD OF FAITH. 325text of Scripture in matters of faith is not evencontemplated.Such then are the respective places to be assignedto the Church of the day and to her membersin regard to the interpretation of Scripture.Neither individual, nor Bishop, nor Convocation,nor Council, may venture to decline the Catholicinterpretation of its sacred mysteries. We have aslittle warrant for rejecting Ancient Consent as forrejecting Scripture itself; our Private Judgmentis as much and as little infringed by the yoke ofthe Catholic sense as by the yoke of Scripture itself.Scripture is an infringement on our PrivateJudgment. It demands our assent ; it threatensus if we refuse it ; and towards it, too, we mayexercise what we presumptuously call the right ofPrivate Judgment. We may reject Scripture aswe reject Antiquity, and we may take the consequencesof what in the next world will be seen tobe either unavoidable ignorance or self-will. Itwill be observed, that I am speaking all along ofnecessary doctrine, or the faith once delivered ; forin matters of inferior moment, both the Churchand the individual have room to exercise their ownpowers ; the individual to judge for himself, andthe Church to give her judgment, as one that hathobtained mercy of the Lord to be faithful ; andthat for this simple reason, either that Scriptureor Tradition is obscure, indeterminate, or silent.ON Scripture AS [Let.But such a necessity is not a privilege, but theabsence of a privilege, and such an exercise ofjudgment is not a boast but a responsibility oneither side. How the Church and the individualadjust their respective judgments, has been consideredin the last Lecture ; and is a mere case ofrelative duties, as that between a master and scholar,or parent and child.We have now cleared the way to another importantprinciple of the Anglican system, in which withequal discrimination it takes middle ground betweenRomanism and mere Protestantism. Our Churchadheres to a double Rule *, Scripture and CatholicTradition, and considers that in all matters necessaryto salvation both safeguards are vouchsafed tous,and both the Church's judgment and privatejudgment superseded ; whereas the Romanist considersthat points of faith may rest on Traditionwithout Scripture, and the mere Protestant thatthey may be drawn from Scripture without thewitness of Tradition. That she requires Scripture1 " With them," the Romanists, " both Scripture and Fathersare, as to the sense, under the correction and control of thepresent Church ; with us the present Church says nothing, butunder the direction of Scripture and Antiquity taken together,one as the rule, the other as the pattern or interpreter. Amongthem, the present Church speaks by Scripture and Fathers;with us, Scripture and Fathers speak by the Church. . . . Twowitnesses are better than one, though one be superior." Water-land,Eccles. Antic. 8, 9.XI.] THE RECORD OF FAITH. 327sanction is plain from the Articles; that she requiresCatholic sanction is plain from the AthanasianCreed, which, in propounding the necessaryfaith of a Christian, says not a word about Scripture,resting it upon its being Catholic * ; that sherequires both is plain from the Canon quoted morethan once, which declares nothing to be the subjectof religious belief except what is agreeable tothe doctrine of the Bible, and collected out of itby the Catholic doctors.This being the state of the case, the phrase 'Ruleof Faith,' which is now commonly taken to meanthe Bible by itself, would seem, in the judgment ofthe English Church, properly to belong to the Bibleand Catholic Tradition taken together. These twotogether make up a joint rule 2 ; Scripture is interpretedby Tradition, Tradition verified by Scripture;Tradition gives form to the doctrine, Scripture giveslife ; Tradition teaches, Scripture proves. And henceboth the one and the other have, according to theoccasion, been called by our writers the Rule of1 E. g. "It is necessary that he hold the Catholic faith;"we are forbidden by the Catholic religion ;" " this is the Catholicfaith, which, except a man believe faithfully, he cannot besaved." It is quite certain that Protestantism, as we experienceit in this day, would have worded it, " This is the Scripturalfaith," &c. &c.2 " The Scriptures and the Creed are not two different Rulesof Faith, but one and the same Rule, dilated in Scripture, contractedin the Creed." Bramhall, Works, p. 402.328 ON SCRIPTURE AS [Let.Faith, sometimes the Catholic Creed, sometimesScripture ; not as if that particular source of truthwhich was not mentioned at this or that time,was thereby excluded, but as is implied throughout,the question not lying between the Creed andScripture, but relating to the Church and the individual.Scripture, when illuminated by the " CatholicReligion," or the Catholic Religion when fortifiedby Scripture, may either of them be called theGospel committed to the Church, dispensed to theindividual l .And now, having stated as perspicuously as maybe,what seems to be the English doctrine, I haveto proceed next to the proof of that part of it whichhas not yet come into discussion. The grounds onwhich Catholic Tradition is authoritative have beenexplained; it follows to inquire into the reasonsfor considering Scripture as the document of proof,as our Sixth Article declares it to be. In whatremains of this Lecture I shall but state the differentlines of argument which have been adoptedwith this view, and make some remarks uponthem.Now Protestants sometimes argue, that theWord of God must necessarily be written ; becausehow else could we be sure of its authenticity andintegrity ? that the notion of a revelation involves1 The Articles do not introduce the term, " Rule of Faith,"at all.XI.] THE Record OF FAITH. 329its being written, else the very object of the revelationwould be defeated. They have been led totake this ground in rivalry of the Romanists, whohave adopted the very same antecedent line ofargument, in behalf of the Church's infallibility, asif the revelation would not really be such, if it leftroom for various and interminable questions concerningthe contents of it. Chillingworth, for instance,uses the following language : " The Scriptureis . . . , a sufficient rule for those to judgeby who believe it to be the word of God, (as theChurch of England and the Church of Rome bothdo,) what they are to believe and what they arenot to believe And my reason hereof isconvincing and demonstrative, because nothing isnecessary to be believed but what is plainly revealed VNow in spite of the great name of this author, Icannot allow that a revelation, if made, must necessarilybe plain, or that faith requires clear knowledge; and that in consequence the uncertaincharacter, supposing it, of Catholic Tradition is adecisive objection to its being considered a divineinformant in religious matters. And, in makingthis avowal, I defend myself by the greater nameof Bishop Butler. " We are not in any sort able tojudge" says that profound thinker, " whether itwere to have been expected, that the Revelationshould have been committed to writing ; or left to1 Chillingworth, Anew. ii. 104.330 ON SCRIPTURE AS [Let.be handed down, and consequently corrupted byverbal tradition, and at length sunk under it, ifmankind so pleased, and daring such time as theyare permitted, in the degree they evidently are, toact as they will V Indeed it certainly does seempresumptuous for a creature, not to say a sinner,to take upon him to say, " I will believe nothing,unless I am told in the clearest conceivable form."The utmost that can be safely advanced antecedently,is, that, part of the revelation being confessedlywritten, it is likely that the whole is,whatever weight attaches to this presumption.Facts, too, are inconsistent with this line of argument;from Adam to Abraham there seems tohave been no written revelation at all. Again, itis undeniable that the Gospel has been before nowpreached, and successfully too, where the writtenword was unknown ; if then the argument in disputebe correct, the people addressed ought tohave dismissed the preachers, refused to hear anything,because they could not know all, and remainedin heathenism. Further, it is not true thata traditionary doctrine cannot be "plainly revealed;" for the abolition of the seventh day rest,comes to us upon Tradition. If the maxim in questionwere sound, we should have "convincing anddemonstrative reason" for disbelieving it. But ifTradition may convey to us one doctrine, it surely1 Anal, part ii. c. iii.XL] THE RECORD OF FAITH. 381may convey others also. I say there is no antecedentnecessity for the written word containing thewhole of the Gospel, true though it be, that it doescontain it.Others have considered that Scripture bears witnessto its own sufficiency and perfection in mattersof doctrine. And to prove this, they bring forwardsuch texts as 2 Tim. iii. 16, 17. "All Scripture isgiven by inspiration of God," &c. ; which speaksof the Old Testament, before the New was evencompleted, much less collected into a volume, andtherefore proves, if any thing, that the Old Testamentis sufficient without the New, or else thatevery Scripture, every separate book, is a Canon. Or,again, it might plausibly be argued, if such strongterms are used of the Old, and yet the New is notexcluded from the Canon, but rather is the mostimportant part of it, it follows that, even had theNew been so spoken of, yet doctrines might haveremained behind for Tradition to supply. And sofarI suppose is certain, whatever comes of it, thatclearly as Scripture speaks of the divine inspirationof its writers, yet it no where says that it, by itself,contains all necessary doctrine. Indeed from thebeginning to the end of the New Testament thereis no recognition even of its own existence, no reflectionon itself, no putting forward of its claimsas a written document. We simply meet with ourSaviour and His Apostles' teaching, and their respectiveclaim of authority for their own words and332 ON SCRIPTURE AS [Let.their own persons, and this for the most part historicallyconveyed in the books of which it is composed.The last words of the Apocalypse are, Isuppose, the sole great exception to this remark,the sole declaration in the books of the New Testament,of an exclusive character, and surely theycannot be considered sufficient in themselves toestablish so bold and eventful a negative, viz. thatnothing is necessary doctrine but what is in it.Others, accordingly, argue from the analogy ofthe Jewish Law that the Christian Law also mustbe written. But why should the analogy betweenthe Dispensations hold in this point ? does it holdin all points in which Scripture is silent as to itsnot holding ? The Protestantism of the day surelywould not gain by the recognition of such a rule.Again, it might plausibly be argued that the JewishCovenant was one of formal enactments, of ritesand ceremonies, and therefore required a writtenword, but that the Gospel is of the spirit, not ofthe letter; either then that the New Testamentmust be obeyed in all points literally, or that perchanceit is not the whole of the revelation ; andno party in the controversy consider themselvesbound literally to cut off the right hand, and pluckout the right eye, to wash each other's feet, to haveall things in common. It might be added that,though the Gospel has definite doctrines and rites,as well as the Jewish Law, yet that the Catholicityof the Tradition, which was wanting under the Law,XL] THE RECORD OF FAITH. 333may supply the office of a written word. I meanto say, that the analogy of the Jewish Law is aninsufficient ground on which to reject Traditionfrom the Gospel revelation ; it being a means ofTruth, ample and adequate in its nature, and alreadyemployed by Providence in conveying to usthe New Testament itself.Such are some of the most approved methods atthe present day, for proving that Scripture, andScripture only, is of supreme authority in matters offaith. Another and acuter line of argument is to callon those who deny it to prove their point ; if therebe anything besides Scripture equal to Scripture,to produce it, and give reasons in its behalf. Inother words, it grants their principle and deniestheir matter of fact. And certainly it does seemas if the onus probandi, as it is called, lay with theRomanists, not with us. Such, then, has been thecourse pursued by some of our greatest writers,as Hooker, who observes, "They which add Traditions,as a part of supernatural necessary truth,have not the truth, but are in error. For theyonly plead, that whatsoever God revealed as necessaryfor all Christian men to do or believe, the samewe ought to embrace, whether we have receivedit by writing or otherwise, which no man denied ;when that which they should confirm, who claimso great reverence unto Traditions, is, that thesame Traditions are necessary to be acknowledgedON SCRIPTURE AS [Let.divine and holy. For we do not reject them, onlybecause they are not in the Scripture, but becausethey are neither in Scripture, nor can otherwise sufficientlyby any reason be proved to be of God. Thatwhich is of God, and may be evidently proved tobe so, we deny not, but it hath in his kind, althoughunwritten, yet the self-same force and authority withthe written laws of God 1 " Such is the judgmentof this great author, who sets us right as to thesense in which Tradition is inadmissible, viz., notin the abstract, and before inquiry, but in the particularcase ; not as being an uncertain mode ofconveying religious truth, as requiring care andthought, on our part, and after all leaving us insome degree of doubt, which is the objection noticedabove, but because, in matter of fact, certaingiven Traditions, (so called,) as the Roman, afterinquiry, turned out not to be Traditions.Yet this mode of understanding the Sixth Articlewould seem to lie open to two serious objections.First, the matter of fact is not at all made out thatthere are no Traditions of a trustworthy nature. Forinstance, it is proved by traditionary informationonly, (for there is no other way), that the text ofScripture is not to be taken literally, concerningour washing one another's feet, while the commandto celebrate the Lord's supper is to be obeyed in1 Hooker, Ecce. Pol. i. 14.XL] THE RECORD OF FAITH. 335the letter. Again, it is only by Tradition that wehave any safe and clear rule for changing the weeklyfeast from the seventh to the first day.Again, our divines, such as Bramhall, Bull, Pearson,and Patrick, believe that the Blessed Marywas " Ever Virgin," as the Church has called her ;but Tradition was their only informant on the subject.Thus there are true Traditions still remainingto us.Perhaps it may be said, however, that all thatthe argument under review really denies is, theexistence of any important Traditions, any pointsof faith, affecting our salvation. But then followsa still more difficult question, as to what are necessarypoints of faith, and how they are to be defined.We say Scripture contains all necessary doctrines ;and why ? because there happen to be none exceptin Scripture. Now there are true Traditions extantof some kind, as by the argument is granted,and such as we even act upon ; perhaps then theyare necessary. How do we know they are not?The common answer would be, because they arenot in Scripture ; but this is the very point tobe proved. To this it may be replied that assumingthe Creed is the collection of necessary truths,since there is not one of its Articles but what maybeproved from Scripture ; it follows that theSixth Article only means to say that for provingof the Articles of the Creed we do not want Tradition,Scripture is enough. This answer seems so336 ON SCRIPTURE AS [Let.far unexceptionable ; yet it does not hold againstthe second objection which I have to notice to theline of argument under consideration. This lies inthe wording of the Article itself. The Article iscertainly engaged in stating a great principle; itbegins with a formal, enunciation, as if utteringwhat it felt to be a bulwark of the Truth, and anantidote against the errors of the time. " HolyScripture contained all things necessary to salvation,so that whatsoever is not read therein, normay be proved thereby, is not to be required ofany man." How is this fulfilled, by merely provingthat it so happens that no doctrine coming fromthe Apostles is to be found anywhere else, that itso happens the Creed can be proved from Scripture ?Surely the Article speaks, not as if narrating amatter of history, but of doctrine, not a conclusionto be arrived at, but a principle to start with.These, then, are the difficulties in the proof ofour Sixth Article, to which Romanists add the particularstructure of the New Testament. Theyobserve it is but an incomplete document on thevery face of it. There is no harmony or consistencyin its parts. There is no code of commandments,no list of fundamentals. It comprises fourlives of Christ, written for different portions of theChurch, and not tending to make up one whole.Then follow epistles written to particular Churcheson particular occasions, and preserved, (as far asthere can be accident in the world,) accidentally.XL] THE RECORD OF FAITH. 337Some books, as the Epistle to the Laodicea, arealtogether lost ; others are preserved only in atranslation, as perhaps the Gospel of St. Matthew,and the Epistle to the Hebrews ; some delivereddown with barely sufficient evidence for their genuineness,as the Second Epistle of St. Peter. Norwere they generally received as one volume till thefourth century. These are disproof, it may besaid, of any intention, either in the course of Providence,or in the writers, that the very books ofScripture, though inspired, should be the Canon offaith, that is, that they should bound and completeit. Also, the office of the Church as the " keeperof Holy Writ," seems to make it probable that shewas intended to interpret, perhaps to supply whatScripture left irregular and incomplete. On theother hand, the circumstance that religious truthscan be conveyed by ordinances, or by Catholic Tradition,as well as by writing, seems an intimationthat there is such a second Rule of Faith, equallyauthoritative and binding with Scripture itself.This being the state of the case, the line ofargument I would adopt is one which many of ourmost eminent Divines have pursued, and amongthem the writer of the first Homily. Nor let anyonebe startled at all this discordance of opinionamong our Divines, in their mode of proving oneof the great principles of Protestantism, as if itreflected upon the wisdom or soundness of the principleitself. Above all, let not Romanists venturezON SCRIPTURE AS [Let.to take advantage of it, lest we retort upon themthe vacillations, absurdities, intrigues, and jealousiesdisplayed in those deliberations of divines whichhave attended their General Councils, and whichissued, as they conceive, in infallible decisions. Itis well known that the Church of Rome reckonsno part of the process by which the Fathers inCouncil arrive at their final decrees to be of anyauthority. She conceives they are invisibly overruled,in whatever manner, to arrive at it. Andaccordingly on inspecting their deliberations we shallfind them so full of both moral and intellectualdefects, that we shall agree with the Romaniststhat, if their conclusions be infallible, it clearly isin consequence of some miraculous guardianship,and not from any tendency in the human agency employedto produce that result. But surely a theorywhich serves plausibly to evade a difficulty in Romanism,may, with more speciousness, and withoutevasion, be applied to the case under consideration.Which, or whether any of the reasons already mentioned,or presently to be mentioned, was adoptedas the ground of the Article by its framers, mattersnot; or whether we can ascertain it, or adopt itourselves. It matters not whether or not they onlyhappened to come right on what are, in a logicalpoint of view, faulty premisses. They had notime for theories of any kind ; and to requiretheories at their hand, argues an ignorance ofhuman nature, and of the way in which Truth isXL] THE RECORD OF FAITH. 339struck out in the course of life. Common sense,chance, moral perception, genius, the great discoverersof principles, do not reason. They haveno arguments, no grounds ; they see the Truth, butthey do not know how they see it ; and if at anytimethey attempt to prove it, it is as much amatter of experiment with them, as if they hadto find a road to a distant mountain which they seewith the eye, and they get entangled, embarrassed,and perchance overthrown in the superfluous endeavour.It is the second-rate men, though mostuseful in their place, who prove, reconcile, finish,and explain. Probably the popular feeling of thesixteenth century saw the Bible to be the word ofGod, so as nothing else is His word, by the powerof a strong sense, by a sort of moral instinct, or bya happy augury. Even though the first Protestantsproceeded to give insufficient reasons for theirbelief, or at times stated it unguardedly or extravagantly,it would not follow that they did not discernand speak a great Truth. Nor does it followthat we, to whom they have left the task of harmonizingtheir doctrines, are mistaken, because weareat times at fault, and dispute among ourselveswhat is the best way of setting about it.If asked, then, how I know that the Bible containsall truth necessary to be believed in order tosalvation, I simply reply, as the first Homily implies,that the early Church so accounted it, thatthere is a " Consent of Catholic Fathers " in its340 ON SCRIPTURE AS [Let.favour. No matter, whether or not we can see aprinciple in it ; no matter, whether or not we canprove it from reason or Scripture; we receive itsimply on historical evidence. The early Fathersso held it, and we throw the burden of our belief,if it be a burden, on them. It is quite impossiblethey should so have accounted it, except fromApostolic intimations, that it was so to be.Stronger evidence for its truth is scarcely conceivable; for if any but the Scripture had pretensionsto be an oracle of faith, would not the firstSuccessors of the Apostles be that oracle? mustnot they, if any, have possessed the authoritativetraditions of the Apostles ? They surely must havefelt, as much as we do, the unsystematic characterof the Epistles, the silence of Scripture on thedoctrine of its own canonicity, or whatever otherobjections can be now urged against the doctrine ;and yet they certainly held it.If this line of argument can be maintained, therewill be this especial force in it as addressed toRomanists. They are accustomed to taunt us withinconsistency, as if we used the Tradition of theChurch only when and as far as we could not avoidit ; for instance, for the establishment of the divinityof Scripture, but not for the doctrines of theGospel. " Were it not for the testimony of theChurch," they say, " we should not know whatbooks are, what books are not inspired ; they donot speak for themselves, or at least when they doXL] THE RECORD OF FAITH. 341they scarcely can be admitted as their own vouchers.Yet a Protestant will quote them implicitlyas divine, while he scoffs and rails at that informantto whom he is indebted for his knowledge." Protestantshave felt the cogency of this representation;and have been led to explore other modes of provingthe genuineness of the New Testament, whichmight set them free from the first ages of Christianity.Paley, for instance, has shown from theundesigned coincidences of the Acts and Epistles,that they bear with them an internal evidence oftheir truth. Others have enlarged upon what theyconceive to be the beautiful and wise adaptation ofthe Christian doctrines to each other, which, in thewords of one writer is such as to show that " thesystem " of the Apostles " is true in the nature ofthings, even were they proved to be impostors VIngenious as such arguments are, were they everso sound and reverent, as they are generally irreverent,and often untenable, they do not touch thequestion of the divine origin of the New Testamentitself, except very indirectly, nay, sometimes tendto dispense with it. Yet allowing what force wewill to them, I suppose it is undeniable after allthat we do receive the New Testament in its existingshape on Tradition, not on such refinements ;for instance, we include the Second Epistle of St.Peter, we leave out St. Clement's Epistle to the1 Erskine's Internal Evidence, p. 17.ON SCRIPTURE AS [Let.Corinthians simply because the Church Catholichas done so. Now this objection, whatever be itsvalue, is fully met by the mode of proof which Ihave suggested; or rather a point is gained thereby.We do not discard the Tradition of the Fathers ;we accept it ; we accept it entirely ; we accept itswitness concerning itself and against itself; itwitnesses to its own inferiority to Scripture; itwitnesses, not only that Scripture is the record,but that it is the sole record of saving truth.This is the more remarkable from the great stresswhich the Fathers certainly do lay on the authorityof Tradition. They so represent it in its Apostolicaland universal character, they so extol and defer toit,that it is difficult to see why they do not makeit, what the Romanists make it, an independentinformant in matters of faith; yet they do not.Whenever they formally prove a doctrine, theyhave recourse to Scripture ; they bring forwardTradition first ; they use it as a strong antecedent,,argument against individual heretics who professto quote Scripture ; but in Councils they eververify it by the written Word. Now, if we chooseto argue and dispute, we may call them inconsistent,and desire an explanation ; but, if we will belearners in the school of Christ, we shall take thingsas we find them, we shall consider their conduct asavestige and token of some Apostolic appointment,from its very singularity. It is nothing tothe purpose, even though Catholic and ApostolicXL] THE RECORD OF FAITH. 343Tradition be strong enough to sustain the weight ofan appeal, supposing, in matter of fact, it was not soemployed by the early Church. Christ surely maygive to each of His instruments its own place ; Hehas vouchsafed us two informants in saving truth,both necessary, both at hand, Tradition for statement,Scripture for proof ; and it is our part ratherto thank Him for His bounty, than to choose oneand reject the other. Let us be content to acceptthe canonicity of Scripture on faith.Moreover this view of the subject rids us of allquestions about the abstract sufficiency and perfectionof Scripture, as a document of saving truth.Romanists sometimes ask us whether some onebook, as the Gospel of St. John, would have beensufficient for salvation ; and, if not, whether thoseof the Apostles' writings which happen to remainare sufficient, considering that some of them areundoubtedly lost. We may answer, that any onebook of Scripture would be sufficient, providednone other were given us ; that the whole Volume,as we have received it, is enough, because we haveno more. There is no abstract measure of what issufficient. Faith cannot believe more than it istold. It is saving, if it believes that, be it little orgreat.Lastly, it may be asked, if Scripture be, as hasbeen above represented, but the document of appeal,and Catholic Tradition the authoritative teacher ofChristians, how it is that our Articles say nothing344 ON SCRIPTURE AS THE RECORD OF FAITH.of Catholic Tradition, and limit Tradition to thesubject-matter of Ceremonies and Rites which arenot " in all places one or utterly like," " and maybechanged according to the diversity of countries,times, and men's manners?" To which I answerby asking, in turn, why the Articles contain no recognitionof the inspiration of Holy Scripture. Intruth, we must take the Articles as we find them,they are not a system of theology on whatever view,but a protest against certain specific errors, existingat the time they were drawn up. There areasall parties must confess, great truths not in theArticles.LECTURE XII.ON SCRIPTURE AS THE RECORD OF OUR LORD'STEACHING.OF the two lines of proof offered in behalf of thesixth Article, which I discussed in my last Lecture,the one considered it to declare a doctrine,the other a fact ; the one spoke as if Holy Scripturemust contain, the other as if it happened to containall necessary truth. Of these the former seems tometo come nearer to the real meaning of theArticle, and also to the truth of the case, thoughthe particular considerations commonly offered inproof are insufficient. Certainly, we cannot maintainthe peculiar authority of the written word, onthe ground of any antecedent necessity, that revelationshould be written, or from the witness ofScripture itself, or from the parallel of the JewishLaw ; yet there are probabilities nevertheless, whichrecommend the doctrine to our belief, even beforegoing into the details of that historical testisON SCRIPTURE AS THE RECORD [Let.mony which I consider to be the proper evidenceof it.Let us see, then, what can be said on the primefacie view of the subject, in behalf of the notionthat Scripture is on principle, and not only byaccident, the sole Canon of our faith.First, the New Testament is commonly calleda testament or will. Indeed, the very circumstancethat St. Paul calls the Gospel Revelation a Testament,and that Testaments are necessarily written,and that he parallels it to the Mosaic Testament,and that the Mosaic was written, prepares us toexpect that the Gospel will be written also. Andthe name of Testament actually given to the sacredvolume confirms this anticipation. It evidently isa mark of special honor ; and it assigns a most significantpurpose to the written Word, such as Tradition,however clearly Apostolical, cannot reach.Even granting Tradition and Scripture both to comefrom the Apostles, it does not therefore follow thattheir written Word was not, under God's over-rulingguidance, designed for a particular purpose, for whichtheir Word unwritten was not designed.Next, we learn from the testimony of the earlyChurch, that Scripture and Scripture only is inspired.This explains how it may be called in anespecial manner the Testament or Will of our Lordand Saviour. Scripture has a gift which Traditionhas not ; it is fixed, tangible, accessible, readilyapplicable, and besides all this perfectly true in allXII.] OF OUR LORD'S TEACHING. 347its parts and relations ; in a word, it is a sacred text.Tradition does not convey to us any form of wordsor of discourses, but things only ; doctrine, that is,embodied in diversified language, which in all itsvarieties expresses the same ideas, but is avouchedas literally Apostolic in none. It gives us little ornothing which can be argued from. We can argueonly from a text ; we can argue freely only froman inspired text. Thus Scripture is in itself speciallyfitted for that office which we assign it in ourArticle ; to be a repository of manifold and variousdoctrine, a means of proof, a standard of appeal, anumpire and test between truth and falsehood in allemergencies. It thus becomes the nearest possibleapproach to the perpetual presence of the Apostlesin the Church ; whereas Tradition, being rather acollection of separate truths, facts, and usages, iswanting in flexibility and adaptation to the subtlequestions and difficulties which from time to timearise. A new heresy, for instance, would be refutedby Tradition only negatively, on the very groundthat it was new ; but by Scripture positively, bythe use of its text, and by suitable inferences fromit.Here, then, are two tokens that Scripture reallyis what we say it is. But now we proceed to athird peculiarity, to which more time shall be devoted.Scripture alone contains what remains to us ofour Lord's teaching. If there be a portion of348 ON SCRIPTURE AS THE RECORD [Let.revelation, sacred beyond other portions, distinctand remote in its nature from the rest, it must bethewords and works of the Eternal Son Incarnate.He is the One Prophet of the Church, as He isour One Priest and King. His history is as farabove any other possible revelation, as heaven isabove earth ; for in it we have literally the sightof Almighty God in His judgments, thoughts, attributes,and deeds, and His mode of dealing withus His creatures. Now this special revelation isin Scripture, and Scripture only ; Tradition has nopart in it.To enter into the force of this remark, we shouldcarefully consider the peculiar character of ourLord's recorded words and works when on earth.They will be found to come even professedly, asthe declarations of a Lawgiver. In the Old Covenant,Almighty God first of all spoke the TenCommandments from Mount Sinai, and afterwardswrote them. So our Lord first spoke His ownGospel, both of promise and of precept, on theMount, and His Evangelists have recorded it. Further,when He delivered it, He spoke by way ofparallel to the Ten Commandments. And Hisstyle, moreover, corresponds to the authority whichHe assumes. It is of that solemn, measured, andIsevere character, which bears on the face of ittokens of belonging to one who spake as noneother man could speak. The Beatitudes, withwhich His. Sermon opens, are an instance of thisXII.] OF OUR LORD'S TEACHING. 349incommunicable style, which befitted, as far ashuman words could befit, God Incarnate.Nor is this style peculiar to the Sermon on theMount. All through the Gospels it is discernible,distinct from any other part of Scripture, showingitself in solemn declarations, canons, sentences, orsayings, such as legislators propound, and scribesand lawyers comment on. Surely every thing ourSaviour did and said is characterized by mingledsimplicity and mystery. His emblematical actions,His typical miracles, His parables, His replies, Hiscensures, all are evidences of a legislature in germ,afterwards to be developed, a code of divine truthwhich was ever to be before men's eyes, to be thesubject of investigation and interpretation, and theguide in controversy. " Verily, verily, I say untoyou ;" " But, I say unto you," are the tokens of asupreme Teacher and Prophet.And thus the Fathers speak of His teaching.His sayings," observes Justin, " were short andconcise ; for He was no rhetorician, but His wordwas the power of God ! ." And Basil, in like manner: " Every deed, and every word of our SaviourJesus Christ is a canon of piety and virtue. Whenthen thou hearest word or deed of His, do not hearit as by the way, or after a simple and carnal manner,but enter into the depth of His contemplations,1 Pol. i. 14.350 ON SCRIPTURE AS THE RECORD [Let.become a communicant in truths mystically deliveredto thee VAs instances in point, I would refer, first, to Hisdiscourse with Nicodemus. We can hardly conceivebut He must have spoken during His visitmuch more than is told us in St. John's Gospel ;but so much is preserved as bears that peculiarcharacter which became a Divine Lawgiver, andwas intended for perpetual use in the Church. Itconsists of concise and pregnant enunciations onwhich volumes of instructive comment might bewritten. Every verse is a canon of Divine Truth.His discourse to the Jews in the fifth chapterof St. John's Gospel, is perhaps a still more strikinginstance.Again, observe how the Evangelists heap His wordstogether, though unconnected with each other, asif under a divine intimation, and with the consciousnessthat they were providing a code of doctrineand precept for the Church. St. Luke, for instance,at the end of his ninth chapter : " Then there arosea reasoning among them, which of them should bethegreatest ; and Jesus, perceiving the thought oftheir heart, took a child, and set him by Him, andsaid unto them, Whosoever shall receive this childin My name, received Me ; and whosoever shall receiveMe, received Him that sent Me ; for He that1 Constat. Monast. i.XII.] OF OUR LORD'S TEACHING. 351is least among you all, the same shall be great. AndJohn answered and said, Master, we saw one castingout devils in Thy name ; and we forbad him,because he followeth not with us; and Jesus saidunto him, Forbid him not, for he that is not againstus is for us. And when His disciples, James andJohn, saw [that the Samaritans did not receiveHim] they said Lord, wilt Thou that we commandfire to come down from heaven and consume them,even as Elias did? But He turned and rebukedthem, and said, Ye know not manner of spirit yeareof; for the Son of Man 'is not come to destroymen's lives but to save them. And a certain mansaid unto Him, Lord, I will follow Thee whithersoeverThou goes ; and Jesus said unto Him, Foxeshave holes, and the birds of the air have nests, but theSon of Man hath not where to lay His head. AndHe said to another, Follow Me ; and he said, Lord,suffer me first to go and bury my father ; Jesussaid unto him, Let the dead bury their dead, but gothou and preach the kingdom of God. And anotheralso said, Lord, I will follow Thee, but let me firstgo bid them farewell which are at home at myhouse ; and Jesus said unto him, No man havingput his hand to the plough and looking back is fit forthe kingdom of God." Here are six solemn declarationsmade one after another, with little or noconnexion.The twenty-second chapter of St. Matthew wouldsupply a similar series of sacred maxims ; or again,352 ON SCRIPTURE AS THE RECORD [Let.the eighteenth ; in which the separate verses, thoughsucceeding one the other with somewhat more ofconnexion, are yet complete each in itself, and very-momentous.No one can doubt, indeed, that as the narrativesof His miracles are brought together in one as divinesigns, so His sayings are accumulated as lessons.Or take again the very commencement of Hisprophetical ministrations, and observe how Hiswords run. He opens His mouth with accentsof grace, but still they fall into short and expressivesentences. The first : " How is it that ye soughtMe ? wist ye not that I must be about My Father'sbusiness ?" The second : " Suffer it to beso now, for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness."The third : " Woman, what am I tothee ? Mine hour is not yet come." The fourth :Take these things hence ; make not My Father'shouse a house of merchandise. The fifth : " Repentye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand."The same peculiarity shows itself in His conflictwith Satan. He strikes and overthrows him, asDavid slew the giant, with a sling and with a stone,with three words selected out of the Old Testament: " Man shall not live by bread alone, but byevery word which proceeded out of the mouth ofGod." " Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God."Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and Himonly shalt thou serve."In like manner, what He from time to timeXII.] OF OUR LORD'S TEACHING. 353at His crucifixion even go by the name of His sevenlast words.Again : His parables, and often His actions, asHis washing His disciples' feet and paying the tribute,are instances of a similar peculiarity.Now, let it be observed, I am not venturing toconjecture what His usual mode of conversationwas ; I am only speaking of it so far as it was of apublic and formal character, intended for everlastingmemory in the Church. But who else among theProphets, from the beginning of the Bible to theend, thus speaks " in proverbs," to use His ownaccount of His teaching ? Whose incidental sayingsbut His are thus collected and preserved bythe inspired writers 1 ? And thus, according to thetext which He Himself quotes, we do really liveby every word which proceeded from His mouth.Certainly this separates Him on the whole fromother prophets, whatever exceptions there maybeto the general rule, or whatever resemblance St.James and St. John may bear to Him in theirEpistles.Such is the character of our Lord's teaching ;impressed with the signs of that sovereign dignitywhich we know belonged to Him ; and, being suchas it is, it surely indisposes us to look for it elsewherethan where we originally find it. For, as1 Eg. David's saying, recorded 2 Sam. xxiii. 17., is a similarinstance.A a354 ON SCRIPTURE AS THE RECORD [Let.any one may see, it has not the character of diffuseand lavish communications ; it is not so exuberant,various, or incomplete, as to lead us to expect portionsof it scattered through the records of Antiquity.We have actual evidence from the Gospelsthemselves, that, in the midst of His condescension,our Lord was sparing in His words and actions, andthat every single deed or word was in one sensecomplete. To His own indeed, to those who layupon His breast at supper, or conversed with Himfor forty days, He might vouchsafe to tell much,whether in the way of prophecy, or interpretationof Scripture, or Church discipline ; and the result,nay, perhaps portions of such instructions, remainamong us to this day. But I speak of the formaldeclarations of His word and will ; to which HisApostles' witness, derived from His private teaching,would be subordinate and as a comment ; andthese, I say, are not prodigally bestowed. Heutters the same precept again and again, and repeatsHis miracles. The very manner, then, of His teaching,as recorded in Scripture, rather disinclines usthan otherwise to expect portions of it out of Scripture; and in matter of fact it is not to be foundelsewhere. Of this teaching, remarkable both fromits Author and its style, Tradition contains no remains.The new Law is preserved by the fourEvangelists alone. The force of this remark willbe seen by considering its exceptions. One solitaryinstance is furnished by a passage of the Book ofXII.] OF OUR LORD'S TEACHING. 355Acts, where St. Paul preserves a sentence of ourLord's, which is omitted in the Gospels : " It ismore blessed to give than to receive." Two otherprecepts are preserved by Antiquity; the one byseveral early writers, " Be ye approved moneychangers;" the other by St. Jerome, " Be ye neververy glad, but when ye see your brother live incharity VHere then is a broad line of distinction betweenthe written and the unwritten word. Whateverbe the treasures of the latter, it has not this preeminentgift, the custody of our Lord's teaching. Imight, then, for argument's sake even grant to theRomanists in the abstract all that they claim forTradition as a vehicle of truth, and then challengethem to avail themselves of this allowance ; in fact,to add to the sentences of the New Law, if theycan. No ; the Gospels remain the sole record ofHim who spake as never man spake ; and it issome kind of corroboration that they are so, thatthey confessedly contain so much as is really to be1 Acts xx. 35. Origen. t. 19. in Joan. viii. 20., Heron.quoted in Taylor Dissuasive infra., Jones on the Canon collects,all the sayings attributed to Christ in the writings of thefour first centuries, of which three alone deserve any notice, inaddition to the above, viz. those in Justin Martyr, Dial. p. 267.(as Jones quotes it), in Iron, Her. i. 20., and in Athena. Leg.32. fin., which last, if it were genuine, would remarkably illustrateRom. xvi. 16. I Cor. xvi. 20. 2 Cor. xiii. 12. 1 Thes.v. 26. 1 Pet. v. 14.A a 2356 ON Scrip Pure AS THE RECORD [Let.found in them. How is it, unless they are theformal record of the New Covenant, that they havein them all the rudiments of Christian Truth asit has ever been received by all branches of theChurch, by Romanists as well as ourselves ? Theircontaining so much is, as far as it goes, a presumptionthat they contain all ; they seem to tend towardscompleteness. Romanists, I suppose, allowthat Baptism and the Eucharist are the especial ordinancesof the New Law, and have a certain priorityof rank over the other Sacraments. Now, if theyground this on their being expressly ordained inScripture, they seem to confess that things prescribedtherein are of more importance than whatis derived through the medium of Tradition. Ifthey do not, then it rests with them to account forthis singular accident, the coincidence of their beingprescribed in Scripture, and their also being thechief ordinances of the Gospel. Certainly, coincidencessuch as this, lead to the surmise that Scriptureis intended to be that which it is actually, therecord of the greater matters of the Law of Christ.Is not all that we know of the life and death ofJesus," asks Bishop Taylor, " set down in thewritings of the New Testament ? Is there any onemiracle that ever Christ did, the notice of which isconveyed to us by Tradition ? Do we know anythingthat Christ did or said, but what is in Scripture?. . . How is it possible that the Scripturesshould not contain all things necessary to salvation,XII.] OF OUR LORD'S TEACHING. 357when of all the words of Christ, in which certainlyall necessary things to salvation must needs be contained,or else they were never revealed, there isnot any one saying, or miracle, or story of Christ,in anything that is material, preserved in any indubitablerecord, but in Scripture alone * ?"In this passage, Bishop Taylor assumes that ourLord's teaching contains all things necessary tosalvation; an opinion, which, in addition to theindirect evidence resulting from the foregoing remarks,seems to be sanctioned by the concludingwords of St. John. Let it be remembered, hewrote what may be considered a supplement tothe three first Gospels. Surely then, the inspiredApostle speaks in the following passages as if hewere sealing up the records of his Saviour's life,and of the Christian Law, after selecting from thematerials which the other Evangelists had left, suchadditions as were necessary for the strength andcomfort of faith. Surely, the following passagestaken together, tend to increase the improbabilityalready pointed out, that our faith, as to greatermatters, has been turned over to the informationof Tradition, however well authenticated. " Andthere are also many other things which Jesus did,the which, if they should be written every one, Isuppose that even the world itself could not containthe books that should be written." " And1 Dissuasive, part ii. book i. 2.358 ON SCRIPTURE AS THE RECORD [Let.many oilier signs truly did Jesus in the presence ofHis disciples, which are not written in this book ;but these are written that ye might believe that Jesusis the Christ, the Son of God ; and that, believing, yemight have life through His name" " And he thatsaw it, bare record; and his record is true. Andhe knoweth that he saith true, that ye might believe VHere St. John, closing the record of our Lord's life,declares, that out of the numberless things whichmight be added to the former Gospels, he hasadded so much as is necessary for faith ; and impliesmoreover, as if it were a principle, that in thingssupernatural proposed for our acceptance, the testimonyof the original witnesses may be expected,and not such secondary information as mere Traditionat best must be accounted.It will be replied, I suppose, that St. John isspeaking of miracles, not of doctrines ; as if we werenot allowed to detect a great principle in the inspiredtext, though conveyed in a form of expressionarising out of the immediate events whichled to his bequeathing it to us. For he surelyuses language which generalizes his statement,and makes the particular case but one instanceof what he really meant. When he says, " therewere many other things which Jesus did 2 ," whatelse can he mean but simply, " much more might1 John xxi. 25. xx. 30, 31. xix. 35.2 He has just recorded a saying of Christ's.XII.] OF OUR LORD'S TEACHING. 359be told concerning Him when on earth," whetherof His words or works being an irrelevant distinction? It is the more strange that such an exceptionshould be taken, though it is taken, becauseall parties understand the principle of extendingthe meaning of texts, and apply it in many importantcases. Both Protestants and Romanists agreewith us in understanding our Lord's " sufferinglittle children to come unto Him," as a sanction forinfant Baptism. There is nothing extravagant thenin the notion of such an extended interpretation ofthe words before us ; and in the particular instanceit is sanctioned by the authority of St. Austin. Heexplains them as follows : " What of His owndeeds and words Christ wished us to read, He badethe Apostles write, as though it had been with Hisown hand." Again : " The Holy Evangelist testifiesthat the Lord Christ said and did many thingswhich are not written. Those were selected forwriting which appeared to be sufficient for the salvationof believers V St. Austin becomes in thesepassages a witness of our doctrine as well as our interpretationof the particular passage.I have said all this by way of refuting what isa favourite theme with the Romanists, that the NewTestament consists of accidental documents, andthat our maintenance of its exclusive divinity is1 Austin de Cons. Evan. i. 54. Tract, in Joan 49, Inthe former passage the text is not expressly referred to.360 ON SCRIPTURE AS THE RECORD [Let.gratuitous and arbitrary. And to this I reply, thatat least there is something in it peculiar and singular,viz. our Lord's teaching. Now, to this representation,two objections will be made which deserveattention ; first, that it narrows the Canon of Scripturewithin the limits of the Gospels to the exclusionof the Old Testament and the Apostolic Epistles; next, that after all, the characteristic doctrinesof Christianity are found in the Epistles, not inour Lord's teaching. These I shall consider together.Now the fact is not as the latter objection representsit. The doctrines of our faith are reallypromulgated by Christ Himself. There is no truthwhich St. Paul or St. John declare, which He doesnot anticipate. Which of them can He be said toomit? He names " the name of the Father, theSon, and the Holy Ghost ;" He announces Himselfas " the Only-begotten Son, given* by the Father tothe world, that whosoever believes in Him shouldnot perish, but have everlasting life ;" " the Son ofMan, which is in heaven ;" " having glory with theFather before the world was ;" " giving His life aransom instead of many ;" and, after His resurrection,having " all power in heaven and earth." Hedeclares that without a new birth of " water andthe Spirit," there is no entrance into " the kingdomof heaven ;" that except we " eat His flesh anddrink His blood, there is no life in us." He praysthat we may be all " one in Him, as He and HisNil] OF OUR LORD'S TEACHING. 361Father are one ;" and He promises to " build HisChurch," and that " the gates of hell shall not prevailagainst it." If we had only the Gospels, weshould have in them all the great doctrines of theEpistles, all the articles of the Creed ; only, in consequenceof our Saviour's peculiar style, as alreadydescribed, His announcement of them is not assistedby the context. Every word of His is complete initself; in half a sentence He states a mysterious truth,and passes on. And it has been ever the fallacyof heretical interpretation to measure the depth ofthe text by the immediate context ; as, for instance,in the discourse in the tenth chapter of St. John,which ends with, " I and My Father are One ;"words which mean far more than the context requires.And this is one main reason, it would seem, whythe Epistles are vouchsafed to us ; not so much toincrease the Gospel, as to serve as a commentupon it, as taught by our Lord ; to bring out andfix His sacred sense, lest we should by any meansmiss it. That this was the office of the Apostles, andnot that of preaching a new and additional revelation,is surely implied by our Lord when He promisesthem the gift of the Holy Ghost. For instance ;These things have I spoken unto you," He says,being yet present with you ; but the Comforter,which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father willsend in My name, He shall teach you all things,and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever362 ON SCRIPTURE AS THE RECORD [Let./ have said unto you'' Again, after telling themthey could not bear as yet to be told the wholeTruth, and that the Holy Spirit would teach itthem, (words, which do not imply that He had notHimself uttered it, only that He had not conveyedit home to their minds,) He proceeds : " He shallnot speak of Himself, but whatsoever He shall hear,that shall He speak ; and He will show you thingsto come. He shall glorify Me ; for He shall takeof Mine, and shall show it unto you V Now whateverelse these words mean, they seem to implywhat the former passage expressed literally, thatthe Comforter would use and explain Christ's ownteaching ; not begin anew, but merely develope it.That some deep and heavenly mystery is impliedin the words, " whatsoever He shall hear, that shallHe speak," I doubt not ; yet it seems to relate alsoto what took place on earth. It is part of the condescensionof the Persons of the Ever-blessed Trinity,that They vouchsafe to allow the adorable secretsof heaven to be adumbrated in some inscrutableway on earth. The Eternal Son was subjected toa generation in time ; He received the Spirit intime; and the Spirit proceeded from the Fatherto Him, and then from both, in time. The textswhich speak of what took place in eternity, arealso fulfilled in the economy of redemption 2 . Andin like manner, I say, whatever else is meant by1 John xiv. 25, 26. xvi. 13, 14. 2 E. g. Ps. ii. 7.XII.] OF OUR LORD'S TEACHING. 363the words in question, this also they must be takento mean, that the Holy Ghost, as is expressly saidin the corresponding passage, would bring Christ'swords to their remembrance. The office of theHoly Ghost, then, lay in "glorifying" Christ; inilluminating, in throwing lustre upon, and drawinglustre from, all that belonged to Him, to His person,His mission, His works, His trials, His sufferings,and among the rest, His words, in exaltingHim as the Prophet of the Church, as well as herPriest and King. In one of the clauses it is added,He will show you things to come," and this will befound to complete the description of the inspirationwhich the Apostles received ; viz., understanding inour Lord's words, and the gift of prophecy. Theirwritings are actually made up of these two, prophecyand doctrine.The same general meaning comes within thescope of a later verse of the chapter last quoted.These things have I spoken unto you in proverbs ;but the time cometh, when I shall no more speakunto you in proverbs, but I shall show you plainly"that is, in explicit words, " of the Father VTo the same purport is our Lord's parting charge,recorded by another Evangelist. "All power isgiven unto Me in heaven and in earth. Go yetherefore and disciple all nations, baptizing themin the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of1 John xvi. 25.364 ON SCRIPTURE AS THE RECORD [Let.the Holy Ghost, teaching them to keep all things,whatsoever I have commanded you? The revelationhad been already made to the Apostles ; itwas like seed deposited in their hearts, which, underthe influences of heavenly grace, would, in dueseason, germinate, and become " the power of Godunto salvation " to all that believed.A number of passages in the Gospels will occurto every inquirer, which take the same view of ourLord's teaching, viz., that it was not mere instructionconveyed in accidental words, but that it consistedof formal and precise sayings and actionsafterwards to be opened and illustrated by theApostles ; some of these shall now be cited."These things understood not His disciples atthe first: but, when Jesus was glorified, then rememberedthey that these things were written of Him,and that they had done these things unto Him."He says to St. Peter, before washing his feet,What I do, thou knowest not now ; but thoushalt know hereafter."When He had bidden them keep the miracle ofthe Transfiguration secret till after His resurrection," they kept that saying with themselves, questioningone with another what the rising from thedead should mean."At another time Christ says, " What I tell youin darkness, that speak ye in light ; and what1 Matt, xxviii. 18, 19.XII.] OF OUR LORD'S TEACHING. 365ye hear in the ear, that preach ye upon thehouse-tops."We have a remarkable instance of this gradualillumination in the way in which they learned thatthe Gentiles were to be called. After His resurrection,Christ enlightened them, we know, in manythings ; it is said expressly, " Then opened He theirunderstanding that they might understand theScriptures." The sacred narrative continues ; "andsaid unto them, Thus it is written, and thus it behovedChrist to suffer, and to rise from the deadthe third day ; and that repentance and remissionof sins should be preached in His name among allnations, beginning at Jerusalem." Who would nothave supposed that His words now at length cameto their minds in their full meaning? but it wasfar otherwise ; the Holy Ghost had not descended,and they were still ignorant of the calling of theGentiles.In the calling of Cornelius, however, the divinepurposes were at length illustrated fully and finally ;but it is very deserving of notice, that though theHoly Ghost was the gracious Agent in the revelation,as our Saviour had given them to expect,yet St. Peter, instead of regarding His guidanceas a new and independent source of truth, promptlyrefers his increased insight into the Gospel to ourLord's teaching. " Then remembered I the wordof the Lord, how that He said, John indeed baptizedwith water, but ye shall be baptized with the366 ON SCRIPTURE AS THE RECORD [Let.Holy Ghost." He perceived that that religion whichwas spirit and truth, could not be confined to placeor nation.Again ; when the women came to the sepulchre,the Angels said to them, " He is not here, but isrisen ; remember how He spake unto you when Hewas yet in Galilee."Further ; the last chapter of St. John's Gospelseems to supply a striking instance of the religiouscaution with which the Apostles treated His words,resisting wrong interpretations, but there stopping,contemplating them in ignorance, rather than supersedingthem. " Then went this saying abroadamong the brethren that that disciple should notdie ; yet, Jesus said not unto him, he shall not die ;but, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is thatto thee ?" To have our Lord's words was in theirjudgment the principal thing, to aim at comprehendingthem secondary, and not to be impatientlyattempted.In this connexion, I may notice as remarkable thesameness of expression under which the three Evangelistsrecord our Lord's consecration of the Breadin the Holy Eucharist. All three use precisely thesame words, " This is My body." They were, itwould seem, more bent on recording our Lord's wordsthan interpreting them. Were the notions nowpopular among us true, one Evangelist would haveworded it, " This is a figure of My Body ;" another,This imparts the benefits of My Body ;" and aXII.] OF OUR LORD'S TEACHING. 367third, " This is a pledge of receiving My Spirit."But the sacred writers seem to have understoodthat our Lord's words were too solemn to paraphrase.As a contrast to this, we find that Pilate'sinscription on the cross is recorded by each Evangelistwith some accidental variation l .Enough has now been said to show, not only thepeculiar prerogative of the Gospels, but the positionalso of the Apostolic Epistles in the revelation.They are on the whole an inspired comment uponthe Gospels, opening our Lord's meaning, and elicitingeven from obscure or ordinary words andunpretending facts, high and heavenly truths. Onthe other hand, our Lord's teaching in the Gospelsacts as a rule and key to the Epistles ; it gives themtheir proportions, and adjusts their contents to theirrespective place and uses. So far from His teachingsuperseding theirs, as may at first sight be objectedto the view under consideration, it ratherrecognizes and requires it. And, as to the OldTestament, far from being put aside on this viewof the revelation, it is delivered to us on the sameauthority, under the seal of catholicity impressedupon it by Christ Himself. There is somethingbeautiful in this appointment. Christ is the great1 John xii. 16. xiii. 7. Mark ix. 10. Matt. x. 27. Luke xxiv.4547- Acts xi. 16. Luke xxiv. 6. John xxi. 23. and of Matt,xxvi. 26. Mark xiv. 22. Luke xxii. 19. also 1 Cor. xi. 24. withMatt, xxvii. 37. Mark xv. 26. Luke xxiii. 38. John xix. 19.368 SCRIPTURE AS THE RECORD OF OUR LORD, &c.Prophet of the Church, and His teaching is as trulyher law, as His death and intercession are her life.In that teaching the whole canon centres, as forits proof, so for its harmonious adjustment. Christrecognizes the Law and the Prophets, and commissionsthe Apostles.These then are some presumptions in favour ofattributing a special sacredness to the New Testamentover and above other sources of divine truth,however venerable. It is in very name Christ'sTestament ; it is an inspired text ; and it containsthe Canons of the New Law, dictated by Christ,commented on by His Apostles and by the Prophetsbeforehand. Though then, as the Romanistsobject, it be incomplete in form, it is not in matter ;it has a hidden and beautiful design in it. Whywe limit it to the particular books of which it iscomposed, will be seen in the next Lecture, in which,passing from antecedent presumptions, such as havehere been discussed, I shall draw out the directproof of the Article on which we are engaged.LECTURE XIII.ON SCRIPTURE AS THE DOCUMENT OF PROOF INTHE EARLY CHURCH.SHOULD any one feel uncertain about the argumentagainst Romanism contained in the last Lecture,he may put it aside without interfering with whatgoes before and after. It is intended to show, howfar there is a presumption that Scripture, is whatis commonly called, " the Rule of Faith," independentlyof the testimony of the Fathers, which isthe direct and sufficient proof of it. And perhapsit may suggest profitable thoughts to those who willreceive it, over and above the immediate servicewhich it has been brought to supply.Before proceeding to the Fathers, which I shallnow do, let me, for the sake of distinctness, repeatwhat is the point to be proved. It is this ; thatHoly Scripture contains all things necessary to salvation; that is, either as being read therein or deducibletherefrom ; not that Scripture is the onlyground of the faith, or ordinarily the guide into itBb370 ON SCRIPTURE AS THE DOCUMENT [Let.and teacher of it, or the source of all religious truthwhatever, or the systematic of it, or the instrumentof unfolding, illustrating, enforcing, and applying it;but that it is the document of ultimate appeal incontroversy, and the touchstone of all doctrine.We differ, then, from the Romanist in this, notin denying that Tradition is valuable, but in maintainingthat by itself, and without Scripture warrant,it does not convey to us any article necessaryto salvation ; in other words, that it is not a ruledistinct and co-ordinate, but subordinate and ministration.And this we hold, neither from anyabstract fitness that it should be so, nor from theaccident that it is so, neither as a first principle,nor as a mere fact, but as a doctrine taught usand acted on by the Fathers, as proved to us historically,as resting neither on argument nor on experience,but on testimony. Thus the same courseis to be pursued, as in determining the Fundamentals; we must take what we have received, whetherwe know the reason of it or not.The most 'simple and satisfactory mode of determiningthe question would be to find some judgmentof Scripture upon it ; but Scripture, as I havesaid, does not contemplate itself. The mentionwhich it makes of inspiration, is rather a promiseto persons, than a decision upon a document. Itis a promise to the Apostles and to the Church builton them ; and the Romanists ask why it need beconfined to that first age any more than otherXIII.] OF PROOF IN THE EARLY CHURCH. 371promises, than the promise of Christ's presencewhere two or three are gathered together, or of thepower of His ministers to remit and retain sins ; orthan those precepts which we still observe, as thecommand to celebrate the Lord's Supper. Scripturedoes not interpret itself, or answer objections tomisinterpretations. We must betake ourselves tothe early Church, and see how they understood it.We consider the Eucharist is of perpetual obligation,because the ages immediately succeeding theApostles thought so ; we consider the inspired Canonwas cut short in the Apostles whose works are containedin the New Testament, and that their successorshad no gift of expounding the Law of Christsuch as they had, because the same ages so accountedit. They witness to their own inferiority,like John the Baptist in speaking of Christ, andwe accept what they say. One passage, indeed,there is, that with which the New Testament closes,which is remarkable certainly, as seeming to anticipatethe testimony of the primitive Church ; I mean,the last words of the Apocalypse : and, consideringtheir correspondence with the closing verses of theProphet Malachi, and those of St. John's own Gospel,which is known to be supplementary, theywould favour the notion that he was sealing up therevelation within the limits of the inspired volume,supposing any evidence could be brought that beforehis death such a volume existed. Any how, theydemand the attention of the Romanists, especiallyBb2372 ON SCRIPTURE AS THE DOCUMENT [Let.considering the testimony of Antiquity agrees withthem, when thus interpreted. To that testimonyI now proceed.The mode pursued by the early Church in decidingpoints of faith seems to have been as follows.When a novel doctrine was published inany quarter, the first question which the neighbouringBishops asked each other was, " Is thispart of the Rule of Faith ? has this come down tous?"The answer being in the negative, they atonce silenced it on the just weight of this presumption.The prevailing opinion of the Church was asufficient, an overpowering objection against it ; norcould truth suffer from a proceeding which onlysubjected it, if on the protesting side, to a trial ofits intrinsic life and energy. When, however, thematter came before a Council, when it was discussed,when the Fathers reasoned, proved, anddecided, they never went in matters of saving faithby Tradition only, but they guided themselves bythe notices of the written word, as by landmarksin their course. Tradition was no longer morethan a subordinate guide, as explaining, illustrating,reconciling, applying the Scriptures. Then, as underthe Old Covenant, the appeal was made " to theLaw and to the Testimony," to the testament ofthe Saviour, to the depository of His teaching, tothe inspired document of Apostles and Prophets.The following passages from the Fathers are givenin proof or explanation of this statement.XIIL] OF PROOF IN THE EARLY CHURCH. 373Tertullian, for instance, is well known as recommendingTradition as a means of silencing heresyin preference to Scripture. He observes that thereis no end of disputing if we go to Scripture, whereasthe joint testimony of the Catholic world is at onceclear and unanswerable. This is true ; the forceof the argument from Tradition is of singular usein hindering controversy, but the question is, whatis to be done when controversy is persisted in, andheresy spreads so widely, or is countenanced sopowerfully that it cannot be put down by authority?Excommunication is doubtless the ultimate resolutionof the difficulty ; but meanwhile the Church,as being considerate and long suffering with hermembers, allows herself to dispute and argue, andshe argues from Scripture. She proceeds from thenegative argument from Tradition, that the opinionsadvanced were not known before, or not allowed,to the positive refutation from Scripture. AccordinglyTertullian says in his treatise againstHeroines, who maintained the eternity of matter: " ' In the beginning God created the heavenand the earth.' I adore the depth of Scripture,in which are manifested to me a Creator andHis work. The Gospel adds the Word as theMinister and Agent of Providence; but I readnot a word any where of a pre-existing matter,out of which things were made. Let the schoolof Heroines show us that it is mentionedin Scripture ; if it is not in Scripture, let him374 ON SCRIPTURE AS THE DOCUMENT [Let.fear the woe destined for those who add or takeaway VOrigen in like manner: " We know that JesusChrist is God, and we seek to expound the wordsthat are spoken, according to the dignity of thePerson. Wherefore it is necessary for us to callthe Holy Scriptures as witnesses ; for our notionsand statements without these witnesses are nottrustworthy 2 ."In another place he says, " All the Scriptures,according to the Preacher, are ' words of the wiseas goads and as stakes well planted, given as secretcyphers from one Shepherd;' nor is there aughtsuperfluous ifi them. The Word is the One Shepherdof all things intelligent, which to those whohave not ears to hear seem to disagree with oneanother, but in truth are most harmonious. For asthe several strings of psaltery or harp, with each itsown note, different (as it would seem) from the rest,make discords in the judgment of the unmusicaland unscientific, because of their variety, so in likemanner ears unpractised in the divine concord ofHoly Scripture, set the Old Testament against theNew, and the Prophets against the Law, and Gospelagainst Gospel, and St. Paul against Evangelist,or against himself, or against his brother Apostles.But when another comes well taught in God's hartContr. Herm. c. 22.2 In Jeremy. Horn. i. 7. The above is translated from theLatin ; but it coincides with the Greek. Also in Matt. torn. ii.XIII.] OF PROOF IN THE EARLY CHURCH. 375monies, accomplished in deed and word, as a secondDavid, ' cunning in playing,' he will bring out theirperfect tones, being instructed thence to strike thestrings in season, now those of the Law, now thosewhich respond in the Gospel, now of the Prophets,now again, when fitting, of the Apostles in accordance,and so again those of the Apostles with the Evangelists.For he knows that Scripture, as a whole, isGod's One Perfect and Complete Instrument, givingforth, to those who wish to learn, its one saving musicfrom many notes combined, stilling and restrainingall stirrings of the evil one, as David's musicin Saul's madness." The main drift of this passagedoubtless is to show the consistency of Scripture ;but it also bears a clear and strong testimony to itsintrinsic completeness and independence of allother sources of truth. Could Origen have sospoken, had he believed that Scripture containedonly one portion of the Revelation, and that the restwas unw T written ?The light in which St. Cyprian regarded HolyWrit, is shown by his books of Testimonia, orScripture Proofs, in which he goes through thevarious points of doctrine relating to the abolitionof the Law, the person and office of Christ, and thediscipline of the Christian Church, with a selectionof texts in behalf of each of them. And the introductionsto the first and third Books set beforeus the feeling under which he did this. The workis addressed to a friend :376 ON SCRIPTURE AS THE DOCUMENT [Let.I could not but comply, well-beloved Son,with your religious wish, most urgently imploringthe divine directions, which God has vouchsafedthrough the Holy Scriptures for our grounding andbuilding up ; that, being rescued from the darknessof error, and illuminated by His pure and radiantlight, we might, by such saving intimations, attain theway of life The perusal of these books mayserve you for the time for tracing out the first lineamentsof faith. More strength will be given you,and the understanding of the heart will become moreand more vigorous, the more fully you search intothe Old and New Scriptures, and study one andall of the portions of those spiritual books. For inthe following work I have but drawn somewhatfrom the divine fountains, to send to you for theseason. You will be able to drink to the full andbe satisfied, if you. for yourself, as I have done,approach the same fountains of divine fulness todrink therefrom."It is still more remarkable that he should bringtexts in maintenance of the lesser duties and usagesof Christians, which he does with the followingpreface :As becomes your known faith and devotiontowards the Lord God, dearly-beloved Son, youhave asked me to instruct you by extracts fromthe Holy Scriptures relating to the discipline ofour religion; seeking a succinct course of divinereading, that your mind, devoted to God, insteadXIII.] OF PROOF IN THE EARLY CHURCH. 377of being wearied by long or many books, . . . mighthave its memory refreshed by a wholesome andcomplete summary."St. Opiates, who lived in the same part of Christendom,about a century later (A.D. 360.) arguesagainst the repetition of Baptism as follows :You say it may be repeated, we say it maynot; the minds of our people fluctuate betweenthe two. Let no one trust you, or us either ; weareall of us party men. Arbiters must be found ;but if they be Christians, such are not fairly producibleon either side, for Truth suffers by ourprivate prejudices. If we go out of doors for anarbiter, he must be either a pagan, and so unacquaintedwith our mysteries; or a Jew, who isnecessarily the enemy of Christian Baptism. Itfollows that no human tribunal can be found forthe question ; we must have recourse to heaven.But why knock at heaven's gate, when we havewith us a Testament in the Gospel ? We may herefitly compare earthly things to heavenly. It is likethe case of a man with a large family. While thefather is alive, he gives his orders to each of them ;a will is not yet necessary. Christ, in like manner,during His abode on earth, (may He never really beabsent !) laid His commands on the Apostles, as thisor that was necessary. But when a father feelshimself to be dying, and fears lest after his deathhis sons should quarrel and go to law, he summonswitnesses, and transfers his will from his heart,378 ON Scripture AS THE DOCUMENT [Let.which is soon to fail, to tablets which shall endure ;so that, if afterwards a quarrel arise between thebrothers, they have recourse, not to his tomb, butto his testament, and thus he who rests in his tombyet speaks, though without voice, from his writing.Now He whose testament we speak of, is alive inheaven ; therefore His will must be sought for, as inatestament so in the Gospel." And then he proceedsto prove the Church's view of Baptism, by the conductand words of our Lord when He washed thedisciples' feet l .Cyril of Jerusalem : " As regards the divine andholy Mysteries of faith, it is necessary that noteven a chance word should be delivered in ourtradition without the warrant of divine Scripture,to the exclusion of mere probabilities or skilfullycontrived arguments. Neither give credence to mymere words, unless they are demonstrated from theScriptures. For this is the saving principle of ourfaith, being derived, not from our inventions, butfrom proofs of Holy Scriptures 2 ." What makes thispassage the stronger, is, that Cyril speaks thus withreference to the Creed, which, if any statement ofdoctrine, might surely depend on Tradition.St. Basil's judgment, as contained in the followingpassage, has been often adduced in the controversy."It is a plain fall from the faith," he1 Optat. De Schism. Don. v. 3. vit. also Austin on Ps. xxiii.30. 2 Cat. iv. 17.XIII.] OF PROOF IN THE EARLY CHURCH. 37<)says, " and a sign of pride, either to annul anythingthat is in Scripture, or to add what is notin Scripture, since our Lord Jesus Christ has said,My sheep hear My voice,' and ' the voice ofstrangers they know not.' And to add tothe inspired Scriptures, or to detract from themisforbidden with especial earnestness by the Apostle,saying, 4 Though it be but a man's Testament,no man disannulleth or addeth thereto V "Let us now proceed to St. Chrysostom, commentingon the words, " He who entered not bythe door into the sheepfold, but climbed up someother way, the same is a thief and a robber." Hespeaks thus : "Behold the evidences of a robber;first, that be enters not openly ; next, that heenters not by the Scriptures, for this is meant bynot entering in at the door. Here Christ alludesto those before Him, and to those who were tocome; Antichrist, and false Christs. Judas andTheudas, and such like. He suitably calls theScriptures the door ; for they bring us to God, andopen upon us the knowledge of Him. They makethe sheep, guard them, and fence off the wolves.As a trusty door, Scripture shuts out heretics,securing us from error, in whatsoever we desire;and, unless we damage it, we are unassailable byour enemies. By means of it, we shall know whoare pastors and who are not 2 ."1 De Fide 1 fin. and Moral, reg. 72. c. i.2 In Joan. 58. ed. Due.380 ON SCRIPTURE AS THE DOCUMENT [Let.St. Austin : " If any one, in matters relating toChrist, or His Church, or any other thing whichbelongs to faith or our life, I will not say, ifwe, but even (what St. Paul has added,) ' if an angelfrom heaven shall preach unto you, besides whatye have received in the Scriptures of the Law andthe Gospel, let him be accursed V "Again, speaking to the Donations, he asks, " Whyadd ye to God's Testament by saying, that Christis heir of no lands, but where He has Donatus forco-heir ? We are not jealous. Read this to us outof the Law, out of the Prophets, out of the Psalms,out of the Gospel itself, or out of the letters of theApostles, read it thence, and we believe it 2 ."Eustathius of Antioch, speaking of the trees oflife, and of the knowledge of good and evil, says :"It is manifest that those things are not to beinquired into, which Scripture has passed overin silence. For the Holy Spirit has dispensed andadministered to us all things which conduce to ourprofit 3 ."In our controversy with the Romanists, we donot need to bring early authorities ; indeed, thelater is the date of the evidence, the stronger is ourcase against them. With this view I quote John1 Contr. Lit. Petition. iii. 7. The Romanists in answertranslate praeterea against, as if it were praeter.2 Contr. Donatist. Ep. (De Imitate Ecce.) 11.3 Anagog. Contemp. in Hexem. lib. 8. int.XIII.] OF PROOF IN THE EARLY CHURCH. 381of Damascus, (A.D. 730) whose exact and learnedorthodoxy on the great points of faith is sullied byhis defence of Image-worship. In*the beginning ofhis work on the Orthodox Faith, he says : " Godhas not abandoned us in our complicated ignoranceof Himself; nay, He has implanted in all men, bynature, the knowledge that there is a GodMoreover He has directly revealed to us a knowledgeof Himself, as far as our weak nature can bearit, first by the Law and the Prophets, then also byHis Only-begotten Son, our Lord and God, andSaviour, Jesus Christ. All things, therefore, whichare delivered to us by the Law and the Prophets,the Apostles and Evangelists, we receive and acknowledge,and reverence ; but we seek for nothingbeyond them. For in that God is good, Heis the Giver of all good ; He has neither jealousynor other passion Whatever is profitable forus, that He has revealed : whatever were too greatto bear, that He has buried in silence. These things,then, [which are given] let us, on our part, makemuch of, in these let us rest ; neither over-passingthe lines marked out by His Eternal Will, nor in anyrespect transgressing the divine message V In thenext chapter, he closes a reflection upon the mostsacred doctrines of the faith thus : " It cannot bethat we should preach, or at all know, any thingabout God, besides what the holy oracles of the1 Chap. i. ii.382 ON SCRIPTURE AS THE DOCUMENT [Let.Old and New Testaments have set forth, said, ormanifested to us."These extracts, strong as they are in themselves,give but a faint impression of the distinct andfamiliar apprehension of this great principle, in theminds of the Fathers, as evinced by their writings.It is not in one or two formal enunciations, but inthe spirit, the drift, the concealed assumption of theirarguments, that we discern this fundamental doctrineof the Anglican Church. It is by tracing thecourse of a controversy, and observing how habituallypresent it was to the reasonings of all the contendingparties, how it guided the deliberationsand decisions of Councils, how it is incidentallybrought out into words, that we realize to ourselvesthe strength of our position. This cannot be adequatelyconveyed to the mind by a mere representationthat it is so, or by mere extracts, yet one ortwo more may be of service in illustrating whatonly the reading of the originals in course cansuitably impress on the mind.Vincentius is commonly and rightly adduced asthe champion of Tradition. He is certainly a remarkablewitness of the sense of the Church inhis day, that Private Judgment was not to be toleratedin the great matters of faith, which were asclearly determined, as much parts of the foundationof Christianity, as the Scriptures themselves,or their canonicity. He maintains that individualsmust yield to the voice of the Church Catholic.XIII.] OF PROOF IN THE EARLY CHURCH. 883But let it be observed after all, what kind of Traditionhe is upholding ; an independent witness ofChristian Truth? far from it, merely and solelyan interpretative Tradition, a Tradition interpretativeof Scripture in the great articles of faith.Thus the very treatise, which is so destructive tomere Protestantism, is as fatal to the claims ofRomanism. Not only is all mention of the Popeomitted as the judge of controversies, but all mentionof Tradition, except as subordinate to HolyScripture. The opening of his work will set thisclearly before us :I have made frequent inquiries," he says, " andthat with much earnestness and anxiety, of a greatnumber of holy and learned men, for some definiteand general rule for discriminating the truth of theCatholic faith, from the falsity of heretical gravity ;and have always got an answer such as this, I maysay, from all to fortify my faith in two waysfirst, by the authority of the Divine Law,next, by the Tradition of the Catholic Church.Here some one may ask, Since the Canon of theScriptures is perfect, and sufficient, and more thansufficient in itself for all purposes, what is the need ofjoining to it the authority of the ecclesiastical sense ?I answer, because the depth of Holy Scripture issuch, that all do not take it in one and the samesense, but its statements are interpreted variouslyby various persons, so that as many senses seemdeducible from it, as there are men to read it384 ON SCRIPTURE AS THE DOCUMENT [Leer.On this account it is very necessary, such complicatedand various error abounding, to regulate theinterpretation of Prophets and Apostles by the standardof the Ecclesiastical and Catholic sense 1 ."Now, on the former part of this extract I makethis remark ; Tradition, we know, is prior to Scripturein order of time, both historically and in its applicationto individuals 2 . Romanists indeed rest its claimsin no slight degree on this very circumstance. " JesusChrist," says Bossuet 3 , " having laid the foundationof His Church by preaching, the unwrittenword was consequently the first rule of Christianity;and when the writings of the New Testament wereadded to it, its authority was not forfeited on thataccount." . This being the case, it is very remarkablethat Vincentius should put the written wordfirst, and Tradition second. Had not Scripturebeen first in dignity and consideration, he necessarilywould have made prior mention of the unwrittenword. There is no other way of accountingfor his saying, "first the authority of the Divine Law,next the Tradition of the Church Catholic." Whatfollows makes this abundantly clear. The veryneed of Tradition arises only from the obscurity ofScripture, and is terminated with the interpretationof it. Vincentius assumes as undeniable, the verydoctrine rejected by the Romanists, the sovereign1 Common. 1. and 2. 2 Laud, xvi. 32. p. 101.3 Expos, ch. xvii.XIII.] OF PROOF IN THE EARLY CHURCH. 385and sole authority of Scripture in matters of faith,nor has a thought of any other question but thefurther one, how it is to be interpreted. His submissioneven to Catholic Tradition, is simply andmerely as it subserves the due explanation of Scripture.Vincentius's treatise was occasioned by the Nestoriancontroversy. I will now review some of thedocuments of the Apollinaris, in which the sameprinciple of verifying doctrine by Scripture is firmlyand uniformly kept in view.Athanasius, in the following passage, distinguishesbetween Tradition as teaching, and Scripture asproving, verifying doctrine. " Our faith is correct,and is derived from Apostolical teaching and theTradition of the Fathers, being established out of theNew and Old Testaments 1 ." The same contrastbetween Scripture and Tradition, is observed byCyril of Jerusalem. For instance, he says justbefore the passage already quoted from him, afterreciting and commenting on the Creed, " Keep inthy mind alway this seal of faith, which I have nowsummarily stated in its chief articles. But if theLord permit, I will speak of them according to mypower with proofs from Scripture." And shortlyafter, " Learn and hold fast thy faith in what istaught and promised ; that faith which alone is nowdelivered to thee by Traditions of the Church and1 Ad Adolph. 6.c c386 ON SCRIPTURE AS THE DOCUMENT [Let.established from Scripture. But, since not all haveability to read the Scriptures, but are hindered fromknowing them, whether by want of education or ofleisure, we comprehend in a few articles the wholedoctrine of faith, lest souls perish from want of instructionV To return to Athanasius :In the following passage, that great authorityrecommends the very course, as a mode of actingfamiliar to him, which has been already describedas the Church's usual procedure towards innovators; viz. first to silence them by her own authorityand the received Tradition ; but if matters becameworse and a controversy ensued, then to have recourseto Scripture as a sure confirmation of theCatholic doctrine. He has been recounting theApollinaris tenets, and then chides the Bishop, towhom he writes for not having silenced them atonce. " For my part," he says, " I was astonishedthat your holiness endured such impieties ; and didnot silence the authors of them with the reverentFaith of the Church; that in this way matters mightbe brought to an issue, either submission leading topeace, or resistance to excommunication However,perhaps it is necessary formally to proveand expose their extravagance; yet it were well,if possible, to stop here, and say not a word more.For doctrines which are unsound, as these are onthe very face of them, ought not to be discussed1 iv. 12, v. 7.XIII.] OF PROOF IN THE EARLY CHURCH 887and made much of, lest disputatious men shouldtake it as a proof that there is no clear case againstthem. They ought to receive this answer andnothing beyond, fi It is enough that these are notthe doctrines of the Church nor of the Fathers.'However, lest these devisers of evil should be emboldenedby our continued silence, it may be wellto bring to memory a few things from the HolyScriptures, since this may shame them perhaps frompursuing their unseemly theories 1 ."Again : " Either then deny the Holy Scriptures,or, if you acknowledge them, do not indulge speculationsbeyond what is written, which will do irreparablemischief 2 ." Now, this is one of thosepassages, which, taken by itself, would stand forlittle; for it might easily be said, that it merelyasserts that Scripture is of authority, not that Traditionis not. But when we find this appeal toScripture repeated again and again in variousshapes, and no similar appeal to Tradition, theargument for Scripture being the record of savingfaith, becomes a strong one.For this reason, I add the following passagesfrom the same treatise ; " If then ye be disciplesof the Gospels, speak not iniquity against God, butwalk by what is written and done. But if ye desireto speak other things beyond what is written,why do you contend with us, who are determined1 Ad Epic. 3. 2 Contr. Apollo. i. G.c c 2388 ON SCRIPTURE AS THE DOCUMENT [Let.neither to hear nor to speak beyond what is written,the Lord having said, ' If ye abide in My word, yeshall be truly free V "What inconceivable abandonment of mind isthis, which leads you to speak what is not in Scripture,and to entertain thoughts foreign to godliness?"While then we confess that Christ is God andman, we do not speak this as if to imply separationin His nature, (God forbid) but, again, according tothe Scriptures."He concludes with these words, in which thesame distinction is made, as has already been pointedout, between the Tradition of the Church, as anantecedent argument, a fair plea, ordinarily supersedinginquiry, and, on the other hand, when forone reason or another the inquiry has proceeded,Scripture as the only basis of sound argument andconclusion. " I have written the above, beloved,though really it was unnecessary, for the EvangelicalTradition is sufficient by itself; but since youasked concerning our faith, and because of thosewho are desirous of trifling with their theories, anddo not consider that he who speaks out of his privatejudgment speaks a lie. For neither the comelinessnor the glory of the Lord's human body canbe adequately expressed by the wit of man ; butwe speak so far as we are able, viz. confess what1 Contr. Apollo. i. 8. fin.XIIL] OF PROOF IN THE EARLY CHURCH. 389has been done, as it is in Scripture, and to worshipthe true and living God, for the glory and acknowledgmentof His love towards man V' &c.Again, in his second book against Apollinaris :Whence you gained your notion," that the soulis of a fleshly nature, " I cannot understand ; it isneither proved from the Holy Scriptures, nor is itaccording to the received opinion of the world 2 ."I conclude with referring to Theodore's mode ofconducting the same or a similar controversy. Ineach of the three argumentative Dialogues, of whichhis Eranistes is composed, we find the followingsignificant Arrangement, in accordance with Vincentius'sdirection already commented on ; thearguments from Scripture come first, and then passagesfrom the Fathers in illustration. Moreoverin his first Dialogue, he introduces his authoritiesfrom the Fathers in the following way. Eranistes,the heterodox disputant, after hearing his proofsfrom Scripture, says; "You have expounded thistext well ; but I would fain learn how the ancientDoctors of the Church understood it." Orthodoxreplies ; " You ought to have been satisfied withthese proofs from the Apostles and Prophets. However,since you desire besides to know the expositionsof the Holy Fathers, I will give you this aidalso, with God's blessing." As if he said, it is not1 Ibid. 9. 11. 22, fin.2 Ibid. ii. 8. Vide also passages in 9. 13. 14. 17- 18. and 19.390 ON SCRIPTURE AS THE DOCUMENT [Let.now the place for bringing mere authority ; I amproving the doctrine. Authority is well in its place,viz., before the controversy ; but now our businessis with Scripture.Again, in his second Dialogue : " We will endeavourto persuade Arius to confess the one substanceof the Holy Trinity, and we will bring the proofs ofthis from Holy Scripture."And again ; " How can a man dispute with thosewho deny our Lord has taken flesh, or human soul,or mind, except by adducing his proofs from divineScripture ? how refute the frenzied men who studyto disparage the Divinity of the Only-begotten,except by showing that Divine Scripture hasspoken some things with reference to His Divine,other things with reference to His human Naturel rOut of the third Dialogue I select the following.After Orthodox has stated the Catholic doctrine ofthe Passion and Resurrection, Eranistes answers;The doctrines of the Church should be set forth,not in declaration merely, but by proof. Show me,then, that Holy Scripture teaches this." Uponwhich Orthodox proceeds to cite the Epistle to theRomans.Again : " Eranistes. St. Peter says, ' Christ havingsuffered for us in the flesh.' Orthodox. Surelythis is quite agreeable to our doctrine ; for we1 Pp. 43. 78. Vid. also pp. 79 and 97.XIIL] OF PROOF IN THE EARLY CHURCH. 391have learned our Canon of doctrines from HolyScripture."One more passage shall be cited. " To add anythingto the words of Scripture is madness andaudacity ; but to open the Sacred Text, and todevelope its hidden sense, is holy and religious."Here is the doctrine of the Gallic Vincentius inthe mouth of a Syrian Bishop l .Nothing, I think, is plainer from these extracts,than that the authors of them looked upon Scriptureas the standard of proof, the tribunal of appeal,in controversy. Now how strikingly coincidentwith this view are the words of our Articles? "HolyScripture contained all things necessary to salvation,so that " (i. c. in such sense that) " whatsoeveris not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, isnot to be required of any man." The Article isaltogether of a polemical character.1 Page 224.LECTURE XIV.ON THE FORTUNES OF THE CHURCH.AND now, that our discussions on what may fitlybe called the Prophetical Office of the Church drawto a close, the thought, with which we entered onthe subject is apt to recur, when the excitement ofthe inquiry has subsided, and weariness has succeeded,that what has been said is but a dream, thewanton exercise, rather than the practical conclusionsof the intellect. Such is the feeling of mindsunversed in the disappointments of the world, increduloushow much it has of promise, how little ofsubstance ; what intricacy and confusion beset themost certain truths ; how much must be taken ontrust, in order to be possessed ; how little can berealized except by an effort of the will ; how greata part of enjoyment lies in resignation. Withoutsome portion of that Divine Philosophy which bidsus consider " the kingdom of God " to be " withinus," and which, by prayer and meditation, by acting onON THE FORTUNES OF THE CHURCH. 393what is told us, and by anticipating sight, developsoutwardly its own views and principles, and thusassimilates to itself all that is around us, not onlythe Church in this age and country, but the ChurchCatholic any where, or at any time, Primitive, Roman,or Reformed, is but a name, used indeed asthe incentive to actions, but without local habitation,or visible tokens, "here or there," "in thesecret chambers," or "in the desert." After all,the Church is invisible in its day, and faith onlyapprehends it.Under this feeling I proceed, lastly, to considermore attentively this main difficulty in the Anglicansystem ; and in so doing shall have opportunity tojustify, by examples, the doctrine which has justbeen suggested by way of reconciling the mindto it.The most plausible objection, then, urged by theRomanists against the English Church, is, that wearewhat they call a Parliamentary Church, a StateCreation or Establishment, depending on the breathof princes or of populace, and directed towardsmere political ends, such as the temporal wellbeingof the community, or the stability of theConstitution; whereas the True Church is builtupon the one Faith, transmitted through successivegenerations, and simply maintains what it has soreceived, leaving temporal benefits to come and gotofollow or be suspended, as the case may be. Theargument comes with the greater force, because394 ON THE FORTUNES [Let.Protestants have not unfrequently granted the fact,and only denied its importance. Yet we need notfear to contest the fact itself in spite of both Romanistsand the Protestants in question ; and inorder to show how little it can be maintained, Iwill take pains to state it as strongly as I can, beforeI proceed to reply to it.It is objected, then, that the Church is by office,and in her very definition, " the pillar and ground ofthe Truth," that " God's Spirit which is upon her,and His words which He has put in her mouth, shallnot depart out of her mouth, nor out of the mouthof her seed, nor out of the mouth of her seed's seed,from henceforth and for ever ;" that " all her childrenare taught of the Lord, and great is the peaceof her children." In such texts the Faith committedto the Church is represented, not as a secretand difficult doctrine, but as clearly proclaimed,indefeasible maintained, and universally acknow-\ledged. Whatever errors and corruptions theremay be in the Church and her children, so far, itmay be argued, is clear, that the true Faith, theone way to heaven, the one message from theSaviour of sinners, the Revelation of the Gospel,will be plain and unequivocal, as the sun in theheavens, from first to last ; so that whoever goeswrong within her pale, will have himself to blamewholly, not his defective light. In the EnglishChurch, however, we shall hardly find ten or twentyneighbouring clergymen who agree together; andXIV.] OF THE CHURCH. 395that, not in the non-essentials of religion, but as towhat are its elementary and necessary doctrines;or as to the fact whether there are any necessarydoctrines at all, any distinct and definite faith requiredfor salvation. Much less do the laity receivethat instruction in one and the same doctrine,which is the evidence, as may be fairly alleged, oftheir being " taught of the Lord." They wanderabout like sheep without a shepherd, they do notknow what to believe, and are thrown on their ownprivate judgment, weak and inadequate as it is,merely because they do not know whither to betakethemselves for guidance. If they go to oneChurch they hear one doctrine, in the next thatcomes, they hear another ; if they try to unite thetwo, they are obliged to drop important elementsin each, and waste down and attenuate the Faithto a mere shadow; if they shrink, as they maynaturally do, from both the one doctrine and theother, they are taught^to be critical, sceptical, andself-wise ; and all this is sure to lead them to heterodoxyin one form or other, over and above theevil whether of arrogance or indifference in themselves.If, again, they are blessed with teachableand gentle minds, such uncertainty makes themdesponding and unhappy ; they walk in darkness,and disquiet, far removed from that "peace"which the Prophet describes as resulting fromthe "teaching" which the children of the TrueChurch receive.396 ON THE FORTUNES [Let.Further, it may be urged, that, over and abovethe variations existing in the Creed of our Church,we are not even agreed among ourselves whetherthere be any Church at all, that is, One True Church,commissioned and blest by Christ ; that many ofour Clergy openly avow their disbelief of it, andwithout censure from our Bishops ; and that ournational schools, in which we profess to educatethe mass of the populace, commonly teach nothingdefinitely and strictly about it, but are content forthe most part with providing that vague kind ofreligious knowledge which might be learned as wellamong Dissenters; that, while we instil into theminds of children some sufficient horror of Popery,we give them no preservative against the Wesleyans,Baptists, or Independents. It may be further objected,that we are in a state of actual warfare witheach other, not only differing, but considering ourmutual differences perilous or even damnable ; thatwe have no internal bond of union, but are kepttogether by the State, which by a wholesome tyrannyforces us to be friends with each other. And furtherstill, much intemperate declamation may beindulged about our system of patronage in theChurch, the mode in which our Bishops are appointed,their being corrupted by their intercoursewith laymen in Parliament, and the like topics.Specific instances of scandal may be added ; thatHadley, for instance, in the last century, thougha Socinian, as is now acknowledged by high authorOF THE CHURCH. 397city in Church matters, was allowed to remain fornearly fifty years a Bishop in possession ; and thatwhen in the early part of his career, the Clergy inConvocation, the legitimate ministers of the Faith,attempted to censure some of his errors, they werehindered by the civil power, which suspended theConvocation forthwith, and has never allowed itsince to resume its functions. Or again, noticemay be directed to the existing carelessness in manyplaces about the due administration of Baptism,no sufficient regard being had to the persons administering,the mode of performing it, nay, orthe very rite itself.All this has been said, and in an exaggeratedtone ; certainly exaggerated, for after all the PrayerBook is a practical guide into the sense of Scripturefor all teachable minds ; and those of our Divines,whom " all the people account as prophets," withwhatever differences of opinion in minor points, yeton the whole teach in essentials one and all thesame doctrine. For instance, the most popularbooks in our Church, and the most highly sanctionedfor the last 100 or 200 years, have been, I suppose,such as Bishop Taylor's Holy Living and Dying,the Whole Duty of Man, Hammond's Catechism,or Bishop Wilson's Sermons; and do not thesesufficiently agree together in doctrine to edify allwho ask what the Faith of Christ is ? Surely thenthere is much exaggeration in such statements asthe foregoing. But whether exaggeration or not,398 ON THE FORTUNES [Let.it matters little ; were every word of them literallytrue, yet they would not tend to invalidate theclaim of the English Church to be considered abranch of the One Church Catholic.The parallel of the Jewish Church will affordus a sufficient answer to all that has been objected.I need scarcely observe that the Israelites wereespecially raised up to be witnesses for the OneTrue God against idolatry, and had the doctrine ofthe Divine Unity set before them, with an injunctionupon the fathers ever to teach the children,and that they remained God's peculiar people tillChrist came; and yet, as every one knows, therewere even long periods in their history duringwhich the whole nation was sunk in idolatry orlingered on in decay, captivity, or dispersion. Eventhen were the English Church, as a Church, togo further than she is ever alleged to have gone,in denying her own powers, were she to put herselfon a level with the sectaries round about her,and to consider Ordination as a mere human ceremony,it would not follow that she had lost hergift. That they who do not claim the One ChurchCatholic as theirs, possess it not, however speciousan argument, cannot really be maintained. Of coursethere are cases in which a Church incurs more orless of punishment for neglect of its privileges, buteven then its state is not the same as if they hadnever been given ; generally speaking, they are butsuspended or impaired, not forfeited. Even Sam-xiv.]OF THE CHURCH. 399son, after losing his hair upon the lap of Delilah,recovered his strength in his captivity, when hishair grew again. If we have been made God'schildren, we cannot unmake ourselves; we cannever be mere natural men again. There is but thealternative of our being His children still, thougherring ones, and under rebuke, or apostates anddevils ; and surely there is enough on the very faceof our Church, as we humbly trust, and as our mostbigotted opponents must grant, to show that wearenot reprobates, but that, amid whatever scandals,we have faith and love abiding with us. Thisis to take far lower ground than we think we mayfairly take in comparison of Rome ; yet it is wellto see what the objection under review amounts toat the utmost. Whether or not there are cases inwhich a branch of the Church, as an individualChristian, may utterly exhaust itself of grace and becomereprobate, St. Paul expresses the rule of God'sdealings with us in his Epistle to the Romans ; " thegifts and calling of God are without repentance"If the Israelites sinned, they were not to be abandoned; on the contrary, it is declared, " then willI visit their transgression with the rod, and theiriniquity with stripes ; nevertheless, My loving-kindnesswill I not utterly take from him, nor suffer My faithfulnessto fail i My covenant will I not break, noralter the thing that is gone out of My lips V OrPsalm Lxxxix. 3234.400 ON THE FORTUNES [Let.again, in the well-known passage of the prophet,God says to the Jews, " That which cometh intoyour mind shall not be at all, that ye say, Wewill be as the heathen, as the families of the countries,to serve wood and stone. As I live, saith theLord God, surely with a mighty hand, and with astretched-out arm, and with fury poured out, willI rule over you And I will cause you to passunder the rod, and I will bring you into the bondof the Covenant V The same is the lesson of theNew Testament, as in the parable of the talents,in which the servant who hid his Lord's talent didnot at once forfeit it, did not release himself of theresponsibility of having it ; he had it by to produce,though unused, at the last day 2 . Still more impressive,because more directly in point, are St. Paul'swords concerning his own commission : " ThoughI preach the Gospel, I have nothing to glory of:for necessity is laid upon me ; yea, woe is unto me,if I preach not the Gospel. For, if I do this thingwillingly, I have a reward ; but if against my willadispensation of the Gospel is committed unto me 3 ."If we disbelieve or neglect our gifts, they remainwith us, though as a burden and as a witness atthe last day. We do not become a mere creationof man, though we sell ourselves to be his slave.And, if not even a denial of her gifts on thepart of a Church, necessarily leads to their absolute1 Ezek. xx. 3237. 2 Matt. xxv. 25. 3 1 Cor. ix. 16, 17.XIV.] OF THE CHURCH. 401forfeiture, much less will the disbelief of certain ofher ministers incur that penalty. From their ownsouls, indeed, the grace of her ordinances will beshut ; but though they trample on their invisiblepowers, yet are they unconsciously the instrumentsof transmitting them onwards and of impartingtheir blessed effects to those who believe. Theydo what they know not ; holy Isaac blessed Jacobfor Esau, and could not reverse it. The old prophetof Bethel was the involuntary instrument of God'swrath, condemning himself the while. Balaam,with a covetous heart and amid heathen enchantments,announced Christ's coming. Caiaphas, thehigh priest, while contriving his Lord's death, prophesied,because he was high priest, yet did notknow that he prophesied. The words of St. Johnshould be carefully studied : " One of them, namedCaiaphas, being the high priest that same year, saidunto them, Ye know nothing at all, nor considerthat it is expedient for us that one man should diefor the people, and that the whole nation perishnot. And this spake he not of himself, but beinghigh priest that year, he prophesied that Jesusshould die for that nation, and not for that nationonly, but that also He should gather together in onethe children of God that were scattered abroad VThe language of Caiaphas then had quite a differentsense from what he intended, and far higher. He1 John xi. 49 52.Dd402 ON THE FORTUNES [Let.spoke of the Jewish nation under the word " people,"but it was the Holy Ghost's word in his mouth todenote the elect children of God wherever foundall over the earth ; and he meant to speak of Christ'sdeath as removing the perplexities which His miraclescaused to himself and his party, but he reallyspoke of the Atoning Sacrifice which He madeshortly after for the sins of the whole world. Inlike manner, even though a Bishop were to usethe words, " Receive ye the Holy Ghost," withlittle or no meaning, or a Priest the consecratingwords in the Eucharist, considering it only a commemorationof Christ's death, or a Deacon the waterand the words in Baptism, denying in his heartthat it is regeneration; yet they may, in spite oftheir unbelief, be instruments of a power they knownot of; and " speak not of themselves;" they maybeas Balaam or as Isaac.The state of the later Jewish Church, of whichCaiaphas affords one instance, illustrates most strikinglyhow dangerous it is to go by sight in religiousmatters instead of consulting God's word. Howdeeply was the divine building " daubed with theuntempered mortar" of secular politics ! how closelydid it simulate a mere civil establishment, till theday of vengeance came, and God claimed His fugitiveProphet, who had hid himself amid the empiresof this world ! What anomalies in the presentstate of the Church can parallel those which werecommitted among the Jews ? What infraction, forXIV.] OF THE CHURCH. 403instance, of the law of Moses could be greater thanthat the high priesthood should be taken away fromthe hereditary line, held but for a time, and associatedwith the profession of arms or with royalty ?Yet such were its fortunes in the family of theAsmonseans, who, besides their priestly character,were many of them stained with crimes which gavedeeper shade to the irregularity. Aristobulus, sonof Hyrcanus, starved to death his mother, causedone brother to be assassinated, and imprisoned therest, and then died of remorse. - Alexander, onoccasion of a mutiny, massacred six thousand ofthe Jewish populace; and, at another, had eighthundred crucified before his eyes at an entertainmenthe gave in honour of his wives and concubines.Hyrcanus and Aristobulus, his sons, carriedon civil war against each other. Herod, a man ofEdom, was allowed to fill the throne of David ; and,stained as he was with the most heinous crimes, heappointed three or four high priests in succession,and rebuilt the temple of God. Yet, in spite ofall these enormities, " the seat of Moses," the oilof the priesthood, and the miraculous governanceof the nation, remained, not fading away withoutmemorial, but for a while latent and quiescent,then fearfully showing themselves in the utterdestruction of the race which had profaned its owngifts. But, till that final destruction the gifts continued,and were profitable to those who cared touse them religiously.Dd2404 ON THE FORTUNES [Let.Earlier periods in Jewish history may next bespecified; for though in these the irregularitiesthemselves might be less, yet the presence of asupernatural Providence, however latent, is furtherremoved from doubt or cavil.What a remarkable picture does the Book ofJudges present to us ! Suppose it was lost to us,and we were to read Numbers and Joshua, and thenturn to the reign of David, could we have conceivedthe actual state of the nation between the former andthe latter period ? Had we been bidden to describeit by conjecture, to connect together the two bysome probable medium, should we have guessed bya stretch of fancy that the newly-created fabric ofJudaism had been destined so soon to fall to pieces,or rather was to fade away like a dream, unrealizedand unattempted for a space of three or four hundredyears after the giving of the Law? Mosesand Joshua set in motion a system which suddenlystops with the human originators of it. Whatmust have been the feelings of a thoughtful Israeliteduring those centuries of confusion, when every onedid what was right in his own eyes, and the lawlesswere kept in order as much by the yoke of theinvader and oppressor as by the divinely-orderedsway of the Judges ? what would have been hisarguments against the cavils of Philistine or Mi-dignity,who thought it worth while to examine thepretensions of his Law? Would they not treatthose pretensions with utter scorn and derision,XIV.] OF THE CHURCH. 405as fantastic and extravagant, as idle, foolish, andirrational, as the world now deems our ApostolicalDescent ? What evidence, indeed, could the Israelitesgive of a supernatural presence amongthem ? There were men who lived and died inthe holy land, without sign or token, as far as wearetold, of the Lord God of Israel, except such asalively faith detects and appropriates. The Philistinesat one time were masters of the chosenpeople for forty years, the Moabites for eighteen,the Canaanites for twenty, the Ammonites for eighteen.And such greater disturbances of the Mosaiccovenant were but centres and origins of theextended distress and confusion in which religionlay during those early times. Its champions, too,had sometimes almost as little in them to refreshthe eye of purity and truth as its enemies. Thehistory of Samson and Naphtha presented as greatperplexities to faith, as Cabin, king of Canaan, orChushan-rishathaim, king of Mesopotamia. Or, considerthe fortunes of Gideon's family ; Abimelech,the son of his concubine, massacring all his brethren,to the number of threescore and ten personssave one, and making himself king ; his townsmen,by whose aid he seized the sovereignty, revoltingfrom him, and then defeated and destroyed by him ;then he himself cut off in battle. Or, consider thehistory of the tribe of Benjamin, its victories overthe other tribes, then its overthrow with the loss oftwenty-five thousand men in one day. Or again,406 ON THE FORTUNES [Let.(what is portentous,) the worship of a graven imageset up by certain Nantes on their original settlementin the promised land, with the regular successionof a priesthood, all the time the house ofGod was in Shiloh, as if Satan were from the firstto share the holy land with the Lord God of Hosts.Such are some of the irregularities and disorderswhich Almighty Wisdom does not find inconsistentwith the continuous and progressive fulfilment ofits purposes ; such the valleys and pits in the wildernesswhich intervene between the great providenceof God, and are lost to us while we contemplatethe majestic summits of Moral, Pisgah, orZion, and the beacon lights thereon kindled. Andif a supernatural presence was with the Israelitesall along their years of crime and captivity, whoshall presume to say, that we, whatever be our misfortunesand our sins, have certainly forfeited theGospel promises, or that a true faith cannot elicitfrom our ordinances and appropriate in its fulnessthose benefits which Christ originally lodged inthem? who shall curse whom God has not cursed,drying up our Baptism, or tainting the manna ofour Eucharist, making our Priests speechless, orbreaking the staff of our Rulers ? Who can excommunicatethose who have ever held to thatCreed, and that Succession, and those Ordinanceswhich Apostles bequeathed them ? Let Romanistssee to it, whether, instead of attempting anythingagainst us, it is not rather their wisdom to shelterXIV.] OF THE CHURCH. 407their own Church under the foregoing argumentsfrom the far more serious charges to which it isexposed.Two other periods occur in the history of Israel,which deserve attention. In their captivity inEgypt, they seem almost to have forgotten thatany promise had been made to their race; andwhen Moses reminded them of it, they " hearkenednot unto him for anguish of spirit and for cruelbondage." Again, much might be said concerningtheir captivity in Babylon, when " their king andtheir princes were among the Gentiles, the Lawwas no more, and their prophets found no visionfrom the Lord 1 ." And again, a fresh field of remarkis afforded by the great schism of the tentribes under Jeroboam and the ministry of Elijahand Elisha among them.Setting, then, our present disorders at the veryhighest, making the largest admissions on thatscore which Romanists can demand, not denyingfor argument's sake, that our Bishops have beforenow done despite to their own Apostolical powers,that our Teachers have been at variance with eachother, that aliens and enemies have usurped ourrights, that the laity has been almost sanctionedby their pastors in loose and irreverent views andpractices, and that the very notion of the ChurchCatholic has died away from the popular mind,1 Lam. ii. 9.408 ON THE FORTUNES [Letgranting, that is, what is a great deal more thanthe truth, it will not follow that Almighty Godmay not be as truly and supernaturally with us asHe was with His former people, when the Angelappeared to Gideon during the Midianitish captivity,or to Zechariah in the days of Herod. And iftruly with us, then, doubtless, in a far higher andmore miraculous way, by how much the ChristianChurch has more of heaven in it than had thePolity of Israel.One more remark shall be suggested. Is it notvery strange and very significant, that our Lordand Saviour, the immaculate Lamb of God, shouldbe descended not only from virtuous Ruth theMoabitess, but from incestuous Tamar ?Such is the light which the Jewish history throwsupon our present circumstances, taken at the worst,but Christian times afford us a second parallel tothem. The Romanist must admit that the state,whether of the Church Catholic or of the RomanChurch, at periods before and during the middleages, was such, as to bear a very strong resemblanceto the picture he draws of our own. I do not speakof corruptions in life and morals merely, or theerrors of individuals, however highly exalted, butof the general disorganized and schismatical stateof the Church, her practical abandonment of herspiritual pretensions, the tyranny exercised overher by the civil power, and the intimate adherenceof the worst passions, and of circumstantial irregu-XIV.] OF THE CHURCH. 409rarities to those acts which are vital portions of hersystem.For instance, the especial stain, which is imputedto our own Church, is this; that in A.D. 1560,Elizabeth, on succeeding to the throne, deprived,by Act of Parliament, all its existing Bishops butone, for refusing to become Protestants, and introduceda new succession, by means of Parker, whowas consecrated under her special license to theArchbishoprick of Canterbury, by certain Bishops,either not in possession of Sees, or only Suffragans.No one denies this was a violent proceeding, thoughunavoidable under her peculiar circumstances ; butit is one thing to be violent in accidental andadjuncts, another to be invalid in essentials. Thequestion is simply whether Parker was formallyconsecrated by those who had the power of consecrating.God may carry on His work amidhuman sin, granting, for argument's sake, that itwas such ; as the incest of Judah was, as I haveobserved, in the line of our Lord's genealogy. This 'is to view the matter at the extremest point ofdisadvantage at which the Romanist can place it.Now let us see whether former times do not supplyinstances of similar scandals l .The third General Council was held A.D. 431, onoccasion of the Nestorian heresy, and passed decreesconcerning our Lord's Person, as divine and1 Vid. Bramhall, Works, pp. 40. 153, 154.410 ON THE FORTUNES [Lucy.human, which the English Church as well as theRoman, has ever recognized as true and necessary.Now under what circumstances were these decreesframed ? Nestorius, Bishop of Constantinople, wascharged, and rightly charged, by Cyril, Bishop ofAlexandria, with heresy. Antioch, and the rest ofthe East, remained neuter ; Rome, and the West,took part with Cyril. Celestina, Bishop of Rome,held a Latin Council, condemned Nestorius, degradedhim on the event of his contumacy, andcommitted the execution of this sentence to Cyril.The Emperor of the day interposed, and summonedat Ephesus, the General Council in question. Cyriland Nestorius, with their respective partizans, arrivedat Ephesus, at the time appointed, beforeJohn, Bishop of Antioch, and the Orientals. Aftera delay of a fortnight, Cyril opened the Council, asPresident, without them, in spite of the earnestrepresentations of the Imperial Officer, who intreatedhim to allow a further delay. Its proceedingsthus unsatisfactorily commenced, wereconcluded within the space of a single day. Fivedays afterward the Orientals arrived, and, angry atthe slight put upon them, they held a Council bythemselves, and degraded Cyril, and Memnon, theBishop of Ephesus, who had sided with him. Mention,being powerful in his own city, shut theChurches against them, and stationed a guard inthe Cathedral, which, on the advance of the Imperialtroops against it, vigorously repulsed andXIV.] OF THE CHURCH. 411routed them. After a riot of three months' continuance,the hostile parties retired to their respectivehomes ; and at the end of several years Johnand Cyril, making mutual admissions and explanationsin points of doctrine, were reconciled toeach other, and jointly assented to the condemnationof Nestorius. From that time Nestoriushas been accounted a heretic by the Church.Transactions such as these are a proof that, in theRoman system at least, while adherence is paid tothe positive observances enjoined us, the sins ofindividuals taking part in their execution, do notinterfere with their validity. That at that timewith whatever incidental dissension and delay, thetestimony of the Catholic world was at length collectedon the subject of dispute, and that that testimonyreally condemned Nestorius; and furtherthat it was but a repetition of the testimonyafforded by Catholic Fathers from the first, is sufficientlyclear to all students in theology. But,anyhow, the scandals of the Council of Ephesusare an effectual obstacle to any over-delicate andfastidious criticisms of Romanists upon our Reformation.The history of Vigilius, Bishop of Rome, in thefollowing century, presents the Romanist with asimilar difficulty. It is well known that accordingto the Roman system, a General Council is not ofauthority unless confirmed by the Pope ; now thefifth Council was confirmed by this Vigilius, who,412 ON THE FORTUNES [Let.unless positive observances, not moral qualifications,be the conditions on our part, of supernaturalagency, neither confirmed the Council, nor wasPope at all. His career was as follows. The lastBishop of Rome had died at Constantinople, afterdeposing the Bishop of that city for heresy ; Virginius,who was at that time a deacon, had accompaniedhim thither, and made offers to the EmpressTheodora, who had adopted the same heresy, toacknowledge and support the deposed Bishop, ifshe assisted himself to rise to the See of St. Peter.Having gained the Empress, he proceeded intoItaly, to Belisarius, whom he also gained throughthe interest which she exerted in his favour, andby promising two hundred pieces of gold, fromhimself, should he obtain the appointment. MeanwhileSilverius had been chosen at Rome to fill thevacant See. On suspicion of corresponding withthe Goths, he was summoned before Belisarius,stripped of his sacerdotal habit, and banished toLycia. Vigilius was appointed in his room, andhis first act was to refuse to discharge his ownengagements in the contract ; neither siding withthe heretics, nor paying the promised bribe. Thelatter condition he at length fulfilled on being putinto possession of his rival, Silverius, whom he sentto Pandataria, where death by famine put an end tohis sufferings. The fifth General Council being afterwardsheld at Constantinople, he refused to assentto its decrees, and was, in consequence, banishedXIV.] OF THE CHURCH.by Justinian; nor was he allowed to return toRome, till he recanted, formally confirmed them,and thereby secured, as the Romanists consider,their infallibility. Unless formal acts are the secretthreads by which the line of Divine Providenceis continued, how can Romanists hold either thatVigilius was Pope, or that he confirmed the decreesof the fifth General Council? Thus they accordto us a principle which brings us safely throughour own misfortunes, though they apply it to instancesin which we consider it is not pertinent.Let us now take an instance some hundred yearslater. In the tenth and eleventh centuries, therank and wealth of the higher ecclesiastics wassuch as to absorb those higher spiritual functionswhich had led to their obtaining them. The Bishopswere temporal princes, were appointed irrespectivelyof their religious fitness, and felt more closelybound to the feudal lord of whom they held theirtemporalities, than to the Church. " They wereobtruded in their Sees," says a recent writer, " asthe Supreme Pontiffs were upon that of Rome, byforce or corruption. A child of five years old wasmade Archbishop of Rheims. The See of Narbonnewas purchased for another at the age often."He adds, "It was almost general in- theChurch to have Bishops under twenty years old."Again; "Either through bribery in places whereelections still prevailed, or through corrupt agreementswith princes, or at least customary presents414 ON THE FORTUNES [Letto their wives and ministers, a large proportion ofthe Bishops had no valid tenure in their sees.The case was perhaps worse with inferior clerks ;in the Church of Milan, which was notorious forthis corruption, not a single ecclesiastic could standthe test, the Archbishop exacting a price for thecollation of every benefice VSuch being the general state of the Church,Rome itself was the scene of contest between rivalclaimants of the Holy See, the respective championsof the imperial prerogatives and ecclesiasticalliberty. In 1012, Benedict VIII. was forced bythe Anti-pope, Gregory V., to fly to the EmperorHenry II., who reinstated him. Benedict IX., aman of abandoned life, being degraded by theRomans, was restored by the Emperor Conrad,and, running into still greater excesses, was againdeposed by his people, who chose in his placeSylvester III. A third time he was reinstated,by the arms of his adherents ; and at length, despairingof appeasing the resentment of the Romans,he sold his holy office to the arch-presbyter ofRome, who succeeded under the name of GregoryVI. While the Roman see thus lay between thepretensions of three competitors, the Emperor,Henry III., deposed them all, and introduced afourth, under the name of Clement II. This is1 Hallam's Middle Ages, chap. vii. Vid. passages quoted inTillotson's Rule of Faith, iii. 7.XIV.] OF THE CHURCH. 415but one specimen of ecclesiastical irregularities,greater, surely, than any which have occurredamong ourselves, whether in the reigns of theTudor princes, or of William III.The great Western Schism, in the course of thefourteenth and fifteenth centuries, is another instanceof ecclesiastical disorder, such as has not happenedin our own branch of the Church. We in Englandthink it, as it really was, a very grievous thing, thatthere should have been in King William's timerival Bishops in the Archiepiscopal and some othersees, the exigencies of the State calling for measurestowards the Church which, in civil matters,would have been tyranny. But what prudent Romanistwill object this to us, as if more than aruffling of the surface of the deep fountains of herpower, who recollects the state of his own Churchduring the period referred to ? For fifty years theLatin Church had two or three heads at the sametime, each intriguing and directing anathemas againsthis rivals. Mosheim remarks, that during that period,as was natural, " many plain, well-meaning people,who concluded that no one could be saved unlessunited to the Vicar of Christ," i. e. the Pope, " wereoverwhelmed with doubt, and plunged into the deepestdistress of mind l ;" the very misfortune which isalleged mutatis mutandis to be the result of our ownunhappy differences at present. Meanwhile the GalsMosheim, vol. iii. p. 328.416 ON THE FORTUNES [Let.lucan Church, seriously affected by the scandal ofthe contest, in a council held at Paris at the endof the fourteenth century, solemnly renounced allsubjection to either of the contending parties. Atthe beginning of the next century the Council ofPisa deposed the rival Popes of the day, appointinga third in their place, who being unable tocarry into effect their decision with a strong hand,did but become a third competitor, and form afresh party in the schism. Doubtless to these andsimilar miserable disorders we owe the licentiousand profane movements of the sixteenth century,of which the Romanists are so ready to complain ;and the present wasted and enfeebled state of theChurch, including our own branch of it. And, asduring the continuance of these old dissensions,the humble and believing, as we humbly trust,enjoyed the Ordinances of grace though administeredby unchristian hands, much less can theirconsequences, our present and past distressing circumstances,taken at the greatest, be any bar inthe due administration of the Sacraments to thosewho believe and seek God truly.Such was the state of things in the middle ages ;let us now turn to the early Church, which apparentlywas not altogether free from those errorsand disorders which are the scandal of moderntimes.In the fourth century there were at one timethree, and for a long time two, Bishops of AntiochXIV.J OF THE CHURCH. 417at once, one countenanced by the East, the otherby the West ; and that succession at last prevailedwhich had been violently introduced by the Arianss.In Africa the Donations, in the time of their power,had as many as four hundred Bishops, within sixtyor seventy as many as the Catholic Church.In the early Ante-Nicene times, the Churchseemed for a while to be but one sect among many,being confused with Jews, and the various Gnosticdenominations, as it is at this time in our owncountry, with the multitude of parties and heresieswhich prevail. Nay, it had peculiar difficulties ofits own, distinct from those of after centuries.While it was still under persecution, with deficientunion in its separate branches, private Christianshad to struggle with uncertainties, and with partialknowledge, I do not say whether more or lessthan ours, but certainly such as we have not.Till the fourth century there was no unanimousreception of the Canon of the New Testament, nosufficient check upon the fancies and extravagancesof individual teachers. All the great points, indeed,of faith were thoroughly known by all, in afar higher way than is at present vouchsafed to us ;but in many matters of detail, or as regards theintellectual comprehension of its terms, thoughthere was, doubtless, one uniform doctrine handeddown from the Apostles, heresy was not so immediatelyrecognized, as it was afterwards, when thestimulus it supplied had retouched and deepenedE e418 ON THE FORTUNES [Let.the lineaments of the Creed. It is observable thatthe two most learned and gifted of the Write-NiceneFathers, while explicit in their report of CatholicTruth in all matters of necessary faith, yet arelittle trustworthy themselves, and are open insecondary points to the charge of unwarrantablespeculation. There can be no instance amongourselves of sincere Christians being tempted, asOrigen was, to question what is meant by theeternal punishment destined for the finally impenitent;or of a Bishop, as Dionysius, speakingof the Eternal Son, in terms which to some othersconveyed a sense as far *from orthodoxy as fromhis own meaning ; or of a whole Church, as theRoman, doubting of the full authority of the Epistleto the Hebrews. All the most important pointsin the Christian system have been publicly canvassedin detail, and settled once for all ; but inthe first ages of the Church there was more roomthan now, not for practical uncertainty where menwere teachable, but for inquiry where they wererestless, and for controversy where they werestubborn.To these instances, in earlier and later times, Iwill but add the testimony of two Bishops of theChurch in ages and countries far removed fromeach other, and under circumstances widely different,in proof of this one fact, that there havebeen junctures in the history of the Dispensationbefore our own, in which contemporaries thoughtXIV.] OF THE CHURCH. 419they saw the utter confusion and the destructionof all that was sacred, venerable, or precious ; theimmediate extinction of that Truth which has lastedcenturies after them. The first of these writers isSt. Basil, Exarch of Caesarea, in the fourth century;the other is an authority, whom the Romanists atleast cannot reject, the famous Thomas Becket,Archbishop of Canterbury in the thirteenth. Ofthese the former thus writes concerning the stateof Asia Minor, where the Arianss had for some yearsbeen spreading their heresy :Our afflictions are well known without my telling; the sound of then* has gone forth over allChristendom. The opinions of the Fathers aredespised ; Apostolical Traditions are set at nought ;the speculations of innovators hold sway in theChurches. Men have learned to be theorists insteadof theologians. The wisdom of the worldhas the place of honour, having dispossessed theboasting of the Cross. The gravity of the sacredorder has perished; there are none to feed theLord's flock with knowledge ; ambitious men areeven spending, for purposes of self-indulgence andbribery, possessions which they hold in trust forthe poor. The accurate observance of the Canonsis no more ; there is no restraint upon sin. TheLaity remain unchastised ; the prelates have lostall freedom of speech, for they are necessarily theslaves of those by whose patronage they have gainedtheir dignities Unbelievers laugh at what theyEe2ON THE FORTUNES [Let.see, and the weak are unsettled; no one can tellwhere the true faith lies, because the adulterersof the word make plausible pretences to be true.The better sort of people keep silence ; but everyrailer speaks what he will. Sacred things are profaned; those of the laity who are sound in faithavoid the places of worship, as schools of blasphemy,and raise their voices in solitude, with groans andtears to the God of heaven VNine hundred years afterwards, an Archbishopof Canterbury, who at least is an authority withRomanists, writes as follows : "The king of England,"he says, in a letter concerning Henry if.addressed to the Roman Cardinals, " has seizedand is every day seizing the property of the Church,subverts its liberty, stretches out his hands againstthe anointed ones of the Lord, against the clergy,without limit of place or selection of persons, imprisoningsome, beheading others, tearing out theeyes of others, forcing others to single combat,others to the ordeal, that the Bishops may not payobedience to their Metropolitan, nor the Clergy totheir Bishops, nor account themselves excommunicatedwhen they have been duly excommunicated."In another place, he thus speaks of the corruptpractices of the Roman see : " Sacrilegious men,murderers, plunderers are absolved, impenitent men,1 Basil, Ep. 92. The first sentence is condensed from theoriginal.XIV.] OF THE CHURCH. 421whom I boldly pronounce on Christ's word, thoughthe world be against me, not even St. Peter, werehe in the Roman see, could absolve in God's sight.. . Certainly, if restitution might be made and isnot, there is no true repentance. . . . Let who darethus bind himself and not fear the sentence of theJudge to come. Let him absolve men of plunder,sacrilege, murder, perjury, blood and schism, thoughimpenitent. . I will trouble the court of Romeno longer ; let those apply to it who are strong intheir iniquities, and after triumphing over justiceand leading innocence captive, return in glory forthe confusion of the Church VBut in truth the whole course of Christianityfrom the first, when we come to examine it, is butone series of troubles and disorders. Every centuryis like every other, and to those who live init seems worse than all times before it. The Churchis ever ailing, and lingers on in weakness, " alwaysbearing about in the body the dying of the LordJesus, that the life also of Jesus might be mademanifest in her body." Religion seems ever expiring,schisms dominant, the light of Truth dim,its adherents scattered. The cause of Christ isever in its last agony, as though it were but a questionof time whether it fails finally this day oranother. The Saints are ever all but failing from1 Ep. D. Thorn, ii. 46. v. 20.422 ON THE FORTUNES OF THE CHURCH.the earth, and Christ all but coming ; and thusthe day of judgment is literally ever at hand ; andit is our duty ever to be looking out for it, notdisappointed that we have so often said, " now isthe moment," and that at the last, contrary to ourexpectation, Truth has somewhat rallied. Such isGod's will, gathering in His elect, first one andthen another, by little and little, in the intervals ofsunshine between storm and storm, or snatchingthem from the surge of evil, even when the watersrage most furiously. Well may prophets cry outHow long will it be, O Lord, to the end of thesewonders ?" how long will this mystery proceed*?how long will this perishing world be sustained bythe feeble lights which struggle for existence inits unhealthy atmosphere? God alone knows theday and the hour when that will at length bewhich He is ever threatening; meanwhile, thusmuch of comfort do we gain from what has beenhitherto, not to despond, not to be dismayed, notto be anxious at the troubles which encompass us.They have ever been ; they ever shall be ; they areour portion. " The floods are risen, the floods havelift up their voice, the floods lift up their waves.The waves of the sea are mighty, and rage horribly ;but yet the Lord, who dwelleth on high, is mightier."THE END.GILBERT & Livingston, Printers, St. John's Square, London.