THETRIBUTEA COLLECTION" OFMISCELLANEOUS UNPUBLISHED POEMS,EDITED BY LORD NORTHAMPTON.LONDON :JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREETANDHENRY Lindsey, Simple STREET.MDCCCXXXV1I.LONDON:ERRATA.Page 6, line 11, for " doomed," read " doomed."Pages 22, 238, 265, for " BY A. J. DE VERB, ESQ. read " A. T. DEVERE, ESQ."Page 27, last line, after " vain" insert a comma.32, line 1, for " morning," read " Morning."38, 15, for " Now," read " Nor."146, 10, for " islands," read " island's."153, 12, for " Gives," read " Give."160, 5, for " Jove sent," read " Jove-sent."161, 16, for" Sweet, slumbering Majesty," read " Sweet slumberingMajesty,"164, 18, for " wizen," read " widened."166, 19, for " sconce," read " ensconce."167, 3, for " whiskered," read " whiskered."168, 2, for " longed for," read " longed-for."169, 4, for " at the dewy Morn," read " at dewy Morn."Pages 170 and 198,/or " By MISS POPPLE," read " MISS M. PO Pale."Page 181, line 10, for " autumns," read " Autumn's."192, 8, add a comma at the end of the line.last line, for " hand," read " hand)"196, line 18, for " paid," read " pallid."206, 15, for " me," read " we."214, 11, after " found," omit the comma.215, 15, after " gates," omit the comma.260, 8, " And old-school Proctors." At the end of this linethere should be a comma only, and no break after it,the paragraph being continued.298, 10, for " gleam," read " glean."299, 4, for " lesson," read " lessons."311, 14, for " ill cherish" read " ill-cherish."318, 18, for " fame," read " fane."356, 14, for " guest," read " quest."360, 2, for " waves 's," read " waves.' "386, 6, for " the silence," read " the solemn silence."PREFACE.THE Editor of the TRIBUTE, in submitting the followingcollection of poetry to his readers, thinksit necessary to preface it by a short statement ofthe circumstances under which it has been preparedfor publication.This work was projected as early as Spring,1836, while the late Reverend Edward Sedleywas still living, and its original object was to sparehim the necessity for those arduous literary labourswhich at that time threatened his sight orhis life. His hearing he had already lost, and adisorder in his eyes was to all appearance sappinga sense still more precious. Before many weeksa 2had elapsed, these anticipations proved too wellfounded, and death relieved him from his sufferings,and deprived his family of an affectionatehusband and father. For them the project wascontinued, but as it depended on the co-operationof many, and might therefore very possibly cometo nothing, the Editor did not think it right toinform those for whose benefit it was intended,till it was so far advanced that at least it was notlikely to fail from a deficiency in literary contributions.When this communication was at lastabout to be made, the Editor found that Mrs.S medley was herself going to publish, also bysubscription, a Volume of Poems by her late husband,with a memoir of his life. Had this beenknown sooner, the Editor would certainly neverhave undertaken the present work. He rejoices,however, that he did not know it : as whatevermay be the pecuniary result of this publication,he is sure that it must be gratifying to the feelingsxiii )PageWoman Miss M. Popple 198Evening - Anonymous 201A Day Remembered Rev. John Eagles 206Cowper's Oak and the Emperor Butterfly The Editor 207Babylon Anonymous 212Stanzas Miss Sandal 221The Wicked Nephew Anonymous 223Sonnets on the Seasons Rev. H. Afford 230Stanzas supposed to be written on the Site ofTroy The Editor 234Stanzas A. T. De Vere, Esq 238Lines on leaving Rome Wm. Empson, Esq 240Stanzas written for a Blank Page in Rogers'Pleasures of Memory Anonymous 241Sonnet to Mrs. on hearing her sing The Marchese Spine 243Stanzas . J . . . Alfred Tennyson, Esq 244Sunday Mrs. Cheney 251Stanzas to Edith Rev. Chauncey Hare Townshend . 254On a Painting of Zuccharelli Rev. W. L. Bowles 259The Rival Sculls Horace Smith, Esq 260Song A. T. De Vere, Esq 265Farewell Mrs. Myers 266On a Birth Day C. A. Elton, Esq 270The Oath of Hannibal G. F. Richardson, Esq. 271Hunting Song Anonymous 274Prologue on the Opening of the English Theatreat Rome, 1824 H. Gaily Knight, Esq. M.P 275Epilogue to the Honey Moon, Rome, 1824 . . Ditto 277Brough Bells Robert Southey, Esq. L.L.D 280Village Epitaph Rev. W. L. Bowles 288The Deaths of Tristan and Yseult Miss Costello 289To a Lady Rev. C. T. Tennyson 293Complaint of a Poet on visiting the CumberlandMountains Rev. Chauncey Hare Townshend . 294To a Lady Miss Randall 298Luther's Parents Walter Savage Landor, Esq 300Lines on leaving a Place where one had dweltmany Years R. M. Milnes, Esq 310xiv )PageSonnet Rev. C. Strong 314Byron in Greece C. A. Elton, Esq 315The Departed Bernard Barton, Esq 320The Outlaw The late Lady Northampton 323Song S. Augustus O'Brien, Esq 332The Toy of the Giant's Child G. F. Richardson, Esq 334A Fisher's Song of Invitation Anonymous 337The Merry Bachelor Mrs. Joanna Bailie 339May Rev. John Frere 343Sing to me a Song of Heaven Anonymous 346King Alexander III. of Scotland Miss D. M. Clephane 349On Childhood Mrs. Cheney 353The Eagle's Nest Francis Hastings Doyle, Esq. . 355Sonnet on Seas Force The Editor 363Borjewski Miss Randall 364Town and Country Rev. John Eagles 370The Ninth Plague of Egypt Anonymous 371From the Persian of Suzeno R. M. Milnes, Esq 374Recollections of J. W. and his Sister Anonymous 375Verses Professor Smyth 379Sonnet on some Humming Birds Rev. C. T. Tennyson 380A Thought from La Buyers C. A. Elton, Esq 381Song from the German G. F. Richardson, Esq 382Sonnet on the Death of Sir Walter Scott The Editor 384The Last Repose Miss Agnes Strickland 385Essay on Man and Nature The Hon. Sir E. Must, K.C.H. . . 387Irregular Sonnet Professor Smyth 392Chest? Anonymous 393i Our Father's at the Helm Miss Mary L. Boyle 401Message from the Moon James Montgomery, Esq 405Sonnet from the Italian of Bernardo Tasso . . . Miss Agnes Strickland 409Verses for Music Professor Smyth 410Tartar G. P. R. James, Esq 411First Part of Book V. of the Odyssey Lord John Russell 413Sonnets to the Memory of the late Rev. EdwardSedley Rev. Henry Thompson 421Mrs. ImplySir R. H. Inglis, Bart., M.P.Miss InglisMiss M. InglisJ. Ingram, Esq., 2 CopiesRev. Mr. James, WinchesterG. P. R. James, Esq.Mrs. JamesLord JeffreyMiss Johnson, Dan sonRt. Hon. Sir Alex. Johnston, Bart.Mrs. J. Jones, StapletonWilliam Kerr, Esq., Med.Mrs. William KerrMrs. KerrH. Gaily Knight, Esq., M.P.The Marquis of VanstoneWalter S. Landor, Esq.Rev. J. B. LangleyMiss LeavesRev. E. Austen LeighMrs. Burke LewisThe Lady MilfordThe Earl of LimerickThe Earl of LonsdaleG. Lucas, Esq. Newport PanelMiss Lundin, Fife, N. B.Rev. Win. MansfieldMrs. MansfieldMrs. Market, of MeophamMrs. Le MerchantDenis Le Marchant, Esq.J. H. Maryland, Esq.W. Marshall, Esq., C.C.C.C., 2 CopiesH. Marshall, Esq.Mrs. MarshallMiss Cornelia MarshallMiss Maunsell, 48, Upper Harley St.The Earl of MayoThe Countess of MayoViscount MiltonLady MilanRev. H. H. MilanR. M. Milnes, Esq.The Countess of IntoRobert Monteith, Esq., Corsairs,Lanark, 2 CopiesMrs. Willoughby MooreThe Viscount Worketh, M.P.J. Mortier, Esq.Wm. Mount, Esq.R. I. Hutchison, Esq.Mrs. HutchisonMrs. MyersMiss NepeanG. Nicholson, Esq., 10 CopiesThe Marquis of Northampton, 20 CopiesThe Dow. March lioness of NorthamptonThe Lord Bishop of NorwichMadame de NormanRev. Dr. Not, WinchesterS. A. O'Brien, Esq.Rev. G. Peacock, Trin. Col., Camb.Rev. R. N. Pemberton, 2 CopiesH. Penn, Esq., 2 CopiesSir G. Philips, Bart., 2 CopiesG. Philips, Esq., M.P., 2 CopiesThomas Phillips, Esq.Rev. John PitmanRev. Miles PoppleGeneral RamsayMrs. RandallMiss Catharine RawsonThe Duke of RichmondThe Duchess of RichmondH. R. Reynolds, Esq.Sir John Richardson, 42, Bedford Sq.Lady RichardsonLady Theodosian Spring RiceThe Rt. Hon. T. Spring Rice, M.P.Stephen Spring Rice, Esq.Dr. Rosen, 34, Maddox StreetSamuel Rogers, Esq.Wm. Rogers, Esq.J. R.Sir R. M. Role, M.P.W. S. W. Sam well, Esq., Upton HallRev. J. SergeantRev. S. Y. EngraveJohn Selwyn, Esq.Rev. R. SeymourMrs. Julian ShrineE. M. S., 5 CopiesA. M. S., 5 CopiesDr. Sculls, Med., TorquayThe Earl SpencerThe Earl of SurreyR. N. Share, Esq., RedgraveMiss SharpThe Viscountess Sidmouth, 2 CopiesMrs. SimpsonThe Lady SinclairF. S., 3 CopiesMrs. F. S., 2 CopiesSpencer Smith., Esq.Mrs. Smith, 6, Portland PL, 2 CopiesMiss SmithMrs. Smith, Bedstead, near BognorMiss Smith, Glanville, SouthamptonProfessor Smyth, CambridgeRev. T. S. Smyth, 2 CopiesJ. Spending, Esq., 60, Lincoln's InnMiss Steward, TorquayRev. C. StrongMrs. F. SullivanMrs. Vincent ThompsonJohn Thornton, Esq., Somerset HouseMrs. Thornton, BrockhallRev. C. R. TrenchRev. Edward TrevenenMrs. G. Tudor, 28, Park CrescentH. Tunnel, Esq., AdmiraltyWilliam Turner, Esq., LiverpoolE. V. Utters, Esq.Sir A. de Vere, Bart.Vere de Vere, Esq.Miss WalkerJohn Ward, Esq., LogwoodGeorge Webster, Esq., Med.G. Westmacott, Esq., Somerset HouseRev. W. Wheel, 3 CopiesMrs. S. WhiteheadHenry Wickham, Esq., 2 CopiesRev. Joseph WixJohn Wood, Esq., Chester StreetJ. Smith Wright, Esq.Wm. B. Brighton, Esq., M.P.Rev. R. WrightTownshend Wright, Esq.E. D. W., 5 CopiesE. W., 2 CopiesW. W., 2 CopiesF. L. and H., 3 CopiesofHER MAJESTY THE QUEEN,HER ROYAL HIGHNESS THE LANDGRAVINE 2 Copies,HER ROYAL HIGHNESS THE DUCHESS OF GLOUCESTER,HER ROYAL HIGHNESS THE DUCHESS OF KENT.The Lord Advocate of Scotland, M.P.Lord AshtonSir T. Dyke Aslant, Bart.Mr. S. Adkins, NorthamptonRev. H. AffordRev. Gerard T. Andrews, 5 CopiesThomas Tree, Esq. BrightonMiss AustenWilliam Banks, Esq.F. T. Baring, Esq. M.P.Rev. T. W. Barlow, NorthamptonThe Countess of BathurstThe Rt. Hon. Sir John Bailey, Bart.,5 CopiesGrosvenor Charles Bedford, Esq.Mr. Birdsall, NorthamptonWm. Blake, Esq.S. Haddington, Esq.Mrs. Bourne, Paul's CrayHon. Sir Courteney Boyle, K.C.H.Mrs. BoyceThe Earl of BradfordThe Dowager Countess of BradfordF. Bradley, Esq.Mrs. BradstreetThe Lord BridgeportThe Lady BridgeportThe Dowager Countess of Brownlow 'Sir A. de Capelle Brooke, Bt., 2 CopiesThe Rev. Dr. Auckland, Prof. Gaol.T. Bedford, Esq., BlockheadRev. Richard Burgess, ChelseaWm. Burton, Esq.Dedimus Burton, Esq.The Marquis of Bute, 2 CopiesSir Charles Barrel, Bart.Rev. Dr. Butler, GastonMiss ByrneMiss G. ByrneThe Earl of Carnarvon, 3 CopiesLady Can-missCan-missIsabella Can-rev.G. S. CastleMiss CastleColonel CheneyMrs. CheneyR. H. Cheney, Esq.Edward Cheney, Esq.Miss CheneyGingham Christie, Esq.Mrs. ChilternMrs. Chute, 2 CopiesMrs. D. M. ClephaneMiss D. M. Clephane, 2 CopiesHon. Mrs. Cockayne, 2 CopiesThomas Cockburn, Esq.Mrs. CockburnJoseph Colthurst, Esq.Rev. H. ComberThe Earl ComptonLady Marianne ComptonLord William ComptonRev. W. D. C. Coneybeare, 3 CopiesThe Earl of CorkMrs. CrawhallMrs. Arthur CurrieCape Cure, Esq.Mrs. Cape CureThe Hon. Sir Edward Must, K.C.H.C. D., 2 CopiesH. H. D., 2 CopiesThe Lady Dare, 5 CopiesRev. Dr. Davy, Master of Caius Coll.Camb.Lady DavyMessrs. J. and J. J. Leighton, Camb.,3 CopiesMiss DealLady E. F. Dickins, 2 CopiesC. S. Dickins, Esq.Mrs. Dickins, 2 CopiesT. Dickins, Esq.C. Dixon, Esq.Mrs. DixonSir F. Hastings Doyle, Bart.Sir Philip Malpas Egerton, Bt., M. PThe Ladies Elliot, AdmiraltyWm. Empson, Esq.Mrs. SwartJ. P. Fearon, Esq., Chester TerraceThe Earl Fitzwilliam, 2 Copiesviii )Hon. G. W. FitzwilliamFriend, a (per D. Le Marchant, Esq.)50 CopiesRev. J. FrereP. H. Frere,Esq., Downing Col. Camb.Rev. T. Garden, Trin. Col. Camb.Mrs. GaskellMrs. GellThe Lord GlenelgThe Lord Bishop of GloucesterHon. Mrs. GoslingRobert Gosling, Esq.Mrs. Robert GoslingW. Gratwick, Esq.G. B. Greenough, Esq., 10 CopiesMrs. Groves, WinchesterLord Robert GrosvenorMrs. General GrosvenorM. H., 5 CopiesMrs. HackMrs. HaddoCaptain Basil Hall, Ren.J. S. Hartford, Esq.The Lady Portland, 2 CopiesMrs. Robert B. HeathcoteHenry Arthur Hare, Esq.James Holding, Esq., BasingstokeH. P. Hope, Esq.Edmund Hopkins, Esq.Mrs. HopkinsHon. C. HowardMrs. Hudson, 42, Bedford SquareMrs. P. HiltonSir Abraham Hume, Bart.J. D. Hume, Esq., 2 CopiesMrs. Huskissonv )of Mrs. Sedley's friends to see this proof of therespect in which he was held.The Editor regrets that his task has not falleninto the hands of some one more competent toits discharge : this feeling makes him the moreanxious to express his acknowledgments to thosewithout whose aid his undertaking could not havebeen completed. To several friends he has togive especial thanks for procuring for him thecontributions of others, whose acquaintance hehad not the pleasure of possessing. In this respecthis gratitude is more particularly due to theChancellor of the Exchequer, who was indeed hisconfederate in the scheme from the first : and alsoto Mr. Milnes, Mr. Strong, Mr. Richardson, andMr. Bernard Barton.In the first Prospectus of the present Collection,there appeared the name of a gentlemanvi )who has unfortunately been prevented by illnessin his family, from contributing any of his beautifulpoetry. This circumstance the Editor deeplyregrets ; but he has the satisfaction of laying beforehis readers contributions from five gentlemenand two ladies, who were not named in the sameprospectus.August, 1837.TABLE OF CONTENTS.PageOur Title Bernard Barton, Esq 1Stanzas \V. Wordsworth, Esq 3Verses suggested by a Page in Herodotus. . . . G. V. Enables, Esq 5Sonnet. On Prayer Rev. R. C. Trench 14Lines Miss Costello 15Verses The late Wm. Southey, Esq 17Sonnet. Sunset and Night The Editor 18Noah's Dove Miss Douglas Maclean Clephane 19Love and Sorrow A. T. De Vere, Esq 22Sonnet Rev. C. Strong 24Stanzas, suggested by some Lines of Standard,an American Poet The Editor 25Lines Wm. Empson, Esq 27Julia in her Garden Miss A. Bradstreet 29Trenton Church Rev. G. S. Castle 33Lines addressed to the Poet Wordsworth Sir William Hamilton 34Sonnet suggested by an Engraving of " LaPense" in the Literary Souvenir for 1835 . . The Editor 36Stanzas on Shakspeare Wm. Empson, Esq 37Verses for Music Sir Aubrey de Vere, Bart 42The Sabbath Rev. John Frere 43April, 1834 Wm. Empson, Esq 46The Templar's Revenge Miss D. M. Clephane 47Paraphrase on Part of the First Chapter ofEzekiel The late Lady Northampton 54Translation of Gray's Latin Ode on the Monasteryof the Grande Chartreuse Charles A. Elton, Esq 58Memory The Editor 60The Beggar's Castle R. M. Milnes, Esq 61xii )PageOctober Wm. Empson, Esq 68Address to Poetry Rev. R. C. Trench 71On Re-visiting Trinity College, Cambridge The Right Hon. T. Spring Rice 77II. The Temptation ^ ( 80II. The Prevalent I 82III. The Revelling 1 J 85IV. The Luring-on f Gear ^ e Dare y E9 1 < 87V. The Sea Ritual 1 89VI. The Mermaids's Vesper Hymn J (,91Stanzas to a Young Lady on her Marriage . . G. F. Richardson, Esq 93Song R. M. Milnes, Esq 95Orestes and Electra, last Scene Walter Savage Landor, Esq 97Stanzas Henry Taylor, Esq 100The Passion Flower Sir Aubrey de Vere, Bart 102Dido's Answer to aeneas in Hades Francis Hastings Doyle, Esq. . 103Mute Courtship from the Persian Thomas Moore, Esq 106Castle Ashy, Northamptonshire Rev. G. S. Castle 108The Spinning Maiden's Cross Rev. W. Wheel 109'Twas a long Time ago Anonymous 117The Squire's Well S. Augustus O'Brien, Esq 119The Poor Poet to his Purse The Editor 121Infant Bazaar Professor Smyth 125Sonnet, on the Students who were leaving Collegeat Aylesbury for India Rev. Charles Townshend 128Julia's Dream Miss A. Bradstreet 129Sonnet on reading an old English Book Sir Aubrey de Vere, Bart 134Rezia, an Interlude for Music The Lady Dare 135To * * * *. Impromptu ,. The Marchese Spine 144The Boy and the Dolphin Rev. H. II. Milan 146The Tombs of the Scaliger R. H. Cheney, Esq 149A Father to his Daughter Miss A. Bradstreet 153The Frogs and the Stork Anonymous 1 54Morning. A Sonnet The Rev. John Eagles 169Lines on the Ruins of the Chapel of Ravendale Miss M. Popple 170The Knights of St. John The late Wm. Smyth, Esq 173Midnight Thoughts Anonymous 181The Miner Miss D. M. Clephane 183The Idiot Boy The late Lady Northampton 188OUR TITLE *BY BERNARD BARTON, ESQ.A Tribute to the parted Dead !Whose pilgrimage below,By many a shadowy cloud o'erspread,Had much of care and woe.A Tribute to the Muses' Light !Lov'd with a Poet's love ;Which made, at seasons, Sorrow brightBy sunshine from above.The Editor in his own name as well as that of the other contributors,begs to tender their thanks to Mr. Bernard Barton for his verses, justifyingthe title of this volume.A Tribute to that steadier rayOf Gospel Truth and PowerWhich cheer'd the Christian Pastor's wayAnd sooth'd his saddest hour.A Tribute to the Mourners left !Who, while they feel the rod,Bow in submission, though bereft,And put their trust in GOD.Lastly, a Tribute to the worthOf Christian Charity!Whose recompense is peace on Earth,Whose record is on high !Such is our Volume such it's aim ;Reader ! perform thy part ;So shall our pages haply claimTheir Tribute from thy heart !STANZASBY W. WORDSWORTH, ESQ.THE moon that sails along the skyMoves with a happy destiny,Oft is she hid from mortal eyeOr dimly seen ;But when the clouds asunder fly,How bright her mien !Not flagging when the winds all sleep,Not hurried onward, when they sweepThe bosom of th' ethereal deep,Not turned aside,She knows an even course to keep,Whate'er betide.4 )Perverse are we a froward race ;Thousands, though rich in fortune's grace,With cherished sullenness of paceTheir way pursue,Ingrates, who wear a smile-less faceThe whole year through.If kindred humour e'er should makeMy spirit droop for drooping's sake,From Fancy following in thy wake,Bright Ship of Heaven,A counter-impulse let me takeAnd be forgiven.VERSES,SUGGESTED BY A PASSAGE IN HERODOTUS, vHi. 66.BY G. V. Enables, ESQ.Two exiles on the desolated plainOf Tria stood in thought, breathing the air,Their native air of Hellas, exiles still.Banish 'd eternally from sacred feasts,And kindred rites, and solemn officesHeld in old temples of ancestral Gods,And from their fathers' graves. One was a chiefSpare-formed and scornful-eyed, in other daysKing in great Lacedaemon, follower nowOf the fierce Mede. He, turning to his friend,Whose dark locks with cicada gold-inwroughtTold his high Attic race indigenous,Broke through the silence. " Thou hast seen the landShadowed with desolation. Proudly clad6 )In purple robes of rich prosperityIt spurned thee forth, to welcome thy returnIn melancholy garb, lonely and bare,Treeless and harmless, without sound of life.It is enough. Well hath the Persian,Who is the thunderbolt of our revenge,Done his foul work of murder. Is thy soulGlad, oh Dickens ? Is thy vengeance full ?I too rejoice ; upon the fallen landOf Pallas toying, but with inward eyeFull fixed on doomed Sparta, trusting notTo curses darkly breathed, or Nemesis,Or the unnamed Virgins : but to trainOf subtlest wiles, sprung from slow-climbing hateCherished in silent watches of the night,And to the will of Man." Mournfully thenAnswered the calm Athenian. " Oh friend,By equal wretchedness in equal loveJoined to my heart, look on the purple slopeOf yon white-bellowed sea, how like a hillCrested with flocks it shows. Such is desireSeen dimly ; so thou loosest from afarOn the event of fortune. I have reachedThe shore which bounds the waters, and I knowThat sooner shall Man walk the rolling wave,Or gather food from the unfruitful deep,Than find the full accomplishment of hope.Through many toils we struggle, till the goalOpens before us, and we grasp in the endThat which our wishes knew not. Not for thisPrayed I or laboured, pouring venomed words"Into the greedy ears of the Great King,Pride-swoln in his Memnonian capital :"But musing on Athenian foes, I seemedTo think of Athens. Therefore looked I onWhile Asia gathered, as some wizard seer,When the storm-laden wind from HellespontAnswers his master-call. Now I beholdOnly my birth-place, once so beautiful,By me forlorn of beauty. No fair flowerWelcomes the wandering bee HymettianWeary at noon : no polish 'd ivy-leafRustles in old Colonel, underproppedBy plumage of clear warbling nightingales,8 )Rising and falling with their joyous songs.Mine is the violation. Mine should beAtonement : but repentant tears are shedVainly, and Destiny is unremoved.Henceforth like a war-wearied conquerorCasting aside his bloody sword at eve,I stand apart. With the barbarianLet the Gods work their pleasure." " Yes," repliedThe kingly Dorian, " if Gods there be,Or being, look on us ; let Sparta fallThen were I well contented : of the KingDeeming, and of his gorgeous ornament,As of a stone set rolling by a childTo crush it knows not what." With lips compressAnd low firm accents deeply drawn he spoke,As one who sternly bows a struggling heartTo his unyielding purpose. So they stoodIn mournful thought. But when the larger SunLow hanging in the chambers of the WestTinged the green hills with fire, a distant cloudShadowed the clear horizon, dim at first,And doubtful if on earth or upper air,(. )Till in near view a mighty orb of dustRolled from Eleusis on the sacred wayEastward to Athens. All instinct it seemedWith multitudinous life : for fitfullyLarge wreaths shot out, and torches dully gleamedHalf-hidden in the many-folded veil,But none might pierce the darkness. Sternly gazedThe proud Lacedaemonian, too proudFor fear, but not for wonder. By his side,As one who borne in sleep from a far landWakes in his home and muses doubtfullyWhether his dream be past, Dickens stood.His eye was fixed, his lips were moving fastAlthough no sound was there, sometimes the bloodForth bursting with the eager flush of joyPurpled his cheek, sometimes in sudden doubtLeft it like marble. Once he pressed his handOver his aching brow, and with closed eyeStrove to shut out the vision; but againHe looked, and nearer rolled that orbed cloudPregnant with hidden wonders, and it seemedThat many moved therein ; and choral sounds10 )Rang loudly out, swelling with names of Gods,Demeter and Persephone, and lordOf mystic dance to the fire-breathing stars,Great Dionysus." In the gathering dinThe voice was swallowed up : but it had beenTo the Athenian like the blush of dawnFalling on that Egyptian statue oldWhich answered light with music. All the doubtsAnd musings of his silence were no more,As in the calm of certainty he spoke.We stand upon a bare and desert soil,And lo, the press of multitudes. Thine eyeAsketh and I will answer. Mark me well,Oh Demaratus, surely there are Gods,Whereof but now thou doubted mighty Gods,In many sounds, by many messengersUttering the mandates of their lordly will :Sometimes by the low whispering forest oak,Sometimes by lightning, thunder-heralded,Or the sky-cleaving eagle. Holier signsThan these are here. The pure and sacred deadOnce more upon the bleak world wandering11 )Pour forth the solemn song, that combe of oldUnto rejoicing ears Olympian.The Eternal speak their purpose. Joy to GreeceFor there is woe on Persia. " What is this,"Answered the Spartan, " for thy words are dark,And memory is silent in my breast.Seeing, I see not, and this outward showWith it's profounder meaning is to meBut as a strange tongue, syllabled in vainTo an unconscious ear." " To me it speaksIn unforgotten tones," Dickens said,The language of my youth ; but it's dark senseMust not be all revealed : what I mayWill I interpret. Though yon whirling massPass amid desolation rife with soundsNumberless, and with forms of living men,Stand not in blank amaze. Those sights and soundsAre but life's shadowy symbols. OftentimesHave I beheld the thickly-rolling dustWhere now it's image moves, and year by yearHeard the melodious song unspeakable,When in full pomp of festal pageantryAthens and Greece held the Ogygian ritesOf the Great Mother, and the veil is tornFrom the eternal mystery that liesShrouded in grey Eleusis. Seek thou notTo pierce the secret that unlocks the doorOf Wisdom unto Man, but from the streamJudge of the fountain. Happy they who seeAright that wondrous truth, for evermoreTo them the sun shines with a clearer light,And the green earth and purple atmosphereLie bare in beauty to their cloudless view.And such die not ; if it be death to sleepIn the grave's mouldering chambers, or to flitNaked beside the melancholy pool,A pale and shrieking ghost ; for all that EarthAnd Hades hold of dark or horrible,Flowers from error only : truth is pure,And they who know the truth ; therefore their soulsGlide from their fleshly temples peacefullyTo the Elysian island of their blissIn the warm bosom of the western seaThence come they now, chanting in mystic strain13 )Known to the echoes of this sacred shoreThe changeless doom of Destiny : beholdThe cloud from earth is rising where it fallsShall the Mede perish." As he spoke, the soundsFaded, and all that shadowy multitudeSolemnly through the twilight floating up,Hung high in the blue region, like a troopOf snowy swans over some Scythian marshWhen Autumn utters low his warning voiceIn gusty winds across the Caspian :Then was the changeless will of the high GodsLaid open. Southward moved the fatal cloudOver the rocky shore to the near sea,And with prophetic pause majestical,Stooped to the fleet that lay at Salamis.14 )SONNETON PRAYER.BY THE REV. II. C. TRENCH.LORD, what a change within us one short hourSpent in thy presence will avail to make ;What burdens lighten, what temptations slake,What parched ground refresh as with a shower !We kneel, and all around us seems to lowerWe rise, and all the distant and the nearStand forth in sunny outline brave and clear ;We kneel how weak, we rise how full of power.Why therefore should we do ourselves this wrongOr others, that we are not always strong ?That we are ever overborne with careThat we should ever weak or heartless be,Anxious or troubled, when with us is Prayer,And joy, and strength, and courage are with Thee !LINESBY MISS COSTELLO,AUTHORESS OF " SPECIMENS OF THE EARLY POETRY OF FRANCE. 1HE said her eyes were soft and bright,Her cheek was fair, her voice was sweet,Her tresses were like summer night,And like a fairy's were her feet.I listen'd to each tender wordThat painted all her charms too well ;And trembled as each jarring chordBade my struck heart with anguish swell.I strove my starting tears to hideAnd sought to calm my bosom's thrill,I call'd to aid my struggling pride,And ask'd him if he lov'd her still !16 )He turn'd him tow'rds me with surpriseThat glance even yet is forgot!And, with a voice that speaks in sighs,He told me that he lov'd her not.He said, altho' her form of graceThe charms of ev'ry clime combined,The beauty of her angel faceCould find no answer in her mind.I felt a sudden, transient glowWithin my aching bosom steal,And fear'd the flush that stain'd my browMy cherish'd secret might reveal :Swift as that blush my hopes were o'er,And reason bids me all resign :He said that she was lov'd no more,But said not that his love was mine.VERSESADDRESSEDBY THE LATE WM. Southey, ESQ.TO AUGUSTUS WALL Alcott, ESQ. AFTER HAVING SEEN THE PORTRAITOF MRS. Alcott, PAINTED BY HIM.BID me no more with charmed eyes reviewThy silver lakes and skies of azure hue ;Rocks piled on rocks, or mountains capt with snow,Or Sunsets gleaming on the Vale below :But let me on that form attractive gazeWhere thy skill'd pencil all its power displays ;'Tis no resemblance, slowly traced by Art,No Nature found her image in thy heart :Thence those raised eyes with vivid genius fraught,That speak the secret of the unuttered thought.Thence featured on that brow, th' impassion'd SoulBeams brightly forth, and lights with life the whole.And, mingled with thy hues that ne'er shall fade,The Husband's tenderest feelings glow portray 'd.SUNSET AND NIGH-T.A SONNET,BY THE EDITOR.DAY with her glare and heat and toil is o'er ;Her orb is sunk beneath its ocean bed :The sky's bright azure now is seen no more,But changed to orange blushing into red :Rosy the billows break upon the shore,The snow is crimson on the mountain's head,And on the steps of Eve that goes before,Approaches Night, with sad and solemn tread.Hail, sable-stole Queen, whose diademTen thousand thousand blazing suns beget !Friend of the exile's and the captive's woes !How grateful should they kiss thy garment's hem,Who, with thine opiate, Sleep, bestows on themTranquillity forgetfulness repose!NOAH'S DOVE.BY MISS DOUGLAS MACLEAN Elephant.THE Dove, forth speeding at the Patriarch's hestTo wander o'er the deluge waters dark,Could for her wearied wing obtain no restTill she regained the ark.Went she not forth in hope, careering lightlyTo reach again the nest where she was reared,Where sheltering woods and sparkling waters brightlyTo Memory's eye appeared?20 )All, all now desolate ! the wreck of sinHad swept her flowery dwelling-place from earth ;And o'er each spot where peace and joy had beenSent wastefulness and dearth.Ah, is not this a lesson ? to impressOur worldly hopes how fragile and how vain ;Where those who hurry forth to seek for blissCan only gather pain.When next the Patriarch sent her, she obeyedWith slow and heavy flight as one forlorn,Who lingers fruitlessly round hopes decayedThat can no more return.But lo ! she sees, from the dull waters rising,A verdant branch that sparkles in the sun ;Oh 'tis the olive ! right the symbol prizing,She feels the earth re-won.With joy she plucks the emblem of sweet peace,And bears the treasure gladly to her lord,Who owns in thankfulness the flood's decreaseAnd earth again restored.Bears this no lesson ? to the contrite, yes ;Owning their helpless state with humble mind,In the Great Olive Branch, our Righteousness,They peace and pardon find.Yet once, once more the messenger hath sped jThey watch for her return, but watch in vainWill those who, free, the path of heaven may tread,Be lured to earth again ?LOVE AND SORROW.BY A. J. DE VERB, ESQ.WHENEVER under bowers of myrtleLove, summer-tressed and vernal-eyedAt morn or eve is seen to wander,A dark-eyed girl is at his side.No eye beholds the Virgin glidingUnsandalled through the thicket's glooms ;Yet some have marked her shadow movingLike twilight o'er the whiter blooms.A golden bow the Brother carries,A silver flute the Sister bears :And ever at the fatal momentThe notes and arrows fly in pairs.She rests her flute upon her bosom,(While up to heaven his bow he rears,)23 )And as her kisses make it trembleThat flute is moistened by her tears.The lovely twain were born together,And in the same shell cradle laid,And in the bosom of one MotherTogether slept, and sleeping played.With hands into each other's woven,And whispering lips that seemed to teachEach other in their rosy motionWhat still their favourites learn from each.Proud of her boy, the Mother showed himTo mortal and immortal eye, . .But hid, (because she loved her dearer,)The deeper, sweeter Mystery.Accept them both, or hope for neither,Oh loveliest Youth, or Maid lovelorn,For Grief has come when Love is welcome,And Love will comfort those who mourn.SONNETBY THE REV. C. STRONG.How manifold are thy deep wonders, Lord !Night after night into thy heavens I gaze,And watch, as circling through the starry maze,The golden planets move in sweet accord.Oh blasphemy of fools, oh, thought abhorr'd,That would th' eternal characters eraseWhich to the creature show in living blazeCreative Wisdom, and a God record :Yea, characters that they who run may read,Writ every where, throughout each land and sea,In telling of His Power are all agreed.Yet nought on earth beneath, in heaven aboveDeclares like Jesus, Sinner, given for thee,A God of Holiness, a God of Love.STANZAS,SUGGESTED BY SOME LINES OF Standard, AN AMERICAN POET,ON AUTUMN,BY THE EDITOR.WHAT is there saddening in the Autumn leaves?"Hear we aright ? and can a son of song,Song whose progenitors are memoriesOf years gone by, and fears and hopes that throngImagination's Court, and fill with sighs :Can he require an answer ? He who weavesHis tissue fair of sadness or of gleeFrom all the things that are, that have been, and shall be ?26 )October's gales as full of balm may beAs those of merry May. The barn-stored cornMay glad the peasant's breast. The lark may springAs high amid the clouds, and to the mornAs loud, as clear, as sweet a descant singAs when the youthful foliage on the treeFirst budded, and the year itself was young,And every forest glade with Love's own music rung.And Autumn's changing hues and ruddy leavesPerhaps are warmer, lovelier than the greenGay robe of Spring : but while the painter's eyeWith rapturous delight surveys the scene,Far different objects will the mind descry.Alas ! it is the prescient heart that grieves ;In Autumn's tints sees Winter's coming gloom,The twilight of Man's life, the shadow of his tomb !LINESBY WILLIAM EMPSON, ESQ.BRAVO, Cuckoo, call again !Loud and louder still !From the hedge-partitioned plainAnd the wood-topt hill.With thine unmistaken shoutMake the valley ring !All the world is looking out,But in vain for spring.28 )I have search'd in every placeGarden, grove and green :Of her footstep not a traceIs there to be seen.Yet her servants without failHave observed their day,Swallow, bat, and nightingale :And herself away !Shout again ! she knows thy call,'Tis her muster-drum.An she be on earth at allShe will hear and come.29 )JULIA IN HER GARDEN,EXTRACTED FROM A MANUSCRIPT POEM,BY MISS A. BRADSTREET.OH worldly men, too sage ! do not afflictMy fancy with such doleful prophecies,Taking such care deep sorrows to depictThat never may arise.Oh rather preach to me, indulgent flow'rs !Darlings of beauty, emblems of my years !The clear drops left in you from sunny show'rsAre Youth's delicious tears.How many ages of the world are gray,Pass'd out of sight, forgotten every where !But in Creation's last and freshest dayCould you have been more fair ?30 )Th' eternal fountain of all lovely huesPour'd thro' the arteries of the world that day,Still springs in rainbow mists and golden dewsWith never-ceasing play.And thence are your fresh cheeks wash'd every morn,And garments new their loveliest tints disclose,White, azure, amethyst and of the dawnPearls strung in rows.And crystal pendants, loosely hung, that tremble,And golden hearts within each breast serene,And veils of gossamer that lace resemble,And mantles of close green.So were ye garmented in Paradise,And Eve, awaken'd by your morning breath,Wove with white hands, and many a sweet device,Your blossoms in a wreath.31 )Thus I too every day mine eyes unclose,And life is still as new, and earth as fairAs when by midnight lamps for soft reposeI folded up my hair.But," say the sages, " Youth's a gliding hour,A sun-beam only born to dart away,Noon withers it like a too tender flow'r,And cometh Evening gray."But Evening too has flow'rs, star-shaped and bright,In silver gardens dropping dew from heav'n ;The sweetest bird too singer most at night,Songs for the houseless giv'n.Then Earth is dark but Heav'n is full of lightEarth is asleep, but in the world aboveThings countless for their wonder and delightFor ever wake and move.32 )I sport in morning 'tis my time and dutyBut oh, my dearest Father, not the lessTastes my revering soul the truth and beautyOf Evening quietness.How beautiful upon my Father's headThe silver hairs just mingling with the brownOf Manhood as on Autumn's russet bedThe first snow falls like down.And in the fixing of his gentle lookThere is a power which reads at will in mineMy thoughts, as they were written in a book :Such is the skill divineOf Wisdom in unclouded majestyWaiting the close of its experienced day,Ah ! who that sees thine EquanimityWould wish thee not yet gray ?33 )Grandson CHURCH,A SONNET,BY THE REV. G. S. Castle.OH! quiet Church, which, midway in the vale,Throned on the knoll above yon solemn grove,Dost hallow the amenity of loveShed from this gentlest scene : if ever failThe currents of Life's joyousness, and paleSpirit-consuming heaviness doth moveSullenly round my heart, oh then I proveThe beauty of thy presence in the dale.Thou art so fair, and soothingly arrayedIn the simplicity of olden gray,Gleaming against the far hill's purple shade :A beam of glory at thy foot doth play.Ah, it is fled ! and double gloom is laid,Emblem of one whose fate we mourn to-day !LINES,ADDRESSED TO THE POET WORDSWORTH,BY SIR WILLIAM HAMILTON,1830.I BID thee now farewell ! but with me bringMany a remembrance as a cherish'd thing ;Many a fond thought, and many a vision clearOf all the loveliness I've gazed on here,In Beauty's very home, where all aroundSeems as her own peculiar, sacred ground.Nor shall the converse soon forgotten beHere in that sacred presence held with thee.Whether my joy was heightened and refinedBy impress of thy meditative mind,35 )Which, long to Beauty and to Nature vowed,Not less could hear their low voice than their loud ;Or I, who love to tend the sister faneWhere Science worships with her solemn train,Would tell how also there from little thingsTo the purged eye a sight of wonder springs :Or whether soared we, while these walks we trod,From Beauty and from Science up to God.And in the midnight or the lonely hourOft shall these thoughts put forth a sudden power,With a too bright remembrance startling me,And bidding all my custom'd musings flee.Then shall the shadowy abstractions fade,And give me back the valley, lake, or glade ;Or I shall gaze again with raptured eyeOn those ethereal hills, that evening sky.And haply, if some fluctuating aimDisturb me, or some hope without a name,'Twill vanish 'neath the steady light that flowsFrom the calm eminence of thy repose.T>2SONNET,SUGGESTED BY AN ENGRAVING OF " LA Pense," IN THE LITERARYSOUVENIR FOR 1835, FROM A PAINTING BY STONE,BY THE EDITOR.FAIR image, when I look upon thine eyes,And see thy pale cheek rest upon thine hand,The Vase upon thy table, flowerless stand,The faded pansy on thy lap that liesEmblems of thoughts no no of Memories !Of one perchance an exile from his land,Sad, lonely wanderer on a foreign strand,I gaze until I almost hear thy sighs!Strange force of genius ! that a vase, a flower,An antique table, and a pallid form,Should thus, without the aid of words, have powerTo tell of all the darkening clouds that lourO'er love and beauty : of wild passion's storm,The bleeding heart, and the deserted bower !SHAKSPEARE.STANZAS BY WILLIAM EMPSON, ESQ.OH surely, Willie Shakspeare,We are not parting too !Yet now we meet not daily,As we were wont to do.For more than bone of my bone,Heart of my very heart,In all my schemes of pleasureThou once went art and part.38 )At night beneath my pillow,In hand at every stroll,Thy words like second natureCame bounding o'er my soul.But now I scarce believe itWhole weeks may pass away ;And with thy boon companionsI shall not spend a day.Like Hal I am reforming :For a good month or moreThat fat old Knight of EastcheapHas never crossed my door.I have not fool'd MalvolioTo his fantastic walk,Now with the gipsey RosalindDevised a jeering talk ;39 )Nor lent adventurous PortiaA Lawyer's gown and guiNor tangled wanton AntonyIn Cleopatra's smiles :Nor gone a gallant masquerUnto Lord Capulet's ball,And vaulted with young MontagueThat midnight garden-wall.When was it last, sweet Imogen,We left for love our home ?And thou and I, brave Martin us,Canvass'd the mob of Rome ?It seems an age, since, maddening,I wander'd forth with Lear,Or stuck Titania's rosesIn Bully Bottom's ear :40 )Or woo'd with saucy BenedictA yet more saucy maid,Or learn'd from hot PetruchioTo make myself obey'd :Or sang with pretty ArielHis blossom-waving song,Or brooded with poor HamletOver a father's wrong :Avenged the world on Caesar,Echoed Othello's groan,Or saw from Duncan's chamberMacbeth steal out alone.My darling Willie Shakspeare,This coldness must not growI love thee far too dearlyTo think of parting so.41 )I've grasped the hand of Manhood,In generous anguish, fast;I've kiss'd the lip of woman,And known it was her last :I've watch'd what's worse than all thisfriendship waste away,And love believ'd immortalLike vulgar loves decay.No form of bitter trial,Alas, is new to me :So much the more 'twould cost me,To say, farewell, to thee.VERSES FOR MUSIC,BY SIR AUBREY DE VERB, BART.A LOW unearthly soundIs groaning on the air,And there shoots along the groundA shadow and a glare.A shroud is o'er the skyAnd the thunder-stroke is nigh.Oh ye dead ! oh ye dead ! 'tis the hourWhen ye rush on my heart with avenging power.They are gone the steely glareAnd the tempest rattling loud ;There is sunshine in the air,A bow upon the cloud,A perfume on the breeze,A music in the trees.Oh ye dead ! oh ye dead ! 'tis the hourWhen ye steal on my soul with a soothing power.THE SABBATH.BY THE REV. JOHN FRERE.HAIL, holiest of festal Days,That from beginning of all TimeWert consecrate to Rest and Praise,When the Sons of Glory heard,Peace to Thee, and Blessing givenBy the same Almighty WordThat created Earth and Heaven ;And the Stars with sweet AccordAnd spiritual Thrones on high,With seraphic MelodyAnd Anthems loud, pronounced theeBlest for ever"Making the eternal Mansions ringWith Hosannahs to the King.44 )That primeval Blessing stillKeeps thee from the taint of ill,And, despite of Sin and Folly,Preserves, as erst it made Thee holy.Hail the hour of Heavenly Rest,Hills and Vales, and Sea, and Air ;And let Earth her greenest Vest,To do the Day meet Honor, wear:Beasts, that roam the Field and Wood,Birds, upon the waving Trees,And ye, that people the dark Flood,Hail the day of Rest and Ease.Ye too, Masters of Creation,For whose Sin it groans throughout,Stay the Work of DesolationYour Transgression brought about,That Nature may awhile be freeFrom your oppressive Mastery.45 )Lo ! the holy Dawn is breakingWith the sound of Sabbath Bells !How many a Heart from Slumber waking,Feels the Peace their Music tells,And blesses God that he has givenA Day on Earth so like to Heaven.The Thoughts which all the Week had beenIn the busy, bustling Scene,Violently toss'd, and hurl'dWith the worry of the World,Now again, serenely slow,In their ancient Channel flow,And glad rejoin the Current freeOf their Youth and InfancyAs yonder W T aves, that lately droveWith steep descent the labouring Wheel,Turn'd from the Channel where they strove,Along the level Meadows steal,Their Labour done ; rejoining smoothThe liquid current of their Youth,And visiting with Life the Shorewhich they fertilised before.4(J )APRIL, 1834.SONNET,BY WILLIAM EMPSON, ESQ.BROODING I lay among the sunny hours,When came the primrose-kirtle April by :I heard her call unto her thousand flowers,Come forth, my stars, and mate with yonder sky!But no," she stopp'd " of soft and gleamy showersEarth-sprung, your beauty must not look so high :A happier, though a humbler lot is our'sThan cold and distant immortality.Nor envy nor provoke those haughty Powers,Nor grieve you are too lovely not to die ;Life is made life by human sympathyForth then, and meet the maidens in their bowersWith smile for smile, and sigh, alas, for sigh ;Your's is their love, your's too their destiny."THE Templar' REVENGE.BY MISS D. M. Elephant.'TWAS a fearful day in Paris, when, by the King's commands,The Master of the Templarss was bound with felon bands ;One only 1 comrade by his side in darksome prison lay,To share the bondage and the fate of Jacques de Molly.Of lordly lineage, valiant heart, and turbulence of might,They stood together many a day, in leaguer and in fight,And now, the darkest and the last of all their trials come,They sink beneath the force of France, and treachery of Rome,4-8 )No weak repining at their fate, no yielding to their foes,Ev'n in this dire extremity, from these stout hearts arose ;But ire and vengeance boil'd within, that yet shall find a wayTo make the victors rue the wrath of Jacques de Molly.Two years had pass'd since fifty-nine brave knights were doom'd to die,That sign'd the Cross and call'd on God amid their agony:Whom slanderous tongues as Atheists devoted to the fire,Well trusting that their name and wrongs should with their lives expire.Their power and riches were their bane, their high and lonely bandHad force to compass whatsoe'er they listed take in hand,Till unsuspected burst the mine by which they were o'erthrown,And, like the Nazarite of old, they found their strength was flown.To the Grand Master's dungeon, a Templar entrance found,Who held not that the Pope's decree his fealty unbound;He, one shrinking champion of the faithful 2 seventy-four,Craved counsel for the Order, when its Chief should be no more.49 )Then proudly spake the Temple Chief unto his comrade stern,Commander bold of Normandy, true brother of Auvergne,Not unrequited shall our blood sink darkly in the ground,When friends like this and those for whom he speaks are still unbound.Our Order is abolished, our wealth and lands are sharedBy those who to provoke our wrath but lately had not dared ;And, in their greedy rivalry, the Brethren of Saint JohnPerceive not in our fearful fall an earnest of their own.The King of France sits proudly in the Temple Palace now,And thinks the crown by our defeat sits firmer on his browBut ere those walls be cast to earth, they may our vengeance see,And yet enclose usurping France in stern captivity.Now list, thou faithful messenger, and bind upon thy soulThe counsel I shall give thee now, so shall my hest controulThe fate of knight, and king, and priest, when winds have borne away,In scatter'd ashes, all the mortal relics of Molly.E50 )Still let our noble brethren in hand and heart combine,But veil the pride of Beau-seant beneath a humbler sign :'Tis Pride hath brought our Order to sorrow and decay,Then let Humility restore its lustre if ye may.No outward pomp must warn our foes the Brotherhood endures,But league ye by the fearful oath your compact that secures ;And cherish, in your alter'd state, our own, our 3 Syrian Tree,Whose roots shall yet be dew'd with blood, and spring for Liberty.But, chief of all, our legacy of vengeance dark and deepThe inmost and the holiest of your secrets must ye keep,And not ev'n exultation to our foemen must betrayThat their evil genius wields the Curse of Jacques de Molly.Watch o'er the diadem of France, watch o'er the triple crown,And spare not both or either in the dust to trample down ;And on the Order of Saint John our vengeance be outpouringunremitting deadly wrath, by counsel and by swords) ' jThe day has dawn'd the messenger is from the dungeon goneThe unsubdued Grand Master and his comrade are alone :His task is done, his will made known, and though his foemen slay,Yet shall they taste the malison of Jacques de Molly.Upon a high-rais'd scaffold, the funeral pyre in view,They summon'd him again his late confession to renew ;But, haughtily repelling all their efforts, he averred :It is by that confession I most grievously have erred.That foul and false confession, I deeply here disown ;'Twas made to save my brethren's lives, it shall not save my ownTrue Knight and Christian I have lived, and readily I dieTo vouch my Order's innocence, o'erpowered by calumny.I cite the faithless Pontiff, within five days, to meetMy injured brethren and myself before God's judgment seat:And thee, false Philip, King of France, I cite within the year,Before the same tribunal, to answer and appear."E 2The two devoted champions are bound unto the stake,The flames ascending in the pyre a hideous roaring make;With constancy unmoved and proud the warriors met their fate,That wrung admiring sympathy ev'n from their foemen's hate.The sacrifice completed, the flames have sunk away,A heap of ashes now is all of noble De Molly ;Eight humble artisans stood round, who gather'd them with care,And bore them from the place of death, unquestion'd why or where.Eight artisans they seem'd of those that free 4 accepted stand,Bound in by ties of brotherhood, an isolated band :Mid these the Templarss refuge found, and thus the hest obey,Enjoin'd them, of Humility, by Jacques de Molly.Nor in his fiercer mandate has their long obedience fail'dThe Lilies and the Triple Crown have oft before them quailed ;And when the Brethren of Saint John from lands and home were driven,It was avenging Beau-seant that wrought the will of Heaven.NOTESTHE Templar' REVENGE.1 The Commander of Normandy, brother to the Dauphin of Auvergne.2 Seventy-four Knights of the Temple, who offered to undertake thedefence of the Order, at Paris, and were refused the opportunity.3 The Acacia Tree, assumed by the Templarss as a cognizance, andsupposed to have been subsequently converted into the Tree of Liberty.4 Free and accepted Masons.PARAPHRASEON PART OF THE FIRST CHAPTER OF EZEKIEL.BY THE LATE LADY NORTHAMPTON.'TwAS in the fourth month of the thirtieth year,Among the captives by the river Clear,That Buzz's son, in the Chaldean's land,The Priest Ezekiel, heard the word of God.I saw and lo ! a whirlwind from the NorthCame rolling on cloud above cloud, and fire,Now flashing dim and lurid through the dark,Now brightly issuing to enwrap the stormIn one vast blaze !Oh for fit words55 )To utter to declare the wondrous shapesIn that bright radiance !Human like they seem'd,Yet wing'd above, below, around ! Their brightnessFar brighter than the furnace' roaring flames,Or than th' intense reflection thousand-foldOf burnish'd brass, a blazing amber lightThrough the dark tempest.O'er all limits, powerSeem'd theirs: their motions, will: their being, sight;And wheels in wheels, in mazing way, were there,Instinct with life, with visual power.And highO'er all bright as the firmament invisibleFrom overpowering brightness sat the LikenessMan was created from.The living wingsOf the wing'd beings moved.The rushing noiseOf mighty waters and the infinite roar56 )Of the pealed shout that victor armies raiseSeem'd join'd in echoing thunder.My ears rungMy eye-balls nigh to burst the sight overpoweredReceiv'd such blaze of sapphire living amberFire and white flash and rainbow hues in light,That prone to earth, I sank.A voice aboveRoll'd through the firmament, and fell on meRise, Son of Man," he said, " Stand on thy feet,"And I will speak unto thee."Stiff, upraised,But not by strength of mine, I stood, and heardI heard poor Israel's burden ; and their sinsOf monstrous guilt and sinking weight ; I heardMyself commission'd, Priest of God, to preachHis will to these rebellious all in vain!I saw the Book of Woes, of bitternessAnd lamentations, mourning and despair.57 )Then loud the rushing wheels and sounding wingsRose through the space and the full mingled voiceOf thousands join'd and criedBlest be the Lord ;Blest be the Lord Almighty in this place,Hence and for evermore !"Then silence cameAnd power of utterance slow revisitedMy shaking frame.On Clear's banks I stood,And seven long days, 'midst the CaptivityI sat confounded knowing nought I saw.58 )GRAY'S LATIN ODE,ON THE MONASTERY OF THE GRANDE CHARTREUSE.TRANSLATEDBY CHARLES A. ELTON, ESQ.O THOU ! the Genius of this awful spot,How shall I fitly name thee ? for I deemLess than a Godhead's presence haunted notThis antique forest and this native stream :And we behold more near the visible GodMidst these shagg'd cliffs, these rude hill-solitudes,These rocks, which foot of man hath never trod,This dash of waters and this night of woods,Than if beneath a citron arch he shone,Fashion'd in molten gold by Phidias' handHail ! if invoked aright, look gracious on !Here let my wearied youth glide calm to land.59 )Or should hard Fate's rebuff, e'en while I yearnFor these endear'd retreats, this holy reignOf silence, with the reflux swell returnMe to the tossing midmost waves again ;Sire! (shall I call thee ?) be the boon allow'dTo share thy freedom in my drooping age ;Then steal me from the cares that vex the crowd,And safe receive me from their restless rage.60 )MEMORY,A SONNET,BY THE EDITOR.OH Memory, thou ever restless Power,Recalling all that's vanish'd from our sight,Thy pencil dipp'd now in the rainbow's light,Now in the gloomy tints of midnight's hour.From youth's gay garden, manhood's blighted bower,Culling thy varied chaplet, dark and brightThe rose, the rue A the baleful aconite :Alternating the cypress and the flower !Casting with lightning speed thy wizard glanceThrough the long retrospect of by-gone years,Whence, at thine hest, in dim array advance,Shadows of idle hopes and idle fears :Half cheerful is thy saddest countenance,Thy sweetest smile, alas, is moist with tears !THE BEGGAR'S CASTLE.*A STORY OF THE SOUTH OF FRANCE,BY R. M. MILNES, ESQ.THOSE ruins took my thoughts awayTo a far Eastern land,Like camels in a herd they layUpon the dull red sand :I know not that I ever sateWithin a place so desolate.I am indebted for this legend and part of its conduct to JeanReboul, the baker-poet of Nismes, the JJurns^of modern France.Note by the Author.62 )Unlike the relics that connectOur hearts with ancient Time,All moss-besprent and ivy-deckt,Gracing a lenient clime,Here all was death, and nothing born,No life but the unfriendly thorn.My little guide, whose sunny eyesAnd darkly-lucid skinWitness, in spite of shrouded skies,Where Southern realms begin,Come, tell me all you've heard and know,About these mighty things laid low."The Beggar's Castle, wayward name,Was all these fragments bore,And wherefore legendary fameBaptized them thus of yore,He told in words so sweet and true,I wish that he could tell it you.63 )A puissant Seigneur, who in warsAnd journeys had renown,With wealth from prudent ancestorsSloping unbroken down,Dwelt in these towers, and held in feeAll the broad lands that eye can see.He never tempered to the poorMisfortune's bitter blast,And when before his haughty doorWidow and orphan past,Injurious words and dogs at bayWere all the welcome that had they.The Monk, who toiled from place to place,That God might have his dole,Was met by scorn and foul grimace,And oaths that pierced his soul :'Twas well for him to flee and pray,They know not what they do and say."64 )One evening, when both plain and woodWere trackless in the snow,A Beggar at the portal stoodWho little seemed to knowThat Castle and its evil fame,As if from distant shores he came.Like channelled granite was his front,His hair was crisp with rime,He askt admittance, as was wontIn that free-hearted time;For who could leave to die i' the coldA lonely man and awful-old ?At first his prayer had no reply,Perchance the wild wind check it,But when it rose into a cry,No more the inmates reck it,Till, where the cheerful fire-light shone,A voice out-thundered " Wretch ! begone.65 )There is no path, I have no strengthscan I do alone ?Grant shelter, or I lay my length,And perish on the stone ;I crave not much, I should be blestIn kennel or in barn to rest."What matters thy vile head to me ?Dare not to touch the door !"Alas ! and shall I never seeHome, wife, and children more !"If thou art still importunateMy serfs shall nail thee to the gate."But when the wrathful Seigneur facedThe object of his ireThe Beggar raised his brow debasedAnd armed his eyes with fire :Whatever guise is on me now,I am a mightier Lord than thou !"F6GMadman or cheat! announce thy birth."That thou wilt know tomorrow."~" Where are thy fiefs"" The whole wide Earth.And what thy title"" SORROW."Then, opening wide his ragged vest,He cried, " Thou canst not shun thy guest."He stampt his foot with fearful din ;With imprecating handHe struck the door, and past withinRight through the menial band.Follow him Seize him There and there!'They only saw the blank night air.But he was at his work : ere day,Began the work of doom,The Lord's one daughter, one bright May,Fled with a base-born groom,Bearing about, where'er she came,The blighting of an antient name.67 )His single Son, that second self,Who, when his first should fall,Would hold his lands and hoarded pelf,Died in a drunken brawl :And now alone amid his goldHe stood, and felt his heart was cold.Till, like a large and patient SeaOnce roused by cruel weather,Came by the raging Jacquerie,And swept away togetherHim and all his, save that which TimeHas hoarded to suggest our rhyme.OCTOBER.LINES BY WILLIAM EMPSON, ESQ.WHAT is there in the autumn months, the months of corn and wine,That any pensive looker-on can sorrow or repine ?And least, that one, that travels forth with the revolving yearIn harmony, should mar his cheek with touch of trouble here ?How beautiful is Nature, and every look she wears !How virtuous all her pleasures, how happy all her cares !O'er heaven and earth the seasons in link'd succession range,Changing, but bringing always a blessing in their change.The virgin smile of Spring-tide, the Summer's genial blue,And Winter's gallant chiding, our grateful thanks renew :'( 69 )Oh surely, then, rich Autumn, whose liberal bounties fillOur emptied barns with fatness, must be more welcome still.And from the poet's lonely walk in evening woods, as wellAs from the peasant's harvest-home, one burst of triumph swell.Then wherefore these misgivings ? Is it I shrink to seeAutumnal foliage hanging upon October's tree ?Yet they're the flowers of Autumn, the crown that fires her browShort-lived!" But where's the justice of turning preacher now?These things must not be thought of so, or we shall scarcely bear,As meet is, Adam's penalty, which all the Seasons share.For, yes, of all the Seasons, the pride is also frail,Yet who at their mortality was ever heard to quail ?Or let their charms so tender, because so soon to part,Cast a foreboding sadness across the human heart ?The gleams of sprightly April more quickly pass away,And blossoms more abundant die in the lap of May :Just when the days are longest (as at its destined heightDown drops the humbled arrow from its aspiring flight)The solstice stops : while twilight draws on its fatal pallOf slow-descending shadows over the Summer's fall :70 )Entrench'd in frost and tempest, rough Winter takes his stand ;But see ! the surly Chieftain's soon chased from out the land :His own most lordly mountains resign their shield of snow,And not one dazzling fragment reaches the flood below.Thus 'tis not Autumn only which will not, must not, stay,And tells proud Man his fortune Mutation and Decay,Affrighted startled Fancy with Nature's outspread bier,The fallen leaves her statements upon the dying year.You strive in vain, poor Reason ! alas, it will not doThe sere-leav'd shafts of Autumn have pierced me through and through ;In feelings I can neither resist nor understand,I own the thrilling influence of some magician's hand.Yon bird imbibes, while lingering these sunset tints among,Their richness to its plumage, their softness to its song.What ? if the woodland spirits now make themselves a nestOut of the Autumn's ruins within man's haunted breast !And give our thoughts a colour and the hush'd voice a tone,Which is indeed a Spirit's although it seem our own.ADDRESSTO POETRY,BY THE REV. R. C. TRENCH.IN my life's youth, while yet the deeper needsOf th' inmost spirit unawakened were,Thou couldst recount of high heroic deeds,Couldst add a glory unto earth and air,A crowning glory, making fair more fair :So that my soul was pleased and satisfied,Which had as yet no higher, deeper care,And said that thou shouldst evermore abideWith me, and make my bliss, and be my spirit's bride.But years went on, and thoughts which slept before,O'er the horizon of my soul aroseThoughts which perplexed me ever more and more,As though a Sphinx should meet one, and proposeEnigmas hard, and which whoso not knowsTo interpret, must her slave and victim be ;And I, round whom thick darkness seemed to close,Knew only this one thing, that miseryRemained, if none could solve this riddle unto me.Then I remembered how from thy lips fellLarge words of promise, how thou couldst succeedAll darkest mysteries of life to spell ;Therefore I pleaded with Thee now to readThe scroll that was perplexing me, with speed,The riddle and the obstinate questioning :Something thou spak'st, but nothing to my need,So that I counted thee an idle thing,Who had so much avouched, yet no true help could bring.And I turned from thee, and I left thee quite,And of thy name to hear had little care :For I was only asking if by flightI might shun her, who else would rend and tearMe, who could not her riddle dark declare :This toil, the anguish of this flight was mine,Until at last, inquiring every where,I won an answer from another shrine,An holier oracle, a temple more divine.But when no longer without hope I mourned,When peace and joy revived in me anew,Even from that moment my old love returned,My former love, yet wiser and more true,As seeing what for us thy power can do ;And what thy skill can make us understandAnd know and where that skill attained not to,How far thou canst sustain us by thy hand,And what things shall in us a holier care demand.74 )My love of Thee and thine, for earth and airAnd every common sight of sea and plain,Then put new robes of glory on, and wearThe same till now, and things which dead had lainRevived, as flowers that smell the dew and rain :I was a man again of hopes and fears,The fountains of mine heart flowed forth again,Whose sources had seemed dry for many years,And there was given me back the sacred gift of tears.And that old hope, which never quite had perished,A longing which had stirred me from a boy,And which in darkest seasons I had cherished,Which nothing could quite vanquish or destroy ;This, with all other things of life and joy,Revived within me, and I too would seekThe power, that moved mine own heart, to employOn others, who perchance would hear me speakIf but the tones were true, altho' the voice were weak.75 )Tho' now there seems one only worthy aimFor Poet, that my strength were as my will,And which renounce he cannot without blame,To make men feel the pressure by his skillOf an eternal loveliness, untilAll souls are faint with longing for their home,Yet the same while are strengthened to fulfilTheir work on earth, that they may surely comeUnto the Land of Life, who here as exiles roam.And what tho' loftiest fancies are not mine,Nor words of chiefs power, yet unto meSome voices reach out of the inner shrine,Heard in mine heart of hearts, and I can seeAt times some glimpses of the majesty,Some prints and footsteps of the glory trace,Which has been left on earth, that we might beBy them led forward to the secret placeWhere we perchance might see that glory face to face.76 )If in this quest, oh power of sacred Song!Thou canst assist, oh never take thy flight :If thou canst make us gladder or more strong,If thou canst fling glimpses of glorious lightUpon Life's deepest depth and highest height,Or pour upon its low and level plainA gleam of soberer gladness, if this mightThou hast (and it is thine !) then not in vainAre we henceforth prepared to follow in thy train.ONREVISITING TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE,AFTER TWENTY YEARS' ABSENCE.BY THE RIGHT HONOURABLE T. SPRING RICE.YEARS have rolled on since first I passed these gates,Yet each succeeding year I love thee moreWhen I revisit thee, within my heartThoughts, images, emotions crowd. The pastAwakens from its tomb, and present lightBlends with the future's dim uncertainty.All that is best in life I here have known,Love, Friendship, and Ambition, heavenly HopeLifting her seraph-eye to brighter worlds :And now the gushing founts of tendernessWhich spring perennial in a parent's heart.Thy walls to me are vocal. Many a soundOf solemn warning and of stern reproof78 )Echoes beneath those arches. Time misusedAnd Opportunity for ever lostPowers misapplied: these thoughts of deep remorseAll, all around me rise, like angry shadesWhich haunt the midnight of some murderer.Oh ! had such thoughts flowed earlier o'er my mindI should not now lament its barrenness.Had they but roused me to some strenuous deeds,In more enduring love for human kind,Purging my soul from sloth and selfishnessHad those whose bright examples might have taughtTo scorn the earth, and humbly strive for heavenHad these but shed due influence, noble actsHad sprung from noble thoughts Duty and Joy,Like two fair sisters with their arms entwinedAnd glances love returning, had led on,Through deeds of manly usefulness below,To the inheritance of brighter crowns.But though the sun his mid-day height has passed,Light yet remaineth while 'tis given to workThen let me not a vile and abject thing79 )Pass in a world of dreams my life awayOr bubble-like float down the stream of lifeOr like an Autumn leaf circling aloftWhirl in a useless orbit.The drowsy joys of indolent repose,Or the unmeaning laugh of vapid mirth,Accomplish not man's destiny. 'Tis hisTo will to do to suffer days of toilAnd nights of watching and to cast his lotTo live for others or to live in vain.Before the Spirit to Bethesda's poolGave healing power, the waters first were moved ;Could but such influence reach a worm like me,And rouse from torpor, life new life would gain,And, like the Eagle springing towards the Sun,The soul, on angel-pinions borne, would seekEternal Beauty decay ing Truth,Wisdom heaven-taught, and Virtue strong in Faith.80 )SYREN SONGS.BY GEORGE Barley, ESQ.I.THE TEMPTATION.O STEP and try how along the smooth oceanAs safe as the wild-bird thou'lt wander to me,O step and feel how supreme the emotionTo tread like an else the green ooze of the sea.Come and behold the wide deep in its splendour,While bright shines the path from the sun to the shoreCome while the waves their wild freedom surrender,And humble their proud necks for thee to step o'er.Firm is the flood to thy foot, and as fleetlyAs wind shalt thou waft on its bosom secure !Come while the blue sky is beaming so sweetly,And air is so balmy, and light is so pure !81 )Hymns of soft triumph all day shall attend theeWhere'er be thy spirit's young fancy to roam 1Bow'rs of red coral at eve overhead theeTo shade thee in slumber from night dew and foam !Step then and try how along the broad levelThou'lt follow the Sun to his cave in the deep !O step, and join at his red evening revelThe loud liquid chorus that lulls him to sleep !Thee, thee will I lull with sea-ditties so tender,The bee cannot murmur as soft to the rose !With my bright golden harp, gentle Youth, I will renderThy slumbers as calm as an angel's repose.Step then, oh step ! and we'll tread a wild measureAs far as the sunbeams lie smooth on the main !Oh step and try if so thrilling a pleasureWill ne'er tempt thee o'er the bright waters again.II.THE Prevalent.LISTEN, Youth ! oh listen, listenTo my sitting lyre and song !She whose eyes so gently glistenCannot will thee wrong !O that unto thee as meDeep dominion of the seaDid, sweet youth, belong !'Neath the sea there is no sorrowLove the only pain we know !Jocund night brings joyful morrowTo the bowers below !At the green foot of this wellIs my glassy bower and cellWill the Mortal go?I will give thee green shell-armour,Crystal spear and helm of gold ;Sword of proof against the charmer,Like a Knight of old !Thou shalt in a chariot braveRoam the deep and ride the wave-dearestthou be so bold ?O'er the wan-blue waters slidingWhat proud pleasure it will beThy wild ocean coursers guidingTo control the sea !Down the rocky ladder steepWinding to the monstrous deep,Come, oh come with me !Treasure past the power of tellingRichly shall the deed repay ;Come ! -I hear the sea-caves knelling,Come, oh come away!"Come and boast thee to have beenWanderer of the sea-bed green,Till thy dying day.85 )III.THE REVELLING.QUAFF, oh quaff the coral wine,Prest in, our sea-vintage yearly,Every crimson-berried vineMelts as lusciously and clearly !Quaff, oh quaff the coral wineBower and all within are thine !Lays of love and odes divineI will sing, thy couch attending ;With the perfume of the wineThe sweet breath of music blending !Quaff, oh quaff the coral wineBower and all within are thine !86 )Thrilling soft this harp of mine,Strewing boughs with coral laden,Pouring high the crested wine,I will be thy Bower-maiden.Quaff, oh quaff the coral wineBower and all within are thine.IV.THE LURING-ON.WHEN westering winds the ocean soothe,Till calm as heaven's blue waste it be,How sweet to glide from smooth to smooth,Like halcyon o'er the violet sea !How brave to tread the glistening sandsThat lie in amber wreaths below,The twisted toil of faery hands,Condemned to swart them to and fro !88 )My bright harp with its golden tongueSpeaks sweetly through the lucid wave,And says its chords need scarce be rung,While floods so soft its bosom lave !Broad-handed Ocean aye will beatIn varying mood this harp of mine,So think not, if it sound less sweet.The fearful melody is mine.V.THE SEA-RITUAL,PRAYER unsaid and mass unsung,Deadman's dirge must still be rung :Dingle-dong, the dead-bells sound ;Mermen chant his dirge around.Wash him bloodless, smoothe him fair,Stretch his limbs and sleek his hair :Dingle-dong, the dead-bells go ;Mermen swing them to and fro !90 )In the formless sands shall heFeast for no foul gluttons be :Dingle-dong, the dead-bells toll;Mermen ring his requiem-knoll !We must with a tombstone braveShut the shark out of his grave :Dingle-dong, the dead-bells chime ;Mermen keep the tune and time !Such a slab will we lay o'er him,All the dead shall rise before him:Dingle-dong, the dead-bells boom ;Mermen lay him in his tomb !VI.THE Mermaids's VESPER HYMN.TROOP home to silent grots and caves !Troop home, and mimic as you goThe mournful winding of the waves,Which to their dark abysses flow !At this sweet hour all things besideIn amorous pairs to covert creep :The swans that brush the evening tide,Homeward in snowy couples keep.In his green den the murmuring sealClose by his sleek companion lies ;While singly we to edward steal,And close in fruitless sleep our eyes.In bowers of love men take their rest,In loveless bowers we sigh alone,With bosom-friends are others blest,But we have none! but we have none !93 )STANZASTO A YOUNG LADY ON HER MARRIAGE.BY G. F. RICHARDSON, ESQ.AND thou shalt be a bride to-day thou young, and good, and fair;And the ring is waiting for thy hand the wreath is in thy hair :The young, the gay, the glad are met to hail the joyous scene,And thy bridesmaids wait upon thy steps like fairies round their queen.Thy young life hath been only past in love, and joy, and bliss,Thou hast but known a mother's care, a sister's love and kiss :But thou shalt seek another now shalt bear another's name,And the love that we alone have shared, another now may claim.For thou, sweet love, art like the bird that left the ark of rest,To seek a dwelling-place on earth, and build herself a nestSo thou hast left thy happy home, in other spheres to soar,And, like the dove the patriarch sent, shalt seek thine ark no more.94 )And sad our task will be, and long, thy memory to trace,To see, in fancy see, thy form, and view thy vacant place ;To dwell with grief on every charm that bade us once rejoice,And miss the magic of thy smile, the music of thy voice.One thought the while will cheer our woes, and sooth our griefs to is the thought, where'er thou art, that thou must still be blest.For howsoe'er thy lot be cast, wherever thou mayst be,All gentlest hopes and kindest loves must ever dwell with thee.And when before the sacred shrine thou stances shortly now,To pledge thy faith to God and man, and breathe the life-long vow,Our warmest loves, our fondest thoughts, shall all be with thee there,And meet, and soar from Earth to Heaven, in blessing and in prayer.But hark, they call thy lover waits no more must we delayWe fain would hold thee ever thus, but dare not bid thee stay.These streaming eyes, these bursting hearts, the pain of parting tellAnd these faint sobs are meant to say but cannot breathe farewell !SONG.BY R. M. MILNES, ESQ.SHE never loved but once,And then her love did seemLike the opening of a tombOr the weaving of a dream ;-A premature betrothingTo immortal things,A momentary clothingWith an Angel's wings.She never loved but once,And then she learnt to feel,The wounds that Love inflicts,That Love alone can heal :For as that light of lifeSlowly faded by,She calmed her spirit's strifeIn her wish to die :Yet lived, and Memory drewSome joy from all the painHer heart was kind to all,But never loved again.She bid it cease to beat,Till, in yon skies above,Love with love should meet,First and only Love !ORESTES AND ELECTRA.LAST SCENE.BY WALTER SAVAGE LANDOR, ESQ.Orestes. Heavy and murderous dreams, O my Electra,Have dragged me from myself.Is this Mycenae ?Are we are all who should be in the house ?Living? unhurt? our father here ? our mother?Why that deep gasp? for 'twas not sigh nor groan.She then 'twas she who fell! when? how? beware!No, no, speak out at once, that my full heartMay meet it, and may share with thee in all.In all but that one thing.It was a dream.We may share all.They live : both live :O say it !Electro. The Gods have placed them from us, and there rollsBetween us that dark riverOrestes. Blood! blood! blood!I see it roll ; I see the hand above it,Imploring ; I see her.Hiss me not backYe snake-hair'd maids ! I will look on ; I willHear the words gurgle thro' that cursed stream,And catch that hand . . that hand . . which slew my father!It cannot be how could it slay my father ?Death to the slave who spoke it ! slay my father !It tost me up to him to earn a smileAnd was a smile then such a precious boon,And royal state and proud affection nothing ?Aye, and you too, Electra, she once taughtTo take the sceptre from him at the doorNot the bath-door, not the bath-door, mind that !And place it in the vestibule, againstThe spear of Pallas, where it used to stand.Where is it now? methinks I missed it there.How we have trembled to be seen to move it !Both looking up, lest that stern face should frown,Which always gazed on Zeus right opposite.Oh ! could but one tear more fall from my eyes,It would shake off those horrid visages,99 )And melt them into air.I am not your's,Fell Goddesses ! A just and generous Power,A bright-hair'd God, directed me.And thusAbased is he whom such a God inspired ?(After a pauseInto whose kingdom went they? did they goTogether?Electro,. Oh ! they were not long apart.Orestes. I know why thou art pale ; I know whose headThy flowerlike hands have garlanded; I knowFor whom thou hast upbraided all thy love.He well deserves it he shall have it all.Cheer, cheer thee, my Electra ! I am strong,Stronger than ever, fire, steel, adamant,But cannot bear thy brow upon my neck,Cannot bear these wild writings, these loud sobs. . . .By all the Gods ! I think thou art half-madI must away follow me not stand there !H 2STANZAS.BY HENRY TAYLOR, ESQ.SOFT be the voice and friendly that rebukesThe error of thy way,For sickness hath the summer of thy looksTouched with decay.Now may be pardoned, even for Virtue's sake,Words of less gall than griefThe warning of Autumnal winds that shakeThe yellowing leaf.101 )They bid thee, if thou leav'st thy bloom behind,Bethink thee to repairThat ravage, and the aspect of thy mindTo make more fair.Let not thy loss of brightness be a loss,Which might be countless gain,If from thy beauty it should purge the dross,Eat out the stain.Then beauty with pure purposes allied,Would'st thou account to liftMen's minds from worldliness and prideA trust, not gift.Oh ! may thy sickness sanative to thee,Bring thee to know that trust !That so thy soul may to thy beauty beNot less than just.102 )THE PASSION-FLOWER,A SONNET,BY SIR AUBREY DE VERB, BART.ART thou a type of beauty or of power,Of sweet enjoyment, or disastrous sin ?For such thy name denote, Passion-flower.Oh no ! thy pure corolla's depth within,We trace a holier symbol : yea, a sign'Twixt God and man ! a record of that hourWhen the expiatory act divineCancell'd the curse that was our mortal dower.It is the Cross ! never hath Psalmist's tongueFitter of hope to human frailty sung,Than this mute teacher in a floret's breast.A star of guidance the wild woods among,A page with more than letter'd lore imprest,A beacon to the havens of the Blest !103 )DIDO'S ANSWER TO aeneas IN HADES.BY FRANCIS HASTINGS DOYLE, ESQ.These Verses are founded on the dreary Homeric notion of a futurestate, according to which nothing but mere being remained to the Dead.I KNOW thee yet no quickening thrillGlides through the icy breast of death :The shadowy veins are cold and still,The silent tide of seeming breathIs regular and tranquil as before:I loved thee once but the dead feel no more.104 )The chill blue lake of Acheron,Whose flood has never moved at all :The dim grey forest, overgrownWith withered leaves which do not fall ;The still mist seated on the harmless ground ;The numb sky barren of all light and sound ;These are not merely dreams, the spawnOf Chaos and unmeaning Fate,But pictured types around us drawnTo image forth Man's inward state,As soon as Time, ebbing in giant waves,Has rolled him down through Death's unsounded caves.The earth, the air, the sea, the sky,Lovely in relaxing change,With deepest harmonies replyTo Life in all her boundless range :Even so accords this wan, unmoving gloomWith what our spirits are beyond the tomb.105 )You ask me to forgive 'Tis vain,We have not here the human will ;Nor feelings now, nor powers remain,To wish thee either good or ill :The shapes that sail around care not for thee ;I am the same with them and they with me.Once bound for this unchanging place,One solemn change all undergo ;Though still ourselves, we lose all traceOf that which used to make us so :One vast and shadowy soul diffused in each,Gives us our phantom thought and dreaming speech.Pass on, then, through this pulseless deep,Home to the eddying world of man ;There love and hate, rejoice and weep,And hurry through thy little span :For earth must close above thee and this orbInto its dim monotony thy soul absorb.106 )MUTE COURTSHIP.FROM THE PERSIAN.BY THOMAS MOORE, ESQ.LOVE hath a language of his own,A voice, that goesFrom heart to heart, whose mystic toneLove only knows.The lotus-flower, whose leaves I nowKiss silently,Far more than words will tell thee howI worship thee107 )The mirror, which to thee I hold,Which, when imprestWith thy bright looks, I turn and foldTo this fond breast,Doth it not speak, beyond all spellsOf poet's art,How deep thy hidden image dwellsIn this hush'd heart?108 )CASTLE Ashy, NORTHAMPTONSHIRE,A SONNET,BY THE REV. G. S. Castle,UPON a green and sunny eminenceStands a fair castle, rear'd in those old daysWhich foster'd England with the stedfast blazeOf her Elizabeth's magnificence.No hanging bartizan proclaims defence,Nor thunder-throated cannon hath a placeOn flanking turret, or the curtain's spaceArcaded with Italia's elegance.But, where grim battlements are wont to frown,The pious architect, with sculpture rare,A psalm hath letter'd in the massive stone :The graven Scripture peoples the blest airWith holiest thoughts; these the eye calleth downTo teach the heart security thro' prayer.109 )THE SPINNING MAIDEN'S CROSS.BY THE REV. W. Wheel.A Gothic cross of the architecture of the thirteenth century, somewhatresembling Queen Elinor's crosses in England, stands at a little distanceoutside the city of Vienna, and is commonly called " Die Spinning amKreuz."BENEATH Vienna's ancient wallLie level plains of sand,And there the pathway runs of allThat seek the Holy Land.And from the wall a little space,And by the trodden lineStands, seen from many a distant place,A tall and slender shrine.no )It seems, so standing there alone,To those who come and go,No pile of dull unconscious stone,But touched with joy or wo.Seems to the pilgrim on his way,A friend that forth hath set,The parting moment to delay,And stands and lingers yet.While to the long-gone travellerReturning to his home,It seems with doubtful greeting thereOf joy and sorrow come.Smiles have been there of beaming joy,And tears of bitter loss,As friends have met and parted byThe Spinning Maiden's cross.111 )Young Margaret had the gentlest heartOf all the maidens there,Nor ever failed her constant partOf daily toil and prayer.But when the Sabbath morn had smiledAnd early prayer was o'er,Then Margaret, gentle, still, and mild,Had happiness in store.For then with Wenzel side by side,In calm delight she stray 'd,Amid the Prater's flowery pride,Or in the Augarten's shade.Gretchen beloved, Gretchen dear,Bright days we soon shall see ;My Master, Lord of Lbwethier,Will link my lot with thee.And there, upon the Fallen's swell,Where distant Donau shines,He gives a cot where we shall dwellAnd tend his spreading vines."Though joy through Margaret sent a thrill,And at her eyes ran o'er,Few words she spoke for good or ill,Nor Wenzel needed more.But when again the Sabbath bellHad struck on Wenzel's ear,A sadder tale had he to tell,And Margaret to hear.Gretchen beloved, Gretchen dear,Joy yet ; but patience now ;My Master, Lord of LowethierHas bound him with a vow.113 )Ami he must to the Holy Land,"Our Saviour's tomb to free ;And I and all his faithful bandMust with him o'er the sea."A swelling heart did Margaret press,But calm was she to view :Meekly she bore her happiness,Her sorrow meekly too.Her solitary Sabbaths broughtA prayer, a patient sigh,As on the Holy Land she thought,Where saints did live and die.But from the Holy Land soon cameReturning pilgrims there,And heavy tidings brought with themFor Margaret's anxious ear.1H- )For Wenzel is a captive madeIn Paynim dungeon cold,And there must lie till ransom paidA hundred coins of gold.Alas for Margaret ! should she spin,And all her store be sold,In one long year she scarce could winA single piece of gold.Yet love can hope through good and ill,When other hope is gone ;Shall she who loves so well be still,And he in prison groan ?She felt within her inmost heartA strange bewildered swell ;Too soft to break with sudden start,Too gentle to rebel.And what she hoped or thought to earnPoor Margaret never knew,But on her distaff oft she'd turnA thoughtful, hopeful view.And by the stone where last they metEach day she took her stand ;And twirled the thread till daylight setWith unremitting hand.Her little store upon the stoneShe spread to passers-by ;And oft they paused and gazed uponHer meek and mournful eye.And e'en from those who had but fewFull oft a coin she won,And faster far her treasure grewThan e'er her hopes had done.i2Through shine and rain, through heat and snowHer daily task she plied ;And wrought for two long twelvemonths so,And then she gently died.They took the treasure she had won,Full many a varied coin,And o'er the stone where she had spunThey raised that shapely shrine.And still Vienna's maids recallHer meekly-suffered loss,And point the fane beneath the wallThe Spinning Maiden's Cross.117 )'TWAS A LONG TIME AGO.VERSES FOR MUSIC.BY MISS CHENEY.THERE is sadness in the thought'Twas a long time ago"Mournful is the lesson taught,Drear the changes that are wroughtSince " a long time ago."Words the heart have dearly cost,'Twas a long time ago"Do hours of joy or sorrow mostRecall the many loved and lostSince " a long time ago ?"Follies past and faults surround,'Twas a long time ago"Memory when she wakes to wound,Seeks for comfort in the sound,'Twas a long time ago."Yet is sadness in the wordTwas a long time ago"Though lightly spoke and lightly heard,Dark are the thoughts and fancies stirr'dBy " a long time ago."THE SQUIRE'S WELL.CRATHOE WOODS, CLARE, IRELAND.BY S. AUGUSTUS O'BRIEN, ESQ.I.TRAVELLER, many a weary hourWandering o'er flood and fell,Come from the heat of the noonday's power,Drink of the Squire's Well.n.Cool to thy lips and burning brow,Pleasant the draught shall come,Sweet as the thoughts of those who nowWait to bid thee welcome home.in.Maid, can I name a name to theeDearer than words can tell,Bend o'er the brink and thou shalt seeThy blush in the Squire's Well.120 )IV.Then drink, and that its gentle streamEach fear and doubt may cure,Know, thou to thy Love like it dost seem,Bright, beautiful, and pure.v.With anxious heart and questioning mind,Man, do thy thoughts rebel ?Stoop for a while 'neath the trees reclined,Drink of the Squire's Well.VI.It will tell thee, though its voice be dumb,If the skies are mirrored here,Oh doubt not thou that there soon shall comeAn hour that makes all things clear.VII.Then go, and with heart and mind at peace,Remembering what here befell,Wish for thy fellows thoughts like these,And a draught from the Squire's Well.THE POOR POET TO HIS PURSE,THE WORK AND GIFT OF THREE SISTERS.A PINDARIC ODE.BY THE EDITOR.Hail! Hail!Thou levity of levities ! Thou empty purse !Thou sieve of gold-dust, were there aught to fallOf genius and of fancy thou dry nurse :Thee, by what name endearing shall I call,Embalming thee in verse ?Oh ! how I love thy radiant hue and matter,But only wish thy form a little, little fatter.n.A little roundness would become thee much,For truth to say, thought very, very thin :Thy mouth is small : in sooth it should be such,Useless if large when nothing e'er goes in.I would not have thee like an alderman,With huge rotundity of form and chin ;But I must own indeed, to see the ninnies,Dull prosy folks, who neither will nor canThe muses serve, have purses full of guineas,This grieves my heart, and makes me bold to expressThe wish, that thy smooth, silky prettiness,Held something more than air and emptiness.Phoebus had golden hair,'Twas all the gold he e'er possess'd,But then he had a very flashy air,And in his dishabille was thought well dress'd.Alas ! 'twould cost much money now-a-days,To make hat, coat, and trowsers of green bays !We Poets yet,As was Apollo erst, are poorHe ran in debtWe may be sure,And never paid the coachman his bill,Who furnish'd him his Phaeton :And we, his sons, can testify that stillPactolus is not Helicon !Dear Purse, my song returns to thee,Thou creature of my patronesses three !I gaze admiring on thy silken sheen,Thy rings vandyked, thy pendent glossy ends,Thy meshes intricate of blue and green,'Thou proof the Muses and the Graces are good friends.Another proof less pleasing dost thou yield :Purses are sooner made than fill'd !Farewell, my purse, farewell !To other themes I tune my lyre,124 )For gold my verse disdains to swell,To wealth my thoughts no more aspire.Let laurels twine around my head,My country echo to my fame ;Although my home may be a shed,And tatters clothe my shivering frame !Alas ! poor Purse ! my glory still may beEmpty, like thee !125 )INFANT BAZAAR.BY PROFESSOR Smith.These verses, sold for the benefit of a Bazaar, have not beenotherwise published.SEE visitor ! to catch thine eyes,Whate'er the pencil can express,Whate'er the fancy can deviseIn toy, in trinket, or in dress.Yet pleased, while thus thou see'st displayedOf lady labours such a store,Say, finest thou here a vain paradeOf beauteous trifles nothing more?126 )Oh let my verse to thee the taleOf all our mimic traffic tell,And let thy generous thoughts prevail,Thy generous thoughts will counsel well.For hence shall rise the simple dome,Where knowledge shall impart a rayTo bless the labourer's evening home,And holier make his Sabbath-day.The helpless child from sloth set free,From vice, and all her reckless train,Shall hence be taught what sure shall be,Nor useless skill, nor learning vain.Oh pause and think what 'tis to knowOur duty well, and well perform,What 'tis with Christian hope to glow,When life grows dark with wintry storm.127 )Thy luxuries of show and dressMay oft thy heart but ill repay,While after-thoughts will surely blessThe passing bounty of to-day.The bounty that to Ignorance blindIn pity shown, and wisdom given,Is riches to the poor man's mind,And love from earth, and light from Heaven.128 )SONNETON THE STUDENTS WHO WERE LEAVING COLLEGE AT AylesburyFOR INDIA.BY THE REV. CHARLES Townshend.FOR various ends each change of clime is plann'dFor wealth, or pleasure, or the lofty swayOf proud ambition ; yet a purer rayNow guides our Pilgrims from their native strand ;E'en as aeneas seeks the appointed land,Or Terah's son, in joyful faith, to obeyThe call to Canaan their firm hearts displayA prompt obedience to the dark command :Submissive wanderers from all homcboAi tiesOf Friend, of Field, of Streamlet, or of Wood,Through transient tears which cloud their thoughtful EyesGleam cheering visions of their Country's good ;And patriot Hopes o'er Ocean's threats prevail,As calm for worlds remote they spread the sail.129 )JULIA'S DREAM.EXTRACTED FROM A MANUSCRIPT POEM.BY MISS A. BRADSTREET.METHOUGHT, I walk'dAlone through that old gallery, and talk'dWith all the ancient pictures one by one :And question'd them of what they might have doneWhen they were living even as I live now !And many an armed man, with serious brow,Mutter'd his warlike story, as I stoodThrilling to hear, of bigotry and bloodAnd one his sword pull'd out, as if to battle,So fiercely, that I heard his armour rattle.These men were all of Cromwell's train and hadNoble but tarnish'd faces, stern and sad.Then came a row of ladies, mincing outTheir lover's names but some had died withoutAcknowledg'd love and one with sun-bright hair(In the true gallery is not one so fair)K130 )Died in her bloom ; and when she told me this,With a pale smile bending my cheek to kiss,She said, " And so shalt thou." Then went I onTrembling, till through them all I had nearly gone,And to the Cavalier of Charles's bandI came. He had no albert in his hand,But a small book with silken leaves and whenI paus'd, was writing with a silver penLove ditties. Somewhat in his cheek and eyeSo tender was, the memory makes me sigh !Likest he was, methinks, to one whose faceThough seldom seen, my thoughts distinctly traceAs it were painted. We first met beneathThe ancient porch one Sabbath morn a wreathOf wild rose gather'd in the fields he flungUnder my feet, and when in church I sungThat solemn hymn for peace, his voice to mineLink'd itself in low harmonies divine :(Oh, sweeter voice than ever man possestBefore!) the trembling rapture in my breastIt seem'd to answer, till I blush'd to hearIts meaning in that holy atmosphere.They said he was our enemy I knowNot why I dream'd of him, but it was so ;Ah ! had I known I only dream'd ! for thenI might have gazed on beauty which againI never may behold but in a dreamThings strange and false so naturally seemTo happen, that as if awake my lookFell from his face ashamed into his book ;And so he turn'd it towards me, and I readTo Julia." Then with troubled soul I fled,But pitying look'd behind and therewithalHe stepp'd from that old framework on the wallAnd came to me : I saw him not, for prideAnd pleasure made me turn my face aside,But all the way I felt his breathing stealIn at mine ear, and could the pressure feelOf a warm hand, affectionate, that stroveTo win me back to listen to his love.We hurried on. Methought, my trembling feetCarried me swiftly what I felt was sweet,But it was sad. Now were we dark and deepIn forests, that as if they were asleep132 )Droop'd heavily, and all their boughs were wet,For never sun had been upon them yet :Lowly they murmur'd, gathering to a roarLike Ocean tumbling on a rocky shoreAnd with that sound the Ocean's self appear'd ;But we were on a cliff that proudly rear'dIts white face to the west, and though there seem'dA tumult of loud waves, the moonlight gleam'dAs on a sea of glass serene and clear ;Through it the bottom you could see quite near,Though countless fathoms deep. Then from my sideMethought that youth fell headlong ; petrifiedWith horror as I stood, I saw him goDown to the deepest of the depths below :And lying there, the pale green waves beneath,His hue was of a ghastly white, his breathSeem'd gone in the few bubbles that flew upTo the smooth top like silver. Then the cupOf anguish overflow'd my heart like fire,And I too seem'd to fall and to expire,Whirling in frightful rings, until the gushOf water in my mouth and ears, the rush133 )Of the sea-monsters past me, and the frownOf wat'ry deaths measured my coming down,And I went deeper than my lover went;But him I saw like a lank weed that's rentFrom ocean caves, floating above my head,His arms in long fantastic motion spreadHither and thither, as the waves unwoundOr wrapp'd them, so that misery and the soundOf my own sobbing woke me then I turn'dMy face in my wet pillow, and I mourn'dTo see his face again, and shunn'd the flashingOf the unwelcome day for still seem'd dashingThe sea about mine ears, and so I weptMyself into my dream again and slept.Then on a gloomy plain I seem'd to stand,'Twas Ocean's lowest bed of snow-white sand,Beaten by the world-deep billows into hardAnd marbled smoothness, and with crystals starr'd.It was too deep for life I nothing foundSave a white skeleton, while all aroundThere was a tremulous silence.134 )SONNETON READING AN OLD ENGLISH BOOK.BY SIR AUBREY DE VERE.THESE are the mighty foot-prints that reportThe giant form of antique Literature.Sinews Herculean, proportions pure,Strength or agility for strife or sport,Dexterity in fence, grace for the court,No meretricious jargon, to allure,Wrote these of old, but language to endureThe stern regards of Time. Ill ye assortWith that undying philosophic spiritWhich breathes in these worn pages, who derideTheir scant reward of praise. Well they inheritThe fame of a great Era, when the prideOf nations was in all things, loyalty,And trust in God, and magnanimity.135 )Regia.AN INTERLUDE FOR MUSIC.WRITTEN FOR PRIVATE REPRESENTATION, AND FOR PARTICULARPERSONS.BY THE LADY Dare.The scene lies at Bassoon on the Persian Gulf.Regia A Persian Princess.Cilia )> Circassian Slaves.Thirteen 3SELIM A Circassian Youth.Osman A Slave Merchant.136 )(Rezia is discovered in a pensive attitude, withattendant slaves, who are amusing her with instrumentalmusic. To them, Osman)Osmin. Persia's Princess, weep no moreThy favorite Miriam's doom,Untimely snatched by cruel Death,In prime of early bloom.Fair slaves, from far Circassia's shoreWe bring, who may supplyHer loss in Rezia's Anderson,With her in service vie.Rezia. Thanks, Osmin, for thy duteous care :-Let the Circassian slaves draw nigh,Great thy reward, should either maidTo Rezia, Miriam's loss supply.Osmin. A captive youth of dauntless browAnd spirit uncontrolled,137 )We, to a Merchant of Tambour,For rich romans have sold ;And her thou may'st reject, we doomAlike the merchant's prize ;They wait without to read their fateIn beauteous Rezia's eyes.Rezia. Bring in the maids and captive youth,Methinks, I fain would seeOne of a spirit uncontrolled,So reckless, bold, and free.(The slaves are led in, chained, and bow downbefore Rezia. Selim stands apart, indignant.Rezia raises the two Circassians graciously.)SONG.Rezia. Ye fair Circassians, droop not thus,Nor proudly scowl, bold youth, apart ;For Rezia's chains are light to bear,Nor strange to pity Rezia's heart.138 )Fair slaves, whichever I choose shall beWith coral, pearls and gems arrayed ;The heaviest toil I shall imposeTo wreathe my flowers, my tresses braid.Zil., Sir. } Can coral, pearls, and gems avail&; Selim. f To deck the chains of slavery ?Selim. Away proud fair, ")thou hast no powerZil. ft Sir. Thanks, gentle fair, 3O'er spirits not afraid to die.(Rezia takes Zilia by the hand, and leading herfrom the rest, looses her chains, and hangs ornamentsround her neck.)Rezia. My choice is made. This open browBespeaks a pure and tender soul :To Selim, placing Shireen by his side.)Proud youth, thou may'st depart and leadThis fair companion to Tambour.139 )Osmin (endeavouring to lead them away.)Away, now sings the favouring gale,The wavelets leap the vessel's side ;The seamen spread the fluttering sail,Light dancing on the swelling tide.Selim (departing reluctantly and gazing on Zilia, rusheslack.)Ever still will I adore thee,Though wide seas between us roll ;Each fond thought shall hover o'er thee,And thy image fill my soul :Morning breaking on the oceanWill thy opening graces wear,And with Evening's last devotionI will breathe thy name in prayer.Tossing sad mid waters boundlessWhile for thee I live,Wilt thou, dear one, giveA sigh, a tear, to me ?140 )Is the thought tormenting, groundless?Yes, I read thine eyeFaithful I again shall clasp theeEre I die.Zil. & Sel. Dearer than myself I hold thee,Thine alone I live !My sighs my tears I give,My life my soul to thee !To the free-born mind is sweeterDeath than slavery !Selim. Then ZiliaZilia. Blest SelimSelim. Blest If art Kknowing thou < > free,(. wert )die.Zilia. I couldOsmin (impatient.) Haste ye, haste! the Merchant waits ye,Chafing at this long delay;The vessel bounding on the billowsDashes round the glittering spray.(Shireen breaks from him and kneels to Selim.)141 )SONG.Shireen. Shall this pale cheek no pity claim,That thou wert wont to swearMight opening damask roses shame ?Ah, if that hue no more it wear,Thine, cruel, be alone the blameWho hung wan lilies there.And is this eye with tears overwrought,To thine no longer known ?This eye that read the tender thoughtErewhile soft trembling in thine own ?By thee, alas ! to weep since taught,And all its lustre flown.Thou, who hast clouded with despair,My joyous break of day,And blighted what to thee seemed fair,Youth's mantling bloom and smile so gayTear from my heart, in pity tear,The power to love away.142 )Selim. Know, sad Shireen, a boy's light vowsAre but an empty sound ;The heart, that idly wooed thy charmsWhen Nature laughed around,By holier, deeper, dearer thoughts,To Zilia's love is bound.Rezia (taking Shireen by the hand compassionately.)Weep not, Shireen, poor, luckless maid !No longer love, unloved ;In friendship's milder, gentler bonds,A calmer joy is proved.(Draws Shireen towards her, and adorns her with gems,&fc. and then places Zilia by Selim's side.)Rezia(to Osmin.} Take, Osmin, take these pearls, this goldThese jewels all I own!And bid the merchant of TambourPut forth to sea alone.(The Slaves kneel and kiss Rezia' 's hand.)Chorus of Slaves. At thy feet, see, Persia's princess,Willing slaves by thee subdued !Freedom wears with pride the fettersForged by love and gratitude !Rezia (with them.) Doubly blest in fortune's favoursThey who bliss around bestow !Sweet and light the equal bondageFond and grateful bosoms know !THE CURTAIN DROPS.144 )IMPROMPTU,BY THE MARCHESE Spines.LA bend lacerta,Tutti sconvolto,Amor di laurieBanana il volta.Mostrava 1' omerInerme e scarce,Che motto TenereAveagli 1' arco.Ci a te ben devesi,Empio, gridai;A Te che ducereAlto non sai.145 )Si volga, miami,Si acciglia, e tace :Ma centre 1' animaNon trova pace.Su fiori il gomitoAppoggia, e il canto,Dormir dissimilarMa veglia instant.Quince in un subitoSi leva, e eratoGride, Victoria:L'arco e trovato.L'arco infallibleChe val per mille,E 1' adorableCiglio di Fille.Disuse; e scoccandomiUn dardo al core,Or vanne, e magnate'Gride, d' Araore."14 G )THE BOY AND THE DOLPHIN.TRANSLATED From THE HALIEUTICS OF Appian.BY THE REV. H. H. Milan.STILL on the Aeolian shore the tale is sung,No ancient tale, but still in living memory young,The island Boy how once the Dolphin loved :Nor ever from those hallowed waters roved,But dwelt a denizen of that smooth bay,Basked in its waves, or in its cool depths lay.Of youths the fairest he, the islands grace,The fish the swiftest of the watery race.Day after day, along the crowded shore,Still would the island's wondering thousands pour.Light to his boat the Boy would spring, alone,Call the familiar name to both well known,H7 )The name from childhood's earliest hours endeared :Swift as an arrow when that voice he heard,The silver dolphin gleamed beside the deck ;Fawned with his tail, and curled his glittering neck.Fain would he touch the Boy, with motion blandWho smoothed him down, and soft caressing hand,Then leaped the Boy within the yielding tide,And lo! the loving dolphin by his sideAnd cheek to cheek, and side to side he prest,And curled and gleamed and glided o'er his breast.He seemed as he would fondly kiss his face,Or gently fold him in his cool embrace.Soon as the shore they neared, the youth bestrodeHis scaly back, and there in triumph rode.Still where would guide the blithe and sportive Boy,The obedient fish went bounding in his joy,Now where the deeper billows heave and roar,Now gently glide along the quiet shore.Nor e'er might skilful charioteer commandA steed more docile to his mastering hand :Nor at the hunter's beck, the well-trained hound,Track the fleet prey, and scent the tainted ground.148 )Nor half so swift, the obsequious slaves, that waitAround some awful king's imperial state,As this unbridled Dolphin would obeyHis self-chosen master's light and easy sway.Nor him alone all toil at his behestWas pleasure him to serve was to be blest.So, each in turn, his blithe companions rode,And light the Dolphin bore the unwonted load.Such all his life the faithful love he bore,But the Boy died. Then all along the shoreWas sadly seen the mourning fish to roam :At first seem'd wondering that he did not come,And searched each nook, each crevice rock in almost heard his feeble voice complain.Nought heeded he the crowds along the sands,Nor took the offered food from stranger hands.Then far he fled to the great deep, nor moreWas seen to haunt that sad and widowed shore.Nor long survived his dear, his human mate,He shared his living sports, and shared his fate.149 )THE TOMBS OF THE Scaliger,VERONA.BY R. H. CHENEY, ESQ.WHERE Verona's towers look downOn the vallies once her own,Though her glory long has fled,And the crown has left her head,Traveller, there thou still may'st traceRelics of a royal race.Many a marble tomb is there.Many a niche of sculpture rare,Many a fretted canopy,Where in death the mighty lie,Princes of a race gone by.150 )In that lofty pillar'd shrineRests the chief of Scala's line :There to guard the holy ground,Sainted warriors stand around,Imaged in the sculptured stone :Soldiers they of Christ alone,Who, their Christian warfare done,Wear the crown their valour won.On the mimic mail impressed,Still the cross adorns each breast ;And aloft each martial hand,Raises still his threatening brand,Swift to slay, and strong to save,Meet to guard the warrior's grave.They have borne this mortal coil,Stained by blood and worn by toil ;They have known the passions' force,Which beset the warrior's course,Envy, hate, and wrath, and fear,Vainly dogg'd their bright career ;Thirst of power and love of gainSpread their gilded snares in vain :They have triumph'd over sin,Frauds without and lusts within.They who stood the best can tellHow to pity those who fell.Saintly band a blessing craveFor a brother-warrior's grave.Soon, his race of glory run,Low has sunk La Scala's sun ;High he kept his heavenly way,Bright his noon, but brief his day,Nor one lingering gleam of lightHas left to gild the coming night.All La Scala's power and prideThese frail and mouldering marbles hide ;And the stranger's iron handRules La Scala's conquered land.Hero saints upraised on highModels to man's wavering eye,How to live, and how to die,Rouse ye now the wise and brave,Warn them from the Warrior's grave,That the Warrior's crown to shareThey the Warrior's fate must dareYou who would be Freedom's friends,Learn how pure are Freedom's ends.Selfish aims those ends obscure not,Guilty means those ends secure not,Foreign aids those ends endure notBy patriot hands her work is wrought,By patriot blood her triumphs bought.You who would be great and freeFirst must merit Liberty,Then shall you Freedom's banner waveAnd proudly seek a Warrior's grave.153 )A FATHER TO HIS DAUGHTER.EXTRACTED FROM A MANUSCRIPT POEM.BY MISS A. BRADSTREET.As the soft air that cradled roundA springing Rose-tree, and unwoundWith genial warmth and bland caress,Each tender germ of lovelinessSo was my love to thee, my child !Fulfilling glad the ministryOf bounteous Providence to thee.As opening roses, zephyr-born,Gives up a sweeter frankincense,Than fills the breast of orient morn,Where spice-trees odorous dews dispenseSo is thy love to me, my child !Shaking its earliest treasuryInto the heart that nourish'd thee.154 )THE FROGS AND THE STORK.A MIRTHFUL TRAGEDY,IN ONE ACT.The Scene is laid in Thessaly, and comprises a considerableportion of that Province towards the Nee. In thecentre of the Stage rises Mount Olympus, between the footof which and the Orchestra, and bounded by the wings, isextended the low marshy district watered by the Peneus,and sundry other streams of inferior note.Time and space are not taken into consideration.155 )DRAMATIS PERSONS.JUPITER Olympian, Capitoline, Stator, Amman,fyc. fyc. t King of Frogs and Men.MERCURY Son of Maia, his Valet de Colambre.LOG First King of the Frogs.STORK Second ditto.STICK-I'-THE-MUD "^Great Men among the Frogs.SPECKLEBELLY 3SUNDRY FROGS . . . Names ad libitum.GANYMEDE, EAGLE, &c. According to convenience.ACT FIRST AND LAST.SCENE FIRST AND LAST.(Jupiter discovered on the summit of Olympus seatedat a table of Dodona Oak, upon which lies abundle of new thunderbolts. t Mercury in attendance.At the foot of the Mountains are seenpicturesque groupes of Frogs diverting themselvesin various manners.Jup. Tell Vulcan he's an ass, those bolts of hisAre soft as butter, nought but smoke and whiz ;156 )Tis well those roaring Radicals the TitansMade their attack when we'd a batch of right ones ;By Styx how they would shake their ugly sidesTo feel such trash as this against their hides !Pray was that Juno's bell ?Mer. Oh Great Sire, no,Her Majesty went out an hour agoIn the new peacock chair to call at Samos,And visit Carthage which they say is famousPalace bran new, and Queen to match, the Sea . . .Jup. Peace boy ; her absence is enough for me.I care not where she's gone, so fate allowsAn hour of respite from my scolding spouse.Oh Hermes, I am weary, let's have fiddles,Or stay, a batch of Sphinx's newest riddles.But hark !(Frogs during the above Dialogue have graduallyrelinquished their sports, and have been observedto pass through the different stages of languiddejection, animating hope, and inspiring resolution,at which final crisis they burst forth into asimultaneous croakerWhat queezy, wheezy notes are thrownFrom yonder fen, between a croak and groan ?157 )Mer. It is the frogs, great Sire, upon the swampy plainWith an address, I take it they want rain.Chorus of Frogs.From marsh and bog, from pool and fen,Ten thousand snouts are reared on high,Ten thousand throats of speckled greenEcho in croaking symphonyBrekekekex, koax, koax,Give us a King, give us a tax.There's Neptune, great Jupiter AmmonThe King of Trout, Gudgeon and Salmon,There's the Eagle o'er every pinionExerts his unbridled dominion,While the Lion in stateWears a Crown on his pate,And calls e'en the Elephant minion.Shall the Frogs ever famed for their loyaltyThus live without shadow of royalty ?Oh harken, great Jupiter Stator !While e'en Bees have a QueenSure it give us the spleenThis atrocious republican nature.158 )Oh reflect, mighty King of Olympus,Of what elegant doings you scrimp us ;Not a drawing-room here, not a levee a year ;No garters and stars when we come from the warsNo Court presentations, no edicts to nations,No royal assent when the money's all spent ;No Poet Laureate or Physicians,No splendidly-got-up petitions,No dinners cabinet with endless courses,No Coaches with a dozen Horses,No Placemen, no prime Minister,No posts to make the guineas stir ;In short, no grandeur or regalia,And all attempts at pomp a failure.Then hear us, Jove Capitoline !Nor suffer us with grief to pine,Us, your own, your faithful Frogs,Flabby stewards of your bogs,From the green mud softly croaking,Simply on duckweed soaking,Or along the broad flag swarming,Or on lily-islands warming159 )Our capacious golden sides,While the Sun meridian rides ;Weary joyance, listless peace,Dull satiety of ease,Palling on the heart and eye,Hopeless mediocrity !Realms without glory, without name,Prospect, retrospect or aim.Then, oh King of Frogs and Men,Grant to this our fruitful fen,Ere o'er us beams another hour,Grant us a King of stalwart power.Jup. Ha ! ha ! these Frogs indeed are wondrous fellowsThus to exert their greasy leathern bellows,For what? but hush, poor mudheads, I've a schemeWill satisfy full well their crazy dream ;Quick Hermes, hurl them down, a moment's space,That huge old fig-tree log; there, place, frogs, place.(Mercury sends the log forthwith flying into themidst of the fen, where it lights with a prodigioussplash. The Frogs, having somewhat recoveredtheir presence of mind, swell with a crescendochorus the following Address, keeping, however, ata most respectful distance from the object of theiradoration.)Frogs.Welcome to our peaceful bogs,Welcome, chief of Jove sent logs !Whether from old Ida's mount,Or from bright Dircaean fount,Or from dark Dodona's wood,Prophet of the biped brood !Hail, sublimest Monarch hail !Let all Frogs before thee quail !Solemn stillness round thee draws !How thy sombre grandeur awes !,^ Doubtless wrapt in meditationPondering on thy happy nation,Happy o'er each earthly thingIn so grandly mild a King.(After a pause, during which their heads have beenmost respectfully buried in the mud, some of themost sage and valiant venture to approach nearerthe object of their veneration, and with obsequiousvoice proceed.)161 )Would your Majesty give earTo your loyal subjects prayer,By the shadow on the willowThree long hours we've watched your pillow,Not a single nod or smileHath been vouchsafed us all the while;Best of Boles, and Trunks, and Logs,Answer now your faithful Frogs !(Frogs form into little coteries, shaking their heads,and exchanging mysterious glances ; two advancebeyond the rest, with cautious steps and eyesriveted upon the King.)1st Frog. Why Stick-i'-the-mud, I think the King's asleep.2d Frog. 'Fore Jove ! he may be, but let's have a peep.C They creep up and softly touch the Log.)1st Frog. Sweet, slumb'ring Majesty, awake!And sooth some slight refreshment take ;A few fat leeches from the gutter,With slime of eels by way of butter,A fly or two, our choicest pickle,Perhaps your royal taste might tickle;We've mud enough, Sire, I can tell ye,And choicest puddles thick as jelly.M1st Frog. Go nearer, Sloppyfat%d Frog. No, you ; but stay,You'll wake him.1st Frog. Bless your claws he's dead as clay.He's not a croak left in him, wondrous thing !That Jove should sends us down a lifeless king.We are but where we were ; alas, alas !Shall dreams of greatness never come to pass ?Why, what a liege is here ! unhappy race !See how I hop upon your monarch's face !See how with claws his rugged hide I sting.A mudbank hath more feeling than your King.(The animated patriot, throughout the whole of Msspeech, suits his actions to his wordsSome powers of Erebus, malign and swart,The counsels of sublime Olympus thwart ;Then join, my country frogs, e'er daylight's o'er,Again great Jove's assistance to implore.(Chorus of frogs.)Once more, from marsh and moor and fen,Ten thousand snouts are reared on high ;163 )Ten thousand throats of speckled green,Echo in croaking symphony.Brekekekex, koax, koax,Give us a King, give us a tax.Jove ! we thank thy kindly care,That with a crash of thunderThought sent us from thy cloudy chairKing Log to make us wonder ;But ah ! malicious fateStands grinning in the gapBetween us and the stateOf all our glorious hap.Great Log, tho' most imposing,With brawny limbs and strength,Alas for ever dozing,Reclines his listless length.In vain we petition to change his condition,As well might we sue a dead eel in a stew;Not a symptom he gives us to prove that he lives,But in silence he bears whatsoever we do.164 )We've stamped and we've tramped,We've croaked and we've roared,But all is in vain,For our hotheaded lord.Where's now our hoped for Constitution ?Whence now shall crime meet retribution?Who to Van Dieman's land be sent,Ah ! where's our house of Parliament ?Oh kingless kingdom ! woe is me,I read in dark futurity,Anarchy's blood-pouring rage,Defiling thy historic page.Lo, upon the moonlit bogs,Hop the murdered phantom Frogs !Bull and Tree, and barred with black,I see the graceful Natterjack !A moment to the moony beam,Each stretches forth a wizen limb,Each rolls his eye full shot with blood,Then plunges headlong in his native mud.Patriots there bereaved of life,By hoarse rebellion's thirsty knife !Then hear us potent son of Saturn,Of king's the essence, type, and pattern,Ah ! let thy Broglie's humble questBe harboured in thy thundering breast,And send our kingdom to inheritA King of wisdom, life, and spirit.(All fall on their facesJup. Now, by my beard, those idiot FrogsShall rue the day they spurned our Logs :Faugh ! how their croaks for regal powerHave turned this glass of nectar sour !Quick, Ganymede, and draw another cork,And Hermes, send the fools a hungry Stork,Lean and long necked, bred on Caster's creek,Who has not pecked a morsel for a week.Mer. Come forth, Austrian Stork ! (Enter Stork.)Stork. Qui qua, qui qua!Mer. Behold your loving subjects ; there they are !(Pointing to the Frogs, who gaze the while insilent rapture; but upon the Stork flapping hiswings and flying towards them with queernoises, they hop off in every direction: Stork166 )pursues them behind the scenes, having firstdevoured sundry of the smaller fry, to thegreat diversion of the spectators(Re-enter two of the principal Frogs.)1st Frog. Oh, Specklebelly, I'm clean out of breath,Barely escaped the murderous beak of death ;Ah ! luckless and thrice luckless race of Frogs !Why did we spurn the gentle Prince of Logs ?Thrice blest, indeed, had we contented beenOh could we all these horrors have foreseen !We'd clung like leeches to our former state ;But now, repentance comes a day too late !My Speckled, these indeed are fearful days,When tyrant monarchs on their subjects graze,Like cows on mangelwurzel hark, afar!I hear the dreadful sound the hoarse Qui qua !Lo here ungrateful we, secure, behindOur slighted king, may still protection find.They sconce themselves with all due precautionbehind the Log.)2dFrog. My honoured Stick-i'-the-mud, what sights are these;Ah ! how unlike our days of fattening ease !167 )Would we had perished on that glorious day,When thou, my Sticky, foremost in the fray,Sublimely waddled 'gainst the whiskered ranksOf grim-tailed Shrewmice lining Peneus' banks ;While green-nosed maidens from the slimy dam,Waved their webbed hands, and blessed us as we swam.See now how legs and toes disjointed lie,And the whole fen is one huge giblet pie !My five rich aunts the tyrant squashed, and cousins,Good lack ! his highness gulped them down by dozens.Oh, ever luckless state! oh, Log, oh, Log !Would thou once more wert monarch of our bog.Stork (approaching from behind the scenes.)Qui qua, qui qua.Frogs. Oh mud and mallows ! there you are !(Exeunt, with every symptom of trepidation)(Enter Stork, who, apparently full-gorged, slowlyascends the Log, and dropping his head uponhis breast, composes himself to sleep upon oneleg, while Jupiter makes the following harangue.)168 )Poor little father's ! so they've met their fate,And dearly earned their longed for regal state !Let's hope 'twill teach the remnant to adviseTheir young posterity in ways more wise ;That Men and Tadpoles, be they great or small,When once well off, may rest content withal.CURTAIN FALLS.169 )MORNING,A SONNET.BY THE REV. JOHN EAGLES.THE little leaves sparkling at the dewy Morn,Put forth from modest hedge-row into light,That, when the world is up, shrink back from sightTo the green quiet of some humble thorn,Delight me more than fields of golden corn,Or Forests flush'd in Evening's gorgeous might.So, the pure eyes of Innocence, as bright,Beam on the world they dare not to adorn.And their celestial dawning none can tellBut the incorrupt and early worshipper.They, to whom Nature shines not legibleIn simple things who to their hearts transferNo virtue like the Egyptians cannot spellWhat their Priest writ in sacred character.170 )LINESON THE RUINS OF THE CHAPEL OF RAVENDALE, LINCOLNSHIRE.BY MISS POPPLE.ERE yet the silent finger of decayShall o'er thy latest wrecks of beauty creep,Ere the last mouldering arch be swept awayAnd leave thy walls an undistinguished heap,Randall ! the Muse would fain her tendrils twine,To save for Memory's hoard thy falling shrine.The massy tower, the rich carved Gothic aisle,Alike with thee, fast fading from the land,May look with scorn upon thy humble pile,And to the last in haughty triumph stand ;As some proud sculptured marble rears its headAbove the turf which wraps the meaner dead.171 )And yet, perhaps, thy record may have fill'dNo space unworthy on the page of Time,Were but the magic eye of Fancy skill'dTo trace the story of thy olden prime :To mark the source from which thy structure rose,Whose ashes now beneath thy shade repose.Perchance in age remote, some pilgrim lone,As on the vacant site he musing stood,Vow'd to his patron saint thy first-laid stoneTo expiate some untold deed of blood :Then at thy lowly shrine repentant wept,And, when he died, beneath thy pavement slept.Some red-cross warrior bound to Canaan's shore,Might raise thy wall to bless his holy zeal,As on this spot he knelt, and fiercely sworeTo quench in Paynim hearts his thirsting steelAnd in ill-sorted union thus combinedThe greatest bane and blessing of mankind.172 )Or, more accordant with the quiet scene,Some pensive spirit through these vales has stray 'd,And as he view'd thy tufted slope of green,Wish'd that his relics here in peace were laid.And on the earth he thus devoutly trod,He rear'd a fane to virtue and to God.And though no pealing organ here might sound,No full-toned choir the swelling anthem raise,Yet might thy roof for many an age resoundWith heart-felt notes of gratitude and praise :And though no mighty ashes here may rest,Thy grass may wave o'er many a pious breast.And though no stately ruin moulder here,The wild flower clinging round thy simplest stoneShall be to him who loves thy haunts more dearThan all the splendours which the proudest own ;For oh! the fields which smiled upon our birthExceed to all the fairest spot on earth !173 )THE KNIGHTS OF ST. JOHN.William Norton Smyth, son to the Vicar of St. Bustle, was foundlifeless in his room at Brazen-nose, his Aristotle on the floor by his side.A blood-vessel had broken apparently from excess of study, under theexcitement of an approaching examination. In the writing-case of thisamiable and promising youth was found the following Copy of Verses,intended for the Oxford Prize.Within the precincts of their rugged isleA Chapel stood, a sad and solemn pile.Its columns aisles, thro' which scarce gleam'd the day,Were throng'd with chevaliers in long array.174 )Upon the altar step there kneel'd a knightOf noble form and valour in the fight :His heel the spur received, his hand the sword,His breast the emblem of his dying Lord.Then, as in dark accoutrement he stood,The prelate blest that knight in saintly mood.Thy sword so bright and glittering, may it beThe sword of honour and of fame to thee !For the high cross, the banner of St. John,Through the red battle bear thee bravely on ;And be thy sable vestment of to-dayThe robe of triumph, or the shroud of clay !Thou see'st those time-worn trophies hung on high,Thou know'st their proud heraldic blazonryThey speak to thee, my son, of battles wonAt Acre and the field of Salon."'Twas night ; and not a sound the ear did reach,Save the rude breaker dashing on the beach ;Or, echoing from the turret far away,The fitful snatches of the warder's lay.ITS )The moon-beams stream'd on battlement and tow'r,On the blue waters, and the rock-piled shore.That night, within the castle walls which frown'dLike giants, with their stern artillery crown'd,Slept knight and baron high, the sword and shieldAll bright and burnish'd for the battle-field :That night began the Moslem fleet to pourHer thousands on the dim and darkening shore :There scowled the swarthy Algerine, and thereThe turban'd Turk with naked scimitar.The chilly night-wind blowing from the deep,Rous'd the damp drooping banners from their sleep,While for the battle's spirit-stirring song,The sea-bird scream'd their silent march along.And now that countless army, far and wide,Outstretch'd its ranks along the mountain's side,And fronted full in battailous arrayThe fort of Elms, where the Christians lay.There many-colour'd tents were pitch'd, and shoneLike birds of varied plumage in the sun.Their dissonant war-note o'er the mountain rang,The din of horn and drum, the tambour's clang.176 )Then open the cannon's mouth, and bows were bent,And whizzing bullets through the welkin sent :And often in the battle's noontide heat,With furious clash did sword and sabre meet,As ocean proudly meets the opposing streamWith the curl'd billows and the foam's white gleam.The Moslem fought for mansions in the sky,Fairer than e'en the groves of Araby,Where many an Houri bright in odorous bowers,With feast and music shall beguile his hours.With holier views the Knight resign'd his breath,The cross his solace in the hour of death ;His hope, in robes of peace, and glory's crown,To chant Hosannas at the Eternal's throne.Three moons roll sullenly away ; and nowThe Christians' little force is sinking low.So mangled and so deadly pale, they seemThe disembodied spectres of a dream.The feeble finger scarce can grasp the blade,The frame would stagger at the blow it made :Yet still do they war on, till not a knightHas breath to bear his body to the fight.177 )But whence those corses, slowly drifted onBy wind and wave, red gleaming to the sun ?And why upon the warrior's breast engrav'dThe image of that cross which sinners sav'd?'Twas the dark deed of that barbarian horde,In mockery of the faith their souls abhorr'd.But little reeked the lifeless body thenOf the poor weak revenge of savage men,Upon the rocking billows borne along,Lull'd by the wild wind's cry, the sea-mew's song.Brave souls ! your race is run, your warfare o'er,Its perils and its sorrows are no more ;But other eyes in other lands shall viewTear-water'd cheeks and breaking hearts for you.Yet not unpunish'd shall the hand molestThe dauntless eagle in his eyre nest.Though Elms's fort be fallen, still castles stand,Still burn their warrior spirits in the land.Proud tyrant of the East ! their God shall smile,On the brave chieftains of this little isle,N178 )Nor shall thy turban'd myriads e'er prevail'Gainst arms that bend not, hearts that never fail.Not such your bearing, Knights, in after day,When Gaul's great conqueror challenged to the fray ;Nor bore ye, as of old, the hearts of men ;Where was the valour of your fathers then ?Ye had the moat, the battlement, the tow'r,Had nature's rock-hewn bulwarks as beforeYour cannon were all frowning on the hill,But oh ! the hero's fire was quench'd and still.One gun-shot feebly spoke, and scarce a knightUnsheath'd the falchion to maintain his right.But ye shall reap in sorrow and in tearsThe bitter harvest of the coward's fears.Degenerate sons of an heroic race,Deem'd ye the slave retains the freeman's place ?Deem'd ye the foe who gloried in the fallOf church and convent, tow'r and palace-hall,Would look with veneration's pious eyeOn the fair monuments of chivalry ?179 )Behold where Revolution's wasting floodPours o'er the deluged land its stream of blood!Where is the noble now ? Where he who boreThe Mitre, and the priestly vestment wore ?Sorrow and solitude their lot; no friendIn the wide world to comfort and defend :Their's the cold mockery of that reptile crew,Who hate a greatness that they never knew.And such shall be your doom : the spoiler throngShall drive you from the shores you ruled so long ;To foreign lands, sad exiles shall you fly,And eat the bitter bread of poverty ;While in your own lov'd isle each hallow'd stoneThat bears imprest the tale of glory gone,The armorial ensign, and the banner 'd wall,Before the hands of sacrilege shall fall.Religion throned on high with mitred browTo unbelieving jester what art thou ?What are ye, titled rank, ancestral fame ?The enthusiast's dreams, the shadows of a name.To those whose breasts no sacred ardour fires,No memory of departed worth inspires.-( 180 )Who deem that in the light of Reason's raySuch phantoms of the mind shall melt away.Yet live there souls with finer feelings fraughtThe classic fancy and the liberal thought,Souls that can bend in homage due to allThat genius, valour, piety recall,Souls that defy the oppressor's iron rod,Yet venerate the great, their monarch, and their God.181 )MIDNIGHT THOUGHTS.A FRAGMENT.WRITTEN NEAR THE SEA, BY ONE WATCHING A SICK CHILD.NOVEMBER'S wind blows loud and strong,Sweeping the darkened vales along ;Responsive surges sullen roar,And foaming lash the troubled shore,While the pale moon's uncertain light,Through clouds alternate dim and bright,Now silvers autumns sickly green,Now wraps in darkness all the scene :And hark ! from yonder gray-grown towerSounds the solemn midnight hour.The quiet hamlet sunk in sleepNone here uneasy vigils keep,None wakes but one who wakes to weepsweep, and watch the weary bedWhere suffering childhood leans his head.Poor boy ! thy frighted feverish dreamThat murmuring sob, or startled scream,Thy throbbing pulse and fiery cheekToo plainly to my bosom speakFor ah, would gracious ProvidenceThese ills to infancy dispense,A helpless innocent to wound,Unless the cause were elsewhere found?But hear me ! hear, all-pitying Heaven !If for my faults this stroke is given,On me thy juster vengeance pour,And spare my child this painful hour !183 )THE MINER.BY MISS D. M. Elephant.The story on which the following verses are founded, was mentioned inanewspaper, in Spring, 1835, as of recent occurrence in one of the SwedishTHEY brought him from the dusky mineWith kind but fruitless care ;Yet few at first could hope resign,He lay so calm and fair.Strange! from beneath a mass of earthSo heavy and so deep,The youth should thus be lifted forthLike living man asleep.184 )None knew the face, yet was it fair,Not twenty summers oldAround the snowy brow the hairFell thick in curls of gold.That earth from taint of all decayMortality can screen,And who might guess how many a dayThe body there had been.The crowding miners gather 'd round,Their garb the stripling wore,But of them all could none be foundHad seen that face before.Soon every village wife and maidAmid the tumult press'd,Each trembling lest the comely deadWere him she loved the best.185 )His was no form to be pass'd by,No face to be forgot,Yet of that thronging companyAll own'd they knew him not.The spirits of the mine with easeCan varying shapes assume,This form may harbour one of these,No tenant of the tomb."All scatter'd back a shapeless dreadTurn'd every heart to stone :Mid a wide circle lay the dead,In beauty, all alone.When, piercing through the fearful crowd,A wrinkled woman oldCrept slowly forth, and scream'd aloudThat visage to behold.186 )The grief in memory fondly nurstFor threescore years in vain,From its long numbing torpor burstTo Passion's thrill again.She was his love ! Oh contrast strangeIn years, in form, in limb !Life hath on her wrought drearier change,Than Death has brought on him.The pitying crowd was moved to ruthAll felt the sight appalling,The bitter burning tears of youthFrom such old eye-lids falling."Is this the meeting," she exclaimed,I sought of Heaven so long?The prayer that night and morn I framed ?Oh, could the wish be wrong?187 )For threescore years of living deathI've held a fearful strife ;At times mistrusting of thy faith,At others of thy life.I have grown old 'mid woes and fears,Thought slept in youth the while,My cheeks are seam'd with age and tears,Thou dearest thine own sweet smile.I've borne the load of life alone,Alone, unwept I'll die,But in the grave, beloved one,Thou'lt bear me company."She totter 'd fell around the deadHer wither'd arms were thrown ;Her long-toil'd soul its prison fled,And love with life was gone.188 )THE IDIOT BOY.A TALE FOUNDED ON FACT.BY THE LATE LADY NORTHAMPTON.BLAME not the fates, nor call their lot unkindWhose wants are many, and whose joys confin'd;For Heaven's best gifts are equal shower'd around,As vernal dews that bathe the thirsty ground.On the unjust and just the rain doth fall,The sun's bright glories shine alike on all ;The ambient air alike its current blowsOn rich and poor, on brothers and on foes ;And Love the last best gift of bounteous HeavenAlike to all the tribes of Earth is given.Oft deem the chosen few for them aloneThe heart received that last and finest tone ;189 )But, as the dews of Heaven are equal shower'd,And as the blessed light on all is pour'd,So Love itself, despite of fate and ill,Asserts its claim, and holds its empire still.Far 'mid the ocean waves an island lies,Around whose summits hyperborean skiesRoll their dark clouds in every gloomy form,Shaped by the restless workings of the storm ;There, foaming waves assail the time-worn coast,Against the rocks in madd'ning fury tost ;But still the rocks, more stern and strong than they,Mock at their force, and cast them back in spray.Along the isle, huge plains of shifting sandIn arid length their harmless waste expand ;And while the daemons of the earth and skyIn frolic sport, or sharper enmityDrift it along, or upwards whirl it high ; )No scrog, or sapling tree, or shrub is seenTo interpose one branch of cheerful green ;Till circled by some damp morass's bound,The sandy deserts change to sinking ground.190 )On this drear shore a Gothic castle stands,The work of period rude, and ruder hands ;Mis-shapen turrets, neither round nor square,Hang midway 'twixt the island and the air,And crooked walls, from level rule so free,They seem to stand alone through courtesy;And here a donjon's huge and dismal pileServed to enclose the wretched of the isle,Who forfeited, by actions much amiss,The right to range this paradise of bliss.Well sung the Roman bard, that Man should findNo alien to his heart in all his kind ;But better had he said, that worldly gearNo alien heart can find where Man is near.Oh, who could deem, who ne'er the tale had read,That for this castled isle brave hearts had bled !That treacherous wiles had robb'd the rightful heir,That lawless bands had seized his manor fair ;That he had fought and bled the tower to gain,Which they had bled and perish'd to retain !Look here, ye greedy tribe, who cross the seasWith hearts as hard and covetous as these ;Look here, ye Indian swarm, adventurers bold,And see how deep the sacred thirst for gold !This tower were lesson fitted well for youBut could I summon here a gentler crew,I'd point to yonder low and lonely grave,Close on the shore, beside the restless wave.There lies an idiot boy : in sorrow's hourHis mother rear'd him like a drooping flower ;She loved him, as the widow loves her son,Her last, her parting pledge of ties undone,And still, as childhood's years too swiftly flew,She sat and wept his vacant eye to view ;She wept yet hoped that time would change its strain-shewept, to find that hope was all in vain !In nothing froward, in no gesture wild,Gentle and patient, he was all the child.No force he knew so strong as her command,No pleasure loved like her caressing hand,192 )And, still obedient, each revolving day,Straight to the castle's gate he took his way :There, as the menials bade, the wood he bore,And drew the water from the river's shore ;Received at night the dole their kindness spared,Nor e'er would taste it, till his mother shared.Now should he rest, the day's light labour done,Again to rise with morning's early sunAnd ask his mother's blessing on his headBefore he creeps into his humble bed :Why then unbars he slow the cottage doorTo cross with even step the twilight moor,His supper, yet untasted, bring away,And to yon distant cot pursue his way ?He knocks a damsel brighter than the roseOpes the low door, and asks him where he goes ;And knows the idiot boy she saw beforeWhen to the castle's gate her gifts she bore.(For gifts are common in that distant land,And greeting comes not with an empty hand.C 193 )See ! how he offers kind the oaten cake,Which the bright maid, unwilling, seems to take.Oh, how that eye can plead ! that vacant stareThat look'd on all alike in earth or air,Now seems so eloquent its boon to gain,It were a cruel heart could give it pain.She breaks and tastes, returning him the rest,And pleased he eats when she the meal hath bless'd.And while the damsel turns the busy wheel,Or trims the fire, or kneads the household meal,He throws him down upon the cottage floorTo watch her eyes and gaze her features o'er ;Nor, till their hour of nightly rest is come,Across the moor pursues his journey home.The morrow's eve again the cot he seeks,To see the maiden of the rosy cheeks ;Eats blithe the bread that she hath bless'd for him,Tired, on the floor rests every wearied limb,And then, the silent scene repeated o'er,He treads content the long and homeward moor.194 )Ne'er from that hour he miss'd his evening way,But clos'd like these each swift-revolving day,And roaring wind, and cold and lashing rain,Oft interposed their stern behests in vain.And was this Love ? could this poor worm revealA passion the refined alone can feel ?Yes, it was Love ! the purest and the bestOf all the kinds that fill the human breast ;To give was all the boon he sought to gain ;To look the whole return he ask'd again.He knew not if the maid were rich or poor,He felt her dear and had no sense for more.Oh, what a soul were this, had Reason smiledUpon the wanderings of this changeling child !Ah, what a heart was lost to love and lightWhen such a mind was sunk in starless night !He had not heard the Hebrew King proclaimThat many waters cannot quench the flame ;That 'twould but serve the smile of scorn to move,To give the substance of his house for love ;That strong as death that bondage still could beAnd cruel as the grave, stern Jealousy.All but the last he felt ; as new from heaven,The bounteous gift was pure and spotless given.Unholy Jealousy first found its birthIn the foul paths of sin-defiled Earth ;As the red canker nips the blushing roseTo blast the hour of bloom that Heaven bestows,The one short hour that Man redeems from woe,A gleam of sunshine o'er a waste of snow !But yonder grave all things must terminate,And all men seal their fix'd and final fate :Ah ! happy those who seal their fate as wellAs the poor changeling boy whose tale I tell !Age did not close in grief his lingering breath,Nor pain distress his simple heart in deathOne year beheld his guileless love arise,And his freed soul transmitted to the skies.In winter's cold the cot he still would find,And scarcely felt the cold and biting wind,Scarce marked his eye how thick the snow-flake fellWhen on the path to her he loved so well.196 )One night his dame forbade her hest he heard,But wept till she the cottage-door unbarr'd ;Then from his cheek dash'd the full dropping tear,And joyous flew across the moorland drear.She could not see him weep yet wept to markHow thick the falling snow the night how dark :At each loud blast she fearful opes the door,And strains her eyes o'er the deep-drifted moor.No sound nor shape her weeping eyes can findBut the white snow-flake, and the moaning wind :And hour by hour brings on the lingering morn,Nor yet the Idiot Boy doth home return.They search they find where stiff and cold he lies,His bed the snow, his canopy the skies ;And as in death his features smile serene,Still in his hand the untasted bread is seen.Ne'er such a smile he wore in life as nowIllumed his paid cheek and marble brow ;As though kind Heaven vouchsafed a parting ray,Ere to its home his soul had ta'en its way ;197 )Enough to thank the Author of his breathThat granted such a life and such a death !And yonder 'neath that sod his grave is foundWithout a stone to mark the lonely mound ;But if a flower to Innocence be dear,Its gentle blossoms it should lavish here.Ah, Reader, dost thou weep ? the drops are kind,And as they fall, their own reward they find ;For you who weep not would my rambling songHad ne'er been seen by eyes and hearts so strong !Far other mood is needful to enjoyThe simple story of the Idiot Boy!198 )WOMAN.BY MISS POPPLE,ASK ye what Woman was form'd to be ?Oh, woman was form'd to be fair and vain ;To sport awhile on the summer sea,But to shrink from the winter-blast of pain.To smile on Man in his hour of joy,To weave for his brow the festal wreathBut to flee from the storms which his peace destroy,And to quail at the withering glance of Death.199 )No Woman was form'd for a loftier sphere,Nor pleasure to court, nor pity to claim,But to rival Man in his wide career,And to mount with him to the heights of fame.To laugh at the spectre of Fear, and dareTo gaze unmoved on the sanguine field ;Man's valour and pride and ambition to share,Nor in aught, save the strength of her arm, to yield.Oh false is the notion that either extremeIs the path which Woman was born to tread:Her course is that of the bounteous stream,As it calmly glides o'er its sparkling bed.Though it want the strength of the ocean wave,Nor whirlpool nor hurricane trouble its breast,And it still flows on through the darksome cave,As it flow'd through the sunniest vale of rest.200 )Yes to Woman was given the two-fold power,To gild with her smile the green vistas of life,And when its horizon with tempests shall lour,With that smile to dispel the dark omens of strife.And though by her nature defenceless and weak,She may ask the support of a manlier breast,Tis such as the tender vine may seekFrom the stem by her faithful arms cares.Then deem not that Woman was form'd to beThe toy of a moment, capricious and vain ;For bright as an angel of mercy may sheBe found by the wearisome couch of Pain.And though with a feminine softness she shrinkFrom the toils which in this world Man's spirit may dare,Yet stedfast as him may she stand on the brinkOf that which alike they hereafter must share.201 )EVENING.Verses suggested by an hour spent on the Agger of Service Nullius, inthe garden of the Villa Negroes, Rome, January, 1834.O'ER old Albany's purple crest,The sanguine plumes of evening rest,Shreds of the glory from afar,Where, reeking from his daily war,The conqueror sun, reclined at length,Welters in his fiery strength ;And lo! against that peerless light,In contrast deep and definite,Sublimely massed in shadowy power,Rise hallow'd Mary's domes and tower,Crowning the gentle valley laidIn solemn unity of shade.202 )ii.Now Night, the sweet spirit of Harmony,Is winging her way to the eastern sky;Softly, and yet at each delicate motionShe winnows a change over ether and ocean.Like the last of an iris, the landscape lies blended,Hue into hue, as her path is extended.Azure and purple and roseate red,And the deep soft green of the pine-tree's head,She will cradle you all in her mantle of grey,To bless with new beauty the kisses of day.in.Now swells the noiseless triumph ; the accordOf Nature's nightly chorus breathes abroadIts musical silence, arid the ravish'd earsThrob with imagined voices of the spheres :Yet hark ! to earth one earth-born sound recalls ;'Tis the far fountain with its gurgling falls ;Charming the voiceless distance with its tone,Unheard till now, monotonous and lone.203 )IV.And now, since from this light so paleIs skreen'd the outer world's detail :Horace's swell, Frascati's gleam,The striding aqueducts are as a dreamTurn thou, my heart, to heaven, and blessThat eye of virgin holiness,Whose stedfast beams, so mildly bright,Hallow each creature of the night,Vesting the worthless wrecks of dayIn robes of her own silver ray,Till rugged bank and formless stoneAre things we love to gaze upon.v.For the spirits of beauty, at her command,Catch gentle life from the beamy wand ;They couch in the light on the far grey hill,They ruffle their plumes in the dancing rill,They fold their fair wings over cypress and pine,They gleam from yon nook like, a lamp from its shrine.204 )And the pale grim marble they kiss and caress,Till she borrows the smile of their loveliness.VI.Oh moon, oh night, oh tender hourOf most concordant union ; as a dowerMy passive soul is to your altar brought,And my heart drinks its recompense of thoughtFrom an invisible stream, deep, unsubdued,Studded with memory's islands, hope-imbued,Reflecting Heaven, and whispering to EarthOf high affinities and deathless birth.VII.For now, if ever mortal may,I feel the individual rayWhich, quivering from its source on highLinks me with Eternity.I cannot die, a power aboveTells me how limitless is love,And the spirits of the perfected,The glorified, the mighty dead,205 )Answer my heart's querulous prayer,Hovering in the vaulted air.VIII.Oh faithless waverer ! could thine eyePierce through thy gross mortalityCould sentient energies embraceThe glories of our dwelling-placeCould the heart's darkness e'er supplyOne glow of this our ministryCould faintest image be exprestOf the communion of the blestNo form exists which life may wear"Of anguished flesh or heart's despair,Of all the execrated woesWhich Time's black record could disclose,But, disenthrall'd, their burning chainAs God's best gift you'd clasp again,And smile through years of tortured hoursTo win those everlasting bowers."2.06 )A DAY REMEMBERED.BY THE REV. JOHN EAGLES.HENCE, Solitude! I would with life investAnd make companion of a weed, a flower,To banish thee late in thine inmost bower,A solemn wood, I laid me down to rest,Where, like a jewel on the brown Earth's breast,Or the mild Star at Evening's silent hour,A Primrose-tuft shone with a lustrous power,Amid the twilight of that gloom unblest.I had not converse "held with thee, poor weed,Had Laura met me there her gentle feetCharm wheresoe'er they move ; and in my creedOf Love, the loneliest spot wherein me meetIs Fairy-land and I the Guardian KnightEndow'd with purest thought, and joy, and dauntless might.207 )COWPER'S OAK AND THE EMPEROR BUTTERFLYBY THE EDITOR.A BUTTERFLY one summer's daySat on an old oak's topmost sprayA Butterfly that but of lateHad left the chrysalis's state :Emerging from that narrow roomOf sleep, imprisonment, and gloom,For a brief space he flutters round,Then settles on the verdant ground :About impertinently stares,And gives himself most mighty airs.Ungrateful to his foster oak,At length contemptuously he spoke :208 )Huge mass of dingy brown and green,Thou ugliest tree that e'er was seen !With those gaunt arms that white and bareThou raises to the ambient air,Like mendicant whose shrivell'd limbBrings many a pity's dole to him:Thy trunk as hollow to my eyeAs Pride combined with Poverty :Thy foliage thin and poor, and thenUpon thy side that frightful wen !I wonder what could make my motherPrefer thy oakship to another ?When round and near is to be seen"So many a tree, young, straight and green,I cannot think the reason whyI do not need a foil not IThe peacock's plumage bright may shine,Yet it might serve as foil to mine!My wings are form'd to soar on highAnd emulate the azure sky !"209 ) [;"Though oaks are not thin-skinned, we know,A proper feeling yet they show,As much as any other tree,When treated with indignitySo gravely thus our oak replied :Gay insect, full of idle pride,Ungrateful dost thou scoff at meWhose leaves have fed thine infancy ?Whose boughs protected thy weak formFrom piercing wind and angry storm ?Ugly thou say'st I am, and oldAnd yet, if truth is to be told,Art here has spent full many a dayTo bear my lineaments away.Thou art an Emperor idle name !Thy purple robes thy rank proclaimAlone proclaim! Thine empire, where?In earth, in ocean, or in air?The eagle rules the liquid sky ;Wilt thou dispute his sovereignty ?The lion reigns through Africa's groves,Where panther, leopard, tiger roves.210 )The whale, whose power no fish can brave,Is autocrat in every wave;While aged oaks with giant stem,Upraise their leafy diadem:Oaks that for centuries have stoodThe mighty monarchs of the wood:Then give no idle boast and vainTo man his empire o'er the main.Poor insect, though thy hue be gay,Perhaps a week, perhaps a day,Thou'lt live a few miles round to soar,Then fall, thy little being o'erWhile aged oaks, as ships, shall rideIn triumph o'er the bounding tide,And, wing'd with sails, shall treasure bear,To distant ports from regions fair,Where'er the foaming billows roll,From East to West, from Pole to Pole!Thy mother dost thou ask why she ^Did not as cradle choose for thee, VSome younger, straighter, greener tree ? 3\Alas ! I speak with ruth and sorrow,They all may be cut down tomorrow.A mighty bard has giv'n to meFrom woodman's axe immunity ;A Poet, of far different school,Has turn'd thee into ridicule,As making a wise man a fool !To boast of Cowper's praise is mineTo wince at Wolcott's lash is thine !Go ! I forgive thee off awayEnjoy thy very little day ;Ere yet thy fleeting course be run,Show thy bright colours to the sun,Sport in his beam from flower to flowerSoon o'er thine eyes death's cloud shall lourAn age is but to me as is to thee an hour)ur >!" )BABYLON.I HEARD of dwellings marvellous,Reared up by men of old,Of walls that rose three hundred feet,And palaces of gold.I said, I will seek Babylon,That ancient city brave,Whose myriad lamps are mirrored deepIn the Euphrates' wave :And I will tread where those have trod,That ruled a mightier age,The warrior Queen of Shinar,The grey Chaldean sage.Thou Hunter,* who dost climb at eveThe vault of Ether blue,Whose starry dagger nightly gleamsMy casement-lattice through,Orion.213 )Guide me upon my weltering way,Far over sea and land,The ancient and untrodden hills,The desert's lone grey sand,To where thy golden bands were bound,Thine earliest homage paid,Where the first cities of the earth,Cast far their awful shade.I go not to the haunts beloved,Where, many a cloudless night,Thy flashing eyes have lighted me,Beneath the laurels bright ;Where high above the wandering brook,The rustling larch-boughs play,And many a swift and startled plume,Flits fast away, away :Nor where the wild South-wester's wing,Like Azrael hath swept by,And strewn along its fearful pathThe forest-children lie.Oh fair, fair, are the lands that riseFrom out our ocean's foam,And loveliest o'er the Atlantic wave,Looks down our island-home !But my sail is spread, and my heart is spedTo seek a mightier clime,Where rest on the primeval rocksThe footsteps of old time;And I am away to the mountains grey,That see the arisen Sun,Beyond whose bound are the palm-groves found,Of terraced Babylon.My bark flew South ! my bark flew East !Wing'd by the breezes free,The high Herculean pillars through,That guard the midland sea :Past those proud isles where once uproseThe banner of St. John,And Adrian's sapphire waters chantThe dirge of glory gone ;215 )Where still thy towers, La Valette,Rise round thy time-worn grave,And tale of thee, Lisle Adam,Hallows the Rhodian wave.My bark flew South ! my bark flew East !Borne by the laughing waves,Past Ida's fountain watered steep,Past Etna's firelight caves ;And Helle's surges washed her prow,Or ere her sail she furled,Beneath the olive shores that boundThat lovely Eastern world ;Those lands where in the Earth's young time,The age of gold roll'd by,And the lost Eden's guarded gates,For ever hidden lie.Pale pale, and with a waning light,The Moslem crescent gleams,216 )O'er thy sad hills, Jerusalem,O'er Israel's mournful streams ;Where Angel wings have fanned the air,And stirr'd the clear lake's breast,And Heaven's own dwellers have come downIn earthly homes to rest ;All things are waiting silently,As lone night-watchers stand,The coming of the Holy OneTo His forsaken land.I climbed the cliff I crossed the rockI trod the deserts oldI passed the wild Arabian's tentsThe Syrian shepherd's fold ;Behind me far all haunts of men,Stretched into distance gray,When spread before me, lone and wide,The plain of Shinar lay,The boundless plain of far Sinjar,Where long, long ages back,217 )Abdallah read the silent stars,And wrote their mystic track.Where art thou? Gem of the rich Earth !.City of far renown !The glory of the proud Chaldee !The green Earth's ancient crown !Where lies the Lake that gleaming wideGave back thy hundred towers ?Where are thy gardens of delight ?Thy cedar-shaded bowers ?Where where oh! where rolls rapidlyThine ever-flashing river,Past marble stair and columned gate,Guarding thy walls for ever ?There is no voice of gladness hereNo breath of song floats byI hearken, but the moaning windIs all that makes reply ;218 )Solemn and lone the silent marshSpreads endlessly around,And shapeless are the ruinous heapsThat strew the broken ground.Sadly, above huge outlines dimSighs the lone willow-bough,The last last voice of BabylonIts only music now.Son of Montana ! by whose handThe doomed City fellThe swift feet of whose soldieryClimbed tower. and citadel;Thou soundest mirth and revelry,Thou soundest dance and song,Thou soundest many a banquet fair,And many a joyous throng,Like the Death-Angel earnest thouWhen men were care-bereft,And is this lone waste wildernessAll, all that thou hast left?219 )Oh ! glorious were her Palaces !Her shrines of fretted gold !There rose the fane of Merodach,The House of Bells old.And busy life was in her streets,Where countless nations thronged;Light footsteps glided through her homes,And mirth to her belonged.But prophet-voices murmuredEven in her festal halls,And Angel-fingers wrote her doomUpon her palace-walls.At midnight came the PersianMingling amidst the crowd ;He heeded not the beautiful,He stayed not for the proud :False was her fated river !Helpless her Gods of stone !He entered at her open gatesHe passed and she was gone !220 )Her place on Earth abideth not,Memorial hath she none ;Darkness and ruin thou mayest find,But never Babylon !I received this Poem, written by a friend of his, from Mr. BernardBarton. Note by the Editor.221 )STANZAS,BY MISS RANDALL.O BID me not seek the remembrance to banishOf joys that for ever are faded and gone ;Nor tell me those visions of beauty must vanishThat once o'er my pathway so brightly have shone !O wert thou but conscious how fondly I cherishThe thought of those joys that have long wing'd their flight;Thou could'st not desire that the transports should perish,Whose sole recollection is all my delight !For often the heart, while in happiness glowing,Sinks crush'd with the joys it hath pined to possess,As Summer's warm sunbeam with radiance o'erflowing,Is too bright to behold in its beauteous excess !But Mem'ry's pure light, tho' less brilliantly gleaming,Is the softened reflection of hours that have flown,As the pale orb of Eve when in loveliness beamingBut borrows a lustre that is not her own !THE WICKED NEPHEW,A BALLAD.THEN slowly spake that ancient man,For the shade of the tomb was on his brow,Castle and lands are thine, Nephew,For thou hast slain thine Uncle now.n.Castle and lands are thine, Nephew,So high the hall, so broad the lea,When I am but a steely ghostThere's room enow for thee and me.Face to face i'the hall we'll sit,Side by side we'll tread the lea,And aye by day and aye by nightMy sprite shall bear thee company. "-Then down he sank, that aged man,And breath'd his last on the good green swardNor yet a word his Nephew spake,But wiped his life-blood from his sword.All at the foot of the dodder'd oak,And all between its roots so grey,Strait and deep is the fox's cell,I wist ye would not find the way.There's blood upon the canker'd thorn,And white, white hair on the clasping briar ;And there is one whose hands are foul,And garment smear'd in gory mire.225 )And he hath bound him far awayFrom Norman forest dark and drear,And join'd King William and his band,Who soon for merry England steer.And he against Duke Robert ventsUnseemly words of bitter wrath,For that he lost his Uncle dearBy Normans in the forest path.By Norman ambush, so he saith,Yet doth not to the King complain ;And now his speech he doth deny,And will not have it said again.Now when they come to fair HastingsHe call'd to him his trustiest squire;Go, hie thee to thy Lady's bower,And tell her all she may require.Q226 )For I must sooth to London wendWith this my gallant company,Yet soon will kiss her dainty handWithin mine own rich Barony."For Baron now in sooth was he,And Lord of many a hill and dale,Yet beareth him more like a corpse,With haggard cheek so deadly pale.He stares upon his frighted page,And now he rocket to and fro ;St. Edward ! those are fearsome thoughtsCan vex the hardy warrior so.His lady waits in castle hall,For twelve months and a day are spent,Yet never baron hath been seen,Nor none may say which way he went.227 )For he is far beyond the seaWrapt in a palmer's gown so grey,In holy land to cleanse his soul,His vows to vow and prayers to pray.'Twas on a summer evening sweet,The Lady Maud from turret highEspied afar a prancing train,Their pennons waving in the sky.It is my Lord," she faintly cried,I know him 'mid a thousand peers :"Then down she sank in deadly swoonHe waked her, kissing off her tears.Ah why, sweet Lord, was I bereftWhy didst thou tarry far away :Dear heart, but thou art wan, sweet Lord,And thy fair hair is waxen grey."228 )Sooth, Maud, it is"" But oh how changed,How dreary hollow is thy voice,Waltheof, thought ill, yet seeing theeI cannot, dearest, but rejoice."He pressed her to his throbbing heart,But quickly tore himself away ;And clenched his hands and gnashed his teeth,And drew his sword as if for fray.Avaunt, thou grisly doting fiend,And is my penance all in vain ?I saw thee on the drawbridge stand,And dost thou beard me here again ?Hah ! smiles thou, mocking Pagan Shade ?Down to Valhalla or to Hell!'Tis Zernebock or Odin callsHark ! heard ye not that fearful yell ? "229 )With that he shivered to the cross,His sword against the turret wallThen o'er the battlements he sprang,A hundred feet and more to fall.Ah well away, thou Lady fair !That aught so sad thy lot should be !A murderer's widow to be left,And such an end of love to see.Now ere another sun arose,A pale cold corpse that Lady liesAnd many a maiden tears her hair,And wipes in vain her streaming eyes.Yet weep not, maidens blest is she,To her the kindest boon is given ;The sigh which closed her mortal woe,Hath wafted her sweet soul to Heaven.230 )SONNETS ON THE SEASONS.BY THE REV. HENRY Afford.I.WINTER.HAD I the wondrous magic, to investIdeal forms in colour, I would paintThe Winter first, by an age-withered saintDeep in his beads ; on his bare ribs should restA cross of lichens boughs ; and, duly prestEach morn by horny knees, one for each bone,There should be two round hollows in the stone,Whither his bent limbs should be half-addrest.And in the entry of the holy cave,Where this same saint should sit, a rosy boy,Naked, and all aglow with play and joy,Should peer full slily on that father grave,In the full blessedness of childhood's morn,And laugh his crusty solitude to scorn.231 )II.SPRING.SPRING should be drest in emblem quaint and shy :A troop of truant girls escaped from bed,For very wantonness of play, should threadThe garden-paths : one tucks her night-robe high,The dewy freshness of the lawn to try ;Some have been bolder ; and unclothed and brightThe group is seen in the moon's yellow light ;Some, scattered, gaze upon the trees and sky.But there should be, that turn with hurried glance,Beckoning their play-mates, where by a side-path,Between the shrubs is seen to half-advanceThe moody widow-lodger ; who in wrathIs sure to scatter all their stealthy play,And they will rue it ere the break of day.III.SUMMER.FOR Summer I would paint a married palySitting in close embraces, while a bandOf children kneel before them hand in hand ;Healthful their cheeks, and from their mantling hairsand clear their downward limbs are bare;tt IHis hand is past over her neck, and prestIn pride of love upon her full ripe breastAnd yet his brow is delved with lines of care :And in her shining eye one truant tearStands ready to be shed ; a quiet scene,But not without perchance intruding fearThat never comes again what once hath been ;And recollection that our fondest toilBut weaves a texture for the world to spoil.IV.AUTUMN.AUTUMN should be a youth, wasted and wan,A flush upon his cheek, and in his eyeUnhealthful fire ; and there should be hard by,She that best loved him ever and anonWistfully looking ; and for pleasures gone(So would I paint her) she should seem to sigh,The while some slender task her fingers ply,Veiling the dread that trusts him not alone.But he, high-rapt in divine Poesy,Unrolls the treasures of creative art,Spells forming for the world's unheeding heart.His very eye should speak, and you should seeThat Love will brighten as his frame decays,And song not fail but with his failing days.234 )STANZAS,SUPPOSED TO BE WRITTEN ON THE SITE OF TROY.BY THE EDITOR.I.THE lonely mound on which we sitWas once a mighty town,And Poesy encircles itWith glory and renown;And yetThe knowledge utterly has fled,Where once the palace stood, and where the shed.235 )We list not here the owlet moanFrom ruin old and grey ;By hoary moss we mark no stoneProtected from decay :All gone !Gone like the waking from a dream,Or bubble burst upon Time's passing stream.That stream, impatient to destroy,Is ever hurrying by,Bearing along Man's grief and joyAll, all is bora to die!Oh Troy!Thine, thine is but the common doom :On earth not e'en enduring is the tomb.All dies ? Not all ! It is not true :Though mouldering in the grave,Yet Memory ne'er shall say to you,Ye laurell'd wise and brave,Adieu !"Though Troy be vanished from her plains,And gone her tomb the epitaph remains!v.The " Star-appointed pyramid,"The mausoleum's state,Where Egypt's haughty kings are hid,Shall fall to dust when FateShall bid;Though low Thebes' hundred gates may lie,They live in Homer's immortality.237 )VI.For verse, immortal verse, belongsTo man's diviner part ;Her purer, more exalted songsSpeak to his soul and heart :He wrongsThe Muse, who deems that Death and TimeHave power to triumph o'er her strains sublime.238 )STANZAS,BY A. J. DE VERB, ESQ.I.FOR ever gentle, sweet, and lone,Her voice, her step, her hand subdued,She moves like one who ne'er has knownThe changes of a human mood.The tender dawn of those fair eyes,More softly breaks through tears unfailing-wakingstrange visions, MemoriesOf stranger date recalling.239 )in.That shade which makes her face more fair,Seems slanted on her from aboveSo pallid, pearly, faint and rare,A shadow from the star of love.IV.Say, has she loved? In some far spherePerchance she loved, and loved in vain ;And still in this cold exile hereForgets the cause, but feels the pain.240 )LINES, ON LEAVING ROME,BY WILLIAM EMPSON, ESQ.ILEX and Pine that darken on the heights,Or shade the sepulchre of Rome, farewell :Farewell, farewell, ye long Campagna lights,Whose glory deeper glow'd as Evening fell.Dread Allan Mount, divinest Nature's throneThough bright with those immortal names of yoreNot one of all thy hundred tops had shone,Take my last sunset look : we meet no more !And Rome, thou giant shade, whose shiver'd formSleeps 'neath the grass-grown hills it once bestrode,Thy dust, despite of tyrants, time, and storm,Is holy still it was thy son's abode.Man and his words are nothing now to thee :Leave then this breeze our parting dirge to be,Sighs from the broken arch, and lonely cypress-tree.241 )STANZAS,WRITTEN FOR A BLANK PAGE IN ROGERS' PLEASURES OF MEMORY.SWEET o'er the care-worn soul to flingA wreath of Memory's early flowers ;To lapse again into Life's Spring,The sunny May of Hopes and Powers.When wings the thought far, far awayTo spots where merry childhood played ;We smile with those whose lips are clay,We roam through mansions long decayed.242 )Now gazing on Hope's morning star,Which gilds the laurel heights of Fame,Now whirled in Pleasure's tinsel carWe wrap anew our souls in flame.Oh then the thought " What might have been'Comes o'er us like a withering blast,To strip off all the rainbow sheen,The angel visions of the past.Yet but for this, ah ! who may sayWhat follies would not hence arise ?Who would not dream a life awayIf Memory were Paradise ?SONNET,TO MRS. . ON HEARING HER SING THE DUET IN Elfride,Credit LA MIA Feria,"BY THE MARCHESE Spines.INVANO il crime lace rossi, e invanoSparse la bella Dido e preci e luttoE nostri invano al credo e pio TrojanCarthage in fiamme, e il regno suo distrust.II regio sarto, e la regal sua mano,Del pill tenere more i regni e il fruttoSprezzando Ene salvo. Da Lei montanaII Fate il voile, ed ei fu ordo a tutti.Ma se di piano invece averse alloaDone usato quel save cantoE quel tuo stil, che anche 1' Italia nora,In Carthage rialto Ene mariaE il Fate e il Padre a Lei d' accentE Roma, e se, tutti scordato aria.244 )STANZAS,BY ALFRED TENNYSON, ESQ.OH ! that 'twere possible,After long grief and pain,To find the arms of my true-loveRound me once again !When I was wont to meet herIn the silent woody placesloci Uvw. . Of the land that gave me birth,We stood traced in long embraces,Mixt with kisses sweeter., sweeterThan any thing on earth.245 )A shadow flits before meNot thou, but like to thee.Ah God ! that it were possibleFor one short hour to seeThe souls we loved, that they might tell usWhat and where they be.It leads me forth at evening,It lightly winds and stealsIn a cold white robe before me,When all my spirit reelsAt the shouts, the leagues of lights,And the roaring of the wheels.Half the night I waste in sighs,In a wakeful dose I sorrowFor the hand, the lips, the eyesFor the meeting of tomorrow,The delight of happy laughter,The delight of low replies.246 )Do I hear the pleasant ditty,That I heard her chant of old ?But I wake my dream is fled.Without knowledge, without pityV In the shuddering dawn behold,By the curtains of my bed,That abiding phantom cold.Then I rise : the eave-drops fallAnd the yellow-vapours choke.The great city sounding wide ;The day comes a dull red ball,Wrapt in drifts of lurid smoke,On the misty river-tide.Thro' the hubbub of the marketI steal, a wasted frame ;It crossed here, it crossed thereThro' all that crowd, confused and loud,The shadow still the same ;And on my heavy eyelidsMy anguish hangs like shame.247 )Alas for her that met me,That heard me softly callCame glimmering thro' the laurelsAt the quiet even-fall,In the garden by the turretsOf the old Manorial Hall.B.tt-Then the broad light glares and beats,ShadowAnd the sunk eye flits and fleets,And will not let me be.I loathe the squares and streets,And the faces that one meets,Hearts with no love for me ;Always I long to creepTo some still cavern deep,And to weep, and weep and weepMy whole soul out to thee.248 )Get thee hence, nor come againr-" Pass and cease to move aboutPass, thou death-like type of pain,--mix not memory with doubt.'Tis the blot upon the brainThat will show itself without.Would the happy Spirit descendIn the chamber or the streetAs she looks among the blest ;Should I fear to greet my friend,Or to ask her, " Take me, sweet,To the regions thy rest."But she tarries in her place,And I paint the beauteous faceOf the maiden, that I lost,In my inner eyes again,Lest my heart be overborneBy the thing I hold in scorn,By a dull mechanic ghostAnd a juggle of the brain.249 )I can shadow forth my brideAs I knew her fair and kind,As I woo'd her for my wife ;She is lovely by my sideIn the silence of my life'Tis a phantom of the mind.Tis^a phantom fair and good ;I can call it to my side,So to guard my life from ill,Tho' its ghastly sister glideAnd be moved around me stillWith the moving of the blood,That is moved not of the will.250 )Let it pass, the dreary brow,Let the dismal face go by.Will it lead me to the grave ?Then I lose it : it will fly :Can it overcast the nerves ?Can it overlive the eye ?But the other, like a star,Thro' the channel width farTill it fade and fail and die,To its Archetype that waits,Clad in light by golden gates-cladin light the Spirit waitsTo embrace me in the sky.251SUNDAY.BY MRS. CHENEY.'Tis sweet to hear the Sabbath bellSound thro' the cheerful vale,Now rising with a solemn swell,Now dying on the gale.'Tis sweet to note the glad returnOf Heaven's peculiar day,That early-blest time-hallowed mornWhich calls the world to pray.252 )Which gives a due relief from toil,The daily task suspends,Decks rugged features with a smile,And care-worn brows unbends.'Tis sweet to see both rich and poor,With one intent combine,And entering at that sacred door,In prayer together join.To see the hardy labourer leanO'er his trim garden pale,Whilst children on the village green,The sunny evening hail.And may all ye who rich and great,See each successive dayBring fortune's gifts to crown your state.To this due homage pay.253 )Let quiet, vest, and charity,Your time, your bosoms fillNot she alone who gives, but sheWho never thinker ill.Thus when that awful hour shall come,When time itself may pass away,May ye behold your future doom,In one unclouded holiday.254 )STANZAS,TO EDITH.BY THE REV. Chauncey HARE Townshend.HAVE ten years fled of slow and fast,Since in this lovely land we met ?All seemed as when we parted last,The self same looks are glowing yet.No shade of time or dim regretIs o'er thy playful features cast,As if no tear their lids had wet,Thine eyes laugh scorn on sorrows past.255 )Perhaps thou think'st the same of me,As touched by memory's murmur'd spell,I sing the very song to thee,Which thou wert used to love so well.The mind, how faintly looks can tell !How ill do outward things agreeWith inward ! How all things rebel,Which few can know and none can see.I think of times when I could seekVain sorrow as relief from joy :When Poesy was wont to speakThe pains and pleasures of a boyPains which no hour of sleep destroyPleasures, Heaven-tinctur'd as the streakWhich, all unstain'd by Earth's alloy,Greets day on Skiddaw's snowy peak.256 )How lovely looks that rosy light,Seen from the shelter'd vale below !Allur'd, we seek the glittering height,The beam is gone but not the snow !There Life's untrodden summits glow,Thus Hope's first dawning rays invite :We travel on and find 'twas woe,Which distance only made so bright.Oh Edith, pleasant hours were they,When first these mountain-vales I sought;I seem'd to sweep the world away,So hateful to my earliest thought.And in its stead was Nature broughtBefore me in her best array ;Hearts that could feel, and looks untaughtTo mask the feelings' native play.257 )For one glad moment I disownTime's empire, and those days descry,The next, I feel ten years are gone,Mark'd by the heart, if not the eye.Though all around should wake no sigh,Ev'n though Experience had not thrownThe broken toys of childhood byYet Death would prove ten years are flown.How many a gap his hand has madeIn the heart's chain! and one, the worst!Each in the silent grave has laidA Sister ! Ah, what links are burst,When they the same fond bosom nurst,Who at the same dear knee had pray'd,In childhood, are divided first !How Life's drear landscape sinks in shade !258 )Count years by agonies, perchance'Twere centuries since last we met :But hush ! I see thy chiding glanceWhich bids me bear, tho' not forget,And less what Heav'n recalls, regret,Than by each vanish'd joy enhanceThe treasures which time leaves us yet,And brings as brighter years advance.Trust not the poet's pensive line,That Life can find no second Spring.Kind Nature leaves us not to pineWithout one vernal offering.New hopes shall each tomorrow bringTo those who can the past resign ;Round hearts bereaved new ties shall clingsmay thine own be blest as mine.259 )ON A PAINTING OF ZUCCHARELLI,IN POSSESSION OF MRS. BATT, OF " NEW HALL.'A SONNET.BY THE REV. W. L. BOWLES.WELL-SHADOW'D landscape ! I could look on theeFor hours, regardless of the storm and strifeAnd mingled murmurs of tumultuous life.Here all is still as fair the stream, the tree,The wood, the sunshine on the bank : no tear,No thought of Time's swift wing, or close of night,That comes to steal away the long sweet light,No sighs of sad humanity are here.Here is no tint of mortal change the dayBeneath whose light the Dog and Peasant-BoyCome out, with looks and almost bark of joyStill seems, though centuries have pass'd, to stay.Then look again, that shadow'd scene may teachLessons of peace and love, beyond all speech.s2260 )THE RIVAL SCULLS.BY HORACE SMITH, ESQ.THE Schoolmaster's abroad" a pupil cried,At Cambridge to the surly Doctor Rather.Is he?" the Doctor sneeringly replied,I'm glad to hear it, and I hope he'll stay there !Vain are the hopes of all such Doctors,And old-school Proctors.The owls and bats of Colleges, who laudThe good old times when all was dark and dull :The Schoolmaster's at home when he's abroad,And so enlightensWith learning, logic, lore, the public scull,That we shall soon be admirable Crichton,261 )And all become such knowing elves,That none of us will know ourselves !-Our Schoolboys, making no apologiesFor prating about all the " ologies,"And letting us know that learned knowledge isNo longer limited to Colleges ;Draw Hop-scotch figures in the dirtBy strictest rules of Mathematics,And water in your face will squirtTo show their skill in Hydrostatics.If they break folks' heads with a stone, they tell 'emThe surgical nature of the Pia Mater,The cerebrum, occiput, cerebellum.If the stone is broken instead of the pate,They pick up a fragment, proceed to scan it,And in geological terms dilateUpon quartz and feldspar, silex and granite,By which the man whose head has been batteredMust doubtless feel himself highly flattered.This March of Intellect scorns to stopIn cities and towns,But over the meadows and fields must hop,To surprise the clowns.In almost every villageThe humble sons of tillageAs naturally learn to speakOf learning, as a pig to squeak ;For most of them have got an Athenaeum,Or else a wonderful Museum,Cram-full of curiosities unique.Of such a one it was my FateNot long ago to make inspection,And Candour forces me to stateThat 'twas indeed a rare collection ;There were bones of MammaliaBrought from Australia ;Lavas thrown up from the jaws of Vesuvius ;A bronze Agnus Dei ;A pin from Pompeii,And a stone from the temple of Jupiter Plutus.263 )I can't tell the storesOf fossils, shells, ores,Nautili, Cyclades, Terrifies, Ammonites,But I noticed BarytesAnd Iron Pyrites,With alluvial gold as a treat for the Ammonites.In a case near the tooth of a young HippopotamusWas a skeleton Cat,Who had squeezed herself flatThro' a hole in a wall, where it seems she had got a mouse ;But could not get back,So was starved in the crack,And appears still to mewThis moral most trueTo the Epicurean and gluttonous hostIf you 're always a-gobbliny you'll soon be a ghost !"But what the Curator considered a greaterTreat than the whole of his specimens rare,Was the genuine head, with its skin and its hair,Of Oliver Cromwell, the famous Dictator,And truculent regicide Decapitated.264 )With a satisfied air he exclaimed " Look ye there !There's the wart on his cheek. Now all writers deposeThat he had such a wart on the side of his nose,Which proves that this skull is no matter of fiction,But his genuine head beyond all contradiction."Hold, hold" said I " a friend of mineHas also got a Cromwell scull,And proves it true and genuine,By vouchers numerous and full."And I distinctly recollect that hisIs a much longer scull than this."That," said the sapient Curator,Is no objection none in Nature,For this one might have been his scull, in truth,When Oliver, you know, was quite a youth."265 )SONG.BY A. J. DE VERB, ESQ.I.WHEN I was young, I said to Sorrow,Come, and I will play with thee"-He is near me now all day ;And at night returns to say,I will come again tomorrow,I will come and stay with thee."ii.Through the woods we walk together,His soft footsteps rustle by meTo shield an unrewarded head,He hath built a winter shed,And all night in rainy weather,I hear his gentle breathing by me.266 )FAREWELL.BY MRS. MYERS.FAREWELL sad word ! whose magic powerOf pleasure cheats the previous hour,Which doubly dear to parting friends,Too swiftly flies, too quickly ends;Parent of sighs, what sorrows swellThe breaking heart that bids " Farewell,"What shivering chilness thrills the frame,When by the taper's glimmering flameWe rise, and weeping meet the dayThat bears us from those scenes away,Where all our dearest pleasures dwell,Pleasures we now must bid farewell.267 )Then the full heart attempts to sayTen thousand things that die awayUnheard upon the faltering tongue ;Then o'er our weaken'd nerves a throngOf fears, ill-boding, wildly tell,We may for ever bid farewell.Let those whose breasts have learn'd to glow,With warm affection, teach me howTo paint the tumult of the soul,When heavy wheels, with sullen rollOf joy departed, sound the knell,And bid us take a last farewell.From each pale cheek the colours fly,Tears tremble in each swimming eye !By turns each offer'd hand we grasp,By turns each much-loved form we clasp ;Whilst bursting sighs too plainly tellThe anguish of a long farewell.268 )But if you've shared the wanderer's pain,Pity the wretched who remain !Fix'd, on the lessening wheels they gaze,Watch, where the road, with winding maze,Conducts them near some opening dell,Then weeping, breathe once more farewell.Yet ah ! where'er they turn their eyes,Some fond remembrance still will rise !The vacant chairs can e'en impartA poignant sorrow to the heart :Still on their ear the voices swell,Which lately sigh'd a last farewell.At length the long, long day is past,And gentle evening comes at last !Now simple wonder oft beguilesThe lingering hours, how many milesThe weary travellers may tell,Since they at daybreak bid farewell.269 )But, soothed by Evening's peaceful calm,New life, new hopes, their bosoms warm.Fair truth unfolds the instructive page,Her precepts every grief assuage,Whilst of a brighter world they tell,Where we no more shall say " Farewell."270 )ON A BIRTH DAY.BY C. A. ELTON, ESQ.ASK you on my natal day,Mary clear, a tuneful lay ?1 am fall'n into the searAnd yellow leaf, O Mary dear.If I once could touch the lyre(Weak the touch, and faint the fire,)Now the touch would feebler grow,Now the fire would fainter glow.Time is ever on the wing,Blighting first the human spring,Stealing from the summer's bloom,Deepening autumn's gathering gloom.But if pleasures haste away,And if hopes in buds decay,Something shall at least remain,Something time would scathe in vain.What shall outlast each withering year ?The love I bear thee, Mary dear.271 )THE OATH OF HANNIBAL.BY G. F. RICHARDSON, ESQ.IT is the hour of praise and prayer,In Carthage' holiest shrine,And priests and augurs worship there,With pomp and rite divine.And incense flings rich wreaths of smoke,And music blends its chime,While Africa's sons the Gods invoke,Own'd in that fiery clime.And 'mid the pause of rite and song,A warrior-chief draws nigh ;And hurrying through the priestly throng,With ardent step and eye,He leads a stripling by the hand,The hope of all his line,And hasting through the fane, they standBefore its inmost shrine.272 )That aged warrior comes with joyA dreadful vow to make ;And offers up his gallant boyFor his loved country's sake.The youth an equal ardour shares,An equal courage shows ;And on his country's altars swearsDeath to his country's foes.With fearless mind and look severeThe youth hath pledged his troth ;And proudly calls on men to hearAnd Gods to mark the oath !He vows while life's warm current flowsLove to his natal home ;But deadly hate to all her foes,And deadliest hate to Rome !273 )And did the youth obedience yieldTo what he swore that day ?Go ask at Thrasymene's field,Or Cannae's fatal fray !And long have Roman matrons wept,The oath he proffers now ;So deeply sworn, so truly kept,Was Hannibal's dark vow.274, )HUNTING SONG.HARK, hark, to hound and horn,Through the green wood ringing !Far away o'er brake and burn,The buck is springing ;One bound from the coppice hath set him freeAlas ! 'tis a dear bought liberty !Hark, hark, the thundering tread !Now the chase is burning ;Far and wide the hunters spread,Vale and upland spurning ;Dumb is the hound and the bugle's breath,Their voices are lost in the speed of death.Hark, hark, the tuneful mort,O'er the waters pealing ;Far away to bower and courtWelcome notes revealing.Speed, gallants, speed, through the evening dew,For a lovelier quarry is waiting for you.275 )PROLOGUEON THE OPENING OF THE ENGLISH THEATRE AT ROME, 1824.BY H. GALLY KNIGHT, ESQ. M.P.HERE on the spot that, ever dear to fame,Retains the charm of Rome's immortal name ;Amidst the scenes that yet recall to mindThe lords of thought, the masters of mankind ;Where, on the breeze, a Virgil's strain we hearAnd Tully's thunders burst upon the ear ;May themes of common life intrude a while,And modern muses strive to win a smile ?The splendid visions of the past suspend,And, unreproved, their lighter graces blend?Yes, 'tis sublime o'er Caesar's hill to stray,And mark the wreck of empire past away ;To fill the Forum with a fancied throng,And see the Roman Triumph wind along;27G )The very path by heroes trod to tread,And hold high converse with the mighty dead ;Till, raised above itself the mind has foundA greatness kindred with the scene around.But from the clouds we must sometimes descend,Nature grows wearied and illusions end :The thoughts of Rome are too intensely greatFor mind of man to bear the constant weight.From us the necessary rest receive ;To us your enchanted moments give,Refreshing change dramatic scenes impart,And Rome herself approved dramatic Art.Here Roscius earned a fame, to late renownWith heroes, kings, and statesmen, handed down:Here, fostered by his master and his friend,Did Terence write and Scipio's self commend :Here Knights and Senators attention paidTo broader farce than Liston ever played :From self-reproach by such examples freed,The boon we ask, be willing to concede !On Rome bestow the day, nor yet refuseYour evening leisure to the comic Muse !277 )EPILOGUE TO THE HONEY-MOON,SUPPOSED TO BE SPOKEN IN THE CHARACTER OF JULIANA,ROME 1824.BY H. GALLY KNIGHT, ESQ. M.P.No doubt, from what you saw me in the play,You fancied Sposo sure to have his way ;That I should prove a fond obedient wife,And only ask to be his slave for life.But now, reflect, the Honey-moon is o'er ;Reflect I only play'd a part before :And know that soon or late, by force or skill,Misused, triumphant, woman gains her will.Sposo, like many another prudent man,Had form'd a goodly, matrimonial plan ;A scheme to fix me on his own estate,There, like his shrubs and trees, to vegetate.278 )I was to live by clock-work and by rule,Walk in my garden ; watch the village school,See with delight my country neighbours' faces,Nor dream of more amusement than the races.But in a trice I wheedled him from home,And here is he, and here am I at Rome.He came with thoughts sublime and notions vastWe were to live and feed upon the past.I heard him talk of Caesar in his sleepThe dead, the company he meant to keep.And, as for lodging, in some ivied cellWith owls, and bats, and toads he thought to dwell.One day I bore of Gibby's* odious chatter,Then, with the Doctor's help, cut short the matter.The Doctor's veto with my wish agreeing,Applied without reserve to all sight-seeing.Thus was I freed at once, and Rome becameDistinct from darling London but in name.Shopping all morning ! and such lovely things !Cameos, tazzas, miniatures and rings ;Gibby, a well-known Cicerone.279 )At Vespers* oft ; St. Peter's is my passion ;You 've pretty music, and a world of fashion !Or else I saunter with the troop equestrian,Or about four on Pinch am pedestrian.Each night a charming party. I declareOne might be just as well in Grosvenor Square.To finish all, we hit upon the play :And sweetly now fly time and cash away.On earth a perfect bliss two seasons bring ;A Roman Winter and a London Spring.Joys without end ! for sadness not a cause !And nothing left to wish, but your applause !St. Peter's at Vespers, and the walks on Monte Pinch just beforedinner, were the fashionable lounge.BROUGH BELLS.BY ROBERT SOUTHEY, ESQ. LL.D.ONE day to Helbeck I had strolledAmong the Crossbill hills,And resting in its rocky grove,Sat listening to the rills.The while to their sweet undersongThe birds sang blithe around,And the soft west wind woke the woodTo an intermitting sound.281 )Louder or fainter as it rose,Or died away, was borneThe harmony of merry bells,From Brough, that pleasant morn.Why are the merry bells of Brough,My friend, so few ?" said I,They disappoint the expectant ear,Which they should gratify.One, two, three, four ; one, two, three, four'Tis still one, two, three, four.Mellow and silvery are the tones ;But I wish the bells were more !"What, art thou critical ?" quoth he ;Eschew that heart's disease,That seeketh for displeasure whereThe intent hath been to please.282 )By those four bells there hangs a tale,Which being told, I guessWill make thee hear their scanty pealWith proper thankfulness.Not by the Clifford were they given,Nor by the Lufton's line ;Thou nearest in that peal the crune *Of old John Brunskill's kine.On Stanemore's side one summer eve,John Brunskill sate to seeHis herds in yonder BorrodaleCome winding up the lea.Behold them on the lowland's verge,"In the evening light serene,Brough's silent tower, then newly builtBy Blenkinsop, was seen.Lowing.283 )Slowly they came in long array,With loitering pace at will;And at times a low from them was heard,Far off, for all was still.The hills return'd that lonely soundUpon the tranquil air ;The only sound it was, which thenAwoke the echoes there.' Thou hear'st that lordly bull of mine,' Neighbour,' quoth Brunskill then,' How loudly to the hills he cranes,' That crune to him again.Think'st thou if yon whole herd at once' Their voices should combine,Were they at Brough, that we might notHear plainly from this upland spot' That pruning of the kine ?'284 )That were a crune indeed repliedHis comrade, ' which, I ween,Might at the Spital well be heard,' And in all dales between.' Up Mallerstang to Eden's springs,' The eastern wind upon its wings' The mighty voice would bear,* And Appleby would hear the sound,' Methinks, when skies are fair.'' Then shall the herd,' John Brunskill cried,' From yon dumb steeple crune,' And thou and I, on this hill-side,' Will listen to their tune.' So while the merry bells of Brough,' For many an age ring on,' John Brunskill will remember'd be,' When he is dead and gone,285 )' As one who in his latter years,' Contented with enough,* Gave freely what he well could spare' To buy the bells of Brough.'Thus it hath proved : three hundred yearsSince then have past away,And Brunskill's is a living name,Among us to this day."More pleasure," I replied, " shall IFrom this time forth partake,When I remember Helbeck woods,For old John Brunskill's sake.He knew how wholesome it would be,Among these wild wide fells,And upland vales, to catch at timesThe sound of Christian bells.28G )What feelings and what impulses,Their cadence might convey,To herdsman or to shepherd boy,Whiling in indolent employThe solitary day.That when his brethren were convenedTo meet for social prayer,He too, admonish'd by the call,In spirit might be there.And when the blithesome sound was heardOf birth or marriage peal,Some kindly sympathies therewithHis opening heart might feel.Or when a glad thanksgiving sound,Upon the winds of Heaven,Was sent to speak a Nation's joy,For some great blessing given287 )For victory by sea or land,And happy peace at length ;Peace by his country's valour won,And 'established by her strength-whensuch exultant peals were borneUpon the mountain air,The sound should stir his blood, and giveAn English impulse there."Such thoughts were in the old man's mind,When he that eve look'd downFrom Stanemore's side on Borrodale,And on the distant town.And had I store of wealth, methinks,Another herd of kine,John Brunskill, I would freely give,That they might crune with thine.288 )VILLAGE EPITAPH,ON A DUTIFUL DAUGHTER, WHO DIED TWO YEARS AFTER HER FATHER, BUTIN THE SAME WEEK OF THE YEAR, AND IS BURIED IN THE SAMEGRAVE AT BREMHILL.BY THE REV. W. L. BOWLES.OH ! Mother, I will rise and pray,"With feeble voice she cried,For this, dear Mother, is the dayOn which poor Father died."Faintly she spoke she knelt she pray'd,Her eyes with weeping dim,And, ere seven days were past, was laidIn the same grave with him.Oh when all worlds before their GodIn trembling hope shall stand,She shall awake from the same sodAnd smile at his right hand.289 )THE DEATHS OF TRISTAN AND YSEULT.BY MISS COSTELLO.When Tristan was dying, he sent to entreat Yseult la Blonde to visithim, and desired his messenger, if she accompanied him, to put up awhite flag, if not, a black. The treacherous damsel set to watch, deceivedhim in her report, and he died. According to the custom of chivalry,his death was immediately proclaimed in the city and on the port.Yseult landed, and hearing the fatal words, hastened to the chamber of herlover, and clasping his inanimate form to her heart, expired embracinghim.MAIDEN, look forth, far over the seaDoes not a white sail gleam ?Comes not Yseult and life to me,Or was it a fever'd dream?I look far over the foamy main,1 But no bark, no sail appears,Turn thee to rest, brave Knight, again,And dry those fruitless tears :Deem not Yseult yon storm would braveFor him who has ceased to be her slave.290 )Maiden, 'tis true, since the fated hourWhen together we quaff'd the charmed bowl,"Years have pass'd, and gone is the powerThat bound us both in sweet controul,Yet in our hearts there lingers yetOne drop that bids us never forget :Tho' time and absence and fate combineThe tend'rest thought of her soul is mine,To love like our's cannot be knownOblivion, save in death alone !Oh ! to see that snow-white sailWould more than the leech's art availLook forth once more for the blessed sight,For these eyes are closing fast in night !"A bark comes onward before the gale,But no white banner is waving there,Black is the pennon, and black the sail,The colours of despair.Turn thee, Knight, to rest again,Thou highest for Yseult la Blonde in vain.'The magic philtre, which was the cause of their love.291 )Then Tristan turn'd with a deadly sigh,And clasp'd his hands in agony ;To Heaven his failing eyes he threw,And murmur'd faintly a last adieu :Yseult! is it thus we sever?My love, my fate farewell for ever !"Along the shore is a mournful cry,The crowded streets to the notes reply,Widely spreads the solemn sound,Tristan, of the Table Round,A brave, a noble spirit is fled,The Flower of Chivalry is dead!"Thou trait'rous maid! yon snow-white sailShould have told another tale.Oh ! had it gleam'd to Tristan's sightHis soul had lingered in its flight :But, past the stern decree of fate,Fair Yseult reach'd the shore too late !She heard the tidings so loud, so dread,No word she spoke, no tear she shed,292 )But the flush died from her lovely brow,And left it pale and cold as snow.She hurried to the couch, where layThe spiritless, unconscious clay ;Upon the yet unsettled faceOf pain and grief was left the trace,As parting life's convulsive thrillSat on the pallid features still.She gazed on that chill, passive brow,And felt that all was ended now !All their past life of love and care,Their vain, wild dreams extinguished there.One sigh, one long, deep, mournful tone,Told that the heart's sad task was done,Its weakness and its misery o'er,And lovely Yseult was no more.Note. The ancient romance of " Sir Tristes" has engaged theattention of antiquaries and poets for a very long time. Sir Walter Scottperhaps first rendered the subject interesting to general readers, and M.Francisque Michel's valuable and learned work has lately recalled publicnotice to its merits.293 )TO A LADY.BY THE REV. C. T. TENNYSON.FAREWELL ! it is my parting hour :Thy sister wends her way with me,To spend far off, by land and sea,Those first fair moons of peace and gleeThat shine upon the orange flow'r :ii.Fair Moons that guard those petals fair JFull sweetly may ye downward shine !Oh light us o'er the Ocean-brineAnd wane not, on the winding Rhine,Or where the Switzer's mountains are !294 )COMPLAINT OF A POET,ON VISITING THE CUMBERLAND MOUNTAINS.BY THE REV. Chauncey HARE TOWNSHEND.YOUR famed mountains seeingWith their names disagreeing,I own is sufficient to anger a roamed ;From visible thingsWhen an epithet springsOne does not expect just to find a misnomer.True, the mighty HelvellynSounds lofty and swelling,As befits the old comrade of vapours and storms ;Ancient and awfulAre Skiddaw and Scawfell,And their rugged names suit very well with their forms.295 )But Grassmoor, alas !Never had any grass,Whitest is red as the East before squalls ;I sought too great Gable,But only was ableTo see a huge dome like the top of St. Paul's.On the StyheacTs bare shelf,Parson's Tulliver's selfWere cunning to catch a tithe pig by the tail ;You may look till eyes acheFor a stick on the Stake ;Plain sailing, alas, there is none on the Sail.Don't expect in High StreetShops and dandies to meet ;Ev'n a raven is scarce at that height in the air.Dont think that Fair FieldMangel Wurzel can yield ;A crop of good stones is all you'll find there.296 )Causey-Pike like the bridgeOf a nose rears its ridge,While Wry-nose no bit of a snout is upraising,High Hill is so lowThat the floods o'er it flow,But Low-door is a portal of height most amazing.The Haystacks I ownGive some hint of a cone,But those rocks so fantastic, the Lion and Lamb,I rather should settleAre a witch with her kettle,Or that notable female, Beelzebub's dam.But hold! you will cryWhat if your own eyeIn viewing the mountains for wrong names haveblamed them,Perhaps to another'sName and form seem twin brothers,And certainly seem'd so to those who first named them.297 )Besides you, I ween,But on one side have seenThose mountains whose epithets wake your surprise ;"How natural in usTo make such a fussBecause the whole world will not see with our eyes !298 )TO A LADY,WHO WHEN ASKED FOR A THEME PROPOSED " WRINKLES !"BY MISS RANDALL.WHAT ! write upon Wrinkles, the subject's so strange,That I scarcely know what I can say,Since lines upon lines give so narrow a rangeThe art of the Muse to display.That to you they are strangers may plainly be seen,Or you ne'er could have asked such a lay,But come let us try, and perchance we may gleamSome lessons of good on our way.By the hand of old Time, some few furrows are trac'dWith the point of his Scythe as he flies,To remind us how sadly his treasures we waste,How often his warning despise.And some o'er the cheek of the young and the fairAre by Vice or by Folly engraved,299 )As Beacons to Virtue to turn from the snareThat so many before hath enslaved.In the deep lines of thought, on the brow of the sage,Humility's lesson are given ;For the bearings of Light on Philosophy's pageAre but sparks that are borrow'd from Heaven.The iron-trac'd record of sorrow and careThat furrow the brow and the heart;Oh these are the deepest, the hardest to bear,Yet they too instruction impart !For Mercy's own hand hath inflicted the wound,And shall we not bow to His rod,Who thus minds us that Happiness only is foundOn his bosom, our Father, our God ?Thus 'tis not mid the Whirlpools of Folly or ViceThat Wisdom's best lessons are given ;Beneath Sorrow's dark wave lies that " pearl of great price,'That shall win us our portion in Heaven !300 )LUTHER'S PARENTS.BY WALTER SAVAGE LANDOR, ESQ.John Luther. I left thee, Margaret, fast asleep,Thou, who wert always earlier than myself,Yet hast no mine to trudge to, hast no wedgeTo sharpen at the forge, no pickaxe looseIn handle.Come, blush not again : thy cheeksMay now shake off those blossoms which they boreSo thick this morning, that last night's avowalNestled among them still.So, in few monthsA noisier bird partakes our whispering bower.Say it again.Margaret. And, in my dream, I blushed !John. Idler! wert dreaming too ? and after dawn ?Marg. In truth was I.John. Of me ?Marg. No, not of you.301 )John. No matter ; for methinks some Seraph's wingFann'd that bright countenance.Marg. Methinks it did,And stir'd my soul within.How could you goAnd never say good-bye, and give no kiss ?John. It might have waken'd thee. I can give moreKisses than sleep : so thinking, I heav'd upSlowly my elbow from above the pillow,And, when I saw it woke thee not, went forth.Marg. I would have been awaken'd for a kiss,And a good-bye, or either, if not both.John. Thy dreams were not worth much then.Marg. Few dreams are ;ButJohn. By my troth! I will intrench uponThe woman's dowery, and will contradict,Tho' I should never contradict again.I have got more from dreams a hundred-foldThan all the solid earth, than field, than town,Than (the close niggard purse that cramps my fist,)The mine will ever bring me.Marg. So have I,302 )And so shall each indeed, if this be true.John. What was it then ? for when good dreams befallThe true of heart, 'tis likely they come true . . .A vein of gold? ay? silver? copper? iron?Lead? sulphur? alum? alabaster? coal?Shake not those ringlets nor let down those eyes,Tho' they look prettier for it, but speak out.True, these are not thy dainties.Marg. Guess again.John. Crystalline kitchens, amber-basted spitsWhizzing with frothy savory salamanders,And swans, that might, so plump and pleasant-looking,Swim in the water from the mouths of Knights ;And ostrich-eggs off coral woods (the nestsOutside of cinnamon, inside of saffron,And mortar well, for safety-sake, with myrrh,)Serv'd up in fern leaves green before the Flood ?Marg. Stuff! you will never guess it, I am sure.John. No ? and yet these are well worth dreaming of.Marg. Try once again.John. Faith ! it is kind to let me.Under-ground beer-cascades from 'Nuremberg ?303 )Rhine vintage stealing from Electoral cellars,And, broader than sea-baths for mermaid brides,With fruits upon the surface strides across,Pink conchs, to catch it, and to light it down ;And music from basaltic organ-pipesFor dancing; and five faeries to one man.Marg. Oh his wild fancies ! . . . Are they innocent ?John. I think I must be near it, by that shrug.Spicy sack-posset, roaring from hot springsAnd running off like mad thro' candied cliffs,But catching now and then some fruit that drops . . .Shake thy head yet ? why then thou hast the palsy.Zooks ! I have thought of all things probableAnd come to my wit's end.What canst thou mean?Marg. Nay, I have half a mind now not to tell.John. Then it is out . . . Thy whole one ill could hold it.A woman's mind hates pitch upon its seams.Marg. Hush ! one word more! and then my lips are closed.John. Pish ! one more word ! and then my lips . . .Marg. O rareImpudent man ! . . . and such discourse from you !I dreamt we had a boy . . .304 )John. A wench, a wenchA boy were not like thee.Marg. I said a boy.John. Well, let us have him, if we miss the girl.Marg. My father told me he must have a boy,And call him Martin (his own name), becauseSaint Martin both was brave, and cloth'd the poor.John. Hurrah then for Saint Martin ! he shall haveEnough to work on in this house of our's.Marg. Now do not laugh, dear husband ! but this dreamSeem'd somewhat more.John. So do all dreams, ere past.Marg. Well, but it seems so still.John. Aye, twist my fingers,Basting them to hold it.Marg. Never grave !John. I shall be.Marg. That one thought should make you now.John. And that one tap upon the cheek to boot.Marg. I do believe, if you were call'd to Heaven,You would stay toying here.John. I doubt I should.305 )Methinks I set my back against the gate,Thrown open to me by this rosy hand,And look both ways, but see more heaven than earth :Give me thy dream : thou protest it aside :I must be feasted : fetch it forth at once.Marg. Husband ! I dreamt the child was in my arms,And held a sword, which from its little graspI could not move, nor you : I dreamt that proudBut tottering shapes, in purple disagree,Pull'd at it, and he laught.John. They frighten'd thee !Marg. Frighten'd me ! no : the infant's strength prevail'd.Devils, with angel's faces, throng'd about;Some offer'd flowers, and some held cups behind,And some held daggers under silken stoles.John. These frighten'd thee, however.Marg. He knew all ;I knew he did.John. A dream ! a dream indeed !He knew and laught !Marg. He sought his mother's breast,And lookt at them no longer.306 )All the roomWas fill'd with light and gladness.John. He shall beRicher than we are ; he shall mount his horse ;A feat above his father ; and be oneOf the duke's spearmen.Marg. God forbid ! they leadUnrighteous lives, and often fall untimely.John. A lion-hearted lad shall Martin be.Marg. God willing; if his servant; but not else.I have such hopes, full hopes, hopes overflowed.John. A grave grand man, half collar and half cross,With chain enough to hold our mastiff by,Thou fain would'st have him. Out of dirt so stiff,Old Satan fashioned his idol, Pride.Marg. If proud and cruel to the weak, and bentTo turn all blessings from their even courseTo his own kind and company, may heNever be great, with collar, cross, and chain ;No, nor be ever Angel, if, O God !He be a fallen Angel at the last.(After a pauseUncle, you know, is sacristan ; and uncle307 )Had once an uncle who was parish priest.John. He was the man who sang so merrilyThose verses which few scholars understand,Yet which they cannot hide away, nor driveThe man from memory after forty years.Marg. (sings) Our brightest pleasures are reflected pleasures,And they shine sweetest from the cottage-wall.John. The very same.Marg. We understand them, John !John. An inkling. But your uncle sacristanHath neither sword nor spur.Marg. It was a sword,A flaming sword, but innocent, I saw ;And I have seen in pictures such as that,And in the hands of Angels borne on clouds.He may defend our faith, drive out the Turk,And quench the Crescent in the Dana stream.John. Thou, who begannest softly, finest nowShrill as a throstle.Marg. Have we then no causeTo sing as throstle after sign thus strange ?John, Because it was so strange, must we believex2308 )The rather?Marg. Yes ; no fire was in the house,No splinter, not a spark : the Virgin's chinShone not with rush light under it ; 'twas out,For night was almost over, if not past,And the Count's chapel has not half that blazeOn the Count's birth-day, nor the ball at night.Ah surely, surely fare like our's sends upNo idle fumes ; nor wish nor hope of mineFashion'd so bright a substance to a formSo beautiful There must be truth in it.John. There shall be then. Your uncle's sacristyShall hold the armour quite invisible,Until our little Martin some fine dayBursts the door open, spurr'd, caparisoned,Dukes lead his bridle, princes tramp behind.He may be pope who knows?Marg. Are you in earnest ?But if he should be pope, will he love us ?Or let us (O yes sure he would!) love him ?Nor slink away, ashamed ? Pope, no ; not pope,But bishop (ay?) he may be ? There are few309 )Powerfully folks than uncle Zimmerman.Promise he scarce would give us, but a winkOf hope he gave, to make a chorister.John. If thou wilt find materials, were his words.Marg. I did not mark the words ; they were too lightAnd yet he never breaks his troth.John. Not he :No, he would rather break his fast ten times.Do not look seriously when Church allows,I mean ; no more ; six days a week ; not seven.I have seen houses where the Friday cheeseWas not (in my mind) cut with Thursday knife.Marg. O now for shame ! such houses cannot stand.Prythee talk reason As the furnace-mouthShows only fire, so your's shows laughter only.Choristers have been friars our's may beAnd then a father abbot.John. At one leap,As salmon up Schaffhausen.Just the sameMarg. ThenJohn. Ring the bells ! Martin is pope, by Jove!310 )LINES,ON LEAVING A PLACE WHERE ONE HAD DWELT MANY YEARS.BY R. M. MILNES, ESQ.THERE are some moments in each lifeWith strange and wayward feelings rife,When certain words and certain thingsStrike on the heart unwonted strings,And waken forth some solemn toneTheir nature yet has never known :And it is thus, when from some place,As from a long familiar face,Though you may wish the chain to sever,Still are you sad to part for ever.311 )Perchance twas an unlovely spot,Perchance too that you loved it not,Perchance that in that place had beenDramas of many a cloudy scene,That there the first fresh tear was wept,Or youth's impatient vigil kept,That not a day you there had spentKept its unconquered merriment,Market by the free heart's earliest throesAnd chronicled by childhood's woes,Though soulless men may wonder whyYou heaved the involuntary sigh,And how the loss your soul opprestOf that ill cherish when possest,Yet when the thinking eye has castOne look and knows it is the last,And while that look is fixt behind,In every melancholy windA myriad sorrowing voices come,The sighs of a remembered home,A long and terrible farewellPronounced by lips invisible :When many an eye with rapture gleaming,And many a smile with joyance teeming,That may have saved you from despair,Or lightened up your sojourn there,By after-misery sorely tried,In death embalmed and sanctified,Have a new life within your brain,And seem to gaze and beat again,Then thoughts of pain are all forgot,And pleasure's memory passes not ;Yet this by some distortion strangeIts very being fain must changeAnd dim with gloom that parting hour,Using a stern reflective power,As the low trembling spirit straysAmid the smiles of other days.These are the eras of Existence,The seasons these when all resistanceTo times and fates must ever seemA futile consoling dream.313 )So much of life, we feel, is pastWhen e'er we murmur forth " the last,"So nearer are we to the shoreWhere time and things of time are o'er,Where all is Present, and the PastOf aught can never be the Last.314 )SONNET,BY THE REV. C. STRONG.I THANK them for their work, the pious deadWho, strong in faith, this sacred pile begun,Each Sire, through ages, leaving to his SonThe growing walls, till all was perfected.Here, in these echoing aisles sublime be readThe Scriptures, here God's grace be sought and won,Not in that curtain'd nook, as if to shunThe gaze of men, and stint the living bread :Summon thy Preachers, those of loftiest mood,And from the lanes, and, from the highways brought,At thy wide gates let in the Multitude ;Nourish thy Children as a Mother ought,And thou shalt stand as Church hath rarely stood,Based on the love of those whom thou hast taught.315 )BYRON IN GREECE.BY C. A. ELTON, ESQ.O THOU pure sky of Greece ! most lucid domeOf all the heavens that makes the sapphire pale ;Within thy depths the mountain hath its home,Whose head is cleft by that disporting valeWhich Delphi's towers o'erlooked ; O could I roamThe craggy hollows of each upland daleWhere bursts the bay-tree, and, within the cave,List the chimed echoes of its vapoury wave !Then should those priestesses, that served of yoreIn temples of the Sun, the guardian maidsOf medicinal spells' and legends' lore,Threading with voice and lyre their altar's shades,Or kindling turret-torch on sea-beat shore,Isle-nymphs or Syrens, but, in thy green glades,As Muses known, all blooming appearTo unveil'd sight, with lute, and mask, and sphere.316 )And on their tongue a thousand thrilling talesShould dwell, and glorious shapes around them throng,Barbaric warriors in their brazen mails,And queens, half goddesses, should haste along ;Ulysses reef his tempest-shattered sails,And Circe warble her enchanted song :Mother of old romance ! O fancy's child !Fain I would catch those numbers quaint and wild !As he had caught them who by moonlight layHalf up the sacred hill ; when beauty smoteHis vision, moulded of the lunar ray,And sighs, and murmur'd kisses nigh would floatWarm-breathing in his ear ; in that soft dayShone pearly smiles, and looks that made him doatAlmost in dreamy madness, and leap wildIn his traced slumber like a happy child.He who beheld along that gloomiest valeGigantic Gods, outstretched in mute despair,Lie motionless, and scann'd the features paleOf ancient Saturn with his grief blanched hair,317 )And saw the brightness, as from brazen mail,Shot by Hyperion through the dusky air,When on the cliff he stood, and gazed below,In ruth and anger of his passion woe.Such lays I would were mine ; or were it givenTo sing thee, Greece ! starting from thy thrall ;By thy keen atagan the turban riven,And Scio breathing from her bloody fall ;The Angel arm of Justice bared from heaven,The tyrant trembling in his vacant hall :The solemn hush'd suspense of patient earth,And throes of Nations struggling to the birth.Then would I snatch thy own Alcoran lyre,And wake its chords to that immortal dayWhich wrapp'd the Egyptian prow in lurid fire :But none save He could build such lofty layW T ho chose for thee and with thee to expire,Breathing too soon his lavish'd life away ;And fixing on the azure of thy skiesThe last fond glances of his fading eyes.318 )And since to die, 'twere best he died with thee;Thy cause has twin'd its laurel round a nameWhich many a blight of cold severityHad breathed upon ; nor intellectual fameCould win for him a little charity,Nor for some human stains forbearance claim ;And on thy lap he should have slept in pride,Whose mother land a sepulchre denied.Yet will the music of her stately tongueSound on for ever through his boundless verse ;Yet they who had his noble spirit stungReceived forgiveness as his keenest curse;And if his strain the traitor despot wrungThe people's unsought tears bedew'd his hearse ;They saw against his dust the temple closed,Where kings and slaves of kings in pomp reposed.And it was fitting thus ; and with the freeHis tomb should have been raised, and Theseus' fameReceived the generous stranger of the sea,Who flung back on corrupted power disdain,319 )Opening his breast to wide humanity,And claiming kindred with the few, whose chainTheir own nerved hands had snapp'd ; and there his graveHe should have found with those he toil'd to save.Yet deem not, tyrants ! that his martyr's toilHas wither'd like a crush'd and sapless leaf;That he has left his print upon the soil,To be out-trodden by the baffled chief,In desperation of his fierce recoil ;There lives th' undying energy of griefIn each Palladian breast ; there lives his flameOf greatness, the salvation of his name.320 )THE DEPARTED.BY BERNARD BARTON, ESQ.MUCH as we prize the living worthOf those who, day by day,Tread with us on this toilsome earthIts devious, thorny way;A charm more hallow'd and profound,By purer feelings fed,Imagination casts aroundThe memory of the dead !They form the living links which bindOur spirits to that stateOf Being angles, pure, refin'd,For which in Faith we wait :321 )By them, through holy Hope and Love,We feel, in hours serene,Connected with a world above,Immortal, and unseen !For such " are like the stars by dayWithdrawn from mortal eye,"Yet holding unperceiv'd their wayIn Heaven's unclouded sky;The mists of Earth to us may marThe splendour of their light,But they, beyond Sun, Moon, or Star,Shine on in glory bright.In the brief world of chance and changeWho has not felt and knownHow much may alter and estrangeHearts fondly deem'd our own ?But they whom we lament awhile,Not lost, but gone before,"Doubt cannot darken, Sin defile,Or Frailty alter more.Y322 )For Death its sacred seal hath setOn bright and by-gone hours ;And they whose absence we regret,Seem, more than ever, OUR'S !Our's by the pledge of love, and faith,And hope of Heaven on high,A trust triumphant over DeathIn immortality !323 )THE OUTLAW.*BY THE LATE LADY NORTHAMPTON.COME, sit within this dim alcove, where all the glare is lostThat from the festal torches' fire along the crowd is tost ;And if thou needs must know, sweet maid, what face the mask conceals,And if thou needs must know what name my parentage reveals,First swear upon this crucifix, which round my neck I wear,That never shall thy faithful tongue the fatal words declare.And yet, though I would trust thee, dear, with life, and soul, and heart,I cannot find the hardihood that secret to impart.My name is long forgotten, or remains but on the grave,Which tenantless my kindred raised, their house's fame to save.And where shall I begin, sweet maid ? for all my griefs ariseFrom one who was as fair as thou, but far more cold and wise :For a long year my tale she heard, and seem'd as she approvedI thought her coldness modesty, nor doubted that she loved.One night, when late returning from a friendly cup of wine,I saw the light which should be quench'd within her window shine.This poem is founded on a Roman ballad of little poetical merit.324 )I saw her lattice open, and beneath the casement stoodThe friend whom I had dearest held, the chieftain of my blood.Had I believed that such a snake from such a house could rise,I might have watch'd the traitor's steps, and guarded safe my prize ;But princely honour flourish'd in the branches of our tree,And in each swelling vein I felt no traitor thence could be.Two brothers watching stood apart, who, guarding him from harm,By signal made of my approach, convey'd a quick alarm.I fear'd them not, but question'd loud who dar'd the faith to proveOf one whom all the city knew betrothed to my love !Short question serv'd, short answer pass'd, my dagger-hilt was strong,I struck the felon on the face amidst his ruffian throng.I would not he had died before his bloody mouth had wornThe deep disgrace of such a blow as ne'er his name had borne.And then my faithful dagger, which had never known a stain,Struck through and through the recreant's heart, and through andthrough again.A few short steps I saw him run, then springing with a bound,He fell stiff dead and motionless upon the slippery ground.I planted firm for my defence my back against the wall,I dealt my vengeance recklessly, expecting still to fall ;The guard came up, and pistol-shots along the night were heard,But had I borne a charmed life, I could not less have fear'd.325 )I cannot tell their numbers, for I neither saw nor felt,Invulnerable seem'd my arm, and deep the blows I dealt;Till seeing where the gather'd crowd less thickly seem'd to throng,I rush'd in frantic haste the empty midnight streets along.From street to street, from turn to turn, at last I gain'd the portWhere Tiber's hardy boatmen to Ripest's wharf resort.And next, as though my worthless life were Heaven's peculiar care,I found a friend who sheltered me, and gave me harbour there.His boat was loaded with its freight, the Sabine shore to seek,And ere the morning sun was high he loos'd her from the creek.And while a favouring wind the sails right up the stream impell'd,He comforted my wretchedness, and from despair withheld.He gave me store of weapons good, of gunpowder and ball,He gave me all my plight required, whatever should befall.And lastly, landing on the bank, he guided me arightInto the forest wilderness, to save my life by flight.'Twas little that I cared for life, and yet I would not dieA base and common spectacle to glut the vulgar eye,So in the forest wilderness a banish'd man I stood,My only safety solitude, my only home the wood.Lord, Lord, how dark the twilight closed, how darkly fell the night!I would have giv'n my chance of life, could I have purchased light.326 )It seem'd the hours stood motionless, the sun forgot to rise,To drive th' eternal darkness from the heavy cloudy skies.At last it came, the slow grey dawn and when the sun was highI slunk into a darksome cave, to hide from every eye.But yestereve, my love was blest, my hands no blood had shed,And here I stood a murderer, from justice who had fled.Yet still my soul no guilt confess'd, nor could I yet refrainFrom wishing that the felon lived, to kill him once again.And days to days were added, and the months began to pass,My home within the darksome cave, my bed upon the grass,Wild nuts and berries were my food, and pinch'd by hunger sore,I often long'd the time were come to give the struggle o'er.The winter's rain, the winter's snow beat cold upon my shed,The stormy winds were pitiless, and whistled round my head ;And oft with racking pain throughout my aching limbs I foundHow wretched is the outlaw's fate who sleeps upon the ground.My tangled hair and bushy beard had overgrown my face,And suffering left upon my cheeks its deep and hollow traceIn rags my tatter'd vesture hung, my arms alone were good,And daily as I polish'd them, they tempted me to blood ;Nay, start not, gentle listener, nor think me callous grown,The only blood I long'd to shed was in good sooth my own.327 )At last an armed band was sent, commission'd straight to takeThe grisly wight whom some had seen to skulk within the brake.I would their courage had been tasked to gain some nobler end,Nor forced my hand to do them hurt, my freedom to defend.Ten men they were, all arm'd, and skill'd their quarry's lair to findI stood to wait for their approach a mass of rock behind.The friendly bushes shaded me, an aim I coolly took,I shot the leader of the band, just as he cross'd the brookHe fell his length within the stream, his followers turned back,And through the green wood's wilderness I chose a farther track.Their bodies lay unburied there, not one remain'd to tellThe place where by a single arm his slaughter'd comrades fell.It was a work of butchery, but I was used to blood,And well the fools deserved their fate, who such as me withstood.I think the judge would scarce condemn, or call me guilty still,I cannot see what guilt can be a murderous band to killYet though my deed was justified, before my eyes I sawWrit on each tree, each precipice, the strict forbidding law.'Twas all delusion if thou wilt, but it pursued me near ;I fled from it in vain, the words would still in fire appear.From rock to rock, from hill to hill I ran, but still it came;Still, traced on every cloud, it glared in characters of flame.t 328 )I cannot tell the period that in this new torment pass'dSometimes I think that years on years their added burden cast.I went at times to sleep in caves where memory pass'd away,And woke in other countries far, 'mid paths unknown to stray.At last a mountain lake I reach'd, a solitary spot,But whence or where the waters flow'd the outlaw heeded not.'Twas then in deep despair I thought to give the struggle o'er,To throw life as a burden down, and fight for it no more.Within the lake's deep waters, where in haggard guise I stood,I flung my trusty burnish'd arms far o'er the tranquil flood ;And as the flood closed over them, my heart began to melt,And on my pale and hollow cheek, long stranger tears I felt.Beside the lake, upon the sod, in trance of thought, I lay ;From my oppress'd and aching breast, a load had passed away.It seem'd as if an angry sky no more its terrors aim'd,But me, a wretched wanderer, my guardian angel claim'd.I long'd a human face to see, which long I sought to shun,I felt as if my life anew its course had just begun,I ponder'd what I next should do, but ere my way I chose,From the deep lake's entangled shore, a cry for help arose.Oh, sweetly sounds the human voice, when long our deaden'd earNo voice, save of the wolf and owl, has learnt to watch or hear !329 )Towards the thicket bank I rush'd, and piercing through its shade,I found within its wilderness a little open gladeAnd scatter'd on the shelter'd grass, a flock of sheep was there,And struggling in the waters deep, a maid of beauty rare.Again she cried for help, and sank to help her quick I flewAnd soon in safety to the bank my lovely burden drew.Long lay she there insensible, at last she open her eyes,And scream in terror, when she saw my wild and sad disguise :I strove to calm her terrors, and my words were not in vain,The maiden's courage seem'd revived, she dared to look again,And spite of all my savage mien, her face less fear express'd,Believing me no worse to be than wretched and distress'd.Poor man," she said, " if aught I have, or aught I am can aid,You shall not find your kindness saved from death a thankless maid.My master's sheep I may not give, but share my lonely meal,And how to prove my gratitude your prudence must reveal."I told her that I wish'd to hide where I might see her near,And pray'd her for a little space to speak that I might hear.I told her that the wilderness had been my dwelling long,And that it was a heaven to me to hear a human tongue.She prattled on, and won me from the depth of my despair ;I felt that yet the world contain'd much that is good and fair:330 )From her rich master's board each day she brought me down a dole,And softly from her artless lips the words of comfort stole.A lamb was drowning in the lake," she said, " when I beheld,And flew to save the creature's life, by prudence not withheld :Beneath my feet the ground gave way, I sank the waves beneath,And thou, good friend, wert there to save my struggling life from death.'Twas on the gracious Virgin's help I call'd in my distress,And present help was sent to me from the lone wilderness.Betake thee to thy prayers, good friend, she will not let thee pine,And if thy prayers are all too weak, they shall be help'd by mine,And if a careful messenger thy errand safe can do,And if an earnest advocate thy friends to ruth may woo,And if a faithful counsellor may help thee, thou shalt seeThy messenger, thy counsellor, thine advocate in me."It matters not to tell the path, which, folio wed when begun,Through this poor grateful girl's address my desperate cause has won.But though in Rome's proud city I might show my head again,A prouder feeling in my heart compels me to refrain.Once more will I behold the haunts where my gay youth was pass'd,Once more will look on these fair scenes, a moment, 'tis the last :Once more beneath the covering mask I'll see the circle gay,Where of the place which once I held all trace is swept away.331 )The fairest hand I'll clasp in mine, the gayest dance will join,The loveliest face will gaze upon, that loveliest face is thine.'Tis true thy brow is somewhat sad, thy cheek a little pale,Yet in that face a sympathy has drawn me from my tale.No, no ! the mask cannot be rais'd, the visage that it hidesWould blight thine eyes to look upon, those eyes where pity bides.No, no ! the mask must never fall, the ghastly face to showOf one the world has long forgot, and thou must never know.But if again the reeling dance thou wouldest lead once more,And trace the whirling giddy round along the polish'd floor ;Again I'll clasp the fairest hand of all the crowd in mine,Again the mazes intricate with nimble feet will join ;And if tomorrow's dawning light that takes thee to thy home,Give leisure for the thought of him who there shall never come,Turn that kind thought into a prayer, such as an angel prays,For thy mysterious partner's sake, that shunn'd his mask to raise ;Pray that the peace of Heaven may teach him calm his lot to bear,Beneath St. Francis' weeds of brown, which by that hour he'll wear.SONG.BY S. AUGUSTUS O'BRIEN, ESQ.I.NAY, smile not thus, in other yearsThat smile had power to bless,For then to share thy very tearsWas perfect happiness.Think not I wish to ask againWhat never more may be :I would not give thy bosom pain,But smile not thus on me.333 )ii.Thine eye 'mid crowds I will not shun,I'll bosom my despair,To think I am to thee but oneAmong the many there.I wish thy life one sunny dream,From memory's winter free :Oh be what I can only seem,But smile not thus on mein.Hereafter thou may'st find my heart,Though wildly throbbing now,Taught to perform its treacherous part,And calm perchance as thou.But while I yet the task must prove,How hard, forgetting thee,Oh bear with him thou once did love,And smile not thus on me.334 )THE TOY OF THE GIANT'S CHILD.FROM THE GERMAN OF CHAMISSO.BY G. F. RICHARDSON, ESQ.BURG Niedeck is a mountain in Alsace, high and strong,Where once a noble castle stood the giants held it long ;Its very ruins now are lost, its site is waste and lone,And if ye seek for giants there, they all are dead and gone.The giant's daughter once came forth the castle gate before,And played with all a child's delight, beside her father's door ;Then sauntering down the precipice, the girl did gladly go,To see, perchance, how matters went in the little world below.335 )With few and easy steps she pass'd the mountain and the woodAt length near Haslach, at the place where mankind dwell, she stood ;And many a town and village fair, and many a field so green,Before her wondering eyes appear'd, a strange and curious scene.And as she gazed, in wonder lost, on all the scene around,She saw a peasant at her feet, a-tilling of the ground ;The little creature crawl'd about so slowly here and there,And, lighted by the morning sun, his plough shone bright and fair.Oh, pretty plaything," cried the child," " I'll take thee home with me;'Then with her infant hands she spread her kerchief on her knee,And cradling horse and man and plough all gently on her arm,She bore them home with cautious steps, afraid to do them harm !She hastes with joyous steps and quick, (we know what children are,)And spying soon her father out, she shouted from afar,Oh father, dearest father, such a plaything I have found,I never saw so fair a one on our own mountain ground."336 )Her father sat at table then, and drank his wine so mild,And smiling with a parent's smile, he asks the happy child,What struggling creature hast thou brought so carefully to me ?Thou least for very joy, my girl, come, open, let us see."She opes her kerchief carefully, and gladly you may deem,And shows her eager sire the plough, the peasant and his team ;And when she'd placed before his sight the new-found pretty toy,She clasp'd her hands and scream'd aloud, and cried for very joy.But her father look'd quite seriously, and shaking slow his head,What hast, thou brought me home, my child? this is no toy," he said ;Go, take it quickly back again, and put it down below,The peasant is no plaything, girl, how could'st thou think him so?"So go, without a sigh or sob, and do my will," he said;For know, without the peasant, girl, we none of us had bread:'Tis from the peasant's hardy stock, the race of giants are ;The peasant is no plaything, child, no God forbid he were !"337 )A FISHER'S SONG OF INVITATION.COME, cheerful friend, away with me,A sweet west wind is blowing;A wholesome shade is o'er the lea,The distant herds are lowing.With limber rod and dainty flies,Let us the smiling season prize;For ah, there is no knowingWhat may fall, or ere a daySuit so well our skilful play.Spring has donned her bodice green,Though yet of palest hue,Hemmed with many a flow'ret's sheen,All so bright and new.Hark, from every brake and grove,Inimitable songs of love,Where every swain is true.In fairest guise, with sweetest strains,Nature woods us to the plains.338 )Should the noontide's gladsome beamAll too brightly play,And shadows trembling on the streamScare the startled prey ;Scholars we of Walton's school,Seated by the glassy poolWill charm the hours away,While our grateful hearts shall blessThe Lord of Nature's loveliness.For it is the Angler's joyThat his recreation,Though it be a very toy,Yet hath no vexation.Wildest storm, and heaviest rain,Can but urge him home againTo his occupation ;His walk the while shall work him good,And sweeten temper, home and blood.339 )THE MERRY BACHELOR.FOUNDED ON THE OLD SCOTCH SONG OFWILLIE WAS A WANTON WAG."BY MRS. JOANNA Bailie.WILLIE was a wanton wag,The blithest lad that e'er I saw;Of field and flood he was the brag,And carried a' the gree 1 awa'.340 )And was na' Willie stark and keenWhen he gaed to the weapon shawHe wan the prizes on the green,And cheer'd the feasters in the ha'.His head was wise, his heart was lie,His truth was fair without a flaw ;And still by every honest chief'His word was holden as a law.And was na' Willie still our prideWhen in his gallant deer array 'd,He wan the bruise 2 and kiss'd the Bride,While pipes the wedding welcome play'd.And aye he led the foremost danceWi' winsome maidens basket braw ;And gave to each a merry glanceThat stole awhile her heart awa'.341 )The Bride forgot her simple GroomAnd every lass her trysted 3 Joe,Yet nae man's brow on Will could gloom,They liked his rousing blitheness so.Our good Mess John laugh'd wi' the lave, 4The Dominie for all his lair 5Could scarcely like himself behave,While a' was glee and revel there.A joyous sight was Willie's faceBaith far and near in every spot ;In ha' received with kindly grace,And welcomed to the lowly cot.The Carlines left their housewife's war,The barnes shouted Willie's name;The Colles 6 too would fidge and barkAnd wag his tail when Willie came.342 )But Willie now has cross'd the main,And he has been overhang awa' ;Ah, would he were returned againTo drive the deafness 7 frae us a' !1 Gree. Honour or preference.2 Bruise. A race at a wedding, the winner being rewarded with thefirst kiss of the bride, and the first ladle-ful of broth.3 Trysted. Met by appointment.4 Lave. Rest.5 Lairds Learning.6 Colles. Sheep-dog,7 Deafness. Dullness.343 )MAY.A TRANSLATIONFROM SOME MODERN Alcaeus.BY THE REV. JOHN FRERE.HAIL, month of Beauty, dedicate to Song,To Sports, and Wine, and festive Joy,When the three Sisters lead alongThe easy Dance with Cytherea's Boy.Hail, pleasurable Season, and the GraceRenew'd continual of the changeful Year,Bursting afresh, new-born, upon the RaceThat travels on apace, again to disappear.344 )In the first Age, the golden gladsome Age,When the great Sun began his course,With gentle Force his over-violence thou didst assuage ;And the hot Atmosphere with Glory clearShot through, and Radiance new,Thou didst subdue :Then with an even Temper, year by year,It was thy task to soothe the Winter drear,And the kind Soil,Productive without Toil,By warm west Winds to cherish and to cheer.Thine is the Season and the blessed AirAbout the favour'd Happy-Islands blown,Where painful Age, and Sicknesses, and Care,And Sorrows are unknown.Thine is the BreathWhose Murmur soothes the Land of Death ;And stirs the dismal Cypress Trees, that moveO'er silent Lethe, in the silent Grove.345 )And, may be, when the End of TimeBy Fire renews the perishable Globe,An Atmosphere like thine shall robeOur spiritual Forms, in the clear ClimeOf Earth recovering her golden Prime.Hail, glory of the transient Year ;Glad is thy Prospect, and thy Memory dear ;Sweetly Thou dost record a vanish'd Age,And that which is to come full sweetly dost presage.346 )SING TO ME A SONG OF HEAVEN.SING to me a song of Heav'nSweet lady, sing to meFor surely 'tis a heavenly voiceWhich God hath given to thee.Thou hast sung me many lovely songs,Their sweetness charmed my ear ;But there was none that spoke of Heaven,And 'tis such I long to hear.347 )'Twas but last night I dreamed of HeavenOh how beautiful it seemed !The tears will come into mine eyes,When I think of what I dreamed.The lovely glorious things ! I sawThe Angels round me move ;They seemed all made of sunbeams bright ;Their eyes were full of love.I heard them sing oh such a song !'Twas like no earthly thingAs if their hearts ran o'er with joy,And they could not choose but sing.How fair those Angels were ! MethoughtThere was one had eyes like thee ;Oh lady, sing to me like them ;Sing a song of Heaven to me !"348 )The lady looked upon the boy,As he stood with upturned face ;His large dark gentle eyes up-raisedWith a beseeching grace.Those eyes with their deep inward light,So earnest, yet so mild ;You would have thought his very soulSat in their orbs and smiled.The lady looked and did not speak,But she took him to her knee ;She prest him to her heart and weptWept long and silently.Then in low broken voice she said,When speech at last was given,Oh were my heart like thine sweet child !For of such as thou is Heaven !"349 )KING ALEXANDER III. OF SCOTLAND.BY MISS D. M. Elephant.THE King sits at his wedding-feast in Edward's halls of glee,While healths went round with beakers' clang and merry minstrelsy :His youthful bride who sat beside shone bright in beauty's glow,Then why should cloud of sadness shroud the bridegroom's careful brow.He thinks upon his early love, the partner of his youth,Her royal virtues, matron grace, her tenderness and truth ;And all the pledges of their love, that, to the grave gone down,Have forced him seek another bride, for welfare of his crown.350 )That festive board graced many a lord of nobleness and worth,But many a one was lacking now that used to share its mirth ;Who cold beneath the stormy wave in mortal slumbers layWith good Sir Patrick Spent, who sail'd for fatal Norway.King Alexander strove to rouse his mind from all the trainOf thoughts for such a time unmeet, as saddening as vain ;His bride deserved a better cheer, and in his grief-worn breastHer smiles at last rekindled love, a long unwonted guest.The banquet o'er, the tables drawn, the revels are begun,With dance and pageant gay and proud, the night is drawing on,When lo ! from out the mummers' band, that up the hall advance,With scythe and hour-glass issues Death, and woods the Queen to dance.Aghast with horror and affright, in wild confusion tost,The place and presence all forgot, each heart in fear is lost ;The King alone, unawed, though chafed, bids seize that grisly form,And see who dares by such device the festival deform.351 )The spectre shape was seen no more, and how it passed awayOf all the shuddering bridal guests no one could guess or say ;Mid whispers and conjectures sad, the broken revels closeThe wise betake themselves to prayer, the thoughtless to repose.It was in grey Dunfermline's walls, the King kept Lenten tide;The year had not fulfill'd it's round since he brought home his bride.To her he pledged his faith and word, that, whatsoe'er gainsay,He would be with her at Kinghorn ere break of Easter-day.Loud blew the wind on Easter-eve, the night came darkly in,It see'd a wild ill-omen'd hour a journey to begin;But Knight, and Lord, and Priest have bent the suppliant knee in vain,The King refuses to abide till morn return again.King Alexander mounts his steed, his courtiers follow near ;But soon the monarch's headlong speed outstrips both groom and peer,Yet on the gusts of howling wind his horse's tramp is borne,As fast along the rocky coast he spurs towards Kinghorn.352 )The sound has ceased the train alone pursue their weary way ;They reach the Castle of Kinghorn an hour before the dayThe Queen was o'er her absent Lord's forgotten promise weeping,The warders on the castle wall unbroken watch were keeping.Then drear forebodings rose at once to terror and despairO'er crag, and steep, and rocky path, all scatter here and there,Till prone beneath the precipice, as dawn'd the weeping morn,The Monarch's bleeding corse was found, a mile above Kinghorn.vWith solemn pomp and sorrowing hearts his obsequies were held,His funeral games were sadly play'd on many a bloody field;And Scotland torn by civil strife, and prey to foreign foes,Endured from that disastrous time an age of war and woes.353 )ON CHILDHOOD.BY MRS. CHENEY.SWEET Infancy! life's holiday,Young Nature's freshest prime,How lightly glide thine hours awayUnsullied by a crime !Replete with innocence and joyThee harmless trifles charm ;No retrospective cares annoy,No future ills alarm.But short, too short, thy halcyon reign,For fiery youth comes on,With adolescent passions vainTo drive thee from thy throne.Then Knowledge comes but with her bringsThe knowledge too of ill,354 )Whence every earthly sorrow springs,Whence Death gained power to kill.Yet held within sage Reason's boundsThe Passions useful prove,Source of each charm that life surrounds,Of Friendship, Pity, Love.And may this gift of bounteous Heaven(As to the happy few,)Be in its mercy ever given,Beloved Child, to you !Then sheltered from each boisterous gale,From rocks and whirlpools free,Your bark of life may smoothly sailO'er an unruffled sea :Till you that blessed port attainWhere fear and danger cease,And where in cloudless glory reignEternal joy and peace.355 )THE EAGLE'S NEST.BY FRANCIS HASTINGS DOYLE, ESQ.These Verses were suggested by an Incident related in " Wild Sports ofthe West."SPEED hither, all my vassals bold,And in the brown rock's covered breastWhere yon huge fissure yawns, beholdThe ocean eagle's nest.The waves beneath in thunder flingOne awful flash of angry foam ;Above, with iron beak and wing,The Osprey wheels around her home356 )Five hundred feet of sheer ascent,As metal darkly smooth and bare,No jutting stone, no twig is lent,To help the cragsman there.Who boasts a fearless heart, and limbsLike the wild cat, or mountain roe,An eye that neither winks nor swims,Though the waves dance and shine below ?Who in that rush and whirl and glareA pulse unhurried can maintain,And face yon Eagle's fell despair,With steady hand and brain ?"In air the chosen vassal stands,Down swinging on his venturous guest :Now, now he touches it, his handsScrape round the unprotected nest.357 )Up with the conqueror, in pride and mirth !Up with the rope, the prize is won !Won is it? No By heaven and earth,His task is but begun !With claws fast clenched and eyes that gleamLike lightning when it leaps from high,The vast bird swoops with one long scream,Flung forward through the echoing sky.But gallantly and cheerilyThe hunter shakes his faithful knife,Then with strung arm and measuring eyeMakes ready for the strife.And for a moment, from betweenThe covering wings of his wild foe,His upturned face by all was seenUntroubled wholly cheek and brow :358 )But as the bold bird swept around,And keener thrilled its frantic shriek,At something in the savage soundThe hunter's heart grew weak.Those gloomy wings above him spread,Cast, as he deemed, unnatural shade ;Whilst all about the eye-balls dreadUnnatural heat and brightness played.Brave as he was, his mind unstrungFrom early childhood ever drewOmens from dreams, and blindly clungTo each wild tale that grewOn the night-covered mountain-side,Dim shapes which lurk away from men,Under the hollow mists that hideThe wailing stream and haunted glen :359 )Hence in that breathless interimEre the knife fell, like withering flameEach half-seen ghost and legend grimAcross his spirit came.His strained sense imaged that it heardThe rocks with horrid laughter rifeWhilst momently the demon-birdGrew larger into monstrous life.Wild gibbering faces flickered near,Fantastic shapes convulsed the air,A whisper glided round his ear,It is a fiend beware !"Upwards he looked to the void heaven,And downwards on the dazzling main ;Whilst fiercely round and round were driven,The surges of his eddying brain.360 )He strikes at length, but on his eyesDanced giddily the white waves's gleam,As the whirling rocks and the wavering skiesRang to the eagle's scream.There was dread silence up on high,And the tall forms of armed menShone motionless against the skyFor a brief breathing-time and thenHuge frames of giant height and boneReeled all at once like foundering ships,Whilst a low half-unconscious moanSlid from their quivering lips.Not idly from his comrades trueHissed forth that deep-drawn breath of dread,For the stout cord was severed throughTo its last link of straining thread.361 )They fall together on their kneesWith one short thrilling prayer for aidTo the good saints who rule the seas,And the blest Mother-maid.Then without words their task they ply,Sick with alternate fear and hope,Whilst the poor wretch instinctivelyClings senseless to the shivering rope.But still it holds together, stillThey lift him silently and slow,Inch after inch with steady skillUp from the depth below.Hurrah, the arm of God can makeFrail thread as firm as iron bands ;His power forbids it now to break,And safe the bloodless trembler stands362 )The agony of that affrightOne awful sign remained to show,His hair went down as black as night,It rises white as snow.363 )SONNETON Seas FORCE, A CASCADE IN MULL, WHICH AT HIGH WATERFALLS INTO THE SEA.BY THE EDITOR.Where rears on high his giant bulk Tenore,Frowning o'er blue Loch Tuath's stormy sound,And nought of man is seen, far, far around,Save some lone fisherman who plies the oar,Or kelp's white wreathed smoke on Ulva's shore :How do I love, stretch'd on thy grassy mound,Seas Force, to watch thy foaming waters bound,And listen to their wide re-echoing roar !And while its loveliness the scene endears,Teaching a sad and solemn truth, appearsThy fall abrupt into th' engulfing sea ;For human life with all its smiles and tears,Its follies and its frailties, hopes and fears,Oft runs as headlong to Eternity.364 )BORJEWSKI.*BY MISS RANDALL.HARK ! to the trumpet loudly braying,Hark to the war-horse proudly neighingMid the battle's roar !Now host on host is fiercely clashing,And gleaming brands are wildly flashing,All stained with gore !Rise, rise, Sarmatia for the foeIn countless numbers rushes nowTo the deadly fight ;Be Freedom's banner now unfurl'd,And Freedom's bold defiance hurl'dAt the despot's might !Pronounced Borjeski,365 )Who is he of the noble mienDashing the foemen's ranks between,Like a meteor brand ?With swelling form and fiery eyeShouting " For Death or Victory,Our God and our Fatherland !"Borjewski, long as Poland's nameShall live in the deathless voice of fame,Thy deeds shall beEngraved on thy country's tomb,Thy mem'ry hallowing the doomOf her lost Liberty!As foaming waves 'gainst the moveless rock,Are Russia's legions in the shock,To that fearless band ;While echoing loud Borjewski's cryOn, on, for Death or Victory,Our God and our Fatherland!"366 )Why checks the chief his coal-black steed?Why droops his hand from the daring deedHe had sought before ?He turns him from the field of fight,For Poland's star hath set in night,To rise no more !Hushed are the sounds on that battle-plain,Save when the wailing moan of painMeets Pity's ear,As some parting soul from a hero's breast,Forsakes its home of cold unrest,For a brighter sphere !And where is he of the noble mien,Who foremost 'gainst the foe was seenOn that dread day ?And where the friend that fought and bledBy Borjewski's side, as he onward led,In the gory fray ?367 )Aye ! dash the tear from thy gushing eye,'Twere vain to dream he will not dieThat ye must not partThe victor hath pronounced his doom,A traitor's death a traitor's tomb,For that brave young heart !'Tis past and on a distant strandThe exile from his own fair landHath sought repose ;But his spirit lingers where it stood,On that gory plain dyed with the bloodOf his country's foes !Now vainly in the festive hall,Vainly in friendship's sweeter thrall,He strives to quellThe torturing agony of soulThat brooks not rest that spurns control-likethe ocean's swell !Noble he was, and pure of mind,As woman gentle, and as kind.Save when the thoughtOf Poland's wrongs, and Poland's woes,On memory's page tumultuous roseWith anguish fraught !But hark ! again the trumpet's sound,In echoes shrill is heard around,At Freedom's call ;Sarmatia's chief hath grasp'd the blade,Once more he stands in arms array'd,To fight or fall !Far on Hispania's bleeding land,He heads once more his dauntless band,Of the brave and free,Fiercely they urge their gallant steedsOn on to the charge Borjewski leadsTo death or victory !369 )The field is fought the day is won,And calmly beams the parting SunOn the sleeping brave !No more he wakes at the trumpet's sound,In glory's arms he hath meetly foundA hero's Grave !He hath pass'd away like the lightning flash,Mid the thunder peal of the battle's crashHath his spirit fled !But the meteor-light of his young careerStill hovers o'er the lowly bierOf the mighty dead !Peace to thine ashes ! Lightly restThe turf upon thy generous breast,Thou young and brave !Thou hast sought and found, on a stranger strand,The boon denied in thy Father-landA Freeman's Grave !370 )TOWN AND COUNTRY,A SONNET,BY THE REV. JOHN EAGLES.The City's full of death dank Church-yard wallsAnd black processions. In the face of manCare-worn 'tis writ, " Thy life is but a span !"It cankered Beauty in her painted halls.O, let me to the Forest ! Nature callsFrom her perpetual streams, that ever ranWith the same music since the world began,And softest breath wafts every leaf that falls :Still blest, for from their golden traceries,Beautiful ever, beam all beauteous thingsAnd Life, awakening, on her green bed liesUpon old stems a greener leafage springsTrees wave their sun-lit arms, each twin'd in each,And merry birds fly round, and gift them all with speech.371 )THE NINTH PLAGUE OF EGYPT.ANONYMOUS.DARKNESS is brooding o'er the mighty landOf Egypt's kingly pomp, and mystic lore ;E'en from her laden ocean's merchant strandTo where the distant Nile's blue cataracts roar ;Thebes' hundred gates and Memphis' pyramidAlike are darkly hid.Silence is on the land ; no busy humOf active life no warrior's clanging treadNo shouts from thronged processions mingling comeNo solemn chaunt by priestly voices ledDarkness and Silence, twin-born sons of Night,Their kindred sway unite.372 )And yet this is not night night the calm restOf wearied nature ; when we seem to hearThe measured leavings of her placid breastIn each low sound that dies upon the ear ;And wand'ring breezes and light shifting gleamsTell that she sleeps and dreams.This is no healthful slumber 'tis a swoon,A fearful swoon a sleep as of the dead.The pause of anxious fear, awaiting soonThe dimly visioned object of its dread ;When the hushed bosom fears to pant or sob,And the heart dares not throb.And they, earth's human habitants, do theySlumber in wonted calm ? or do they shareIn nature's agony of dumb dismay,Th' expecting pause, and then the dark despairWhen Morning came and went Night passed away,And yet there was no day !373 )They sit and move not the young child hath fearedTo move or cry, and silently hath died !The mother mute and spell-bound hath not daredTo feed her first-born fainting by her side !The son hath felt his father's sinking headAnd hath not sought to aid.They sit and speak not love, compassion, plaintOf fear or sorrow, all are silent thereThere are no words of trust to cheer the faintNo whispered comfort, no soft voice of prayer ;For the thick darkness in their soul had dweltDarkness that might be felt.And whence the darkness ? The sad troubled soulHath asked, and in itself hath found replyIt is His will, who bids the Sun to rollHis car of brightness through the gladdened sky;And He who spake the word, and there was light,Hath said, " Let there be Night."374 )FROM THE PERSIAN OF SUZENO.BY R. M. MILNES, ESQ.FOUR things, O God, I have to offer TheeWhich Thou hast not in all thy treasury :My Nothingness, my sad Necessity,My fatal Sin, and earnest Penitence,Receive these gifts, and take the giver hence !375 )RECOLLECTIONSJ. W. AND HIS SISTER.How oft, sweet children ! are ye broughtBy fancy to the eye of thought !Thou first, whose active feats expressThe dawn of native manliness ;The boyish nature leaping outIn the bold step and frolic shout ;While yet in that soft eye of thineThere dwells a spirit more benign,With smiles half-bashfulness, half-joy,So coyly sweet and sweetly coy ;And looks of shy yet playful grace,Dimpling that half-averted face.376 )Nor less, sweet babe ! hast thou thy partIn the fond memory of the heart ;For thou hast many arts to moveAnd charm each secret spring of love.The beauty of the summer skiesHas settled in those soft blue eyes ;The morning's first faint rosy streakHas tinged with red that velvet cheek :And in that placid face we seeThe charm of infant dignity;The sweet serenity of soul,Where yet no waves of passion roll ;The calmness of the heart which seemsTo dwell among its own pure dreams ;And which, as yet, of life hath provedBut this to love and to be loved.Yes, oft before my mental eyeYe pass like fairy visions by ;But most does thought recall the sightWitnessed one well-remembered night.The boy beside the nurse's feet377 )Had ta'en that eve his lowly seat,Calm and contemplative of mien,With smile so cloudlessly serene,And upturned look that sought replyIn that sweet sister's infant eyeWith air of pleased protecting love,And conscious dignity, he strove,By oft repeated word, to teachThe just-learned mysteries of speech ;Still mingling with his lore the whileThe sweeter speech of look and smile,The joyous laugh, the fond caress,The name of lisping tenderness.And she with answering love and glee,Half-leaping from the nurse's knee,As though another smile to claim ;While through her trembling panting frame,Her little heart so spake and stirred,That every gesture was a word ;Her eyes with laughing lustre glancing,Her limbs all bounding, quivering, dancing,In joy that knew not bound nor measure,378 )A restless ecstasy of pleasure.Oh, who could gaze upon the sight,Nor bless you with a dear delight,And fondly pray that love like thisMight crown your after-life with bliss !Full soon will passing years effaceThe fleeting charms of infant grace ;And oft too soon will time destroyYouth's airy buoyancy of joy.But love is a diviner thing,Unchanging and perishing ;The purest relic left to tellOf that sweet state from which we fell ;A foretaste of the joys above,And sent from God for God is love.379 )VERSES,BY PROFESSOR Smith.OH, shades of the past ! rise not thus to my viewYe are Sorrow and Pain I would bid you adieuOh, scenes of the future ! approach not so near !Away from my gaze ye are Darkness and Fear.Cease, cease, thou poor mortal ! thy wishes are vainThe future must come, and the past must remain ;Alas that thy cheek should thus change and look pale-thepresent is thine and it yet may avail.380 )SONNET,ON SEEING A BEVY OF Humming-birds IN A GLASS CASE.BY THE REV. CHARLES TURNER TENNYSON.FOR vacant song behold a shining theme !These dumb-struck flatterers of the Indian land,The colour of whose crests, sweet nature's hand,Fulfils our richest thought of crimson gleam.Whose wings thus pois'd, and balance forth, do seemSlender as serpent's tongue, or fairy's wand ;And, as by taper-light their breasts are scann'd,Of lovelier golden light we cannot dream :Oh me ! how soon doth human death impairThe glossy surface of the fairest face,In life, perchance, immaculately fair :While these resplendent figures wear no trace,(Bright-bosom'd and bright-crested as they are !)No soil or castel," of the tomb's disgrace !381 )A THOUGHTFROM LA Buyer.BY C. A. ELTON, ESQ.ENOUGH to be with her we love ;If lost in pleasing reverie,If words are utter'd or are mute,It is enchantment so to be.If all our soul on her should dwell,Or absent thought to trifles fleeEnough that she is at our side ;It is enchantment so to be.Enough, to know that she is nigh,To see her not, or still to see ;To hear her still, or not to hear ;It is the same, the same to me.382 )SONG.FROM THE GERMAN.BY G. F. RICHARDSON, ESQ.Yonder in the distance, yonderLie the Valley and the Grove,Where I fain would wish to wander,Blest with home and those I love.Whence I might look forth at leisureTo yon brighter, happier sphere,Where the heart can know but pleasure,Where the eye can shed no tear.383 )Yet that blissful spot ElysianI can never hope to find ;Can not realize my vision,Nor delight ray longing mind.Still, it seems, if no delusionMocks my eager, anxious thought,Once in childhood's sweet illusionI have play'd around that spot.Nor can I refrain from feelingThere at last we meet with peace ;There our wounds shall find their healing,There our bitt'rest sorrows cease.There shall dawn a brighter morrowAnd a better life than this ;Here are darkness, dreams, and sorrowThere are light, and life, and bliss.384 )SONNET,ON THE DEATH OF SlR WALTER ScOTT, SUGGESTED BY LINESIN HIS LADY OF THE LAKE.BY THE EDITOR.HARP of the North, farewell : the hills grow dark,On purple peaks a deeper shade descending ;"The tyrant Death, alas, is with them blendingDread shadows, where no glow-worm lights his spark.Alas, the minstrel-form no more we markThat o'er that wizard harp erewhile was bending ;And to its sounds an inspiration lending,To which Grace, Genius, Virtue loved to hark.Harp of the North, farewell ! again farewell !For ever silent is thy sounding wire ?Of cold annihilation speaks the knellWhere heavenward points yon venerable spire ?No, Minstrel Spirit! thus its accents swell,Go, join in hymns divine the Angelic quire !"385 )THE LAST REPOSE.BY MISS AGNES STRICKLAND.DEATH o'er thy brow is life-like yet,Thou fairest of Earth's fading flowers !And thy pale lip can scarce forgetThe smile it wore in joyous hours.And o'er thine eyes the cold lids closeAs softly in their placid rest,As some meek infant's, in repose,When slumbering on its mother's breast.Thy polished cheek retains no tear,No sigh disturbs thy quiet sleeping,And though fond mourners gather near,Thou canst not hear the voice of weeping,c c386 )Thy golden ringlets loosely spread,Still tremble to the gale's light breath,And though we see that life is fled,We gaze and ask " If this be Death ?"And pause, lest with a step too rudeWe break the silence round thee,Or on the holy calm intrudeIn which the hand of Peace hath bound thee.Can this be Death ? Oh who in sooth,If this be all, would fear to die,And change the feverish dreams of youthTo share thy deep serenity?But thou through all the snares of lifeA homeward path hast firmly trod ;And now, released from earthly strife,Thy spirit finds repose with God.( 387 )ESSAYON MAN AND NATURE,BY THE HON. SIR EDWARD Must, K.C.H.LORD ! what is Man, that thou shouldst mindful beOf the frail tenant of Humanity ?A creature formed but to endure the hour,To grow like grass and wither like a flower ;A morning vapour and a passing shadeTo dust returning whence he first was made ;Endued with Reason yet with Error bound ;Free in Intention yet in Act unsound.With Adam's penalty upon his head,To earn with sweating brow his daily bread,He toils to lift the tower to the skies,And sinks the shaft to search Earth's mysteries ;Yet can his skill not stay Time's ruthless hand,For constant Fragments press th' incumbered land;Should he through Wisdom's pathways seek relief,He finds much knowledge is increase of grief;cc388 )To compass Nature, Man can ne'er attain,Tis far too lofty for his feeble brain.Nature explore with Microscopic eye,See Order in Irregularity.Apply the lens to works of human skillAll is imperfect rough united ill.Man fails in each comparison he brings,E'en in his rivalry with meanest things.Though science aid, and patient labour urge,The stony Pier to breast the roaring surge,Yet tiny insects can exalt with ease,Enduring Rocks amid the boisterous Seas.What, though the Vapour's breath, subdued by Man,Reduces distance to the shortest span,The Cloud, that glides where gentlest Zephyrs blow,Outstrips its faint competitor below !When Salts and Acids mix their turbid stream,Explosions echo Clouds obscure the beam ;Yet Nature's thunder mocks the feeble sound,Whilst Nature's fires convulse the trembling ground.389 )Can Man be worthy his Creator's careWhilst Myriads people the vast realms of air?Number the starry spangles if you can,For these proclaim the littleness of Man.See countless orbs round countless centres move,Yet beauteous order rules their paths aboveThe Sun the Months Stars that deck the sky,Assert the hand of the Divinity ;Swayed by that Power supreme, their rolling spheresNor rust corrupts, nor lapse of wasteful years ;They glide obedient to their Maker's will,On wings untired their Destiny fulfil,Nor need a hope to animate their force,Nor approbation in their finished course.Lord ! what is Man ? Again the question scan,And Faith replies Creation's Aim is Man!The Heavens and Earth like smoke shall pass away,The starry courses lose their quickening ray,Be folded up like garments worn with age,And blotted out from the Celestial page.390 )Corruption's wasting Pow'r cannot controulThe life God breathed into the living Soul !The awful Trump that tells Creation's doom,Shall tear the Cerements, and shall burst the Tomb;The Graves shall yield their renovated dead,The conquered Serpent mourn his bruised head,Whilst Death and Time to unknown fathoms fall,And Man alone outlive the wreck of all.The crash of Elements that rend the sky,Awakens him to Immortality.His mouldering bones shall hear the joyful sound,Shall see the hosts of Angels throng around ;Those Heaven-born spirits who, for ages blestBy ministrations upon God's behest,Have daily grieved o'er Man's infirmity,And gladly hailed returning pietyNow bear his spirit through the realms of spaceAnd robe with light the adopted Sons of Grace,Whilst Cherubim the vocal chorus raise,And welcome harps resound the note of praise.391 )These are thy cheering Hopes, Religion theseConsole our Reason and our Sorrows ease ;Though finite minds can little understandThe wondrous Pow'r of the Almighty hand ;Though Nature far exceed our bounded ken,Chaos and Night at length must reign again.But yet th' immortal Spirit shall endure,For God has said it, and his word is sure.The Universe shall end an't were a tale that's told,But Man to endless bliss the Shepherd Christ shall fold.392 )IRREGULAR SONNET.BY PROFESSOR Smith.AH ! blest the Youth when partial Fortune paysThe first fond Tribute which his heart requires ;Nor yet her tardy smile too long delays,But bids him live ere all of life expires.Lonely and silent droops the Lover trueWhose hopes have blossomed fair and then have fled;As coldly meets the thorn our pensive viewWhen fallen are the Leaves, the Roses shed.Returning Summer with its earliest careThe Leaf, the Flower may to the Stem restore.The Lover's Heart ah sure no second Fail-shallever teach to bloom or blossom moreContent if kind Regard that Heart may prove,But never Bliss can feel but never Love !393 )CHESS.OH Chess ! thou intellectual Game !How much beneath this specious name,Lurks there to foster and draw forthVexation, rancour, tears, or wrath,Or jealousy beyond disguise,When vanquished from thy board we rise ?-Tumultuous clavering for redress,Oft close the silent hour of Chess,Whilst all engaged (save when they win),With thoughts to vengeance near akin,Own as the bitter contest ends,'Tis hard for rivals to be friends.394 )My temper stands a game at Chess,"Cries one elated with success ;'Tis most provoking to be beat,"Adds t' other smarting from defeat.Yet meant the victor not to crowO'er humbled enemy laid low.'Twas human nature ; games, if won,To all appear uncommon fun ;But once the tide of vict'ry turned,Disgrace the only fruit we've earned,Our feelings with our fate revers'd,Small fun it seems to get the worst,And poor diversion that our shameShould but enrich a rival's fame.Stand forth then Amateurs of Chess,I charge ye, candidly confessIf thoughts like these your minds have cross'd,When hard-fought games were won and lost.Some, when they 're beaten, scarce allowThe wreath to deck the victor's brow,395 )But seek insidiously to proveSuccess obtained by some chance move:Fortune was fickle Fate perverseThey never in their lives played worseWere half asleep paid no attention,The whole an act of condescension,While winning such a clumsy game,Were subject not of praise, but blame.Others, their ill success excuse,Ascribe it to mistaken views,Urge distant schemes, which, long design'd,To nearer dangers made them blind ;And thus, while deep-laid plots they formed,Were in their very strong-hold stormed :Some slaughtered Queen or captive Knightmost egregious oversight,Or faithful Castle, treason's prey,Or what you will save want of play ;That truest reason few e'er plead,On one important point agreed,Whatever the issue of their game,To own no fault, to bear no blame.396 )Tho' fell disasters mark their course,Not their's the anguish of remorse ;Tho' luckless every blow they deal,No self-reproach the sufferers feel,Capricious fortune willed it so,And hence invincible the foe.Yet all ambitious of success,By paths wide differing onward press.Some timid Gen'rals scarcely dareAdjourn to e'en the neighbouring square,'Twixt dread of dangers full in view,Of distant ills that might ensue,Or hidden plots they're so perplexed,They know not where to venture next.Debating thus, they look and linger,Weighing each move with cautious finger.That safeguard, which, at length withdrawn,Discloses what ? a valiant Pawn,Advancing, no one guesses why,Whether as champion or as spy.397 )Thus, innocent of plot and plan,They march and perish, man by man,Till mark the King in dismal plight,Reduced, poor soul, to single fight;Now forward urged, now backward driven,No mercy shown, no quarter given,Yet spared, tho' loudly death he ask,Till tyrants find their sport a task,And, 'neath the long delayed " checkmate,'The humbled monarch falls prostrate.But must we all at fortune's frown,Thus tamely part with life and crown,Waiting in helpless dread the blowWhich lays our honored Sovereign low ?No some there be, a daring race,Who deem timidity disgrace,As on they rush, their only aimTo fight and win a desp'rate game.In counsel brief, in combat rash,Swift thro' opposing ranks they dash,398 )While foremost in the bloody scene,Behold their Amazonian Queen,Who, dealing forth her fruitless checks,Of ills domestic little rocks,Till sudden signals of distressRecall her home from brief success ;For there, deprived of troops or guard,There, by relentless foes pressed hard,Invoking many an absent Knight,Her liege exerts his feeble might,Without allies the tide to stem,Save scattered Pawns, and few of them.One only Castle in his place,Advancing now at Minuet pace,Arrives to join the fun'ral train,And mourn a helpless monarch slain ;Vainly his troops in distant clime,Curse headlong zeal and wasted time,And faults deplore, alas ! too late,Faults death alone can expiate.399 )True, some may deem such suff'rings vain,Such triumphs view with cold disdain,Yet one conclusion thence we draw,An emblem, Chess, of sterner war ;Its course with fearful ravage fraught,Its mimic fame, as dearly bought,Scarce less the evils that ariseFrom ill-concerted enterprise,Whilst hope as eager, pang as keen,Attend and terminate the scene.When Kings their life and glory yield,A rival master of the field,Too oft that rival vict'ry stains,Exulting o'er a foe's remains,And not content with conquest won,Explains minutely how 'twas done.Each move recounts, each practised snarestwofold triumph's hard to bearAll may be checked, outwitted, beat,Why then add insult to defeat?400 )Yet some there are with temper blest,Unmoved to stand the bitter test,Should adverse stars and grim checkmate,Their dearest hopes annihilate.Foremost the victor's skill to praise,No sneering doubts they envious raise.From these, tho' few the games they earn,E'en Science' self one art may learn,And conqu'ring foes a pow'r confess,Eclipsing all displayed at Chess.401 )OUR FATHER'S AT THE HELM.FOUNDED ON AN ANECDOTE.BY MISS M. L. BOYLE.THE hurricane was at its worst,The waves dashed mountains high,When from a gallant ship there burst,A loud and fearful cry.The captain's son sat on the deck,A young and lovely child ;And when they spake of certain wreck,He shook his head and smiled.Mid groans of care and deep despair,And manhood's bitter tear,That gentle boy, all hope and joy,Betrayed no signs of fear.D D402 )A mariner, who strove in vainTo nerve his troubled soul,Thought of his wife and babes with pain,Nor could his fears controul,Approached the boy, and with a loudAnd almost angry tone,Tell me," he cried, " art thou endowedWith courage all thine own ;Dar'st thou defy, or doubt the skyHath power to overwhelm?"The gentle child looked up and smiled,My Father's at the Helm !"Oh, could we think as that blest child,While wandering here below,We should not dread the tempest wild,The storm of mortal woe.The waves of misery might dashAbove our little bark,And human wrath, like lightning flash,Then leave our life-track dark.403 )His soul all calm, no thoughts of harmThe Christian overwhelm,Firm in the thought, with safety fraught,His Father's at the Helm.The youthful maid, whose early loveBy man was ill repaid,Begins the bitter truth to prove,That earthly hopes must fade ;Or if her long tried faith be blest,The proud and happy brideForesees no period to her rest,While He is by her side ;Yet Death can part the fondest heart,And sorrow overwhelm,Still will she pray, in faith, and sayMy Father's at the Helm.The Christian parents who consignTheir child unto the tomb,^ 404 )What, though they weep, do not repine,Hope penetrates their gloom.Then let us man our souls to braveEach trial that is given,Nor murmur 'gainst the wind or wave,Propelled by righteous Heaven.Though times may change, and friends may range,What fear can overwhelm,If we but know, 'mid every woe,Our Father's at the Helm.405 )A MESSAGE FROM THE MOON.BY JAMES MONTGOMERY, ESQ.Founded on a thought which crossed the author's mind, while he waswatching the great Eclipse of the Sun, May 15th, 1836.THE Evening Star peeped forth at Noon,To learn what ail'd the Sun, her sire,When lo ! the blank and blindfold Moon,Plunging her shadow through his fire,Of ray by ray his orb bereft,Till but one slender curve was left,And that seem'd trembling to expire,The sickening atmosphere grew dim,A faint chill breeze crept over all,As in a swoon, when objects swimAway from sight, a thickening pallOf horror, boding worse to come,(That struck both field and city dumb,)O'er man and brute was felt to fall.406 )Avaunt, insatiate fiend !" I cry,Like Vampire stealing from its graveTo drain some sleeper's life-springs dry ;Back to thine 'interlunar cave!'Ere the last glimpse of fountain light,Absorpt by thee, bring on a night,From which nor Moon nor Morn can save.While yet I spake, that single beam(Bent like Apollo's bow unstrung)Broadened and brightened ; gleam on gleam,Splendours that out of darkness sprung,The Sun's unveiling disk overflowed,Till forth in all his strength he rode,For ever beautiful and young.Reviving nature own'd his power ;And joy and mirth, with light and heat,Music and fragrance, hail'd the hourWhen his deliverance was complete ;407 )Aloft again the swallow flew,The cock at second day-break crew ;When suddenly a voice most sweet;A voice as from some higher sphere,Of one unseen, yet passing by,Came with such rapture on mine ear,My soul sprang up into my eye;But nought around could I behold,No " mortal mixture of earth's mould"*Breathed that enchanting harmony.How have I wrong'd thee, angry Bard!What evil to your world have done,That I, the Moon, should be debarr'dFrom free communion with the Sun ?If while I turn'd on him my face,Your's was o'ercast a little space,Amends already are begun.Comus.408 )The lustre I have gather'd now,Not to myself will I confine ;Night after night my crescent brow,My full and waning globe shall shineOn yours till every spark is spent,Which for us both to me was lent;Thus I fulfil the law divine.A nobler Sun on thee hath shone,On thee bestow'd benign light ;'- Walk in that light, but not alone,Like me to darkling eyes give sight;This is the way God's gifts to use,First to enjoy them, then diffuse ;Learn of the Moon this lesson right."409 )SONNETFROM THE ITALIAN OF BERNARDO TASSO.Written amidst the ruins of Carthage during the period of his separationfrom his beloved wife, Portia, the mother of the celebrated TorquatusTasso.BY MISS AGNES STRICKLAND.AUGUST and sacred ruins that surroundOf ancient Carthage the deserted plains,Amid whose loneliness remembrance reignsOf deeds which fame and glory still resound !Scenes of fall'n grandeur ! hear the sighs profoundMy heart pours forth amidst its bitter pains.To her, my life's sole light, while war detainsMy steps reluctantly from home's sweet bound.Ah learn my feverish love, the pangs I bearOf doubt and sorrow, and the sad delightTo spend in thoughts the day, in tears the night,Objects congenial to my own despair !I to your gloomy solitudes discloseMy soul's disquiet and my hidden woes.410 )VERSES FOR MUSIC.Bv PROFESSOR Smith.Yes Brutus sighed o'er lost Phillips's field ;Faint died the mighty Roman's generous flame;Freedom and Rome he saw were doomed to yieldAnd virtue sunk, a shadow and a name.But thou by holier thoughts refined,Who feel'st the Day-spring in thy mind,When comes thy hour of trial niffhShalt thou like hapless Brutus sigh ?Shall human Terrors thy lone Heart appal,From the benighted Mind shall Hope be driven ?Sage! Patriot! Martyr! on whate'er thy callToil suffer die and win thy promised Heaven.4-11 )TO A STAR.BY G. P. R. JAMES, ESQ.It were all oneThat I should love a bright particular star,And think to win itAll's well that ends well,SWEET, from the dark blue depths of yonder sky,Gaze forth the beaming eyes of a bright star,On me, with looks of love, where tangled lieMy paths of fate, upon this planet far.On me ! on me look down those eyes of light !Let stern philosophy say what she willTo feeling ever sweet, to fancy bright,The dear delusion shall be cherished still.Still unto thee, bright harbinger of joy,To thee, with hope refreshed, mine eyes shall turn,With the same trust wherewith the Chaldee boySaw thy young light o'er ancient Nicias burn.412 )Oh, how I love thee ! lamp-bearer of night,How yearns my heart to win thee from thy sphere ;To hold near commune with those looks of light,And dwell for ever with thine influence dear.How vain ! How vain ! 'Twixt thee and me there liesA deep, wide gulf, all trackless and unknown,Thou throned in radiance rnidst the glowing skiesI cast afar upon a world alone !In vain, thou glory of the night ! In vainI'd charm thee from thy sky, or fly to thee,No wings shall bear me to yon starry plain,Nor thou bow down thy beauty unto me.It matters not ! sweet star, still will I love,Still watch thy rising fire with joy, and trustPerchance this spirit yet may soar above,To meet thy light when her clay chains are dust.413 )FIRST PART OF THE FIFTH BOOKOF THEODYSSEY.BY THE RIGHT HON. LORD JOHN RUSSELL.AURORA, rosy finger'd, bearing lightTo Gods and men, now left good Titian's bed ;The Gods were met upon Olympus' height,In solemn council thund'ring Jove the head.To them spoke Pallas, mindful of the plightOf wise Ulysses, whom the earth thought dead,But whom she knew against his will detained,In flowery bands of bright Calypso chained.Oh Jove, and all ye blest Immortals, hear !Henceforth no king shall merciful and kindAnd gentle prove, but urge with soul austereImperious rule, for lo ! cast out of mindUlysses ; he who, as his children dear,Loved all his subjects ; still he lies confinedIn fair Calypso's isle, his inmost corePining to touch his native land once more.414 )Nor friends, nor well-oar'd galley can he boastTo cross the boundless main, must he expireA banish'd wretch ? behold his son, too, coastBlest Pylos and fair Sparta, to inquireAmong the leaders of the Grecian hostFor certain tidings of his shipwreck'd Sire :But ambush'd foes his hoped return await,To glut at once their avarice, and their hate."What words," the cloud-compelling Jove replied,Are these, my daughter? whose was the deviceBut thine, to speed across the waters wideUlysses' son ? Then let thy care sufficeHomeward the youth, inviolate to guide,But for his Sire, whom, potent to entice,The nymph detains, thou, Mercury, my son,Shalt hear my will, and see that it be done.Go, tell fair-hair 'd Calypso our command,That wise Ulysses reach his home again.Led by no mortal, no immortal hand,He, on a simple raft, with toil and pain,415 )The twentieth day shall view Phceacian land,Where God-like people dwell beside the main ;They shall revere him as a guest divine,And to his use a noble bark assign.With brass and gold the vessel shall they load,And vestments add of purple, rich and rare ;More than the spoils of Troy would have bestowed,Had he return'd his equal part to share.Thus shall he gain at length that loved abode,For which his heart is now consumed with care."Thus Jove to Hermes spoke his mighty will,Which Hermes, instant, hasten'd to fulfil.The golden sandals on his feet he tied,Wing'd and immortal, by whose aid he dartsSwift as the gale, o'er lands and oceans wide :Then grasped the wand, whose magic power impartsSleep to the eyes of men, or, if appliedWith other aim, the weary mortal startsFrom deepest slumber ; bearing in his handThis rod, he lighted on Pierian land.416 )Thence from the mountain's top, with one light fling,He touched the sea; and as upon the waveThe sea-gull hovers, dipping her white wingFrom time to time, so too did Mercury laveHis brilliant pinion, till with easy spring,He reach 'd the distant isle, where in a caveCalypso dwells ; then, rising from the brine,He sought the mansion of the nymph divine.A fire of cedar, blent with frankincense,Round the green isle its pleasant odour spread ;The nymph's sweet song beguiled another sense ;And as she sung, she wove the golden thread.Above the illumined cave a forest dense,Of cypress, ash, and poplar, reared its head,Where hawks and hers amid the boughs build highTheir rocking nests, and sea-mews circling fly.Round the cave's mouth broad vines embracing throwTheir tendrils, rich with many a clust'ring grape ;Four fountains here with crystal waters flow ;Together rise, but diff'rent ways escape ;417 )There, in green meadows, scented violets grow,While flowers and herbs, of ev'ry hue and shape,Flourish uncheck'd : a God approaching nearMight well admire, nor deem Elysium dear.Charm'd with the savage beauty of the place,One moment Hermes paused; within the caveThe next he stood ; Calypso knew the faceOf him she met ; such sense immortals have,Though far and long removed by time and space,But undiscover'd was the chieftain brave :He, sitting on the shore, in melting woe,Gazed on the barren sea, and let his tears fast flow.The fair-hair'd nymph, when she had placed the GodUpon her throne of ivory, thus addrest :Say, now, mild bearer of the golden rod,What happy errand gives me such a guest ?For none, till now, have more unfrequent trodMy cave ; be frank, and tell me thy behest.Whate'er it be, thy pleasure be the lordOf all my pow'r ; but first partake my board."E E4-18 )Then on a table spreading the repast,Ambrosia, and red nectar, Hermes tookRefection suited to his length of fast ;Then spoke : " You ask me why I sought this nookFair nymph, believe, not willingly the vastSalt ocean have I traversed, where to lookFor towns or hecatombs were vain, but heWho rules Olympus issued the decree.His will to counterpane no God can boast ;He bids me say that captive you detainThe wretchedness of all the numerous host,Who for nine years beleaguered Troy in vain.The tenth, the town destroyed, they left the coast,To seek their long-lost homes across the main ;But Pallas, angry, roused the wind and waves,And sent them wailing to their ocean graves.There all his brave companions died, but he,Toss'd by the waves, was cast upon your shore ;Dismiss him quickly hence ; the Fates' decreeHas doom'd (nor seek the reason to explore)4-19 )That this unhappy wand'ring man shall seeHis darling home, and household hearth once more.Thus spoke the God ; the nymph indignant heard,And instant rolled back the flying word.Invidious Gods ! with ever-jealous mindsYou eye the Goddess, whom to mortal mateThe golden bonds of happy union bind.Aurora, rosy finger'd, felt your hate,When to the hunter her fond heart inclined,Who in Ortygia met his cruel fate,Slain by stern Dean's arrow ; from aboveCame too the dart which punish'd Ceres' love.Scarce in the thrice-plough'd field, Jason knewWith her the sweets of dalliance, when the powerOf Jove aroused, with yellow lightning slewThe youth ; and now your jealousy must lowerOn me, because too lovingly I viewThe man whom I preserved in the dark hourWhen Jupiter had cleft his bark in twain,And 'whelmed his dear companions in the main.420 )Sport of the wind and waters, he aloneWas cast upon a beach with dangers rife ;I saved, and saving loved him, nay, I own,Promised perpetual youth, immortal life,But if the God who fills th' Olympic throne,Dooms his return, far be from me such strifeYet have I not the power with ship and oar,Nor yet the will, to send him from my shore.Counsel, 'tis ture, I can, and nothing hide,That he may safely reach his native land."Thus spoke the nymph, to whom the Regicide :Dismiss him straight, nor brave the chastening handOf mighty Jove;" and having thus replied,The God retired ; Calypso sought the strand,Where sad Ulysses sate from day to day,Pining for home, and wept his life away."SONNETSTO THE MEMORY OF THE LATE EDWARD Sedley, M. A., CAMB.BY THE REV. HENRY THOMPSON, Mea., CAMB.I.I SET no cypress on thy last abode,Friend of my earliest, best, and happiest days!But rather would I plant the solemn sodWith emblems bright of thankfulness and praise,Violet and rose, whose fragrant bloom decaysIn grateful incense to their author God,And trustful hope again their heads to raiseFrom root sepulchres in earthy clod.Thus didst thou fall, in richest flower and prideOf genius and of years ; the fragrance pureOf learning and example scattering wide ;Best sacrifice to Him who gave ! " in sureAnd certain hope*" to rise beatifiedIn the Spring morn that ever shall endure." In sure and certain hope of the resurrection to eternal life."Burial Service.4*2'')II.HAPPY in life and death, lov'd friend, farewell !Happy in life ! since life's severest woesAt Love's transforming smile in joy repose,While health is sickness where He deigns not dwell !Happy in death ! for with the invisible,With whom was here thy converse, God, and thoseWho share his vision's bliss, thou dost uncloseThe unbodied sense to words ineffable !*Farewell a little space ! Taught here how brief,How insignificant the woes of time,From Earth I hope not nor regret relief;But, rising to thy hopes and aims sublime,I'll trust to meet thee far o'er care and griefIn Love's own native and immortal clime.upprjra pr//zarct, 2 Cor. xii. 4.RECTORY, Kingston,July 26, 1837.LONDON :C. Worth AND SONS, BELL Vaud,TEMPLE Mean.