HISTORYEGYPTIAN MUMMIES.ZrnrolUd April. 6^18biAHISTORYEGYPTIAN MUMMIES,AND AN ACCOUNT OFTHE WORSHIP AND EMBALMING OF THE SACRED ANIMALSTHE EGYPTIANS;REMARKS ON THE FUNERAL CEREMONIES OF DIFFERENT NATIONS,OBSERVATIONS ON THE MUMMIES OF THE CANARY ISLANDS, OF THE ANCIENTPERUVIANS, BURMAN PRIESTS, &c.THOMAS JOSEPH PETTIGREW, F.R.S., F.S.A., F.L.S.,DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY OF THE UNIVERSITY OF GOTTINOEN, MEMBER OF The ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY, CORRESPONDINGMEMBER OF THE ACADEMY OF ARTS, SCIENCES, AND THE BELLES LETTRES OF DIJON, AND OF THE SocieteAcademies DE Medicine DE MARSEILLE; SURGEON TO THE CHARING CROSS HOSPITAL,THE ASYLUM FOR FEMALE ORPHANS, &C. &C. &C.Nec remark aut facere fas autant, verum arte meditates intra penetralia coUocant."Pompous Mela, lib. i. cap. 9.LONDON:Hangman, Trees, ORME, BROWN, GREEN, AND Hangman,PATERNOSTER ROW.MDCCCXXXIV.Fine Arts.N\n.Tp.I'. TIIOMS,Printer ANU STKREOl VI'EK, lO, Warwick SOI ARE.HIS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTYKING WILLIAM IV.SIRE,Deeply impressed with gratitude for themost gracious permission afforded me to inscribe the following Workto Your Majesty, I avail myself of the high honour of laying the sameat Your Majesty's feet ; and I beg to be permitted to express the sentimentsof devotion and attachment to Your Majesty's Person with whichI am animated, and to have the honour of subscribing myself,YOUR MAJESTY'SMost loyal and devoted Subject and Servant,THOMAS JOSEPH PETTIGREW.5AV1LLE STREET,March 20. 1834.LIST OF SUBSCRIBERS.HIS MOST GRACIOUS MAJESTY.Large Paper.His Royal Highness the Duke of Cumberland, K.G., G.C.B., K.S.P., G.C.H, F.R.S. iaro-f PaperLIBRARY OF THE ROYAL COLLEGE OF SURGEONS.Viscount Acheron, Map.Thomas Amyot, Esq., F.R.S., Treasurer, Sea.Jasper Atkinson, Esq.Benjamin Atwood, Esq.William Ayrton, Esq., F.S.A.Whitelaw Aisle, M.D., F.R.A.S.James Anderson, Est.Andrews, Esq.Le Comm' Comte di Aceto.His Grace the Duke of Bedford, F.S.A. Large Paper.Viscount Barrington, F.G.S.Sir William Roland, Baron of Exchequersir William Beatty. M.D,, F.R.S., F.L.S.John Barrow, Esq., F.R.S., F.L.S.William Battle, M.D.John Afford, Esq., F.S.A.J. T. B. Beaumont, Esq., F.S.A.ReT. J. George Brett, Mea.J. H. Bradshaw, Esq.Henry Banquet, Esq., Mea.Andrew Baird, M.D., F.R.S.Henry Beauty, Esq., F.R.S., F.L.S.Richard Bligh, Esq., Mea.Edward Bore, Esq., F.S.A.Gilbert Burnett, Esq. F.L.S., Prof. Bot. King's CoU.William Hunter Baillie, Esq.Thomas BeU, Esq., F.R.S., F.L.S.George Lane Blunt, Esq.C. F. Barnwell, Esq., M.A., F.R.S., F.S.A.ReT. Charles Parr Bumey, D.D., F.R.S., F.S.A, F.L.S,Colonel Hugh BaillieBenjamin Guy Barrington, M.D., F.R.S.Edmund Beale, Esq.John Baddeley, M.D.John Barrow, Esq.James Burton, Esq.James Blundell, M.D.William Beings, Esq.George Buckley Bolton, Es[.E. S. Blundell, M.D.Dedimus Burton, Esq., F.S.A., F.G.S.Mrs. BowmanBernard Brocas, Esq., F.S.A.His Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury, D. D., F.R.S.F.S.A. Large Paper.The Earl of Cadogan L<ir>;e Paper.Right Rey. Lord Bishop of Chichester, D.U., F.R.S.,F.S.A.Prince Ciraitile Large Papier.Sir George Cayley, Bart., Map.Sir Ashley P. Cooper, Bart., F.R.S.Sir Charles Mansfield Clarke, Bart., M.D., F.R.S.Nicholas Carlisle, Es(i., K.H., F.R.S., Sec, Sea.,M.R.I.A. Two Copies, Large Paper.T. W. Coke, Esq.Lieutenant General CalcraftMiss Emily Fox CalcraftJames Copland, M.D., F.R.S.Thomas Copeland, Esq., F.R.S.Benjamin Bond Campbell, Esq., M.A., F.S.A.Adair Crawford, M.D.George Cruikshank, Esq.C. R CockereU, Esq., F.S.A.Henry Clutterbuck, M.D.viaLIST OF SUBSCRIBERS.John Cooke, M.D., F.R.S., F.S.A.John Capet, Esq.John Carey, Esq., F.R.S., F.S.A., F.L.S. Two Copies.Thomas Croton Croaker, Esq., F.S.A.William Cubits, Esq., F.R.S.Miss Currer ia'-o-p Paper.Edward J. Cooper, Esq., Map.William Comes, Esq.Francis Const, Esq.Edward J. Cropper, Esq.Alexander Copland, Esq.Joseph Cholmondeley, Esq. Larire Paper.William Clown, Bid.J. T. Coleridge, Esq., Serjeant at Law-georgeC apron, Esq.H. S. Charnock, Esq.Hb Grace the Duke of Devonshire, K.Ci.The Right Honourable Sir Thomas Penman, Lord ChiefJustice of EnglandCaptain Dillon, Ren.Rev. Henry Drury, M.A., F.R.S. , F.S.A. Large Paper.Henry Davies, M.D.John Davidson, Esq., F.S.A. Large Paper.Thomas Davidson, Esq.George Darling, M.D.Francis Douce, Esq., F.S.A.Joseph Delafield, Esq., F.S.A.George Drysdale, Esq.Edward Downes, Esq.George Dodd, Esq.George DoUond, Esq., F.R.S., F.R.A.S.Admiral DonnellyJames Dunlap, M.D. Large PaperNicholas Dennis, Esq., F.G.S.Miss Dyke.The Earl of Egmont, F.R.S., F.S.A.Sir Henry Ellis, K.H., B.C.L., F.R.S., Sw. Sea.William Swart, Esq., Map.John Easthope, Esq.John Easthope, Juu., Esq.James Evans, Esq.William Esdaile, Esq.The Earl FerretsSir Francis Feeling, Bart., F.S.A.Sir William B. Folkes, Bart., Map.Large PaperMichael Faraday, Esq., D.C.L., F.R.S., M.R.I.A.,F.G.S.Rev. Josiah Marshall, M.A., F.R.S., F.S.A.Rev. Fiott, M.A.George Finches, Esq.Rev. Charles Fletcher, M.A.Rev. Dr. FellowsCharles F. Forbes, .M.D., F.L.S.John Richard Farre, M.D.John Fear, Esq.William Friend, Esq.Rev. Peter Eraser, M.A. Large Paper.Rev. William Victor Fryer, D.D.James William Freshened, Esq.James William Farmer, Esq., F.S.A.Sir Arthur Brooke Faulkner, M.D.Earl of Gosport. M.A., F.R.S.Viscount Gage Large Paper.Right Hon. Thomas Grenville, F.S.A. Large Paper.The Venerable George Glover, M.A., Archdeacon ofSudbury, F.R.S.Hudson Gurney, Esq., F.R.S., V.P.S.A.John Gage, Esq., F.R.S., Director, Sea., F.L.S.John Lewis Guillemot, Esq., M.A., F.R.S., F.L.S.,F.G.S.Gordon Gill, Esq.Francis Goodwin, Esq. Large Paper.Isaac Lyon Goldsmith, Esq., F.R.S., F.S.A.A. B. Granville, M.D., F.R.S., F.L.S.Captain Robert Melville Griudlay. F.R.A.S.G. J. Guthrie, Esq., F.R.S., Pros. Roy. Col. of SurgeonsA. W. Grant, Esq.John Griffin, Esq. ,'R. H. Giraud, Esq.Benjamin Golding, M.D.Rev. Gilbert Gilbert, Bed., M.R.I.George Blenny, Esq.Fred. Alex. Grant, Esq.His Grace the Duke of Hamilton and Brandon, F.R.S.,F.S.A. Large Paper.Earl of Hardwicko, K.G., LL.D., F.R.S., F.S.A.Large and Small Paper.Lord Howard, of EffinghamLord Marcus HillSir Henry Halford, Bart., G.C.H , M D., Pres. R. Col.ofPhys., F.R.S., F.S.A,LIST OF SUBSCRIBERS.IXBaron Heurteloup.Rev. John Hailstone, M.A., F.R.S., Fel S., F.G.S.Rev. Thomas Power Hardwicke, M.A.Chevalier J. B. Heath, F.S.A.Rev. F. W. Hope, F.L.S.Charles Hatchett.Esq., F.R.S., L. and E., F.S.A. , F.L.S.Lai'o-o Paper.Thomas Henry Hall, Esq M.A., F.R.S.Richard Hatfield, Esq.Edmund Caldwell, Esq., M.A.John Henderson, Esq.Glassy Hutchinson, Esq.Thomas Hadley, Esq.Caesar Hawkins, Esq.Henry Heath, Esq.John Hare, Esq.Edward Harrison, IM.D., F.R.A.S. Ed.John Huntley, Esq.Henry Thomas Hope, Esq., M.F.Henry Philip Hope, Esq.Alexander Copland Hutchison, Esq., F.R.S. Lord.and Ed.J. D. Holm, Esq.Philip Warwick, Esq., F.R.S., F.S.A.Miss HamiltonHarding, Esq.James Patten Heath, M.D.John Iggulden, Esq.Hon. H. Stafford Birmingham, Map.Sir Richard Paul Jodrell, Bart.John T. Justice, Esq.James Johnson, M.D.William Cornelius Jordan, Esq.Large Paper.Charles Kong, K.H., For. Sec. R. S., F.L.S.James Lewis Knight, Esq., K.C., F.R.S., F.S.A.John Kidd, M.D., Reg. Prof. M.D Oxford, F.R S.,F.G.S. Large Paper.Rev. William Kirby, M.A., F.R.S., F.L.S., F.G.S.William Kingdom, Esq.Daniel Keene, Esq.R. M. Garrison, M.D.William King, Esq.A. Knightly, Esq.Leonard Knocker, Esq.His Grace the Duke of LeinsterThe Most Noble the Marquis of Vanstone, D.C.L.,F.R.S.The Earl of Lonsdale, K.G., F.S.A.The Right Honourable the Lord Bishop of London, Pad.Lieut. Col. W. M. Leake, F.R.S.Thomas Lane, Esq.William Thomas Luxmoore, Esq.Sir Peter Laurie.Rev. Samuel Lee, D.D., Reg. Prof, of Hebrew, CambridgeJohn Gibson Lockhart, Esq. LL.B.Join Lee, LL.D., F.R.S., F.R.A.S.Robert Lemon, Esq., F.S.A.Rev. John Lindsay, M.A., F.S.A.William Linley, Esq.G, J. Lytton, Esq.John Laurie, Esq.Robert Peter Laurie, Esq.Hugh Ley, M.D.E. A. Lloyd, Esq.W. Anson Lettsom, Esq.Charles Morgan Leman, M.D., F.L.S.Thomas Le Blanc, Esq., LL.B., F.S.A.H. R. Lewis, Esq.The Earl of Munster, G.C.H., F.R.S., F.R.A.S.Honourable Charles Augustus MurrayCount MortarsSir James Mac Rigor, Bart., F.R.S, Lond. and Ed.Sir Samuel Rush Merrick, K.H., LL.D., F.S.A.Sir Frederic Madden, K.H., F.R.S., F.S.A.G. W. Maton, M.D., V.P.R.S., F.S.A., V.P.L.S.Thomas Moore, Esq., F.S.A.J. M. Mathew, Esq., F.S.A. Large Paper.W. A. Mackinnon, Esq., F.R.S., F.S.A.Basil Montagu, Esq.Joseph Moore, M.D.James Heywood Maryland, Esq. F.R.S., F.S.A.George Macilwain, Esq.Samuel Merrimac, M.D., F.L.S.R. Maugham, Esq.William B. Maurice, Esq., F.L.S.William Merrick, Esq.Joshua May hew, Esq.J, M. Morgan, Esq.Alexander Wendell, Esq.James Moral, Esq.C. P. Magna, Esq.bLIST OF SUBSCRIBERS.Lady Montfort.W. H. Merle, Esq.Captain James Mangles, Rex., F.R.S.Joseph Need, Esq., M.P., E.S.A., F.L.S. Large Paper.John Nicholls, Esq.T. V'. Nugent, Esq.The Earl of Ormelie, M.P.Viscount Ossulston, M.P.Right Hon. Sir Gore Ouseley, Bart., G.C.H., F.R.S.,F.S.A., F.R.A.S.William Young Ottley, Escj F.S.A.B. F. Outran, M.D.Benjamin Oakley, Esq.Honourable William Ponsonhy, JM.P., F.R.S.Count Ferdinand dal Pozzo.Sir Francis Palsgrave, K.H., F.R.S., F.S.A. Lond. & Ed.Thomas Phillips, Esq., R.A., F.R.S., F.S.A.John Story Penleaze, Esq., M.P.Rev. George Peacock, i\I.A., F.R.S. Lnrf^e Paper.David Pollock, Esq., K.C., F.R.S., F.S.A. Large Paper.Henry Perkins, Esq. Large Paper.Right Hon. Lord Pnidhoe, F.R.S., F.S.A.Frederick Perkins, Esq. Large Paper.George Henry Pettigrew, Esq. Large PaperRichard Percival, Jun., Esq., F.S.A.James Prior, Esq., F.S.A.Louis Hayes Petit, Esq., M.A., F.R.S., F.S.A.'Thomas Ponton, Esq., F.S.A.Charles Pugh, Esq.Samuel Ponder, Esq. Large Paper.James Coles Prichard, M.D , F.R.S.John Proper, Esq.The Earl of Roseberry, D.C.L., F.R.S.R. Richardson, M.D.H. S. Roots, M.D.George Jennie, Esq., F.R.S.Samuel Rogers, Esq., F.R.S., F.S.A.John Rouse, Esq., F.S.A.J. Evans Adore, Esq., F.L.S.William Reid, Esq.Cuthbert Ripon, Esq. Large Paper.Captain Robert Richardson.Joseph Ruler, Esq.Mrs. Anne Russell.Edward Judge, Esq., F.R.S., F.S.A., F.L.S.I^arge Paper.Sir William Rawlins, Kent.His Grace the Duke of Somerset, D.C.L., F.R.S., F.S.A.P.R.I., F.L.S.Earl Spencer, K.G., F.R.S., Fas A.Sir George Thomas Staunton, Bart., D.C.L., F.R.S.,F.S.A., F.L.S.Sir John E. Swinburne, Bart., F.R.S., F.S.A.Sir Walter Stirling, Bart.Sir !martin Archer Shee, P.R.A., F.R.S.E. Ashford Sanford, Esq., M.P., F.R.S. Large Paper.A. R. Sutherland, M.D., F.R.S., F.G.S.James Craig Somerville, M.D., F.G.S.William James Smith, Esq.Thomas Field Savory, Esq.Philip J. Saloons, Esq., F.S.A.John Spurn, M.D.Sutton Sharp, Esq. F.S.A.R. A. Stafford, Esq.B. G. Snow, Esq.Henry Sass, Esq.Samuel Smith, Esq.T. A. Stone, Esq.John Smirnove, Esq., F.R.S., F.L.S.John Shakespear, Esq., F.R.A.S.Thomas R. Smith, Esq.•j-homas Snodgrass, Esq., F.R S. Large Paper.Thomas Saunders, Esq., F.S.A. Large Paper.John Seaman, Esq.J. S. Stevens, Esq.Joseph Sans.A. J. Stephens, Esq., F.R.S.Samuel Sothebv, Esq.R. C. Scarlet, Esq.Christopher Stranger. M.D.Right Honourable Lord Tenterden.Sir Matthew Theme, Bart., M.D., K.C.H.J. Russell Todd, Esq., M.P., F.R.A.S.Dawson Turner, Esq., F.R.S., F.S.A., M.R.I. A.Large Paper.Charles Hampden Turner, F.R.S., F.L.S., F. G. S.Augustus U. Thiselton, Esq.E.W.Tuson, Esq., F.L.S.Honoratus Leigh Thomas, Esq., F.R.S.P. P. Thorns, Esq.LIST OF SUBSCRIBERS.XIWilliam Thomson, Esq.IVIartin Supper, Esq.lieut. General ThorntonCharles Kemeys T)iite, Esq., ,M.P.Colonel Tunnel.William Time, Esq., Sec. Lond. Inst.David Twins, ^I.I).Edward V. Patterson, Esq., F.S.i\.George Vance, Esq.B. L. VuUiamy, Esq.Lewis Vulliamy, Esq.James Vetch, M.D.Right Hon. and Rev. Lord Ward.Richard Westmacott, Esq., R.A., F.S.A.David Wilkie, Esq., R.A.Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Wildmaii.Charles Wind, Esq.Large Paper.Large Paper.Frederick Webb, Esq., F.R.S., F.S.A. Large Paper.Martin Ware, Esq.Edwin Wheaten Wight, Esq.George Wallace, Esq.J. G. Wilkinson, Esq., M,.\. Large Fa/wr.Sir William Woods, F.S.A.James Wigwam, Esq., F.S.A.George Walford, Esq.Thomas Welshman, M.D.Lawrence Walker, Esq.Isaac Wilson, M.D., F.R.S.John Warburton, M.D. Large Paper.George Footfall, Esq., F.S.A.Bowes Wright, Esq.Ralph Watson, Esq., F.R.S., F.S.A.Samuel Weld, Esq.George William Young, Esq.Charles M. Young, Esq.CONTENTS.PageIntroduction . .XVCiiAP. I. On Mummy III. On Mummy as a Drug 7III. On the Theology of the Ancient Egyptians, and Funeral Ceremoniesof Different Nations . . . • ■ . . .13IV. On Egyptian Tombs 23V. On Embalming . 43VI. On the Medicaments employed in Embalming 75VII. On the Bandages 89Vlll. On the Egyptian Idols, Amulets, Ornaments, &c. . . . 103IX. On the Cases and Sarcophagi . . . . . .115X. On the Papyri Manuscripts . . . . . . . 131XI. On the Physical History of the Egyptians . . . . .155XII. On the Sacred Animals embalmed by the Egyptians . . . 169XIII. On the Sacred Animals — the Mammalia . 183XIV. the Aves 202XV'. Amphibia — Pisces — Insecta . .211XVI. On Deceptive Specimens of Mummies . 227XVII. On the Glances — the Mummies of Peru — the Desiccated Bodiesat Palermo — the Burma Embalming 231XVIII. On Modern Embalming 252Explanation of the Plates 261INTRODUCTION.^A'lTHiN the range of archaeological enquiry' there can scarcely be a subject of greatercuriosity or interest than that which relates to the preservation of the remains ofmankind of so early a period as were the first inhabitants of Eg)-pt. The practice ofembalming the dead is deeply interesting, were it to rest upon its antiquity alone ; butwhen it is considered in relation to the history of the human species, and to the conditionof the arts and sciences of so remote a period, it rises in importance, and it isremarkable that there should not exist in any language, as far as I have been able toascertain, any work devoted expressly to the treating of this subject in all its branches.The matter to be gleaned from various travellers and enquirers is most extensivelydiffused, and I trust I am neither trifling with my own time nor that of my readers inhaving endeavoured to collect together aU that I could rely upon in connexion \rithevery branch of the enquiry, and making such humble additions as the objects ofresearch and investigation, which have chanced to faU in my way, have afforded me anopportunity of doing.I had the gratification of knowing the lamented Belzoni, that most intrepid andenterprising traveller, and by his kindness I was present at the opening of threemummies. I also witnessed the unrolling of a mummy at the Roj'al Institution, whichwas presented to the Royal Asiatic Society by the late Sir John Malcolm, and I havelately examined several mummies. The finest and most interesting specimen I havemet with is accurately pourtrayed in the frontispiece to this work, and was broughtfrom Egi,iJt (Thebes, I think) for the purpose of sale, without any history whateverbeing attached to it, and enclosed in a case not coeval sith the mummy, but made upasI believe, merely for the convenience of transportation into this countries specimenhad even been deprived of its outer rollers and bandages ; but the dry state ofthose that remained, together with the evidences of their being genuine, induced me tobecome the purchaser of the mummy, and to be sanguine as to the result of its examination.In this I have certainly not been disappointed ; for, of all the instances onrecord, there is nothing to compare with it in point of perfection or interest. TheXVI INTRODUCTION.particulars of the examination will be recorded in various parts of this work ; but itmay be as well here just to premise a few remarks.For the convenience of accommodating a few friends whom I had invited to witnessthe interesting exhibition of bringing to light the form which had been hidden forperhaps two or three thousand years, I undertook the task at the Charing CrossHospital on the 6th of April, 1833, in the presence of Prince Cimitile, Viscount Boring-don,Lord Gotham, Lord Henley, Sir Henry Halberd, Bart., Sir David Barry, Drs.Sherman, Copland, Sayer, Crawford, Richardson, Ellison, Clutterbuck, Golding, &c.,Messrs. Barrow, Lockhart, Gage, Hawkins, Barnwell, H. Banquet, L. H. Petit,CabbeU, Ottley, Douce, Delafield, Lemon, Westmacott, Howard, &c. &c. The moreimmediate envelopes of the mummy, as I have stated, alone remained ; I was thereforeunable to observe those peculiarities in the mode of bandaging which have been noticedby ^L Jomard, Dr. Granville, and some other writers. It was a task of no littledifficulty, and required considerable force to separate the layers of bandage from thebody. These consisted of envelopes of cloth extending from the head to the feet,under the soles of which they were Wrapped up, and there presented a fringed appearance.Between the cloths, a quantity of pitchy matter had been applied in a heatedstate, so that it was impossible to separate them from each other, and levers wereabsolutely necessary to raise the bandages, and developed the body. This, however,was most effectively and perfectly done — the feet were first made out, the soles otwhich were perfectly soft and yielded to the impression of my nails. The nails of thetoes were all entire, and the upper surfaces of the feet were found to have been gilt —the same occurred on the legs, thighs, abdomen, chest, and head. The specimen wasascertained to be that of a male, and from its appearance rather of an advanced age —the beard was perfect and full, the hairs being about half an inch in length. It was ofa reddish-brown colour, and similar in appearance to the hair of the head, which wasscanty in quantity'. The colour of the whole body was of a brownish Slack, and onvarious places it could he perceived that a quantity of resinous varnish had beensmeared and applied while hot.By the kindness of Thomas Saunders, Esq., I opened a mummy purchased by himat the same time that I obtained the previous specimen. This was enclosed in twocases. The mummy, a female, was destroyed by the excessive heat with which theapplications had been made, and the bandages were UterdUy burnt to tinder.My excellent friend Dr. John Lee, of Doctors' Commons, also purchased a specimenat the same sale as the former had been obtained at, and with great kindness gave meliberty to do whatever I thought proper with it. Accordingly, on the 2-lth of June,1S33, and in the presence of Dr. Lee, M. Rifaud, Mr. Fisher, Mr. Bowes Wright,Dr. Forbes, Dr. Richardson, Mr. Davidson, and Mr. Burgon, all of whom had visitedINTRODUCTION. xviiEgypt, and honoured also by the attendance of the Bishop of Chichester, ViscountOssulston, Mr. Phillips, R. A., Mr. Douce, Mr. Renard, Mr. Dawson Turner,Mr. Hawkins, Mr. Barnwell, Captain Dillon, the Rev. Mr. Saber, and a few otherfriends, I examined this mummy. I should premise that it was enclosed in two cases(represented in Plates IX and X), and was in a very sound and drj' condition. Thebandages were very neatly applied, and were of a fine texture. The unrolling wasa work of great ease. Every variety of form best adapted to preserve the shape ofthe body and fill up all spaces was adopted. Occasionally a whole length would befound passing from the feet along one side, over the head, down the other side, andcrossing into the previous fold at the feet. Two portions were even split to allow ofthe feet passing through them. Between the legs and thighs large portions whichsurgeons would call compresses were placed, and the two limbs were then boundclosely together. In this, as in all the instances I have witnessed, as you approachnearer to the body the bandages become of a coarser texture, and that immediately incontact with the body is the coarsest of all. The body was that of a female, and themode of embalming by incision into the left flank was apparent.On the 13th of July, 1S33, I assisted my friend John Davidson, Esq., to unroll amummy that had been brought from Thebes by Mr. Henderson. This was done atthe Royal Institution in the presence of the Duke of Somerset, the President, and avery large attendance of the members of the Institution and other literary and scientificcharacters. Mr. Davidson delivered an exceedingly interesting lecture* on theoccasion, to which I shall feel it necessary to refer in the course of this work. Themummy was that of a female, and enclosed within a very highly ornamented case. Thebandages were more abundant than in any I had previously seen, and of a fine texture :they were indeed so pure, so dry, and had altogether such an air of freshness aboutthem, that many were disposed to suspect the genuineness of the specimen; of this,however, there can be no doubt, as the references I shall make to it will abundantlyshow.A few years since I purchased at a sale by auction a fine specimen of a sycamoresarcophagus, which contained the remains of a mummy. This formerly belonged tothat ingenious but eccentric artist Mr. Conway, R. A., and I have since found that itwas the specimen brought into this country by Dr. Perry, and particularly describedand figured by him in his Travels in the Levant, t Of this mummy he gives an elaborateaccount. It was found by the Arabs of Saccara in the catacombs of the adjacentmountain two months before he and his fellow-travellers left Cairo, and was lookedSince printed but not published. It is entitled " An Address on Embalming generally."f View of the Levant, particularly of Constantinople, Syria, Egypt, and Greece, by CharlesPerry, M. D. fol. Lond. 1743.Cxviii INTRODUCTION.upon by some of the oldest dwellers there, who were familiar with the various objectsof antiquity, to be the most curious of the kind ever obtained, with but one exceptionDr. Perry resolved upon purchasing it, and it was sent to London in the year I711. Ihave reduced the 1 8th Plate in Dr. Perry's work, and corrected the hieroglyphics uponthe sarcophagus, in order to give a representation of this truly magnificent case, and toenable the reader to comprehend the references I shall have occasion to make to it.(See Plate VI., fig. 4.) Having removed the mummy from the case, I found it in avery decayed state. The flesh had been burnt up by the rapidity with which the processof embalming had been conducted, and the bones were rendered exceedingly brittle.I have oljtaincd only the skull and the vertebrae of the neck entire. The former isremarkable from having a bony tumour (an exostosis) extending along the outer sideof the right orbit, and affecting even the cheek (malar) bone.I have also had the opportunity of witnessing, at the Mechanics' Institution, theunrolling of an adult female mummy belonging to Mr. Reeder, in which the process ofdesiccation appears to have been adopted previously to the application of the bandages,as there literally remained nothing beyond the dry skin and bones ; and, to show thatthe body had been subjected to heat, I may mention that the bones had all their fattymatter withdrawn from them, and were rendered exceedingly brittle and quite white.The inside of the body was filled with earthy matter. Each limb had been separatelybandaged.In addition to these I have had, through the kindness of Mr. Wilkinson, the opportunityof examining three heads brought from Thebes ; and I owe to the liberality ofthe President and Council of the Royal College of Surgeons the permission to examinea mummy brought from Thebes in 1820 by Mr. Henderson, at the same time as thatof Mr. Davidson, and, I believe, taken from the same tomb. I notice this circumstancehere in order to remark that the mode of preparation adopted in both theseinstances was precisely similar : both were furnished with artificial eyes, had necklacesof the same materials, and a scarabaeus on the breast. They were also unfortunatelyloth much injured by the heated state of the embalming material when applied tothem. The cases containing these mummies were also of a similar description. Mr.Davidson has done ample justice to that which contained his specimen. That of theCollege naturally attracted my attention, and when, from an examination of the hieroglyphiccharacters marked upon it, I declared its inhabitant to have been a priest ofthe temple of Ammon, I was assailed by not a few with ridicule, the face paintedupon the case being so delicate and strongly resembling that of a female. To satisfymyself upon this subject, I solicited from the council of the College the loan of somedrawings of the case which had been some years since very carefully executedby Mr. Clift, jun., under the inspection of his father, William Clift, Esq., theINTRODUCTION. Xixvery respected and intelligent conservator of the Museum. By the assistanceof Mr. Wilkinson I was enabled to make out very satisfactorily, not only thatthe mummy contained within the case was that of a priest of the temple I havementioned, but that he was of an inferior order of the priesthood (an incensebearer), and that his name was Horseisi, and the son of Naspihiniegori of the samegrade and profession ; and, having ascertained this, I was desirous not only on accountof my own reputation, but for the verification of hieroglyphical literature, to have thecase opened and the matter determined. The council of the College most literallyassented to my request,* and honoured me by their invitation to perform this in thetheatre of the College in the presence of the members and a large assemblage of distinguishedliterary and scientific characters, who did me the honour to attend upon theoccasion. One circumstance only dwelt upon my mind as likely to cause a possibledisappointment — the occurrence of, Ijy any accident, a body having been substitutedfor the one originally intended. Upon opening the case, however, the first thing thatpresented itself was a singular identification of the individual, by having a fillet of linenloosely folded round the legs, on which were inscribed the hieroglyphical charactersdenoting the name and profession of the deceased. In the course of the unrolling ofthe mummy I found this inscription repeated, with slight variations, no less than fourtimes ; and it is worthy of remark, as showing the hieroglyphics to have been usedwith great freedom and as a kind of tachygraphy, that in one instance the hieroglyphicsdenoting some of the letters were left out, thus abridging the name, as would belikely to occur in any rapid writing of the present day. It is sufficient to observe thatthe result of the examination justified the prediction I had given — the particulars ofthe investigation wiU be found in their proper places in this work, tAlthough I believe I have acknowledged the obligations I owe to many friends in thedifferent parts of this work for various information they have been so kind as to favourme with, I cannot omit here to express my most sincere thanks in an especial mannerto J. G. Wilkinson, Esq., whose knowledge of Egyptian antiquities and hieroglyphicalliterature exceeds, I believe, that of any other individual of the present day, for manyvaluable observations and suggestions he has favoured me with. Nor am I lessindebted to Dr. Richardson, Mr. Davidson, Dr. Lee, Captain Mangles, CaptainI regret to have here to state conduct of an opposite nature on the part of the Trustees of theBritish Museum, to whom I made application to be permitted to examine one or two of the specimenscontained in that national establishment. The Trustees were of opinion that it would destroy the integrityof the collection !f I wish here to correct one point mentioned in the Postscript to Chapter V., in which it is stated thatthe viscera were found wrapped up in three portions in the cavity of the belly. After I had drawn upthe account, a fourth portion was found imbedded in some of the earthy matter with which the bodywas filled. These are all preserved in the Museum of the College.XX INTRODUCTION.Hervey, and others who have travelled in Egj'pt ; to Dr. Ure for the communicationrespecting the textile fibre of the bandages ; to the Rev. W. F. Hope for his illustrationsof the new species of insects I found in the head of a mummy ; to Captain Coke forthe (I believe hitherto described) account of the embalming of the Burma priests ;and to Mr. Kirkmann and Mr. Burgon for information relative to the medals found inand upon Egyptian and Gr2eco-Eg}^tian mummies. I am also indebted to thecurators of the Royal College of Surgeons for their permission to figure the Peruvianmummy contained in the College Museum, and to the Trustees of the British Museumfor the copy of the Portrait in Plate VII. To Samuel Rogers, Esq., my best thanks aredue for permitting me to represent the Funereal Tablets and the interesting figures ofIsis and the infant Cousin Plate VIII. To Dr. Lee I am indebted for Plates IX. andX. representing the inner and outer cases of his mummy, and to Mons. Passalacqua forthe drawings of the Sacred Barge in Plate III., various embalmed animals in Plates XII.and XIII., all taken from the Collection at Berlin; and I must here also acknowledgemy obligations to my friend Dr. Alexander Henderson for his kind superintendenceof this matter. I am also glad to have an opportunity of expressing my satisfaction atthe fidelity with which my very ingenious and talented artist Mr. George Cruikshankhas executed the various drawings for the work, and the great spirit with which he liasetched them.After the preceding pages of this introduction had l^een committed to the impress, Ireceived an obliging in-station to attend the unrolling of a male Egyptian mummy in theMuseum of the London University, to which collection it was presented by James Morrison,Esq., M. P. The body had not Ijeen embalmed in the best manner, but sufficient attentionhad been paid to its preservation to display the form and features of the individual.According to the hieroglyphics on and within the case in which it was contained, itappears to have been the mummy of Kannopos or Cannons, the son of Osiri-Pasht,and Tatiosiri or Tattiosiri or Tattosiri. The name Cannons has no relation to theword Nous (gold), but is taken from the word canoe, which appears to signifystrength or jwiver, victory, or something of similar import, hoeing among the beneficentgifts of the gods to the kings mentioned in the hieroglyphics : nor is this name Can-nousrelated to the city of that name in the Delta. The bandages of the mummywere in good preservation ; but presented nothing remarkable, with the exception ofthe name of the individual, which was repeated in five or six places in various ways,and giving a date of the seventeenth year; but the application of this, either to the ageof the individual embalmed, or to the sovereign during whose reign he lived, is uncertain; the latter conjecture I believe to be the most probable. No cartouche to showunder what dynasty the Egyptian had his existence appears upon the case to.guide usin the enquiry. One of the names on the bandages was written Kannop, on anotherINTRODUCTION. xxiKnnp, and on another Knps or Kanopos (the final s is the Greek termination), followedby the figure of a man. This mode of appreciating the name agrees with thatnoticed on the bandages of the mummy of Horseisi, and appears to me to prove verysatisfactorily the stages of the preparation of the mummy. Different series of rollerswere applied at different times ; and, to prevent mistakes, at the end (for it is always atthe termination of the bandage), the name of the individual is inscribed either at lengthor curtailed, to denote the individual subject contained.In this mummy the intestines and other viscera had been removed by the usualincision in the left flank, and portions of the viscera imbedded in some embalmingmaterial were found enclosed within the enveloping bandages both upon the legs andthighs. I have never before met with this. In the mummy of Horseisi at the Collegeof Surgeons, and that of Mr. Davidson (now by the kindness of that gentleman depositedin my collection), the viscera had been returned into the cavity of the abdomenin four distinct portions, each separately enveloped in its proper bandages. Theinside of the Ijody of Kannopus was filled with the dust of some wood, probably cassia.The brain had not been extracted through the nostrils, but the residue of it was foundas a mass lying at the hind part of the skull. The head had been shaved. The cavitiesof the external ears were filled with portions of linen cloth, by which their shape waswell preserved. The orbits were also filled with linen, and in one it was observed thatthe transparent part of the eye was attempted to be represented. No amulet, necklace,or ornament of any kind was discovered, nor were there any marks by which the characteror profession of the deceased could be ascertained. The body measured five feettwo inches.HISTORY OF MUMMIES.CHAPTER I.ON MUMMY.Etymology of the term Mummy — allusions to its Qualities — Abd'Allatif's description ofnatural Mummy — the opinions of Dioscorides, Serapion, Bonae, Sir IVillium Ouseley,and Kmmpfer on this subject.The word Mummy has been variously derived. Chart, Menage, Roscius,and others have derived it from the Arabic noun ^^ mum, meaning wax ;and Avicenna defines it thus : " Mum parum est parietes bonorum apudin quibus faint ova et pulls et advent in eis mel"* But Salmasiusderives it from amomum, a kind of perfume. Some authors believe theArabic word \^^yt„ mumia, to signify a body embalmed or aromatic.^ The Persian word Lcj^, numina, means bitumen, or mineral pitch, theAvicenna Opera, lib. ii., tract. 2, cap. 473.B2 ON MUMMY.PISSASPHALTOS, wliicli is generally found in the bodies embalmed by theancient Egyptians.The term mummy is mostly applied to the body embalmed, not to theembalming ingredients, and in such sense I shall employ it throughout thiswork.Roscius explains mummy to mean the flesh of man preserved againstcorruption in balsam or myrrh, and aloes, and asphalt. Burton describesit as a bituminous liquor of the consistence of wax, found in sepulchres inwhich bodies have been embalmed.In allusion to its qualities of softness, durability, power of preservation,&c., it has been employed by many writers in various ways.As implying softness :Tib. — " You shall grow mummy, rascals."Beaumont and Fletcher. The Sea Voyage, Act III., Scene 1.Let some soft mummy of a peer, who stainsHis rank, some sodden lump of ass's brains,To that abandon'd wretch his sanction give ;Support his slander, and his wants relieve !"Falconer. The Demagogue.Falstaff. — " I had been drown'd, but that the shore was sheet and shallow ; a death thatI abhor ; for the water swells a man ; and what a thing should I have been, when I had linenweird ! I should have been a mountain of mummy''Merry Wives oflVindsor. Act III., Scene 5.As denoting permanency — durability :Thy virtues areThe spices that embalm thee ; thou art farMore richly laid, and shalt more long remainStill mummified within the hearts of men.Than if to lift thee in the rolls of fctmeEach marble spoke thy shape, all brass thy name''J. Hale's Poems (1646), p. 50.Probably in the sense of durability or preservation, it is used by Shakspearewhen he makes Othello to describe the charmed handkerchief.ON MUMMY. 3A sibyl, that had number'd in the world.The sun to make two hundred compasses,In her prophetick fury sew'd the work :The worms were hallow'd, that did breed the silk ;And it was dy'd in mummy which the skilfulConserved of maiden's hearts."The Moor of Venice. Act III., Scene 4.Abd'AUatif, an Arabian physician who flourished in the twelfth century,describes mummy, properly so called, to be a substance that flows downfrom the tops of mountains, and which, mixing with the waters that carryit down, coagulates like mineral pitch, and exhales an odour resemblingthat of white (Burgundy) pitch and bitumen. " Quant a la momie," saysthis author, as translated by Silvester De Sacy, " proprement dite, c'est unesubstance qui ecole du sommet des montagnes, melee avec les eaux quiI'entrainent ; elle se coagulate ensuite comme la poix minerale, et exhale uneodeur de poix blanche melee avec du bitumen. Suivant Galen, la momiesort de source comme la poix minerale et la capite ; autres disent que lamomie est une variety de poix minerale, et on la nomme menstrues des montagnes.Cette momie qu'on trouve dans les cavities des cadavres en Egypt,s'eloigne peu de la nature de la momie minerale, et Ton pent en substituerSausage a celui de la momie minerale, quand on a de la peinea seen procurer"* But the learned translator in a notes expresses hisdoubts as to the correctness of the reference to Galen, and hints that thedescription may have been taken from Dioscorides. This most likely hasbeen the case ; for in looking into the writings of Serapion, who compiledhis Historia Simplicity Medicamentoruml from the works of the Arabianand Greek physicians, especially those of Paulus ^gineta, Dioscorides, andGalen, I find the following citation from Dioscorides, under the head DePissasphalto. " Decatur et in bituminous genere Pissasphaltus, quasi pici-bitumen dicas composite ex pice et bitumen re et rei appellation.Nascitur ad Apologia quae in Epiro est, fluminumque impetus exCerauniis montis datum in litera eructatur, glebarum modo concrete,adore picts bitumen mists. Protest Picibitumen omnia use» Relation de L'Egypte, 4to. Paris, 1810. Page 201. t No. 133, p. 271.} Edit. fol. Venet. 1552.4 ON MUMMY.posset mist simul Pix et Bitumen"* Again, in another work of thesame author, De Simplicity Medicina,-\ I find the following extract fromDioscorides under the head Mamie. " Mumia est in terris Apologise :descendit namque ex montis, qui ducuntflumina cum aqua, et elicit beamaqua flaminius in ripis, et est coagulate, et tit sicut cera, et habet odorempicts mixtse cum asphalto cum aliquo forbore: et virtus ejus est, sicut picts,et asphalti mixtorum.JIbn Baitar says that " the Miimiya of the tombs, found in great quantitiesin Egypt, is nothing more than the amalgam anciently used by the Greeksto preserve their dead bodies from putrefaction." He says also that theterm Mumia is given to a kind of light black stone found near Sen "a inYemen, and which contains a black fluid substance in a small cavity.Bomare^ gives an interesting note on the subject of liquid pitch fromthe mountains : " Gemelli Career dit que sur la route de Shires aBender-Congo, Ton voit la montagne de Drap, toute de pierre noire, d'oiidistille le fameux bauvie-momie, lequel devient noir en s'epaississant (duPissasphalte, ou Asphalte). C'est le plus repute en Perse; la montagneest garden par ordre du Soph ; tons les ans les Visits de Geaxoux,de Shires et de Lar, vont ensemble ramasser le baume-momie qui couleet tombe dans une conque ou ii se coagulate ; on e'en tire pas plus dequarante onces chaque anne ; ils I'envoient au Soph sous hem* cachet.On voit au Cabinet du Roi les deux bites door remplies de ce bitumen ouhaume-momie que I'Ambassadeur de Perse apporta et present a Louis XIV ;une autre boite en argent, pleine de ce meme bitumen, fut donne au Princede Conte, on la voit dans le Cabinet de Chantilly. Ce present n'avoit demerit que dans Opinion de ceux qui I'ont offert. L'ambassadeur de Persedit a Louis XIV, que le baume-momie etoit un specific pour les fracturesdes OS, et generalement pour toutes les pleasures ; qu'il etoit employe pourles maladies et ulcers tant interest qu'externes ; en un mot, qu'il avoit lapropriety de faire sortir le fer qui pourroit etre reste dans les pleasures.Ce fameux baume-momie qui est une espece de povc minerale, distille desrochers en beaucoup autres countries."Page 101. t Fol. Venet. 1503. t Page 138. § Dictionnairehistoire Naturelle, 8vo., Lyon, 1791. torn. VIII. p. 542.ON MUMMY.The account given by Sir William Ouseley* confirms in many particularsthat just quoted. Sir William visited the Mummy Mountain (KielMiimiay) in the territory of Darabgerd in Persia. He fancied that itpresented a darker appearance than the mountains adjacent to it. Hesays the mummy is a blackish bituminous matter, which oozes from therock, and is considered by the Persians as far more precious than gold ;for it heals cuts and bruises, as they affirm, almost immediately, causesfractured bones to unite in a few minutes, and, taken inwardly, is asovereign remedy for many diseases. Sir William informed some of thosewho were thus describing to him the miraculous efficacy of the mummythat, after an experiment made on the broken leg of a fowl at Shiraz, Mr.Sharp, the surgeon, had declared that in his opinion the application of any^ common bitumen would have been attended with the same effect ; but thisthey disbelieved, and asserted that mummy of an inferior quality might havebeen employed. Sir William quotes from a manuscript work of the tenthcentury (Sir al belton) in which the mountain is described, and states thatthe mummy was gathered for the king, and that numerous officers werecommissioned to guard it ; that once in every year they opened the door ofthe cavern, in which was a stone, perforated with a small hole, and in thisthe mummy was found collected. The produce of the year amounted onlyto a portion of the size of a pomegranate, and it was sealed up in the presenceof priests, magistrates, &c., and deposited in the Royal Treasury.This substance is also alluded to by other oriental writers, referred to bySir William Ouseley, who concludes his account by stating that the easternprinces, both the giver and receiver, esteem a very small portion as a presentof considerable value.Mirza Abu'l Hassan brought to the Queen of England, in 1809, a portionof this mummy as a present from the King of Persia. The Empress ofRussia received a Uke present, about an ounce, in a gold boxes A man atIsfahan demanded nine romans (about eight pounds sterling), and wouldnot accept less, from a gentleman of Sir William Ouseley's party, for asmuch as could be contained within a common-sized walnut shell. |Travels, vol. II. p. 117.+ See M. de Ferries Sauveboeuf Mem. Hist. &c., des Voyages., torn. II. p. 33. Paris, 1790.X For further information on this subject, the reader may consult Kaempferi, Meditates6 ON MUMMY.Kfempfer states it as a popular opinion that the ancient Egyptians preservedthe bodies of their Princes and chief personages by means of thenatural mummy ; for which they afterwards substituted, under the samename, a compound aromatic balsam.*The resemblance and supposed identity of the natural Mummy to thebituminous preparation found in the embalmed bodies of the Egyptiansdoubtless contributed to maintain its character and to enhance its value inthe estimation of the Arabs.Exotic, pp.517, 519. Chardin's Travels. Voyages de Corneille Le Brun, Tom. I. p. 231.fol. Amst. 1718. Freer's Travels, p. 318, and Father Angelo (Gazophylac. Pers.) p. 234.Amcpnit. Exit. p. 520.CHAPTER II.ON MUMMY AS A DRUG.Its use as a Drug — its introduction by Eleazar, a Jewish Physician — deceptions practisedGuy de la Fontaine's enquiries as to the supply of real Mummy — the demand fur it,especially in France — Superstition of Francois I. — Opinions of various Authors as to thevirtues of Mummy — Avicenna — Lord Bacon — Boyle — Claus Worms — Grew — EmeryAmbrose Pare — Anecdote from Guy on, to account for the suspension of the traffic andcessation of the employment of Mummy in Medicine.In the sixteenth and part of the seventeenth centuries, mummy formed oneof the ordinary drugs, and was to be found in the shops of all apothecaries,and considerable sums of money were expended in the purchase of it,principally from the Jews in the East. No sooner was it credited thatmummy constituted an article of value in the practice of medicine thanmany speculators embarked in the trade ; the tombs were searched, andas many mummies as could be obtained were broken into pieces for thepurpose of sale. The demand, however, was not easily supplied ; for thegovernment of Egypt was unwilling to permit the transportation of thebodies from their sepulchral habitation ; too great temptation was thuscreated to the commission of fraud, and all kinds of impositions were indaily practice. According to the " Lemons de Guyon," as early as the year1 100, or as others say 1300, an expert Jewish physician named Eleazar,a native of Alexandria, was in the habit of prescribing mummy both forthe Christians and the Mahometan, then in the East contending for thepossession of Palestine. From that time, following the example thusset, physicians of all nations commonly prescribed it in cases of bruisesand wounds. The asphalt and the bitumen it was contended consolidatedand healed the broken and lacerated veins, and, its piquancy occasioningsickness, it was said to have the power of throwing off from the stomach8 ON MUMMY AS A DRUG.collections of congealed blood. Some Jews entered upon a speculation tofurnish the mummy thus brought into demand as an article of commerce,and undertook to embalm dead bodies and to sell them to the Christians.They took all the executed criminals, and bodies of all descriptions thatcould be obtained, filled the head and inside of the bodies with simpleasphaltum, an article of very small price, made incisions into the muscularparts of the Urbs, inserted into them also the asphaltum and then boundthem up tightly. This being done, the bodies were exposed to the heat ofthe sun ; they dried quickly, and resembled in appearance the truly preparedmummies. These were sold to the Christians.Guy De la Fontaine, physician to the king of Navarre, took a journeyinto Egypt, and being at Alexandria in 1564 he made enquiries as to thesupply of mummy as a drug. He communicated the result of his enquiriesto his friend Ambrose Pare, the celebrated French surgeon, who madeknown the particulars to the public through the medium of his works. Itappears that De la Fontaine sought out the principal Jew concerned in thistraffic, and requested to see his collection of mummies. This was verywillingly granted, and several bodies heaped one on the other were speedilyshown to him. Enquiring as to the places whence they had been obtained,and anxious to know whether that which the ancients had written respectingthe treatment of the dead and their mode of sepulture could be confirmed,the Jew laughed at him and hesitated not to say that all the bodies thenbefore them, amounting to between thirty and forty, had been prepared byhim during the last four years, and that they were the bodies of slaves orother persons indiscriminately collected. De la Fontaine then enquired as towhat nation they belonged, and whether they had died of any horrible disease,such as leprosy, the small pox, or the plague, to which the Jew repliedthat he cared not whence they came, whether they were old or young, maleor female, or of what disease they had died, so long as he could obtain them,for that when embalmed no one could tell, and added that he himselfmarvelled how the Christians, so dainty mouthed, could eat of the bodies ofthe dead. The Jew then detailed to De la Fontaine the mode of embalmingadopted by him, which was in agreement with that just alluded to byM. Guyon.ON MUMMY AS A DRUG. 9The demand for mummy was greater in France than in any othercountry, and Francois I. is stated by Belon* to have been in the habit oalways carrying about with him a Uttle packet containing some mummymixed with pulverised rhubarb, ready to take upon receiving any injuryfrom falls, or other accidents that might happen to him. Armed withthis universal remedy, Francois I. thought himself secure against alldanger.The medicinal use of mummy is alluded to by Shirley the dramatist :—Make mummy of my flesh, and sell me to the apothecaries."The Bird in a Cage (1633).That I might tear their flesh in hammocks, raiseMy losses, from their carcases turn'd mummy ^The Honest Lawyer (1616).Avicenna, one of the most celebrated physicians of antiquity, treats ofthe use of mummy in medicine. He describes it thus : " Mumia calico estin fine [tertii] sicca prout creditor in primo. Finest autem ei proprietyomnes spiritus confortandi (quod adijuvat continuation viscositas)."t Hesays it is subtle and resolutive, useful in cases of abscesses and eruptions,fractures, concussions, paralysis, hemicrania, epilepsy, vertigo, spittingof blood from the lungs, affections of the throat, coughs, palpitation of theheart, debility of the stomach, nausea, disorders of the Ever and spleen,internal ulcers, also in cases of poisons. | For contusions he speaks of it asthe best of all remedies. " De medicines autem quae oportet sumner ilium,qui patter contusion, aut offensive, aut casus memor, et antecedentest mumia pure cum oleo nominate sambacino et vino."§ It is prescribed tobe taken in decoctions of marjoram, thyme, elder, barley, roses, lentils,jujubes, cummin seed, carrara, saffron, cassia, parsley, with oxymel,wine, milk, butter, castor, syrup of mulberries, &c.Lord Bacon says]] " Mummy hath great force in staunching of blood ;*i^ Observations de Plusieurs Singularities, et Choses Memorable, &c. p. 261,t De Various Cords. Tom. II. p. 348, fol. ed. Venet. apud Juntas, 1608.t Tom. I. lib. u. p. 357. § Tom. I. Ub. iv. p. 151.II Sylva Sylva arum, Cant. X. s. 980.C10 ON MUMMY AS A DRUG.which, as it may be ascribed to the mixture of bales that are glutinous,so it may also partake of a secret propriety, in that the blood drawethman's flesh."Mummy," says Boyle, " is one of the useful medicines commendedand given by our physicians for falls and bruises, and in other cases too"*Claus Worms speaks of mummy as beneficial in contusions, cloudedblood, hard labour, &c.t But the sagacious Grew says, " Let them see toit,that dare trust to old gums, which have long since lost their virtue. "§Lemeryll describes mummy as detersive, vulnerary, and resolutive, capableof resisting gangrene, good for contusions, and preventing the bloodfrom coagulating in the body. He was alive to the deceptions practised inthis article during his time, and gives directions for the choice of the"veritable mumie d'Egjqite."In the Pharmacopoeia Schrodero-Hofimanniana^ are several formulae ofmummy as a drug, such as 1. Tincture s. extract, mumise Quercetan. 2.Tinct. s. extra. mumise Crolhi. 3. Tinct. alcalisata s. eUx. mumise. 4. Aliatinct. seu arian. canis humane. 5. 01. olive. murat. 6. 01. exaltation.Ambrose Pare has a chapter expressly upon " Mummies," under the divisionof Contusions and Gangrenes. He speaks of mummy as the meansupon which most dependence was placed in his time ; but he states thatneither the physicians who prescribe mummy, nor the authors that havewritten of it, nor the apothecaries who sell it, know any thing of certaintyrespecting it. After enumerating the opinions of Serapion, Avicenna,Dioscorides, his commentator Methodus, and Thieves, and showing thediversity of conjectures relative to it, he condemns its use in the followingterms : — " This wicked kind of drudge, doth nothing helpe the diseased,in that case, wherefore and wherein it is administered, as I have tryedan hundred times, and as Thieves witnesses, he tryed in himselfe whenBoyle's Works, vol. II. p. 451.t " Magnus ejus usus est ad contusions, sanguinis grunts dissolved, partim facilitate, spatiumet convulsions juvat, omnia interna et externa funera, exaggerations, aliqua ejus generiscurate. Persistent alias, vel seorsim, drachmas domitian exhibent'' Museum Wormianum,fol. Amst. 1655, p. 344.§ Museum Regales Societatis, fol. Lend. 1681, p. 3. || Emery (N.) Dictionnaire desRogues Simples, 4to. Amst. 1716, p. 362. % Fol. Geneva. 1687, p. 609.ON MUMMY AS A DRUG. 11as hee tooke some thereof by the advice of a certaine Jewish positionin Egypt, from whence it is brought ; but it also inferred many troublesomesymptoms, as the paine of the heart or stomach, vomiting, andstinks of the mouth." " I, perswaded by these reasons, doe not onelymyself prescribe any hereof to my patients, but also in consultations, endeavourwhat I may, that it bee not prescribed by others"* It would beeasy to multiply authorities in favour and against the use of mummy inmedicine jf but it is time to draw this part of my subject to a close, andI shall do this by relating an anecdote upon the authority of Guyon toaccount for the suspension of the nefarious traffic in mummy. A Jew ofDamietta, who was principally concerned in the manufacture of falsemummies, had a Christian slave, for the safety of whose soul he appears tohave entertained more concern than for his own, repeatedly urging him toabjure his religion and embrace that of the true faith ; he at last insistedupon the slave submitting to the operation of circumcision as the evidenceof his sincerity : this the slave resisted, and in consequence of his perversenesswas very ill treated by his master. The slave represented to the pachathe practices of his master, and denounced him for the frauds he was committingin the making of mummies. The Jew was thrown into prison,from which he obtained his release on condition of the payment of no lessa sum than three hundred sultan's of gold. When intelligence of thisreached the governors of Alexandria, Rosetta, and other cities of Egj^pt,and the city of Aleppo, delighted with the prospect of readily obtainingso much money, they exacted a ransom from all those Jews whowere merchants of mummies. From this time the traffic ceased ; the Jews,fearful of being subjected to a new oppression, dared no longer to continuetheir trade.It wiU thus be seen that the employment of mummy in medicine did notcease from any discovery of its inefficacy in the relief or cure of disease ;but merely from the hazard with which the traffic in the substance must beThe Workes of that famous Chirurgeon Ambrose Party, fol. Lond. 1634, p. 448.+ See a very sensible thesis on this subject by J. A. Gladbach, entitled " Diss. Inaug. deMumiis in praxi Medica, 4to. Helmsman. 1735. — Also Lanzoni (I.) Tractatus de BalsamationeCadaverous, 12mo. Geneva. 1696.12 ON MUMMY AS A DRUG.carried on. The desiccated bodies of travellers lost in the desert, andburied beneath the sands, were equally with the mummies employed inmedicine ; and Roquefort tells us that the bodies of young girls were consideredmore efficacious than others, and therefore produced a larger price.The Arabs to this day make use of mummy powder for a medicine.They mix it with butter and call it mantel* It is esteemed as a sovereignremedy for bruises both external and internal.Madden's Travels in Turkey, Egypt, Nubia, and Palestine, vol. II. p. 90.CHAPTER III.ON THE THEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS, AND FuneralCEREMONIES OF DIFFERENT NATIONS.The perfection of the art of embalming, as practised by the Egyptians, to be traced to theiriheologi/ — Immortality of the soul — thelEgyptians the first, according to Herodotus, tolay down this principle — transmigration of souls — Service's Commentary on a passage ofVirginia relation to this subject — St. Augustine's opinion — Cicero on the Egyptian embalmings— Allusions to the practice by Sixtus Empirical — Pompofiiiis Mela — Athanasius —Filius Italics — Lucian — Mummies as a security — confirmation of this by Herodotus andDiodorus Siculus — practice of embalming by the Persians, Arabs, Jews, and Ethiopians —also by the Christians — embalming of Jacob — sepulture in the earth the most naturalmode of disposing of the dead — funeral ceremonies of different nations — mode of preservingthe bodies among the Persians, Syrians, Ancient Arabians, the Brazilians, Chinese, andEthiopians.The desire of immortality is most strongly rooted in the mind of man, andinnumerable means have in all ages, and under all circumstances, beendevised to perpetuate this memory after death. In no part of the world doesthis principle appear to have acted so strongly as in Egj'pt, and its ancientinhabitants have not only built huge pyramids, and erected mighty templesand obelisks, covered with symbols, expressing, in hieroglyphical language,characters and events ; but they have succeeded beyond all other ages andpeople in preserving from decay the remains of their own fragile frames.The extraordinary perfection to which they carried the art of embalming thedead is, perhaps, alone to be accounted for by referring to their theology.Behaving in the immortality of the soul, the ancient Egyptians conceivedthat they were retaining the soul within the body as long as the form of thebody could be preserved entire, or were facilitating the reunion of it withr^ the body, at the day of resurrection, by preserving the body from corruption.14 THEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS, ANDAccording to Herodotus :ripwToi it Kal Toyct Tuv \uyov AtyvTrnoi fiji o'l fiVtiiTfC) i>S av'^pwwov i^wx'' nSavnTu^ hard'roil aufiUTOQ Se KaTacfiSh'oyTOi, ££ aXXo ^uiov all ytvo/jiivoi' lai vet cic iwiuv cc TnpiiXBi], xaiTora VEpaaia /cai ra 3aXa(T!ria scat r« ttctiipu, aune Iq ui'BpwTrov cuifia yivufxevov laCvviiv riffTrepiiiXviTiv Ce avT^ yipca^ai kv Tpitj-^^ikioiiii. thai. Tovrii) rei Xoya) ill oi 'EWi'ii'wv ixP'l-trayro, ol jii-v, Trpcrepov, ol Ce, Sarto, wc it*'^ tiuuruii' foirf rwv iyio eldwi ra ovpo^ara, ovy padiit).Herod. Hist. lib. ii. § 123.The Egyptians are also the first that laid down the principle of theimmortality of the human soul ; and that, when the body is dissolved, thesoul enters into some other animal which is born at the same time ; andthat, after going the round of aU the animals that inhabit the land, thewaters, and the air, it again enters the body of a man which is then born.This circuit, they say, is performed by the soul in 3000 years. Thereare several among the Greeks who have adopted the above opinion asthough it were an invention of their own, some in former and others inlater times, whose names I do not mention, although I am not unacquaintedwith them."Laurent Translation.Upon this passage the ingenious Larcher has the following comment:Herodotus ne dit pas que les Egyptians soient les premiers qui aient cru aImmortality de I'ame, mais qu'ils sont les premiers qui aient avance queI'ame, extant immortelle, passport acres la destruction du corps dans celui dequelque animal. Je ne doute pas que les Egyptians n'aient cru de touttemps a I'immortaUte de Fame. 11 seront aise de prouver que Noe y croyoit.Ce dogme se perpetua dans sa famille. Mesraim, son petit-till, peupleI'Egypte. Ainsi Immortality de I'ame fut connue de tout temps dans cepays"*Those who held the doctrine of transmigration of souls would take extraordinarypains to preserve the body from putrefaction, in the hope of thesoul again joining the body it had quitted. Service, in his CommentaryHistoire d'Hkodote, par Larcher, Tom. II. pp. 426, 427.FUNERAL CEREMONIES OF DIFFERENT NATIONS. 15upon a passage of Virgil descriptive of the funeral of Polydorus, in thethird Book of the ^neid.animamque sepulchreCondemns,"takes occasion to 'remark, on this subject, that " the Egyptians, skilful inwisdom, do keep their dead embalmed so much the longer, to the end thatthe soul may for a long while continue and be obnoxious to the body, lest itshould quickly pass to another. The Romans, on the contrary burnedtheir dead, that the soul might speedily return into its own nature"*Upon the practice of the Egyptians, St. Augustine f asserts that theyalone believed the resurrection, because they carefully preserved their deadbodies ; for (says he) they have a custom of drying up the bodies and renderingthem as durable as brass. The account of Herodotus respecting the depositingof the embalmed bodies of their relatives in the habitations of theEgyptians is confirmed by various authors. Cicero says, they embalmedtheir dead and kept them at home.Conduct .^gyptii mortuus, et eos domi sen-ant."Tusciil. Quiet. lib. i.Amongst themselves, and above ground," says Sixtus Empirical.Inter penetrate" (Pompous Mela, lib. i., c. 9.)In lectures," says Athanasius.So also Filius ItaUcus, (lib. iii Unicorn.)Egyptian. tellusPlaudit oporto post funds santa saxoCorpora, et a mensis exanguem haud separate umbra." Unde .(Egyptii perish sapientia conduite duties servant cadavera, scilicet ut animamulto tempore verdure, et corpore sit obnoxia, ne city ad aliud transept. Romani contraI faciebant, comburentes cadavera, ut statim anima in generalities, id est, in sum naturam\rediret." — Servir Comment, in lib. iii., Aeneid.t Augustine (Sti.) Sermons 120 de Diverse, cap. 12, thus :— " jEgyptii soli credit resurrection.quia diligenter curant cadavera mortuum : more enim habet sincere corpora etquasi sea reddere, Gabbaras ea vacant."IG THEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS, ANDBut Lucian goes further, and says, in his tract Deduct* that he speakswhat he has seen, and that they bring the dried body as a guest to theirfeasts and invitations ; and oftentimes one necessitous of money is suppliedby giving his brother or his father in pledge, which practice is fully confirmedby Herodotus, who says, —"'EttI tovtov ftarrtXevovToc, (Acrvxt') iXtyoy, (o'l tpeig) afid,ir)Q iovariQ ttoWj^c-jQimiaTioi',ycvia^ai vvfiov A'tyVTrTtotai, UTroOtiKpivra li'e-)(ypov Tov Trarpug tuv vIkw, bvrto \afij:>aystv tovoEOf TrponTtBijvai Cc 'in roirw rw rtjuw ruvce, Tuv diCuvra to XP^^S ''"' ""■ac'JC KpaTtiiv tTjq tovXajxjiavovTOQ ^i]i:r)C t^ Oc inroTiBivri toto to ii'ixvpoy, Tribe iTrilvat ir][j.lriv, //») (iovXojxivaUTTOCOvvai TO yj>ioQ, IJ-V^f^ avTU heivij) TeXcvTi'itrat/Ti elvai Tatprjg Kvprjaat fiifT iv tKuiy Tf TruTpwu)TCKpu), fiiiT iv ciXXw fir]Civ\, ixijTC. aXKov firjUva tuv tbivTov awoyevofiEvov 5ai//at."Herod. Hist. lib. ii. ^136.In his (Psychic') reign, according to their (the priests') account, moneycirculating very slowly, a law was enacted for the Egyptians, that, by givinghis father's body as a pledge, a man might borrow money ; and to this lawwas added another, that the person who lent the money should be put inpossession of the whole sepulchral repository of the borrower ; that if, aftergiving this pledge, any one refused to refund, the following punishmentshould be inflicted on him, that, in the case of his own death, he shouldhave no right to be interred either in the tomb of his forefathers or in anyother, neither should he be at liberty to entomb any of his relations thatdeparted this life."Laurent Translation.And Diodorus Siculus (lib. i.) also writes, "they have a custom of depositingfor a pledge the bodies of their dead parents. It is the greatestignominy that may be not to redeem them ; and, if they do it not, theythemselves are deprived of burial." And, in another place, he says, " suchas for any crime or debt are hindered from being buried, are kept at homewithout a coffin, whom afterwards their posterity, growing rich, dischargingtheir debts, and paying money in compensation of their crimes, honourably• 'O ^iv "EXXtji' iKava£.v 6 Se niparjQ tBa\peV v Ct Incog va\<^ iTepi\pUi 6 St 2/>dS»)e KUTicr-•Ji'tif. Tapi\e{iii C£ 6 Alyinr-tor,'^FUNERAL CEREMONIES OF DIFFERENT NATIONS. 17bur'. For the Egyptians glory that their parents and ancestors were buriedwith honour." Greenish conjectured that the law of Psychic was framedto restrict the practice of borrowing ; attaching an infamy to it, by connectingit with the pledge of the debtor's most sacred possession.*The practice of embalming, although originally and in the most perfectmanner adopted by the ancient Egj^^tians, was not entirely confined to theiruse; for the Persians, the Arabs, the Jews, the Ethiopians, and even theChristians in some degree employed these ceremonies. Thus we read inthe book of Genesis f that the body of the father of Joseph was, accordingto his commands, embalmed by the physicians : — " And Joseph commandedhis servants the physicians to embalm his father : and the physicians embalmedIsrael. And forty days were fulfilled for him ; for so are fulfilledthe days of those which are embalmed : and the Egyptians mourned for himthreescore and ten days."In the New Testament we read that Nicodemus carried 100 lbs. of myrrhand aloes to embalm the body of Jesus and to envelop it in Unenn with aromaticsaccording to the manner of the Jews : " And there came also Nicodemus,which at the first came to Jesus by night, and brought a mixtureof myrrh and aloes, about an hundred pound weight. Then took theythe body of Jesus, and wound it in Unenn clothes with the spices, as themanner of the Jews is to bury." JAll civilized nations have practised the same on the bodies of their kingsor rulers, or persons of great distinction. Sepulture in the earth, however,has been the most ordinary mode of disposing of the dead ; but manynations committed the bodies to the action of fire, and even reduced theirframes to a state of powder, which was taken either in their drinks or dispersedto the winds. Erasmus Franciscus reports of a nation of thekingdom of Guinea (Arwacse vocantur) that they pulverise the bones oftheir lords, ladies, relations, &c., then mix the dust in their ordinary drink,and so absorb it. " Pulverem hung miscet potui ordinary, et bibendo itaabsorbentsArt of Embalming, p. 303. f Chap. i. 2, 3. J John xxix. 39, 40.§ See Claude, Methodus Balsamandi Corpora Human, &c. 4to. Altenb. 1679. p. 31.D18 THEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS, ANDInterment in the earth appears to have been the earnest, as it is certainlythe most natural,* way of disposing of the dead ; and the first instance onrecord of this mode of burial, though there can be Uttle doubt but that thepractice existed anterior to the record of it, is that of Sarah the wife ofAbraham, t The burning of the bodies of the dead had probably its originin the endeavour to prevent any insult or iU treatment being offered tothem ; and we find that this custom prevailed among the ancient Greeks,Romans, Germans, Gauls, and others. The people of Chios and the oldRomans not only burnt their dead, but beat the bones in a mortar, andwhen thus reduced to powder sifted it through a sieve, and scattered thedust abroad by the winds. The ancient Romans also washed the bodyand rubbed it with perfumes, as we learn from the poet Ennius :Tarquin corpus bona semina la\it et unit;"and Tacitus, speaking of Poppies, the wife of Nero, says, " Corpus non ignisabohtum, ut Romanus mos ; sed rerum exterior consuetudine, differtumodorous conditur." — Annales, xvi. 6. This latter mode approaches nearer tothat of the Egyptians than the former ; though they were both probably derivedfrom that people. PIiny| relates that it was customary among the northernpeople near the Riphaean Mountains to bury the bodies in water. Soindeed in Scythia, they formerly kept the dead bodies of their parents affixed" For dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return." — Gen. iii. 19.His breath goeth forth ; he returned to his earth." — Psalm xlvi. 4.And Euripides, in his Supplicants, introduces Theseus thus speaking :Eao-ar' jjSjj yij Ka\v<p^r]vai vsKpovsO^CV S' EKatTQV tic TO (TtajX a<plKtTOEvravy airajX^t, Trvtvfxa fxtv irpoQ ai^tpa,To aiijfia c eiQ yijv." ' fc^ ^/ ■ /J, . ^ 'Now they are dead, permit them in the earthTo rest concealed. For whence at first proceedsEach portion of our frame, thither againMust it return : the spirit flies aloft,And with its native hither claims alliance;The body mingles with the dust below."+ Gen. xxiii. 19,20. J Hist. Natural, lib. iv cap. 1'2.FUNERAL CEREMONIES OF DIFFERENT NATIONS. 19to the trunks of trees in the snow and ice. Basis Viginerus reports thatthe Macedonians and Ethiopians, having emptied and deprived the bodies ofthe dead of their flesh, covered the remains with plaster, on which a kindof fresco painting was laid, so as to represent as nearly as possible thenati-al body. This done, it was put into a glazed case or coffin. Thenearest relatives kept it in their possession for one year, making offeringsand oblations to it during that time, at the expiration of which the body wasremoved to the environs of the city, and there buried. The Translates*removed the heart and intestines from their dead, bathed them in aromaticand spicy liquors, and then burnt them in honour of their gods. The asheswere carefully collected together and replaced in the body, that no partmight be found wanting at the day of resurrection. The Colchians andTartars suspended their dead upon the trees for three years, to be dried bythe sun. When the desiccation was complete, they took down the bodiesand burnt them entire.The Persians, as also the Syrians and the ancient Arabians, covered theirdead with honey or wax, and so preserved them. Erasmus Franciscus reportsthat a certain people of the kingdom of Guinea (Tivitivae) dwelling aboutthe river Orenoque, mourn their dead with great wailing, and bury them.When it is suspected that the flesh, through the process of putrefaction,has become separated from the bones, they dig it up afresh, hang up theskeleton in the house, decorate the skull with different coloured-feathers,and affix plates of gold to the arms and thighs. A certain nation of theBrazils mourn the death of their kindred-nth. extraordinary sorrow andweeping ; then paint the body with various colours, and afterwards roll itin silk, lest it be rudely touched by the earth in which it is placed. | Thesame authority § acquaints us that it often happens among the Chinese thatthe children preserve the bodies of their parents for three or four years inthe house, as a token of their devoted love and adoration. But the chinksof the coffin are so firmly glued up that no noisome sense of putrefactioncan offend the nostrils.Erasmus Franciscus de Sepulture et honoris ISepulchralibus, p. 1502.t p. I486. tp. fill. I4SS. § p. 1509.20 THEOLOGY OF THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS ANDMr. Thorns, who resided some years at Macao and at Canton, informsme that he has often seen coffins which contained the dead in the housesof the Chinese. On enquiry he found that they had been there for years ;and that some one of the family (generally the eldest son) never failed,morning and night, besides presenting rice, wine, and tea, to invoke thedead to be propitious to them, imagining that while the body is interredthe spirit will continue to hover over it. If the habitation be too confinedto admit of their reception, it is no unusual occurrence for the relativesto build outside the city wall a room of brick, large enough to containone or two coffins ; here the nearest male relation sleeps, (generally on aboard,) whose duty, besides presenting the offerings, it is to see that thesticks of incense, commonly caWedjos-sticks, i. e. sacred sticks, are alwaysburning : the observance of this ceremony is termed completing filial piety.In addition to the rice, &c., akeady mentioned, persons in affluent circumstancesmake offerings of a peculiar kind of pastry, sweetmeats, fowls,large roasted pigs, and even goats : and not unfrequently wardrobes, to thevalue of many hundred dollars, are burnt for the purpose of transmittingthem, as is supposed, into another state for the use of the deceased.Anciently, ministers of state used to retire from office for three years onthe death of a parent ; but this custom has ceased. Persons in morehumble circumstances will erect a shed of a kind of matting, where someoneperson will remain for months, sometimes years, disregarding theseasons, before the dead are interred. As the coffins are generally madeof very hard wood, three or four inches thick, well dove-tailed, andcemented with chunam, they do not emit the least smell.On the death of any one, the wife or nearest of kin, attended by someof his or her relations, repair to a stream of water outside the city wall,into which they throw a little salt, and then take home a portion of thewater, with which the corpse is washed all over ; the body being shaved, a^^ little rice is put into the mouth and a coin in each hand, and the coffin isthen fastened down. The whole of this ceremony is attended to with agreat deal of weeping and lamentation. If the deceased had attained agreat age, or been the mother of a large family, persons of different gradesmake large presents, and, without being invited, attend the funeral. InFUNERAL CEREMONIES OF DIFFERENT NATIONS. 21such cases, a long inscription, extending sometimes more than six feet inlength, written in golden characters on crimson silk, is borne Uke a bannerbefore the coffin, recording the numerous virtues of the deceased. Shouldthe descendants of the deceased become reduced, the dead are often takenup and re-interred in a spot that is considered to be more propitious to thefortunes of the family. At such times, should there be but little remainingof the body, it is collected together and put into an earthen vessel, whichis also interred, and before it is placed some unsoiled rice, with wine andtea. All the priests of the Buddha sect in China, shortly after death, areburnt in an iron vessel in the open air, after which the ashes are collectedand put into jars closely sealed, and either buried in their sacred enclosuresor sent to some new temple to be there deposited.The Ethiopians, according to Herodotus,* delicate the bodies of theirdead and' after some process, the precise nature of which he does notdescribe, cover them aU over with plaster and paint them, imitating asnearly as possible the life; they then are placed within columns of glassmade hoUow.f Deposited within these, the dead bodies appear through,emitting no unpleasant smell, nor exhibiting any thing whatever unsightly,and the whole case is visible, as well as the corpse itself. These columnswere kept by the nearest relations of the deceased during the space of oneyear in their houses, presenting them with the firstlings of all, and honouringthem with sacrifices, after which they were carried away, and set upwithout the town.It may not be uninteresting here to notice the pious expression of regardshown by the people of the East to their dead at the present time. SonniniJhas told us that the traces of the precautions taken by the ancient Egj'p-Thalia, Lib. iii. § 24. f De Pauw (Philosophical Dissertations on the Egyptiansand Chinese, vol. I. p. 197,) conjectures these to have been composed of a resinous matter,something like yellow amber (which would most assuredly presence bodies could means bedevised of rendering it ductile or liquid), or of some transparent gum which is abundant inEthiopia. But we learn from Rudolf (Hist. .^Ethiop. lib. i. cap. 7) that in some parts ofEthiopia a great quantity of fossil salt is found, which is transparent, and hardens by exposureto the air. M. Larcher (tom. III. lib. iii. § 24,) conceives that it was this salt which wastaken for glass.t II. 20.22 FUNERAL CEREMONIES OF DIFFERENT NATIONS.trans in burning their dead are still to be found in their modern successors.Although unacquainted with the art of embalming, they, nevertheless, endeavorsto preserve the body by the use of perfumes. As soon as a personis dead, the Egyptians hasten to press the different parts of the corpse, tofree it from all impurities ; wash it several times ; shave it ; pull out all thehair ; stop up every aperture closely with cotton ; and pour over it odoriferouswaters, so that aU its pores are penetrated with the perfumes of Arabia.After the body is committed to the earth, a little pillar of stone, terminatedby a turban, is erected over the spot where the deceased reposes, and tothis spot the friends repair every Friday to repeat their melancholy adieus.From Wood* we learn that the uncommon magnificence of the monumentsof the dead in ancient PaknjTa seems to have been borrowed from Egypt, towhich country they, of all people, come nearest in that sort of expense. Zenobiawas originally of Egypt; she spoke their language perfectly well, andaffected much to imitate in many things her ancestor, Cleopatra. Butthat they borrowed some of their customs from Egypt before her timeseems plain, from a discover' of mummies in their sepulchral monuments.We had been in Eg^-pt a few months before," says this author, " and bycomparing the Unenn, the manner of swathing, the balsam, and other parts ofthe mummies of that country' with those of Pahn^Ta, we found their methodsof embalming exactly the same. The Arabs had seen vast numbers of thesemummies in all the sepulchres; but they had broken them up, in hopes offinding treasures. We offered them rewards to find an entire one, but invain; which disappointed our hopes of seeing something curious in thesarcophagus, or, perhaps, of meeting with hieroglyphics." I am happy tobe able to add the testimony of Captain Triangles in favour of this accountby INIr. Wood. This intelligent traveller has assured me that hesaw many fragments of embalmed bodies wrapped up in similar swathings,and having quite the same appearance as those he had so frequently seen inEgypt-ruinsof Palmyra and Balbec, fol. Lond. 1827, p. 22.CHAPTER IV.ON EGYPTIAN TOMBS.Practice of entombment by different nations— The tombs of Egypt— various articles foundwithin them— Earliest known Tombs— The Pyramids— The Catacombs— Character of Egyptianarchitecture and sculpture— Opinions of Goguet—Denon— Hamilton— Legh— Light—Wilkinson— Champollion—Strabo— Woodward— Character of the ancient Egyptians— theirhigh sense of virtuous conduct— the wisdom of some of their Laws — Examination into theCharacters of the dead— confirmation of this by Diodorus Stimulus-attested by Champollion—Description of the funeral ceremonies of the Egyptians by Diodorus Siculus— Description ofthe sacred barge— The catacombs— Correction of a statement made by De Pauw— Privatetombs— Plain of mummies— Mr. Salt's opinion as to the antiquity of the catacombs— Evidencein favour of the casing of the pyramids— Mr. Davison's survey of the catacombs ofAlexandria— Catacombs of Thebes— Royal tombs— Private tombs— Bellows account ofGournou — Mummy pits — position of the mummies.An ingenious writer* has remarked that the people of polished nationsaccumulated riches in their temples, whilst those of barbarous ages depositedtheirs in the tombs. Solomon honoured his father by burying nearhim all the riches he could obtain. Warlike nations have generallyentombed the martial weapons of the deceased with the body. The ancientGauls burnt their dead and interred their arms with their ashes. The tombsin Egypt have been found to contain all kinds of articles bearing reference tothe habits and profession of the deceased. I have seen corn, barley, fetches,bread, fiiiits, artists' palettes, brushes, paints, various implements, &c.Instruments of war have been rarely found, although the Egyptians wereso warlike a nation. Belzoni could only find one arrow, which was twofeet long. At one extremity it had a copper point well fixed in it, and atthe other a notch, as usual, to receive the string of the bow; it had evidentlybeen spit by the string and glued together against The armour of AlexanderRoquefort (M. de) des Sepulture Nationales, 8vo. Paris, 1824. t Travels, p. 172.24 ON EGYPTIAN TOMBS.is said to have been placed within his tomb, and Dion Cassius* relates thatCaligula wore the breast-plate of Alexander, which he had taken from histomb.Perhaps the earliest known tombs for the reception of the dead are thosealluded to by the late Dr. Clarke in his " Dissertation on the Sarcophagusbrought from Alexandria." They consist of immense mounds of earth,and are to be found in almost every part of the habitable globe. Dr. Clarkestates that he has seen these sepulchral heaps in Europe, in Asia, from theIcy Sea to Mount Caucasus, over aU the south of Russia, Kuban Tartary,Asia Minor, Syria, Palestine, Egj^t, and part of Africa, f A superstitiouscustom in the northern nations of casting a stone at them, he adds, preventsany appearance of their diminution ; and this practice, according toShaw, X prevails in Barbary, in the Holy Land, and in Arabia. Tliey appearto present the most ancient mode of burial, and to be anterior to the pyramids,as having a less artificial form : and perhaps some proof of thismay be derived from the appearance of one of the pyramids of Saccarain Upper Egj'pt, the stones of which, being further advanced in decompositionthan those of Djiza, prove that they were erected at an earlier period,as they are exposed to the same atmosphere and at no great distance fromthe latter. This pyramid preserves almost the simplicity of the primaevalconic mound, and shows only an approach to the more artificial structureof others. §Next in point of antiquity are the pyramids and the catacombs. Theformer must always be classed among the most extraordinary works of theancient Egyptians, but historians and antiquarians have failed in pointingout either the period of their erection, or the authors of such gigantic undertakings.The learned Goguet|| infers that as Homer, who lived 900years before Christ, sings of Thebes and her hundred gates, and makes no41^ mention of the pyramids, they must have been built posterior to his time.In this respect Goguet is in agreement with the authority of DiodorusSiculus.^ Hieroglyphical researches have hitherto thrown no light towardsLib. lix. cap. 17. f P- 46, Note. t Travels, Pres. p. 10. § Clarke, p. 47, Note.II De origine des Lois, des Arts et des Sciences, torn. Il p. 56. Paris, 1820.f Lib. i. p. 72.ON EGYPTIAN TOMBS. 25dispelling the mystery in which the erection of the pyramids is involved.We are in perfect ignorance as to their use or their builders. Abd'AUatitsays that he saw a prodigious number of hieroglyphical inscriptions on thetwo great pyramids, as many as, if copied, would fill perhaps 10,000volumes. No inscription is now to be found. It would be out of placehere to attempt any description of these buildings, as it is to be obtained inthe works of various travellers ;* but I cannot omit noticing here that theEgyptians appear to have excelled in the gigantic style in all their specimensol" sculpture and architecture. They display a fine and bold outline, butare deficient in the expression of passions and the representation of grace :due proportions and elegance of form are rarely to be met with. Immensemasses astonish the eyes every where ; indeed, so numerous and so stupendousare all the remains of the ancient monuments of Egypt, that Demonwas tempted to say, " On est fatigue desire, on est fatigue de lire, on estepouvante' de la pense d'une telle conception ; on ne peut croire, memeacres Savoir vu, a la reality de Existence de tant de constructions deniessur un meme point, a leur dimension, a la constance obstinate quia exigenceleur fabrication, aux defenses incalculable de tant de sumptuosite." Mr.Hamilton t has well expressed himself in allusion to the magnitude of thatcolossal fragment of antiquity called by the French Memnonuim. " Amongother dimensions of this colossus," says he, " I found that it measured sixfeet ten inches over the foot, and sixty-two or sixty-three feet round theshoulders. This enormous statue has been broken off at the waist, and theupper part is now laid prostrate on the back. The face is entirely obliterated: and next to the wonder excited at the boldness of the sculptor whomade it, and the extraordinary powers of those who erected it, the labourand exertions that must have been used for its destruction are most astonishing.It could only have been brought about with the help of militaryengines, and must then have been the work of a length of time. Its fallhas carried along with it the whole wall of the temple, which stood withinits reach. It was not without great difficulty and danger that wee couldclimb on its shoulder and neck ; and, in going from thence upon its chest,See Dr. Richardson's Travels along the Mediterranean, Greaves' Pyramidographia, &c.t Remarks on several parts of Turkey. Part I. .^gyptiaca. 4to. Lond. 1809, p. 167.E26 ON EGYPTIAN TOMBS.I was assisted by my Arab servant, who walked by my side, in the hieroglyphicalcharacters engraved on the arm."Mr. Le"-h* says that "from the appearance and present state of thetemples (at Phil?) it appears clear that the system of building amongst theancient Egyptians was first to construct great masses, and afterwards tolabour for ages in finishing the details of the decorations, beginning withthe sculpture of the hieroglyphics, and then passing to the stucco andpainting. In Philte, as at Thebes and Dendera, nothing is finished but whatis of the highest antiquity."Mr. Wilkinson has represented, in the 4th Plate of Part II., of his mostvaluable and interesting " Materia Hieroglyphica," the proportions of anEgA-titian figure taken from the sculptures of the tombs at Thebes. He tellsus, that "when the Egyptians intended to sculpture, or paint figures on awall, they began by smoothing the surface, and drawing a number of parallellines at equal distances ; at right angles to which were traced other lines,forming a series of squares. The size of these squares depended upon thesize of the figures to be introduced ; but, whatever was their size, nineteenparts or spaces were always allowed for the height of the human figure ; ifsmaller figures were to be introduced, intermediate lines were then ruled,which formed smaller squares, and consequently a figure of smaller proportion.The figures of the earlier times are of more lengthened proportions,because what is taken from the breadth of the limbs gives the appearanceof greater height; but the total length of the figure is still divided intonineteen parts in their sculptures and fresco-paintings. "fCaptain Light gives the following description of his visit to Karnak, theancient Diospolis: — " It was impossible to look on such an extent of buildingwithout being lost in admiration ; no description will be able to give anadequate idea of the enormous masses still defying the ravages of time.Enclosure within enclosure, propyltea in front of propylwa; to these,avenues of sphinxes, each of fourteen or fifteen feet in length, lead fromNarrative of a Journey in Egypt and the Country beyond the Cataracts, by Thomas Legh,Esq. 4to. Lond. IS 16, p. 51.t P. 113. See also Appendix III. for Observations on the Sculpture and Drawing of theancient Egyptians.ON EGYPTIAN TOMBS. 27a distance of several hundred yards. The common Egyptian sphinx isfound in the avenues to the south ; but, to the west, the trio sphinx, withthe ram's head, from one or two that have been uncovered, seems to havecomposed its corresponding avenue. Those of the south and east are stillburied. Headless statues of grey and white granite, of gigantic size, layprostrate in different parts of the ruins. In the western court, in front ofthe great portico, and at the entrance to this portico, is an upright headlessstatue of one block of granite, whose size may be imagined from findingthat a man of six feet just reaches to the patella of the knee.The entrance to the great portico is through a mass of masonry, partlyin ruins, through which the eye rests on an avenue of fourteen columns,whose diameter is more than eleven feet and whose height is upwards ofsixty. On each side of this are seven rows, of seven columns in each,whose diameter is eight feet, and about forty feet high, of an architecturewhich wants the elegance of Grecian models, yet suits the immense majestyof the Egj'ptian temple.Though it does not enter into my plan to continue a description whichhas been so ably done by others before me, yet, when I say that the wholeextent of this temple cannot be less than a mile and a half in circumference,and that the smallest blocks of masonry are five feet by four indepth and breadth, that there are obelisks of eighty feet high on a base ofeighteen feet, of one block of granite, it can be easily imagined thatThebes was the vast city history describes it to be"*Champollion calls Karnak the Palace, or rather the City of Monuments."Lk m'apparut," says he, " toute la magnificence pharaonique, tout ceque les hommes ont imagine et execute de plus grand. Tout ce que j 'availsadmire avec enthousiasme sur la rive gauche, me parut miserable en comparaisondes conceptions gigantesques dont j'etais entire. Je me gar-seraibien de vouloir rien desire ; car, ou mes expressions ne vaudraientque la millieme partie de ce qu'on doit dire en parlant de tels objets, oubien si e'en travis une faible esquisse, meme fort decoloree, on me pren-trait pour un enthousiaste, peut-ere meme pour un fou. II sutfira d'ajouterqu'aucun peuple ancien ni moderne n'a con^u Fart de Architecture surune rochelle aussi sublime, aussi large, aussi grandiose, que le firent lespp. 105—107.28 ON EGYPTIAN TOMBS.vieux Egyptians ; ils convenient en hommes des 100 pieds de haut, etImagination qui, en Europe, s'elance bien au-dessus de nos portiques,s'arrete et tombe impuissante au pied des 140 colonnes de la salle hysde Karnak"*The finest specimen of Egyptian sculpture hitherto discovered is unquestionablythat of the " Young Memnon," as it is called, found atThebes, whence it was removed by the intrepid and indefatigable Belzoni,and now placed in the British Museum. Mr. Hamilton was struck withits extraordinary delicacy, the very uncommon expression visible in itsfeatures, and the marked character that well entitled it to the admirationof Damies.fM. Caviglia exhumed a magnificent colossal figure at Memphis. It isrepresented by M. Champollion to be a portrait of Sesostris, and he isconfirmed in this opinion by the hieroglyphics on the breast and on thearms of the figure. |But M. Denon's description of the sphinx ought not to be overlooked :Expression de la tete," says he, " est douce, gracieuse, est tranquille,le character en est African ; mais la bouche, dont les livres sontpasses, aune noblesse dans le mouvement et une finesse execution vraimentadmirables ; c'est de la chair et de la vie." An earlier author (Abc'Alsatia) seems to have felt the same sensations upon viewing this extraordinaryspecimen of Egyptian sculpture : " Uu homme esprit," says he,ayant demande quel etoit, de tout ce que j'avois vu en Egypt, Objetqui avoit le plus excite mon admiration, je lui dis que c'etoit la justesse desproportions dans la tete du Sphinx." And he adds, " Or, il est bienetonnant que, dans une figure aussi colossale, le sculpteur ait su conserverla juste proportion de toutes les parties, tandis que la nature ne presentedaucun model d'un semblable»colosse, ni rien qui put lui etre compare." §The Egyptian sphinxes, we have the authority of Mr. Wilkinson forsaying, are always representative of the male' not female sex. Tliey areeither andre or trio-sphinxes, that is, having either the union of the lionand man, or the lion's body with the ram's head.||Lettres ecrites d'Egypte et de Nubie, p. 98. t See iEgyptiaca.t See Plate III. in Lettres ecrites d'Egypte, &c , p. 66. § p. 180. 1] Mat. Hierog. p. 94ON EGYPTIAN TOMBS. 29The monotony of the Egyptian buildings is most striking; they areenormous masses, distinguished by a " can and solemn grandeur of conception,"but defective in spirit; all colossal, stupendous works of infinitelabour, but deficient in taste. Strabo, speaking of the edifices of the ancientEgyptians, says they have neither design, genius, nor elegance.*Singularity and superstition form the peculiar character of the ancientEgyptian. I am, however,'far from agreeing with a learned author,! who,in a "Discourse on the Wisdom of the Ancient Egyptians," affects to findthem abounding in all that is bad, and deficient in aU that is good. Thefirst principles of the laws, the arts, and the sciences, have been derivedfrom these people, from whom they have been transmitted to us through theGreeks and the Romans. J According to Herodotus, Diodorus Siculus, andother historians, the ancient Egj^^tians were a people holding truth andvirtuous conduct in the highest estimation. Their penal laws applying tocases of homicide, parricide, perjury, adultery, &c., mark the high senseof justice entertained by them, and this is even carried to the verge of thetomb; for we learn from Diodorus Siculus § that, upon the death of anyone,the relations of the deceased were obliged to announce to the judges(forty, or forty-two, in number) the time at which it was intended to performthe ceremony of burial. This consisted in the first place of thepassage of the deceased across the lake or canal of the department, ornome, |1 as it was called, to which the deceased had belonged. The dayLib. xvii. p. 1 1 59. f Dr. Woodward.X As the arts and sciences took their origin in Egypt, the Greeks began to visit it with a vievfto commerce, instruction, and curiosity, and it has been ingeniously and with great probabilitysuggested that the Greeks must have looked upon Egypt with nearly the same feelings as wedo on Greece and Rome. " Plan and Objects of the History of Herodotus," by P. E. Laurent.§ Lib. i. § 92.II Sesostris, who ruled 16,59 years, Ac., divided ancient Egypt into thirty-six provinces. Thename of nomes was given to them by the Greeks upon becoming the masters of Egypt underAlexander. The Romans afterwards under Augustus called them prefectures. Sesostriswas perhaps the greatest sovereign of Egypt. He divided the people into seven classes,and obliged the children to take to the profession of their fathers. In his reign the celebratedtemple of Vulcan was built. He is said to have been instructed by Mercury inpolitics and in the art of reigning. He ruled over Egypt thirty-three years, and the learned30 ON EGYPTIAN TOMBS.being named, the judges* assembled, and the court of inquiry was open toall, so that any accusation might be urged against the defunct. Should hislife have been bad, the right of sepulture was denied to him, which wasconsidered as one of the greatest calamities that could occur. If, on thecontrary, the life of the deceased had been well conducted and blameless,and that no reproach could attach to his memory, a eulogium was [pronouncedupon him, and he was permitted to be entombed with aU duehonour. Diodorus Siculus informs us that in these eulogies no mentionwas ever made of the race or family of the defunct, all Egyptians beingconsidered equally noble. No one was exempt from this ordeal — kings aswell as the ordinary people were subjected to the same inquire' — thosewho during life no one dared to reproach, or whose actions no one daredto question, when dead, were submitted to a rigorous examination. Apublic audience was given to hear all accusations against the deceasedmonarch. The priests commenced by making his eulogy, and recountinghis good actions. If the general opinion of the people as to the governmentand conduct of the monarch corresponded with that of the priests,the multitude poured forth their acclamations ; but, if the contrary, murmuringsucceeded ; and Diodorus Siculus says there have not been wantinginstances of the denial of burial to a deceased sovereign in accordance withthe decision of the people. M. Champollion saw in Biban-el-Molouk thetomb of a king, in which the sculpture had been defaced from one end tothe other, except in those parts where were sculptured the images of thequeen his mother, and of his wife, which have been most religiously respected,as well as the hieroglyphical legends relating to them. M. Champollionconceives this to have been the tomb of a king condemned by thejudgment after his death, and denied the rite of burialsGoguet gives to him the merit of ha^^ng been the first to erect an obelisk ; but Pliny assignsthis distinction to Metres. The obelisk of Rameses, ne^ir the palace of Heliopolis, is thegreatest.• In some of the Papyri representations of these judges (forty-two in number) are to beseen. A good example may be found in the Catalans de' Papiri Egiziani della BibliothecaVatican, fol. Rom. 1 825. This work is by the celebrated Angelo Mai.t Lettres ecrites d'Egypte et de Nubie, p. 96. M. Champollion has also seen the tomb ofanother king of Thebes of a most ancient period, from which it would appear that the tombON EGYPTIAN TOMBS. 31This rigorous examination into the characters of the dead, either royal orplebeian, and the inquiry into their course of life, are surely entitled to praise,and shows in what estimation this people held good and virtuous conduct.The audience was public; the people pronounced sentence. The followingis the account of this ceremonial as detailed by Diodorus Siculus :Tou Se ixiXKovTOC Bdima^ai (7<iyuaroc ol trvyyEveis irpoXiyovtri ti)v yfiepav Trjg raibfje tolere oiKaaToig Kal To'ig avyyeviaiv, 'in Se. (plXoiQ tov TeTcXtvrriKoroQ' Kal Oia/3£/3atouvrat, XiyovTCeon Ciafiaivciv jueWei T))v Xifivqv tou lofxov tov T£Tc\evTr]K6-og. t-rrciTa Tro.payiyofxiva}y diKaaTtHvirXeiu) Tui rtrrapak.oira, ital Ka^iaavriav iii Tivog yfiiKvuXlov, KaTiaKEvaafiivov izipav Ttje Xifiyrjg,j; fit ftaptg KaBlX^crat tarfffceuafT/jtJ'j) irpoTEpov vvb Twv Tavrrjv i')(0VTii)v nev tTifiiXeiav.E(p£(TTr]KC Cc TavTr] ■Kp(i)pEvg, uy Alyinrrtoi caret Ttiv Ibiuiv IiuXektov dvofia'Covai Xapwva. Bid Kal<paalv 'Op(pEa to vaXawy elg A'iyvTTTOV irapafiaXovTa Kal ^Eaaafitvov toto to vojitfioy, fxv^o-TTOirjaai Ct KaS' ^Sov, to. [xiv fiiiXTftrafiEvov, to. £' avTov lBl<f vXaaafXEVov. irEpl oh to. icara fiipogfiiKpov vtTTEpov a.yaypd\lioiJ.EV. ov fir)v aXXii Trjg (iapeaig Etg Ttjy Xlfiyrjy KaBEXKV(7^Ei(TT]g, irplv r)Trim Xapyaica Ti)v Toy VEKpov t-ffovaav Eig avrijv Ti^EcrSat, rw /jouXo/jeju i;aTi]yopE~iy 6 vofioge^ovaiav BiBuxny. icy jjiev oiiv Tig TrapEXBiiiy tyicaXEVj) Kal oeilr) jjEJoiuKoTa KaKwg, ol fie KpiTalyvitjxag diroipaiyovTai, to Be aufia E'ipyETat Ting et^i/TiXEyrig ra^>/£' icy ct o lyKaXiaag Sd|j/ ^ijBiKaiwg iyKaXEly, fjiEydXotg TrtpiTriVrft irpoaTifioig, ora Bt firjBEig vitaKovcn} Kariiyopoc, i] vap-EX^uty yydXT^irj avKO(pdyTr]g VTrdp'^eiy, ol fie avyyEyElg dvo^Efieyoi to irivBog, iyKiiifitd^ovtri ToyTETEXevTrjKOTa, Kal vspl jxev tov yiyovg ovBiv Xiyovaiv, HinrEp irapd roTc "EXXijuiv, v7roXafx(3a.-voyTEg avayTag bfioiwg EvyEVEig iivai Tong kut A'iyvKToy' Ttjy C' ek iratBog aybjyfjv Kal TraiBeiavBieX^ovTcg, ^rdXiv ayBpog yeytyoTog T>)y Ivaijieiay Kal BiKaiotxvyrjy, eth Be Tt)y iyKpdTtiay Kal racanas dpETdg avTov oit^f'pj^ovrai, Kal TrapaKaXovai Toiig care ^Eovg aiiyoiKoy BEL,atr^at ToldEi/(T£/3£(Tt. Tu Be TrXiiBog £7r£u0»;yUE(, Kai avyaizo(JEfivvvEL Ty)y Bo^ay tov TETEXevTrjKOTog, oie Toyaiaiva BiaTpijietv fiiXXoyTOg Ka' ^Bov /itra Twy EvaEftuiv. to Be aUfxa TiSiatrty, ol fiiy loiovgE^oyTEg Td(povg, iy Ta'ig aTToBEBEiyfiivaig ^{jKatg. oig B' ov-)(^ virdp-)^ov(n rdfoiy KTijaEig, KaivovdiKTjfia TOiovcri Kara Ti)v IBiay otKiay, Kal 7rpo£ roc d<T(paXE<TTaT0y twv Tol\iM)y op&fjv laTuai Trjvhad been usurped by one of his successors of the nineteenth dynasty, and who has coveredover with plaster all the old cartouches, and substituted for them his own, and also the bas-reliefsand inscriptions of his predecessor. The usurper had, however, cut a second tomb inwhich his sarcophagus was to be placed, so that that of his ancestor was not to be removed. Itwould seem that every king caused this tomb to be cut out of the rock during his life-time ; forthose who have reigned the longest period are found to have the largest tombs and the mostelaborate sepulchres.32 ON EGYPTIAN k-al tovq KioXvo^ii'ov^ ?e dia rae Karrjyopiat, i) Trpoc Sai'Eiwv iiiro.?j;Kac, ^(nr-taSat,Ti^lacri KOTO. Fiji' i^iay oiKlav. ouc vartpov Iviore traction Traite ivTropijaavTec, Kai tuiv ncvfifioXaiwv Kai tuiv lyi:\rifj.a.ru)v aTroXio-avrtc, yuEyaXoTrptTToOc raijiiic a^iovtn."Diodorus Siculi Biblioth. History. lib. i. § 92.The relations of the dead person fix the day of his obsequies, that thejudges and all the friends of the deceased may assemble ; and they appointit by declaring that he will pass the lake of his nome. The judges, morethan forty in number, then repair to the spot, and form a semicircle onthe further side of the lake. A boat containing those who are to officiatein the ceremony then approaches, under the direction of a navigator, whomthe Egyptians, in their language, call ' Charon.' It is said that Orpheus,having in his travels to Egypt witnessed this ceremony, took from it hisfable of the passage into the infernal regions, imitating a part of the ceremonies,and inventing the remainder. Before the coffin containing thecorpse is placed within the boat, the law permits any person to accuse him ;if sit is proved that he has led a bad life, the judges condemn him, and heis excluded from the place of bm-ial. If it appears that he has been unjustlyaccused, the law inflicts a severe punishment on the accuser. Ifno one undertakes to accuse him, or if the accuser is convicted of calumny,the relations take off the badges of mourning, and pronounce the panegyricof the deceased, without speaking of his birth, as is done in Greece ; forthey think that all Egyptians are equally noble. They expatiate uponthe manner in which he has been brought up and instructed from his infancy,upon his piety, his justice, his temperance, and his other virtues,since he attained the age of manhood, and they pray the gods of the infernalregions to admit him into the abode of the pious. The peopleapplaud and congratulate the defunct, who is about to pass a blissfuleternity in the residence of the blessed.* If any one has a tomb destined" According to the theology of the Egyptians, the philosophers, and those who had practisedthe most rigid virtue, were the only people whose souls went directly to dwell with God,without passing through purgatory, or ever being subject to resurrection. In the Egyptianceremonies a public confession was made in the name of some dead persons, declaring thatthey had constantly honoured their parents ; that they adhered invariably to the religion ofthe state ; that their hearts were never sullied with a crime, nor their hands tinged with humanON EGYPTIAN TOMBS. 33for his sepulture, his body is placed in it ; if not, a chamber is constructedin his house, and his bier is placed close against the most solid part of thewall. They place in their houses those to whom sepulture has been denied,whether on account of the crimes of which they have been accused, or ofdebts which they have contracted ; and it sometimes occurs that they afterwardsreceive honourable burial, because their descendants, having becomerich, pay their debts, or purchase absolution."In the family sepulchral chamber discovered in 1823 by Mons. ,in the Necropolis of Thebes, he found two models of boats, one forthe ordinary purposes of navigation on the Nile, the other for conveyingthe mummy of a deceased person across the lake of his nome. Of thelatter, as closely connected with the subject of this work, I have, by thekindness of M. Passalacqua, obtained a drawing from the original now inthe collection at Bern. (See Plate III.) The boat or bark is cut out ofsycamore wood, and measures two feet eight inches and six lines, Frenchmeasure. The boat is furnished with a large projecting portion of woodat the prow and at the pour. In the centre is a male mummy extended ona sofa or table, of which the legs are formed of the limbs of a hon. This issurmounted by a canopy, on which are inscribed various hieroglyphicalcharacters, and is supported by six pillars painted successively in red,black, white, and green. At the head and feet of the mummy are twofemale figures ; the former is in an attitude of great grief and desolation,represented by the hair of her head falling upon the mummy, whilst herarms are employed in embracing the deceased. The hands ot the latter areplaced upon the feet of the mummy. Four priests are seated upon thedeck of the vessel, one at each corner of the table or bier, whilst another mfront is observed to be holding out a MS. unrolled before him, and appearsblood in the midst of peace ; that they had preserved and religiously discharged every trust confidedto them ; and, finally, that during their whole lives they had never given reason to anyperson to complain of an injury. AU these conditions were evidently indispensable for thosewho hoped to escape the amenities or purgatory ; and to me it appears obit-ious that this doctrineon the duties of the man and of the citizen is an extract from what was read in the lessermysteries, where it was probably displayed on two tables of stone"— De Pauw, Phi. Diss.vol. ii. p. 247.F34 ON EGYPTIAN TOMBS.to be delivering a funeral oration. Another, a sacrificer, is, with knife inhand, prepared to immolate an ox which lies bound at his feet. The firstfigure on the prow has his right arm extended, and appears to be watchingthe course of the vessel. The pilot, whom from his long white tunic we mustsuppose to be a priest, is seated at the pour between the two oars, themechanism for moving which is well worthy of observation. The oars andthe pillars on which they move are crowned with the head of a hawk. Thebody of the vessel is of a green colour, the extremities of the same colour,but of a deeper tinge. Paints and frames, to serve in the representation ofreligious ceremonies, are lying on the vessel, and at the sides of the fore partare emblematical representations of the sacred eye, the Eye of Osiris,which is also represented on the flat part of the oars surrounded by leaves ofthe lotus. The plank to descend from the vessel, and the pegs to fasten it,together with the club to drive them into the earth, are also on the deck.The male figures in the vessel have a red tinge of countenance, the womena yellow one, which corresponds with what is commonly seen in the ancientEgyptian paintings. It is to be observed that the priests as well as thefemales have their heads well covered with hair, which was permitted togrow during the term assigned for the mourning for the dead. This hasinduced M. Passalacqua to conceive the funeral ceremony here representedto be that of a priest, and the hieroglyphical inscription on the MS. reads,according to M. Champollion, " Grand Pretre." In the tomb, in whichthree coffins or cases enclosed one within another were found, these hieroglyphicalsymbols were seen marked upon each, together with the namesof different divinities, to the worship of which probably the deceased hadbeen particularly devoted.But, to return to the catacombs. Five series of these subterraneouscaverns have been described by travellers in Egjqit as being in variousstates of preservation. They are those of Alexandria, Saccara, Silsillis,Gournou (Qoorna), and the tombs of the kings of Thebes. These varyconsiderably in extent. Those at Thebes are the most extensive. Overthese hj^oogfea were built the city of Memphis and other places. It must beadmitted that in the selection of these places for depositing the dead, — placeswhere the water of the Nile could not reach, and where the air couldON Egyptian TOMBS. ' 35scarcely penetrate, in caverns hidden from the view of men, and hewn outof the sold rock, surmounted by the base of the pyramids, — the ancientEgyptians must have been deeply impressed with the necessity (agreeably totheir religious opinions on the subject of the Metempsychosis), and thusmade choice of, situations beyond all others calculated to receive and to preservefrom decay and corruption the remains of their dead. According toM. De Pauw,* an Egyptian laws preserved by Plato declares that no personshould be buried on any spot capable of producing a tree. The soil in theenvirons of the pyramids and around the sepulchres of Thebes would be inagreement with this regulation. But at Sais the tombs are erected uponmounds of earth ; it is not rocky here. So numerous are the masses in thecatacombs that they are said to extend to the distance of some miles, evento the temple of Ammon and the oracle of Serapis. The city of Saccara isthe nearest to the cave of the mummies, as it has been called, and the inhabitantsof Saccara are said to have derived the means of subsistence by breakingopen these caves and extracting from them the embalmed bodies j TheII. 23.+ This is one from a large number of instances that might be adduced of the carelessness inthe mode of citation adopted by this author. The law here referred to is not an Egyptianlaw, but one by Plato himself, and inserted in the 12th book of his Laws. It runs thus :Brtfiag o upas, ria yjapiiay oiroaa fxei' epyaaifia firi^ufiov, //?; ri fiiya fir)TZ ti ufjwpov i-ivr}jxa.a C(. 'tj Xiopa TTpoQ Tort avTO fxovov ipvaiv £Xci, Ta tu)v TSTeKcvrijKOTWv awfiara pciXttrra aXvTTijTwgTone iwtn Sexojuei'') KpvTTTEiv, TavTct t kttXi] po V y . Toil ?£ ai'^piOTTOiQ oaa Tpo(p})y ^nirijp oval ij yi;jrpoc rav-a Trt^uuE ftovXecr^ai (pepeiv, f.n\Tt 4(i)i' fir]TE tiq uizo^avwv trrtptiTO tov Xciii' -j' r]jxij>v.i. e. " Let there be no sepulchres in cultivated places, neither large nor small. But thatplace alone receive the bodies of the^dead which is useless for other purposes, and will in thesmallest degree injure the living. For no one, either living or dying, should impede thefecundity of mother earth, and thus deprive some living person of aliment." — Plat, de Legions.lib. xii.X M. Champollion is the latest traveller from whom we have an account of the plain ofSaccara, the ancient cemetery of Memphis, which he describes as " parseme de pyramides et detombeauxvioles." "This spot," says he, " thanks to the barbarous rapacity of the dealers inantiquities, is absolutely barren for the student. The highly sculptured and ornamentedtombs are destroyed and lie in ruins. The place is frightful, being formed only of mountains ofsand strewed with human bones, the remains of former generations." — Lettres de Champollion,p. 68.Mahomet All accompanied Mons. Cailliaud to visit the tombs at Goumou, and he was36 ON EGYPTIAN TOMBS.excavations are formed in calcareous substances where no humidity canremain. The labour in their execution could not have been so great as mayat first be imagined, as the layer of stone is soft ; its consistence is hardenedby exposure to the air. About half a league from Shut or Shout, one of thelargest cities of Upper Egypt, on the site of the ancient Lycopolis, there areagreat many tombs or excavations more or less magnificent. M. Denonhas figured the largest. They are so numerous that the whole rock resoundsunder your feet.Mr. Salt considers the catacombs to have been built as a place of sepulchrefor the ancient kings of Egypt anterior to the construction of thepyramids, and connected with the city of Heliopolis before the seat ofempire had been transferred to Memphis. But an able writer in theQuarterly Review* thinks differently, and conjectures that many of theseedifices have been constructed from the dilapidated casing of the pyramids.Fi'om Herodotus we learn that they were originally so cased, and M.Belzoni has told us that the second pyramid retains a portion of its casingat the present time. The opinion hazarded by the writer in the QuarterlyReview is strengthened by a statement of Mr. Salt, who says that one ofthe stones, bearing an inscription of hieroglyphics and figures, is built intothe walls upside down, which certainly goes to prove that it had originallybelonged to some other building: and the writer I have alluded to conceivesthe walls of these sepulchral edifices to have been constructed of the fragmentsof the casing of the pyramids. The tumuli, mentioned by Dr.Clarke, this writer regards merely as similar buildings of higher antiquity,smouldered away to their present shape ; or that they were originally composedof more perishable materials.Mr. Davison examined and surveyed the catacombs at Alexandria.He found some Greek inscriptions in them, from which one would be ledshocked at the spectacle presented by the fragments of human remains that every where werescattered about. Venting reproaches against the consuls and others who had permitted and encouragedsuch devastation, he exclaimed, " Quoi ! ces cadavres n'etaient ils pas autrefois deshommes comme nous ? On ne pense quia acquerir de brillantes collections ; et ces chairs, cessiemens, sont fetes 9a et 1^ sans respect ; ces restes humains de^'iennent tous les jours la proiedes plus veils animaux, et Iron y fait a peine attention." He then commanded the Turks tocover the remains with sand. Cailliaud, Voyage k Meroe, torn. I. p. 294. * No. 38.ON EGYPTIAN TOMBS. 37to conclude that these sepulchral receptacles had been made about or alittle after the time when Alexandria was built. Mr. Davison remarks*that the paintings in the catacombs appeared to him to be of ordinaryexecution. Mr. Walpole considers them to belong to the period when thearts were declining, and thinks that they might have been the works of thepagan inhabitants of the city in the sixth century ; for at that time paganismwas not altogether abolished, as we learn from a curious passage in Cyril. JThese paintings were seen only by the light of toi-chest and lamps, whenvisits to the tombs of the dead were paid by their relatives, and the colourof them must necessarily have been such as admitted of a strong contrast.Almost every city had its necropolis or cemetery at a distance from thetown. Here the mass of people belonging to the city were interred ; butthere were many private tombs, and, according to Herodotus and DiodorusSiculus, in some instances the mummies, after being placed in their sarcophagi,were deposited in recesses in the habitations of their relatives orsuccessors. Here, it is said, they were placed in niches insight against thewalls. § This may probably have been the case with mummies kept inhouses ; but in the tombs, both public and private, all travellers agree insaying that they were always found lying down. The public cemeterieswere always formed in a situation so as to be above the level of the waterin the highest known inundations. They are principally excavated in theside of the great Libyan chain of hills which forms the western boundaryofEg\T)t.||The catacombs of Thebes are the most extraordinary and magnificent.The Necropohs, or City of the Dead, of this place, a spot described as"devoted by nature to silence and death," is situated on the west bankof the Nile, and formed the burial place of the people as well as of thekings. Diodorus Siculus mentions that, according to history, there werep. 382. t Id. 382. I In Esaiae, cap. 18. 0pp. torn. xi.§ Belzoni says (p. 170) the wooden case is first covered with a layer or two of cement notunlike plaster of Paris, and on this are sometimes cast figures in basso relievo, for which theymake niches cut in stone.II Hypogees qui criblent la montagne Libyque.'' — Champollion.f Lib. i.38 ON EGYPTIAN TOMBS.forty-seven royal tombs at Thebes,* of which only seventeen remained atthe time of Ptolemy Tagus. In the time of Diodorus Siculus most of themwere destroyed. Strabo says there were forty royal sepulchres cut out ofthe rock, and that they had obelisks and inscriptions setting forth theriches, power, and empire of the several kings.The sepulchral monuments of the private inhabitants of Thebes, Mr.Hamilton states to be equally interesting with those of the kings. Thepainted sculptures on the walls represent the economical pursuits of thoseinterred-ration them, and show to what degree of excellence the arts ofdesign were cultivated in the earlier periods of the Theban monarchy.The reader will be amply compensated for his labour by referring to thework of Mr. Hamilton! for an account of the paintings which adorn thewalls and ceilings of these catacombs, representing feasts, funeral processions,agricultural scenes, fishing, fowling, &c. The plan of these sepulchresis uniform and regular, and formed out of a kind of limestone ; theroofs are in general flat, but some are arched, and in one instance Mr. H.observed a shelving or oblique roof in that form which seems to have beenvery general among the Egyptians for their chests and arbours, but moreparticularly destined for funeral purposes and other religious ceremonies.Belzoni has given an interesting account of Gournou,§ the burial place ofthe renowned city of Thebes. It is a tract of rocks, about two miles inlength, at the foot of the Lydian mountains, on the west of Thebes.Every part of this immense tract is cut out into large or small chambers,each having its separate entrance, and there is seldom a communicationfrom one to the other. According to this traveller there are no sepulchresin the world like them, no excavations or mines that can be compared toBiban-el-Molouk, the place of the tombs, or rather " the Gates of the Kings," is, accordingto the learned De Sacy, a corruption of the ancient Egyptian name, Biban-Ouroon. Thisroyal Necropolis is situated in an arid valley enclosed by very' high rocks. No one tombcommunicates with another ; they are ail isolated. M. Champollion was convinced that theycontained the bodies of the kings of the eighteenth, nineteenth, and twentieth piastres. Heperceived the most ancient of all, that of Amenophis-Memnon, in the isolated valley at thewest. — See Lettres, p. 221. -t Lib. xvii. t Pp. 161-167. See also the work of M. Cailliaud.§ Narrative of the Operations and Recent Discoveries within the Pyramids, Temples, Tombs,and Excavations in Eg)'pt and Nubia, 4to. Lond. 1821, p. 156.ON EGYPTIAN TOMBS. 39them, and no exact description can be given of their interior, owing to thedifficulty of visiting these recesses, not to mention that the inconveniencyof entering them is such that few would be able to support the exertion.I cannot do better than give the account of Belzoni's visit to those cavernsin his own words, and it is too interesting to be abridged. " A traveller,"he observes, " is generally satisfied when he has seen the large hal, thegallery, the staircase, and as far as he can conveniently go : besides, he istaken up with the strange works he observes cut in various places, andpainted on each side of the walls ; so that when he comes to a narrow anddifficult passage, or to have to descend to the bottom of a well or cavity,he declines taking such trouble, naturally supposing that he cannot see inthose classes any thing so magnificent as what he sees above, and consequentlydeeming it useless to proceed any farther. Of some of thesetombs many persons could not withstand the suffocating air, which oftencauses fainting. A vast quantity of dust rises, so fine that it enters thethroat and nostrils, and chokes the nose and mouth to such a degree thatit requires great power of lungs to resist it, and the strong effluvia of themummies. This is not all ; the entry, or passage where the bodies are,is roughly cut in the rocks, and the falling of the sand from the upper partor ceiling of the passage causes it to be nearly filled up. In some placesthere is not more than a vacancy of a foot left, which you must contrive topass through in a creeping posture like a snail, on pointed and keen stones,that cut Uke glass. After getting through those passages, some of themtwo or three hundred yards long, you generally find a more commodiousplace, perhaps high enough to sit. But what a place of rest ! surroundedby bodies, by heaps of mummies in aU directions, which, previous to mybeing accustomed to the sight, impressed me with horror. The blacknessof the wall, the faint light given by the candles or torches for want of air,the different objects that surrounded me, seeming to converse with eachother, and the Arabs with the candles or torches in their hands, naked andcovered with dust, themselves resembling having mummies, absolutely formeda scene that cannot be described. In such a situation I found myself severaltimes, and often returned exhausted and fainting, till at last I becameinured to it, and indifferent to what I suffered, except from the dust, which4'40 ON EGYPTIAN TOMBS.never failed to choke my throat and nose ; and though, fortunately, I amdestitute of the sense of smelling, I could taste that the mummies wererather unpleasant to swallow. After the exertion of entering into such aplace, through a passage of fifty, a hundred, three hundred, or, perhaps,six hundred yards, nearly overcome, I sought a resting place, found one,and contrived to sit ; but, when my weight bore on the body of an Egyptian,it crushed it like a band-box. I naturally had recourse to my hands tosustain my weight, but they found no better support ; so that I sunk altogetheramong the broken mummies, with a crash of bones, rags, and woodencases, which raised such a dust as kept me motionless for a quarter of anhour, waiting till it subsided again. I could not remove from the place,however, without increasing it, and every step I took I crushed a mummyin some part or other. Once I was conducted from such a place toanother resembling it, through a passage of about twenty feet in length,and no wider than that a body could be forced through. It was chokedwith mummies, and I could not pass without putting my face in contactwith that of some decayed Egyptian ; but as the passage inclined downwards,my own weight helped me on ; however, I could not avoid beingcovered with bones, legs, arms, and heads rolling from above. Thus Iproceeded from one cave to another, all full of mummies piled up invarious ways, some standing, some lying, and some on their heads"*Captain Light crept into one of the mummy pits or caverns, which werethe common burial places of the ancient Thebes. As it happened to benewly discovered, he found thousands of dead bodies, placed in horizontallayers side by side ; these he conceives to be the mummies of the lowerorder of people, as they were covered only with simple arguments, andsmeared over with a composition that preserved the muscles from corruption."The suffocating smell," he says, " and the natural horror excitedby being left alone unarmed with the wild villagers in this charnel house,made me content myself with visiting two three chambers, and quicklyreturn to the open air."tHerodotus mentions the mummies as being placed erect. Belzoni says \that, although he had opened a great number of pits, he had never seen app. 156, 7. + Quarterly Rev. No. 37. + P. 167.ON EGYPTIAN TOMBS. 41single mummy standing.* On the contrary, he found them lying regularlyin horizontal rows, and some were sunk into a cement, which must havebeen nearly fluid when the cases were placed on it. The lower classeswere not boned in cases ; they were dried up, as it appears, after the regularpreparation of the seventy days. Mummies of this sort, Belzoni calculates,were in the proportion of about ten to one of the better class.M. Passalacqua met with only one instance in which the mvunmy was placedin an upright posture : this was before the door of a sepulchral chamber inwhich were found two Greek mummies.I do not know how to reconcile this with what he says respecting the cave at Gournou,p. 157.CHAPTER V.ON EMBALMING.Embalming — definition — Ethiopian, Persian, and Scythian methods of preserving their deadalso of the Greeks and Romans — Egyptian method the most perfect — unknown at thisday — accounts of by Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus — difficulty of assigning with precisionthe antiquity of a mummy — points to be attended to in this enquiry — Count de Callus'sopinion — the testimony of St. Athanasius and of St. Augustine — embalming of strangers —examination of the ancient accounts of this process — embalmers probably an inferior kindof priesthood — honours paid to the embalmers or scatters — three methods described byHerodotus — these admit of many subdivisions — price of embalming — First method: Extractionof the brain — insects found in the head of a Greco-Egyptian mummy — extractionnot practised in all cases — Dr. Lees mummy — head filled tsiih bituminous matter and othersubstances — Dr. Perry's mummy — Dr. Mead's 7nummy — Mr. Davidson's mtcvi/ny — ventralincision — the scribe — representations of this part of the process in papyri — the dissectorEthiopia stone — prayer uttered by the embalmers — record of it by Porphyry — exasperationof the body — canopy or vases for the intestines — palm thine — aromatics — replacing of theviscera — discovery of the heart in the author's Greco-Egyptian mummy — restoration of differentparts to a natural state — extraction of the viscera not always practised in the most expensivemode — use of spices — resinous matters — natrum — period for which the body was tolie in a solution of this substance — removal of the cuticle — great care taken to preserve thenails — body anointed with oil of cedar, Sc. — probable application of heat — gilding of mummies—testimony of Abd'Allatif Hertzog, Denon, Jomard, Rouyer, Passalacqua, Madden, ^c,to the application of gold on different parts of the body — probability of the whole bodyhaving been gilt in the author's Greco-Egyptian mummy — the body of Alexander adornedwith a chase work of gold— practice of wrapping the dead in sheets of gold, observed inthe sepulchres on the banks of the Volga, the Tobol, the Irish, and the Ob — staining of thenails and hands with henna — amulets found on the surface of the body — position of mummies— wonderful preservation of the hair — Second method: Non-extraction of the brainno ventral incision — no res nous or aromatic substances — oil of cedar — natrum — probabilityof the injection of a caustic alkaline solution — Third method : Washing the body withsarmatia — natrum — impossibility of classing all the embalmed under the three divisions —Rouyer's method of classing the mummies — rarity of the mummies of children — mummy of44 ON EMBALMING.a benefits in the authors collection — case of a similar kind in Dr. Lee's museum — also in theEarl of Munster's possession — Denon and Cailliaud's notices of these cases — CaptainHenvei/''s foetal mutiny.By embalming we are to understand an artificial operation, in which, bythe aid of various medicaments, a dead body may be rendered capable ofresisting the process of putrefaction. The ancient Egyptians are the onlypeople who have practised this art with any thing like method or success,and by these people, the Persians, and the Arabians, the bodies so preparedhave been, according to the Arabic language, denominated mummies. Theprocess has been variously termed and described as Balsamic — Mumi-Ratio — Caromomia — Emberuma — Honest Anaemia — Juncture Fera-lis— Cadaver Medicated — Funds Medicated — Cadaver Conditum.The Ethiopians employed a diaphanous resin to preserve their deadbodies ; the Persians enveloped theirs in wax ; the Scythian folded theirdead in skins ; and the Greeks and Romans employed perfumes and unctionswith the same intent. The unctions were performed by ordinaryservants, whilst the perfumes were made and applied by the medical attendants.The art of embalming among the Egyptians of the present day is entirelyunknown; we are, therefore, compelled to have recourse to ancientauthorities in order to learn the particulars of the modes of embalmingadopted by the Egyptians. Herodotus, who lived 484 years Bec., is themost ancient author from whom we can derive any information upon thesubject. This is particularly contained in the second Book of his History,the "Euterpe," which gives the history of the kings of Egypt, and goesdown to the invasion of that country by Cambyses, and from which thefollowing extract is taken: —'' Eifft he ot Itt' avis rovru) Ararat, cat ri'xyriv ty^ovrrL raur/ji'. ovroi tTTEiii/ a(pii:ofxiaS^VEKpoQ, ZeiKVvaai toIiti KOfxiaain Trapacdy^ara I'tupwy ^vXiya, rrj ypi'fy ficfiifi-qfjiiva. ac rrivfxEV (nrovSaioTUTi)V avrioiv (paul uvai, tov ovk (jtriov woievixafTii ovvofia etsi toiovtui TTpiipfxari uvii-[la^etv. Tt)v C£ BEVTeprjv SetKyvaai inroSieaTepriv Te Tavriir Kai {.vreXiirriprif rrji' Sc Tphrfv, tvTi-XtaraTrjv. fpaaat'Tic ci, ttw^ch'OI'Tcii Trap' avriuiv Kara ijy ru'ci jioxjXnvrai afiaKivaa^ftvai TuvvEKpov, 01 fie Si) EKTToduv, (UtffJw oyuoXoyZ/fTCC >'-£f , aTrciXXciaaoi'Taf 01 fit vTroXenrofiEt'oi if oiKi'ifxaai,w?£ 7a UTruvOaioTctTa rap(^£uoi;<Ti. vrpwra faut' iTKoXiy (niiipu) Cia roi /.tv^diriipdii' k^ayovai-uvON EMBALMING. 45eyici(pa\ov, ra jiiv avTOv ovtw i^ayopreg, tu cc fy^^EovrfC <papfiaKa, fiETO. Sc,\iBtp Ai^ioTray6E,if irapaa'^iaai'TtQ Traps rijy \aTrapriv, li, wv ttXo tijv i;oi.\a)v Truaav iKKa^tjpavTtg ik uvriiv(cal otTj^T/cajTEt; otvta (poiviKrfibi, avTig hirj^iovOL ^vfiiijfiaai TtTpififitvoiai. 'iirura rijv vr)Cvv(Tfivpvric aKTipdrov TiTpifXiiivriQ, koX KaairiQ, Kal civ ciXXwv-Juw/Jarai)', 7rXi;v XijlavtoTOv, irXyiaavree,(TvppaTTTOvai oirirrij). Tara ^e iroiiiaavTic-apiytvovai Xirpw, KpvihavTEC fifiipae elitofiiiKOvra-TrXri/i/ac Se tovteoiv ovk eJeotj Tapi-)(c.vEiii . kir^av Se. irapEXSfuKn at eftSofiiiKOVTa, XoviravTeg rbvvtKpov, KaTuXiatrovai ttSlv avTov to aHfia aiv^ovoc pv<T(Tivrie TtXafiSiai KaTaTeTixj]fxivoi(xi, viro-■vpiouTze Tip KOfifiL Top Ci) AvTi k.o\\))c TCI TToXXa ^pi<i)i'Tac AlyvTrTiOL. li'^Evrcv Se vapatt^afiEvofill' ui TTpoiriiKOVTEQ , TtoiEvvTai i,vXivov TvTTciv avS'puiTroEiOEa' 7ro(7;(ra/i£voi ?£, ioEpyvvai roi' VEKpuv-KoX i:aTaKXr]'iijavTEQ our), Br]uavpii^ov(7i eV o'iio'ifxaTi 5r)i:a[ij, laTaPTEg op^oi' Trpoc to'iKOv. ov-u)fie TOVQ TO. iroXvTEXEaTaTa crKEvdi^ovtri VEKpovg. Tovc Cc to. fiiaa joovXofiEvovg, ri^v r £ iroXu-teXijitiv (pEvyovTag, aKEvdi^ovai laCE. etteciv Tong KXvffrijpag TrXi'/fTwirat tov inrb KEipov anticipatingyivofiEvov, ev wv ETrXijaay tov vEKpov ri/c KoiXirji', ovate avaTcifioi'TEg avToy, ovate E^tXovTEg tiivvriOxiv, Kara C£ tjiv Edprjv kari^)]aavTEc' cai iTTiXajiovTEg to kiXvafia Tf]g owitjiii oZov^ Tapf^EvovaiTag irpOKEijXEvag i^jxipag' Trj Ce TEXevTair) EsiEiiri ek Ting KotXiiig tiiv wcpi'rjv, T))v layJKay TTpoTEpov'fl CE E^Ei ToaavT-qy 6uvafj.iv, uktte asia IwvTrj T))v vrjCvv Kal Ct c!T!Xdy)(ya KaTaTETi]i:6Ta Et,dyEi.Tag Be adpKag to XiTpov icara7?';iC£f Kal h) XfiTrErai tov VEKpov to cipfxa fiovvoy, Kal ru odTEa.EWEdv CE Tanta TTOiiiaw^i, aw' toy 'ivdiKav ovtw tov vEKpbv, ovCev eth irpiqyfiaTEv^EyTEg. 'H Ce Tpirr)Tapi')^Evaig e(tti ice, ij roi*c ■)(piifxaaL aa^rivEaTEpovg (TKEvdi^Ei. avpfiairj Dirj^i^aayTtg Ttiv KOiXir)y,Tapi\EvoviTL Tag ijicofxiiKoyTa iifiipag, cat ETreira ctt' uiv 'iciDKav dvoipipEa^ai. Tie Oe yvva'iKagTtov tTTKjiavEbiv avcpwy, ETTEav TEXEVTtjatain, ov irapavTLKa Ctcovai TaptXEVEiv, once oat ay ojtri.eiiEiSEEg Kappa Kal Xoyov TrXEVvog yvya'iKEg' aXX' EtvEav TpiToiai ij rErapTa'iai yiyiovTai, ovtu) izapa-OiOovai To'iai TapiyEvovai. toto ce TroiEovcn ourui tovce eivekej , 'ya fii'i aipi 6i Topij^Evral fiiiryuiy-Tai Tai yvvaiL,i. Xa/Kp^fiyai yap Tied spain fxiayofiEvov vEKpw TrporripaTij yvvaiKog' KaTE'nrai cetov OflOTEKVOV."Herodotus Hisloriarum, lib. ix. ed. Schzaeighaeuseri, 8vo. Lond. 1817, lib. ii. § 86-S.There are certain individuals appointed for that purpose (the embalming),and who profess that art; these persons, when any body isbrought to them, show the bearers some wooden models of corpses, paintedto represent the originals ; the most perfect they assert to be the representationof him whose name I take it to be impious to mention in thismatter ; they show a second, which is inferior to the first, and cheaper ;and a third, which is the cheapest of all. They then ask of them accordON embalminging to which of the models they will have the deceased prepared : havingsettled upon the price, the relations immediately depart, and the embalmers,remaining at home, thus proceed to perform the embalming inthe most costly manner. In the first place, with a crooked piece of iron,they pull out the brain by the nostrils ; a part of it they extract in thismanner, the rest by means of pouring in certain drugs : in the next place,after making an incision in the flank with a sharp Egyptian stone, theyempty the whole of the inside ; and after cleansing the cavity, and ringingit with palm-wine, scour it out again with pounded aromatics : then havingfiled the belly with pure myrrh pounded, and cinnamon, and all otherperfumes, frankincense excepted, they sew it up again; having so done,they steep the body in natrum, keeping it covered for seventy days, for itis not lawful to leave the body any longer in the brine. When the seventydays are gone by, they first wash the corpse, and then wrap up the wholeof the body in bandages cut out of cotton cloth, which [they smear withgum, a substance the Egyptians generally use instead of paste. The relations,having then received back the body, get a wooden case, in the shapeof a man, to be made ; and, when completed, place the body in the inside ;and then, shutting it up, keep it in a sepulchre-al repository, where they stickitupright against the wall. The above is the most costly manner in whichthey prepare the dead. For such as choose the middle mode, from a desireof avoiding expense, they prepare the body thus :— They first fill syringeswith cedar oil, which they inject into the belly of the deceased, withoutmaking any incision, or emptying the inside, but sending it in by the seat ;they then close the aperture, to hinder the injection from flying backwards,and lay the body in brine for the specified number of days, on thelast of which they take out the cedar oil which they had previously injected,and such is the strength it possesses that it brings away with it the bowelsand inside in a state of dissolution : on the other hand, the natrum dissolvesthe flesh, so that, in fact, there remains nothing but the skin and the bones.When they have so done they give back the body without performing anyfarther operation upon it. The third mode of embalming, which is usedfor such as have but scanty means, is as follows :— After washing the insidewith syrmaea, they salt the body for the seventy days, and return it to beON EMBALMING. 47taken back. The wives of men of quality are not given to be embalmedimmediately after their death, neither are those that may have been extremelybeautiful, or much celebrated ; but they deliver them to the embalmersafter they have been three or four days deceased : this they do forthe following reason, that the workmen may not be able to abuse the bodiesof those females ; for it is reported by them that one of those artificers wasdiscovered in the very fact on the newly-deceased body of a woman, andwas impeached by his fellow workman."i Laurence Translation.The next authority is that of Diodorus Siculus, who lived 440 years afterHerodotus. He has detailed several particulars not mentioned by the precedinghistorian, and entered more at large upon the funeral ceremonies ofthe Egyptians.""Orar yap tiq cnro^dvij trap' avrolq, 6i fie crvyyeyelg Roi (j)l\oi irdvTcg KaTairaadfJ-Cvoi iriyX^ras KE<pa.\de, ircptip^oyTai ttiv TroXiv ^pr]VovvTtQ, iuiQ av Ta<prJQ TV)(ri to aHfia, oh ftfiv oi/TCXovrpHv, 6vT£ otvov, ore TtJQ oWtjc Tpo<prjs a^ioXuyov fiiTokap-jidvovair, ovtc tir^rJTae Xa^irpacTreptftdXKovTai. twv dc TUfuiv Tpeig vTrdp-)(ovai. ra^Eic, i}TC TroXvreXeirrdTTi Kai friar] Kal Tairii-vOTaTT]. cato. fiiv ovv ttiv Trpuirrji' ava\i(TKeirBai <pa(Tiy apyvplov TaXaiToy, Kara Se TrjV SivTtpavfivac £icO(Ti, Nato. Se Ti)v ka'^aTrfV TTavreXSiQ oXiyov ri cairdyrifia yij'tiT^ai Xlyovtriv. 6i fit ovvTa (T(i/iara ^epawnovTCs, twirl Te\v'trai Ttiv tviaTiifirfv TavTrjv Ik yivove ■irapetXri<j>6vTee. bvToi ceypa(j>7iv tKa(TT0v ribs clg Tag Ta(j>dQ ^airavoifiiviov to'iq oIkuoiq twv TiXzvTTfadvTwv irpoatviyKavTiQ,lirepuiTuKn Siva TpoTrov ftovXovTui Trjv ^epuTreiav yevia^ai prov awjxaTog. ZioixoXoyqadfitvoi Beirspi wdvToiv, Kai tov vcKpbv vapaXajiovTeg, to'iq TiTayfxivoiQ Itt Tt/v KaTU^iafiivriv eirifiiXeiavTO (Tdfia TTapaoidoaai cat Trpdrog fie 6 ypafifiaTtve Xcyofievoc, TeBivTog 'xa.fial tov awfiaToc,till TTIV Xayova ■:repiypa(fiei ttiv c.vb>vvfiov oaov Stl TCfiCiv. trees' o XtyofizvoQ Trapacr)(i(TTriQ, Xi$ov'iy(<ov Ai^ioTTiKOV, cat SiaTefiit>v oaa vofxoQ iCfXtutj t^jv adpKa, Trapa')(prjfia <j>eiyet SpSfia, SiidkovtiiIvruin avfXTTapuvTiiiv koX Xi^oig (iaXXovTOJv, trt Si KUTapiOfievuiv, cat ica^aTrepel to jxviTog elg iKtivovTpeTr6vT(i>v. vvoXafijidvovai yap jikttitov tlvai irdvTa tov 6fio<l>vXu) (rwfiaTi (iiav Trpo(T<l)ipovTa,cat Tpa.vjj.aTa irowvvTa, Kai Ka^oXov t\ KaKov airepyat^ofxtvov. 6i raptj^furai Si KaXovfievot ■jraarigxiv TifiTJg Kai TToXvivpiag a^tovvTai, to'iq te uptuai avvovTeg Kai Tag elg lepov eiaodovg aKoiXvTwcug Icpoi TTOiovvTat. Tpog ci Tijv Bepairiiav tov izapc.a'^^iafiivov aafxaTog a&poier^ivTiov avTwv,tig Ka^iriai ttjv Xf'P'* ^'^ '^C to viKpov TOfiiJQ tig tov BwpaKO, Kai irdvTa t^aipet, X'^P'C vi<ppSivKai KapZ'iag. irepog St Ka^aipei twv iyKoiXiwv ticaoroi', tyKXv^wv oivif ipoiviKei^ Kai %/xid/xaai'48 ON EMBALMING.Kit^uXov Ce ira to awfxa ru )xcv Trpuirov Kecpl<f Kai tktiv tiXXoic tTi^EXfiac ai,wvaiv i(f ijfiipa^nXzinvQ Tuis rpuiKovTa, effftra afivpvrj Kai Kivafii>jiw, scat toIq hwafXEVoiQ fire jiovov vo\v)(p6viovTtipi)(7if, aWa Kai ttiv ivwSiav Trapt'^EorS'ai, ^ipa-jrivaavTtc, TrapaSiSoaari Told avyytviai provTETcXiVTrjKornQ ovtioq cKaarov tUv tov awftaros fjitXuiv aKtpaujy TiTrip-qjiivov Hart scat riir tni rollli\E((idpoig ici rais 6(ppviTi Tpi\ag Siafiiviiv, Kai Trjv vXrjV Trpocroijjiv tov iriifiaTOQ cnrapdWaKTOv£(vai, Kai TOV Ttjc fxopipiic tvttov yvwpi^itT^tii. cio Ka ttoXXoi tuiv A'lyvTTTiwv tv oiKyfxaai ttoXv-TeXtcrL ^uXarrovrtc ret irwfiaTa tuiv Trpoyvvwv, Kar v\Ijiv opuiai tovq ytvia'iq iroXXa'iQ rijc tnvTuivyEVitTEUiQ TrpnTETeXevTrjKOTaQ- are tKaaTuyr ret rf /(fyE^T) Kai roe T^eptoxas ruin awftdrwv, iTi i'Toiig Tri o>//£Wf papa KTijpuc opiafikvovQ, TTupucol.ov \pvxayu)yiav izapi-)(t<r^ai, Ka^dtrip avfijii(iibi-KOTar roof iiMpoVfiivoi^.'Diodorus Siculi Bibliotheca Blister. lib. i. § 91.When any one among the Egyptians dies, all his relations and friends,putting dirt upon their heads, go lamenting about the city, till such time asthe body shall be buried. In the mean time they abstain from baths andwine, and all kinds of delicate meats, neither do they during that time wearany costly apparel. The manner of their burials is three-fold; one verycostly, a second sort less chargeable, and a third very mean. In the first,they say, there is spent a talent of silver, in the second twenty mine, but inthe last there is very little expense. Those who have the care of orderingthe body are such as have been taught that art by their ancestors. These,showing to the kindred of the deceased a bill of expenses of each kind ofburial, ask them after what manner they will have the body prepared ; whenthey have agreed upon the matter, they deliver the body to such as areusually appointed for this office. First, he who has the name of scribe,laying it upon the ground, marks about the flank on the left side howmuch is to be cut away. Then he who is called the cutter, or dissector,with an ethiopia stone cuts away as much of the flesh as the law commands,and presently runs away as fast as he can : those who are present,pursuing him, cast stones at him, and curse him, hereby turning all theexecrations which they imagine due to his office, upon him. For, whosoeveroffers violence, wounds, or does any kind of injury to a body of thesame nature with himself, they think him worthy of hatred ; but those whoare called the embalmers they esteem worthy of honour and respect; forON EMBALMING. 49they are familiar with their priests, and go into the temples "as holy men,without any prohibition. So soon as they come to embalm the dissectedbody, one of them thrusts his hand through the wound into the abdomen,and draws forth all the bowels but the heart and kidneys, which anotherwashes and cleanses with wine made of palms and aromatic odours. Lastly,having washed the body, they anoint it with oil of cedar and other thingsfor above thirty days, and afterwards with myrrh, cinnamon, and other suchlikematters, which have not only a power to preserve it for a long time, butalso give it a sweet smell; after which they denver it to the kindred, insuch manner that every member remains whole and entire, and no part ofit changed, but the beauty and shape of the face seems just as it wasbefore, and may be known, even the hairs of the eye-buds and eye-browsremaining as they were at first. By this means many of the Egyptians,keeping the dead bodies of their ancestors in magnificent houses, so perfectlysee the true visage and countenance of those that died many agesbefore they themselves were born, that in viewing the proportions of everyoneof them, and the lineaments of their faces, they take as much delightas if they were still living among them."These are the two principal accounts of the processes of embalmingadopted by the ancient Egyptians, and the statement of these will preparethe way for a more detailed account upon the subject, previously to which,however, I shall make a few general observations.It would, I fear, be a task of no little difficulty to assign the period andgive any thing like the precise age of a mummy; but much may be done bya careful comparison of the observations of Herodotus, Diodorus Siculus,and other historians, and an attentive examination into the physical formsof the individuals thus converted into mummies. Professor Blumenbachfelt the difficulty of the investigation when he proposed, in order to obtainthis object, the two following Pia Desiderata, as he terms them, to be firstaccomplished : —"LA more accurate determination of the various, so strikingly different,and yet as strikingly characteristic national configurations in the monumentsof the Egyptian arts, together with a determination of the periods in whichH.'^O ON EMBALMING.these monuments were produced, and the causes of their remarkable differences."2, Avery careful technical examination of the characteristic forms ofthe several skulls of mummies we have hitherto met with, together with anaccurate comparison of those skulls with the monuments above mentioned"*Count Caylus is of opinion that no mummies have been made since theconquest of Egj^pt by the Romans. The Christians in Egyj^t, St. Athanasiustells us, in his Life of St. Anthony, were in the habit of keeping in theirhouses the embalmed bodies not only of their martyrs, but also of all whodied among them. St. Anthony opposed this custom, and, fearing that hisbody might be so disposed of, he withdrew with two of his monks into thedesert, and directed that they should, after his death, bury him in secretand not let the place of his entombment be known And St. Augustinebears testimony J to mummies having been made in his time (the beginningot the fifth century). As in relation to the religious opinions of the ancientEg}^T3tians, as we have already seen,§ it was essential the bodies of all classesshould be preserved, it may naturally be asked what was the practiceadopted with the poorest or lowest order of society? Were they alsoembalmed ? Not according to the methods mentioned by Herodotus andDiodorus Siculus most assuredly. The ordinary mode of sepulture amongthe Egyptians effected a kind of natural embalming: they were laid uponbeds of charcoal, || according to Maillet, and wrapped round only with a fewswaddling clothes, covered with a mat, upon which was heaped a quantityof sand seven or eight feet in thickness. This material served as a bed toabsorb aU moisture from the body, and it thus became shrivelled anddried up.Herodotus gives some curious information upon the embalming ofstrangers, or those destroyed by crocodiles or drowned in the Nile, thoughPhilos. Trans. 1794, p. 189. f Montauban Antiquity Explique, torn. V., Part II., p. 176.{ Seem. 361, open torn. V., p. 981. § Chap. III.II Does it not then appear that the Eg3i3tiaiis were acquainted with the antiseptic properties ofthis substance }ON EMBALMING. 51it is to be regretted that his detail relative to the sacred repository is notmore particular.""'Oc ay ij avTiiy AlyvTiTion', y ^eii'wi' iifioiior, vtu Kpok-oCd\ov up7rax-^£'C V ^~' avTou tovTroTajjov ^aLVr)Tai re.^vjjwc, Kar ijv av ironic cSt^six-^p, tovtcvq vasa avityicr) icrri raptXEwcarrneavTuv, cat irtpiaTtiXavTac; ioq taXXioTfi, Sii^ai tv ip^ai Si'ik-rjai. (ice-ipavcrai titan abrou aWofohotva, overt tUv vpoa-qKuvTiDv, ovTt tmv (jilXwf t'lXXa piv at ipetQ avrol ex tov fiiiXov, art ttXcov7( 77 ai'^pwirov I'tKput', x^iparrd^oiTEc BcnrTOviTL."Herod. Hist. lib. ii. ^ 90.If any one, no matter whether one of the Egyptians themselves or aforeigner, is found having been carried off by a crocodile, or merelydrowned in the river, whatever be the city near which he is cast up, theinhabitants must necessarily embalm and dress his body in the mostsumptuous manner, and inter him in the sacred repository : no one musttouch him, whether relation or friend ; the priests of the Nile alone handlethe body and bury it, as though it were the corpse of something more thanaman."Laurent's Translation.This practice was doubtless a wise one, and the effect of it was to inducevigilance on the part of the authorities of the different cities, and preventaccidents, in order to avert the very expensive process of embalming.The account of Herodotus, as we have seen, commences with statingthat the persons employed in embalming, the Kortarai, were individuals spes /ca-j-e=chilly appointed for the purpose ; but he does not inform us of theirquality. The term used to denote the persons performing this office appliesgenerally to those following any sedentary arts. It is not unlikelythat the embalmers were an inferior kind of priesthood ; for DiodorusSiculus informs us that they were esteemed "worthy of honour and respect,"that they were " familiar with their priests," and that " they wentinto the temples as holy men without any prohibition ^ whereas the Paras-chester,the cutter or dissector, who was employed in making the incisioninto the left flank of the body for the extraction of the bowels, was held inabhorrence, and obliged to fly away for safety after the performance of histask. M. Peyron supposes the honours mentioned by Diodorus Siculus asKo~6-n52 ON EMBALMING.given to the Taricheutee, or embalmers, were really paid only to the Choiror waters. From papyri, not long since discovered, M. Peyronstates we derive the knowledge that the latter part of the embalming processwas performed by a peculiar class of priests, of the lowest order, yetpossessed of great privileges, and much respected by their countrymen.*To the embalmers the relatives of the dead made application for thepurpose of preserving the body, and selecting the mode by which it shouldbe effected. Herodotus mentions three modes; but, from the examinationof mummies of various kinds, it is clear that others may be added, andthese probably admit of subdivisions. f The price attending each mode isstated by Diodorus Siculus.J The first method cost a talent of silver, §which is equal to £225 of English money ; the second 20 mine, or £75 ;and the third a much smaller sum, which is not mentioned.The FIRST and the most costly mode of embalming described by Herodotusis that which commenced by the operation of the extraction of thebrain through the nostrils, which was elected by the aid of iron (bronze)crotchets. I, at first, was tempted to conceive that it was not possible toempty the skull of its contents by these means, and at least it seemed tometo be an operation of exceeding difficulty. But the examination ofmore than one specimen has convinced me of the practicability of it. ||Not only has the brain been entirely removed from the head of the mummyI opened, and which I have called the " Greco-Egyptian Mummy," but alsothe whole of the membranes have been dragged through the nostrils withoutin any way defacing them, disturbing the septum of alae nose, or disfiguringthis organ in any manner whatever, as will be seen by a reference toPeyron, Papyri Egyjit. pp. 84 — 89.t The observation of Belzoni is, doubtless, correct, when he states, in relation to the threeseveral modes of embalming, that he " will venture to assert that the high, middling, and poorerclasses all admit of farther distinction."J Lib. i. § 91.§ The Babylonian talent, according to Taylor (Translation of the History of Herodotus), isworth about £226 ; the talent of Euboea is believed to be nearly the same as the Attic, and isvalued at £193. 15s. English money. See also Browne's Travels, p. 8.II Green, in his " Art of Embalming," p. 249, speaks of the extraction of the brainthrough the nostrils as an amusing story of a thing " impracticable and ridiculous''ON EMBALMING. 53Plates I. and II. It would appear that the crotchets fig. 9, 10, Plate IV.)had been introduced up the nostrils, made to perforate the ethmoid bone atthe upper part of the nostrils, and then by a circular rotatory movement tobreak down the cribriform plate of that bone, together with the adjacentportions of the frontal bone, of sufficient size to admit a crown-piece, andthrough which opening the brain and membranes could be extracted andany fluid injected into the skull that might be thought necessary to cleansethat cavity.* In the instance to which I have alluded the skull was quiteempty — the only contents, if such they can be called, consisted of someinsects and the pupae of others I observed a similar opening in Mr.In a remarkably fine specimen of mummy, supposed to have been brought from Egj-pt byM. Passalacqua, and opened in 1828 at the Leeds' Philosophical and Literary Society, the brainwas found to have been extracted through the right nostril. The opening into the skull wasmade through the sphenoidal sinuses and not through the cribriform plate. The membraneswere preserved entire. In Mons. Cailliaud's Graeca-Egyptian Mummy the nose was disfiguredand broken by the operation.Dr. Granville observed small crystals of what appeared to be an animal substance resemblingstealing, studded on the inner surface of the skull of his mummy. I found similarcrystals on the surface of the body of my Graeca-Egyptian Mummy, and I transmitted them toDr. Faraday, the highly-talented professor of chemistry at the Royal Institution, for his examination.The following account is worthy of notice: — "The small needle-like crystals arevery curious, but too minute in quantity, and too vague as to their origin, to allow of muchbeing made out relative to them. The crystallization is very perfect and acicular, and, from theappearance, one might suppose them the result of sublimation ; but when the substance is heatedit does not prove to be volatile. It fuzes, and upon cooling concretes again, crystallizing thewhole like spermaceti. It bums with a bright flame, and evidently abounds in carbon andhydrogen. It is not soluble in water, and has the odour, when heated, of a fatty matter ; butthen alkali acts very feebly upon it, and dissolves only a very small portion. On the contrary,it is very soluble in alcohol, the solution being precipitated by water. The substance may probablybe a result of slow action upon organic (perchance animal) matter, and has, perhaps, beenassisted in its formation by Aea<." Extract of a letter from Dr. Faraday, May 23, 1823. Onthe body of the Mummy opened at Leeds, upon exposure of any part to the operation of theatmosphere, small white crystals were found to be produced ; they consisted of natrum, whichhad been employed in the process of embalming.t I submitted these to the examination of my friend the Rev. F. W. Hope, whose minuteacquaintance with entomological science eminently qualifies him to detect all the peculiaritiesof the beings composing this curious division of animated nature. He has kindly favoured mewith the following description :54 ON EMBALMING.Saunders's mummy, and Mr. Brodie acquaints me that he found the same in1. Necrosis Mhmiarum. Long, lines. Lat. lin. Ij. Purpurascens hirfa, antennae pedi-basqueJlavo-rubris. Antennae ruhrce, totuin corpus fere supra violaceum punctum mar-geniuselytrorum i-ufescentibus Uneato-piinctatis. Corpus infra nigrum hirtum, tediousJlavo-rubris. As this species of Necrosis appears distinct from any previously described,Mr. Hope has named it N. Mumiarum. N. Recipes Fab., an African species, seems closelyallied to it ; it differs, however, in the colour of the antennae, r;{/?;)es having black antennaswith the basal joint red, the Patrician species is also a broader insect and differs from mumi-arum in its sculpture and hirsuties. Mr. Hope thinks it probable that these insects-whenalive, were of a violet or deep purple colour, the medicaments used in the process of embalminghaving partly discharged the colouring matter. Some of them also exhibit the appearance ofimmaturity.2. Demesnes ^^ulpinus } In the Appendix to the 14th vol. of the Linnaean Transactions,there is a notice of this insect being found, together with Corjjneles violates, in a mummy atThebes. The only dedicates Mr. Hope could find in the collection from the head of myGreco-Egyptian mummy appears however quite distinct. Several species of true Demesnesare found in Egj'pt, and at the Cape of Good Hope. It is almost absolutely necessary to describethe species of this genus as soon as they are captured, as they are liable to become greasy,and the colour and appearance of them so changed that it is difficult to name them accurately.3. FupjE OF Dipterous InsECTs. In the head of the mummy was found a considerable quantityof thepupce of dipterous insects, apparently of two distinct species, and from their appearanceMr. Hope was led to remark, that the process of embalming could not possibly be a rapid one.Some of the pupae cases were empty, and the major part of them contained the dried-up insectsalmost in a state of perfection.Mr. Hope has been so kind as to examine a number of insects obtained from the headof a mummy brought for me from Thebes by Mr. Wilkinson. The account of these will,I trust, be truly acceptable to entomologists, as opportunities of examining insects under suchcircumstances are unquestionably of rare occurrence.Dermestes Polunctus. Long. lin. 4. Lat. lin. 2.Notum corpus supra castanets, subtomentosum, tedious concoloribus, abdominal. infra albido.Caput fusco-rubrum" oculis tigris, antennae rubro-castaneis. Thorax castanets, punctatusmedio nigricanti, marginibusq. lateralibus albo-momentous. Scutellum hirsutum, seu pilesalbus obsitum. Elytra castanea, subtomentosa. Corpus infra albido-pilosum segments ab-dominuscastaneo-maculatis, trigonoq. concolori, in medio singular posito. Pedes castanets.This Dermestes appears to Mr. Hope to differ from any species hitherto described. In formit resembles D. domestics Steven, from Siberia. Its light colour is remarkable, arising probablyfrom the exclusion of light, and not in this case, he imagines, from the effects of thedrugs used in embalming. The thorax in many of the specimens is nearly black : in two ofthem the elytra are of a dirk chesnut colour, almost approaching to black. From one skullON EMBALMING. ^Sthree mummies belonging to Lord Mountnorris. M. Lancet says* thathe had found the nose preserved entire, notwithstanding the extraction ofthe brain through the nostrils. M. Rouyerf has made the same remark,but observes that several had the nose broken or destroyed. In Dr.more than 270 tolerably perfect specimens were taken ; and, from the remaining fragments ofothers, probably double that number lived, propagated their species, and died without ever seeingthe light. The perfect pupae are not abundant ; the remnants of the empty cases, however,would lead one to believe that the greater part of them arrived at the imago state some timeafter the process of embalming was completed, when as mummies, they were deposited intheir respective mausolea.Dermestes Roe. — Long. lin. 3. Lat. lin. 2k.Notum corpus supra nigrum, subtus albopilosum. Antenna capituli nigro veteris articlesrubric. Thorax ater lateribus thoracic cinereo-villosis. Corpus infra albopilosum lateribus ab-dominusentice macula magna ovate notaries, posticeque segments utrinq. minoribus macklinvariegated.The above species agrees very well with several specimens of Dermestes which were broughtto Mr. Hope from the shores of the Red Sea by Lieutenant Roe, in honour of whom he namedthe insect. There is a third species also from the same mummy differing from all others of thegenus by its elongate oblong form. It is, however, in too mutilated a state to describe, as theantennae and legs are wanting. Among the broken fragments of insects taken from the mummies,there are remnants of some large species of Pimelia, probably Pimelia spinosa. King,not uncommon in Egypt. There are also immense numbers of Pupil of some dipterous insects,certainly of three different species, if not more. The recorded mummied insects, includingthose described at present, are the following : —1. Coronets violates Fab. vit. Linn. Than. Vol. XIV. Appendix.2. Necrosis Mumiarum, Hope.3. Dermestes \-ulpinus, Fab. vit. Linn. Than. A'ol. XIV. Append.4. poUinctus, "i.5. Roe, hope.6. elongated, J7. Pimelia spinosa, Slug ? *8. Copris Sabres ? found by Passalacqua, embalmed, and so named on the testimony ofLatreiUe.9. Midas, Fab.10. Pithecius, Fab.1 1. A species of Cantharis in the collection of Passalacqua from Thebes (No. 442.)Jomard Description des Hyi30gees de la Ville de Thebes, in the Description de I'Egypte.t Notice sur les Embaumemens des Anciens Egyptians in the Description de I'Egj'pte, parM. Rouyer, tom. I. p. 207.56 ON EMBALMING.Granville's mummy the brain and part of the membranes were extractedthrough the nostrils.* In many cases, however, the brain was not removedat all, and yet the body very carefully and perfectly preserved.This was the case in Dr. Lee's mummy, the brain of which is in my possession.It has sunk down into a cake-like mass, bearing the impress ofthe crucial ridge in the internal part of the back of the skull, and showsthat the body had been placed in a horizontal posture after being embalmed.I have another head from Thebes, showing the same fact. In this specimenthe nostrils are plugged with cotton cloth. M. Rouelle states thatin the head of the mummy sent to the Count de Caylus he perceived a holein the cranium, made at the extremity of the nostrils, and that the endof the orbit on the right side was actually open. Through these aperturesdoubtless the brain had been extracted, and the cavity was, as in manyother instances, filled up nth bituminous and resinous matter. J In themummy, which formerly belonged to Dr. Perry, and which is now in mycollection, I found the head filled with these substances. Dr. Mead'smummy, the remains of which are in the Museum of the Royal College ofPhysicians, was in the same state. Mr. Davidson's mummy also containedthis matter, and it is remarkable that in this instance the apertures of thenostrils, with part of the cavity of the skull, was plugged up and filled withtwisted portions of cloth introduced through the nostrils, which Mr. Davidson" drew out to the extent of nine yards. It was of very fine texture,and about three inches in width." § Mr. Madden mentions that he sawheads of mummies crammed with fine linen, which must have been introducedthrough the nose.|| The head of the mummy opened at Leeds wasfound to be rather more than half filled with spices in a state of coarsepowder, amongst which were a few lumps of resinous matter, particularlyabout the base of the skuU. The right nostril was also filled with a resinoussubstance. Dr. Granville's mummy had a lump of rags dipped inpitch and placed in the mouth.The head being thus deprived of that matter which most readily runsPhilos. Trans. 1825. f Mem. de I'Acad. Roy. des Sciences, 1750.X The nature of the substances will be treated of in the Chapter on Medicaments.§ Address on Embalming, 8vo. Lend. 1833, p. 20.II Travels in Turkey, Egj^t, Nubia, and Palestine, ii. 88.ON EMBALMING. 57into putrefaction, the next step in the process of embalming was the makingof the incision into the flank for the exasperation of the body. DiodorusSiculus, describing this part of the embalming, says, " He who has thename of Scribe (o ypajujuartOc) , laying the body upon the ground, marks aboutthe flank on the left side," &c. Now, all the representations of this process,and they are very numerous, both upon the cases of mummies andon the papyri which have been found within them, represent the body aslying extended upon a table furnished with a lion's head.* I am at a loss toaccount for this emblem, which is constant in MSS., on cases, tablets, &c.Count Caylus has figured in his Recueil d'Antiquites Egyptians (tom. IV.,PI. XIV., Jig. 4) an Egyptian engraving on a htematite of a femalemummy, stretched on the back of a lion, and Anubis standing by its side,with his arms extended as in the act of invoking protection for the body.Be that as it may, a line is marked out by the scribe, and the dissector(o s-apa<rxtoT7)g) makes his incision according to this direction, and with anEthiopia stone,! which is of exceeding hardness, and capable of bearing avery keen cutting edge. The man who makes this incision, it is mostsingularly said, is obliged to fly with aU speed even from the assistants inthe embalming, who throw stones after him, and load him with curses, itbeing considered as odious to do any act of violence to a body of the samenature as their own.Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus leave us in ignorance as to whatis done with the intestines after they are extracted from the body by theembalmers, through the incision made in the left flank by the cutter ; butPorphyry): here affords us some curious and important information. Thisauthor has handed down to us the prayer said to have been uttered by theembalmers in the name of the deceased, " entreating the divine powers toreceive his soul into the region of the gods." It is as follows: — " Whenthose who have the care of the dead proceed to embalm the body of anyThe embalmers are figured with the head of a jackal, and are painted black, &c.t Egyptian pebbles of pyromachous silex, according to M. Brogniart. Fig. 6, 7, 8, Plate IV.,are representations of what is supposed to be the knife for malung the incision. They are takenfrom M. Passalacqua's Collection at Berlin.i De Abstinence, lib. iv. cap. 10.I58 ON EMBALMING.person of respectable rank, they first take out the contents of the belly, andplace them in a separate vessel. After the other rites for the dead havebeen performed, one of the embalmers, laying his hand on the vessel, addressingthe sun, utters on behalf of the deceased the following prayer,which Euphantus has translated from the original language into Greek : —O thou Sun, our lord, and all ye gods who are the givers of life to men,accept me, and receive me into the mansions of the eternal gods ; for I haveworshipped piously, while I have lived in this world, those divinities whommy parents taught me to adore. I have ever honoured those parents whogave origin to my body; and of other men I have neither killed any, norrobbed them of their treasure, nor inflicted upon them any grievous evil ;but if I have done any thing injurious to my own soul, either by eating ordrinking any thing unlawfully, this offence has not been committed by me,but by what is contained in this chest, — meaning the intestines in the vessel,I which is then thrown into the river. The body is afterwards regarded"'as pure, this apology having been made for its offences, and the embalmerprepares it according to the appointed rites." Plutarch confirms the authenticityof this account: — " The belly being opened," he says, " the bowels werecast into the river Nile and the body exposed to the sun. The cavities of thechest and the belly were then filled with unguents and odorous substances."In the representations of embalming to which I have alluded, four vaseswill be constantly seen placed beneath the embalming table.* Each ofthese vases is furnished with a cover, having on it either the head of ahuman being, a cynocephalus, a jackal, or a hawk. These are the fourgenii of the Amenti or Amen-ti, which, in Coptic, exactly corresponds witha^jjc in Greek. It signifies the receiver and giver. Mr. Wilkinson says it was,therefore, a temporary abode. This agrees with the idea of the Egyptians returningagain to the earth, after a stated period. The names of the genii are :1. Netsonof, or Kebhnsnof, with the hawk's head.In Dr. Middleton's miscellaneous works, vol. IV., p. 166, there is a representation of theembalming of a body, the principal operator, and two assistants. There are four vases(Canopy) beneath the table. It occurs in the description of the case, paintings, &c., of an Egyptianmummy given to the University of Cambridge by Captain George Townshend. See Tab.22 and 23.ON EMBALMING. 592. Smof, or Smarts, with the jackal's head.3. Hapee, with the head of the cynocephalus.4. Amset, with the human head. (See Plate III., fig. 1, 2, 3, 4.*)The vases containing the embalmed intestines are made either of bakedclay or of alabaster: the latter are so rare that Belzoni had only met withfragments of this kind. I have seen one perfect and most beautiful set, andsome others imperfect. Lord King has a very fine set measuring 16 J inchesin height. They have most commonly hieroglyphics upon them. In sizethey vary from about nine inches to a foot and a half.To return to the process :The intestines and other viscera being removed through the incision justmentioned, and which is usually about five inches in length, Herodotus tellsus they were cleansed and steeped in palm wine. In several instances theywere neither placed in vases nor thrown into the river ; for, in Dr. Lee'smummy, I found the intestines had been taken out from the opening (51 hatchesin length) in the left flank, and washed I presume in the palm wine ; they hadbeen sprinkled with aromatics, which were also thrown into the cavity of thebelly, and then replaced in one mass into that cavity. These are now inmy possession. Belzoni remarks that the entrails of mummies are oftenbound up in linen and asphaltum.f In Mr. Davidson's mummy the arrangementwas somewhat different ; for, after their removal, they wererolled up in four distinct portions, enclosed in cotton bandages, and thenreturned into the body. The cut surfaces of this incision were, in allthe instances I have seen, merely brought together, not sewed, as stated byHerodotus. M. Rouyer's experience coincides with mine. In the Leedsmummy the edges of the incision were also brought together, but not byany sewing — a simple apposition of surfaces. The contents of the chestand abdomen in this case were removed, with the exception of the liver, thekidneys, and the heart, which had been embalmed, wrapped up in finecloth, and returned into the cavity. In my " Greco-Egyptian Mummy"the cavity was quite empty. I could not find even the kidneys, which areespecially mentioned by Diodorus Siculus as parts that were not to beThese are taken from four care-ed figures in my possession. They are of great rarity,t Travels, p. 170.60 ON EMBALMING.removed. So, also, he says of the heart, and this substance I found placedbetween the thighs of the mummy, without any bandaging or protection ofany kind. I have had this figured in Plate IV., fig. 3, and the reader willeasily observe, by a reference to Plate XXIII. in the Phil. Trans, for 1825, itsstriking resemblance to the form of the heart belonging to Dr. Granville'smummy. I was for a long time at a loss to ascertain what it really was. Isucceeded, however, by macerating it in spirit, and I found the mass toconsist of the muscular or fleshy part of the heart. Upon examination ofthe chest, or thoracic cavity, I was enabled to obtain some portions of membrane(the pleura), a portion of the windpipe, and some of the largerblood-vessels coming from, and going to, the heart. This division ofthe heart from the vessels has evidently been effected by a cutting instrument,and the surfaces receiving this violence are clearly apparent ; for,having macerated the portions in warm water, I completely soaked outthe magnifying matter, and have since preserved the specimens in spirit ;for, the drugs of preservation being removed, the parts began immediatelyto putrefy, after the lapse of a period of probably three thousand years !Dr. Lee's and Mr. Davidson's mummies had the kidneys as well as theother viscera.The extraction of the intestines by means of an incision does not appearto have been exclusively practised in the mummies prepared according tothe most expensive process, detailed by Herodotus as the first mode; formany have been found, as we learn from Passalacqua* and other competentauthorities, with this incision, that had not been enclosed in a sarcophagus.The amount of the expense of the process would rather dependupon the nature and quantity of the spices used, and the profusion of idolswith which the mummy should be decorated. Mummies very richly furnished,and prepared in the most costly manner, have been found withoutthe ventral incision. f Passalacqua remarks J that the mummies in whichthe intestines had been removed through the incision had always the placesupplied by asphaltum ; but I have seen the cavity merely filled with dustof cedar, cassia, &c., and an earthy matter. And Passalacqua himself hadCatalog. No. 1547. f lb. No. 1552. ♦ lb. p. 179.ON EMBALMING. 61the mummy of a child,* the abdomen of which had been emptied of its contents,and no substance was found to replace them. In Dr. Granville'smummy no ventral incision had been practised, nor had the greatest partof the viscera been displaced ; for, upon removing the integuments of thebelly, the stomach was found adhering to the diaphragm, the spleen muchreduced and flattened, the kidney, gall-bladder, &c. The contents of thechest were entire, and those of the pelvis were found in situ; and Dr. Granvillehas detailed some appearances which he conceives to be indicative ofa diseased state of some of those organs, previously to the death of theindividual. tThe great cavities of the body being cleansed and prepared, they are,according to Herodotus, filled with aromatic substances, stated to bemyrrh and cinnamon or cassia. The use of frankincense was forbidden.Resinous matters were also thrown into the body,t which is now to besteeped ^ in a solution of natrum, a composition of carbonate, sulphate, andmuriate of soda, and in this liquid it was to remain for seventy days and nolonger. This would appear to be precisely the time necessary for the operationof the alkali on the animal fibre. Having remained in this solutionfor the time specified, the body was withdrawn and washed. At this stageof the process I suspect the cuticle was removed ; for, in all the instances Ihave been able to meet with, this appears to have been an operation towhich much attention has been paid.U Great care has been observed inthe removal of it, not to disturb any of the nails. My " Greco-Egyptianmummy " has two of the nails fastened on by means of thread, they havingbeen loosened by the detachment of the cuticle.No. 1549.f For the particulars, the reader is referred to the Philosophical Transactions for 1825.t Dr. Granville found several lumps of brittle resin and two or three small pieces of myrrh intheir natural state, mixed up with a compound of a bituminous and resinous matter and argillaceousearth. These Dr. G. supposes were placed to fill up the vacancies created by the removalof portions of the intestines. Dr. VerneuU says, he has been able to recognize myrrhamong the balsamic substances employed in embalming. The abdomen of the Leeds mummywas filled with aromatic powder.§ Herodotus is most likely incorrect here as to the order of proceeding, for the placing thebody in this saline liquid would, of necessity, precede the application of the aromatics.II In the Leeds mummy, it is said, the cuticle had not been removed.62 ON EMBALMING.Dr. Granville has noticed the appearance of minute saline crystals, bothon the exterior and interior surfaces of his mummy, and upon collectingthem together a sufficient quantity was obtained to be submitted to variousanalyses, and they were found to consist of nitrate of potash, carbonate, sulphate,and muriate of soda, and traces of lime. There is no difficulty inaccounting for the presence of all these substances, from the body havingbeen subjected to the operation of the natrum, excepting that of the hie,and the existence of this substance Dr. Granville supposes is owing to anoperation preliminary to embalming, namely, the removal of the cuticle bythe agency of this caustic matter.The cuticle removed, the body would more readily receive the benefit ofthe ablution with palm wine, which would act as an astringent, and in amanner tan the true skin.The body now, according to Herodotus, is fitted for bandaging; butDiodorus Siculus (who makes no mention of the natrum) says that thebody was " anointed with oil of cedar and other things for thirty days,and afterwards with myrrh, cinnamon, and other such like matters;" andI suspect also, from the examinations I have made, that in this process thebody must have been subjected to a very considerable degree of heat ; forthe resinous and aromatic substances have penetrated even into the innermoststructure of the bones, an effect which could not have been producedwithout the aid of a high temperature, and which was absolutely necessaryfor the entire preservation of the body. The heat would essentially destroyall insects, and remove all fatty matter, so powerful in promoting putrefaction.M. Rouyer, I find, also conceives that the bodies must have beenput into stoves, or kept at a certain temperature in convenient vessels, toincorporate most intimately the resinous substances with the animal matter.His words are, " Cette operation, dont aucun historien n'a parle, etoit sansdoute la principale et la plus importante de I'embaumement."*The mummy opened at Leeds presented an appearance different fromany I have either seen or read of. On the surface of the body there wasa coating of the dust of woods and barks, nowhere less than one inch inthickness ; and this extended all over the body, even to the extremities ofDescription de I'Egypte, p. 212.ON EMBALMING. 63the fingers and toes. It had the smell of cinnamon or cassia. The bodycontained within it also a quantity of a similar powder, which, upon beingmixed with alcohol and water and exposed to the action of heat, emittedan odour resembling that of myrrh.The body being embalmed, the additions of gilding and otherwise ornamenting,in some instances, must be presumed to precede the envelopingit in its proper bandages. The gilding of mummies has been most frequentlyobserved on the nails of the fingers and toes,* but it has also beenseen on the eye-Hds, on the lips, the face, on the sexual organs,! and on thehands and feet. Abd'Allatif states | that leaves of gold have been found onthe forehead, eyes, and nose of the bodies— also on the sexual parts of thewomen, and some bodies entirely covered with this precious metal. Healso mentions that it was customary to lay a small leaf of gold on the body,and in some instances a begot of gold Alas placed in the mouth. A cadiof Bousir reported to Abd'Allatif that he had removed three of these ingots,and that they weighed together nine mithkals.ij Mr. Wilkinson has favouredme with a drawing of a plate of gold beaten very thin, and foundupon the tongue of a mummy. From the hieroglyphics upon it, it appearsto be of the time of Ramses the Great. See Plate VI., fig. 1.Dr. Lee has a beautiful specimen of the hand of a female mummy, inwhich the nails of the fingers are gilt. The mummy described by Hertzog,the apothecary of Gotha, had the nails of the fingers and toes gilt.|| Inmy " Grasco-Egyptian mummy" the gilding has been over the whole of thebody, and appears, as Plates I. and II. will show, in the form of squarepatches, which, it has been conjectured, have remained most apparent inconsequenceof their having been applied to fill up spaces where the gildinghas originally been defective, similar to the process now in use among thepicture-frame gilders of the present day. M. Cailliaud's mummy was giltin the same manner. A few years since I saw an unwrapped mummy thatDenon Voyage dans I'Egypte, torn. II. p. 33.t Jomard, p. 42, and Rouyer, p. 216.X p. 200.§ A withal is IJ drachm Arab, or 90 grs., and a grain Arab, is » English.II Hertzog (Christ.) Essai de Mumiographie, 12nio. Goths 1718, p. 55. The head of thismummy was wanting.64 ON EMBALMING.was exhibited in the Haymarket, said to have been brought from Thebesby Captain Jefferson, and upon this there were here and there small portionsof gold leaf apparent. Mr. Madden saw some mummies in whichthe fingers, toes, lips, and eyes were gilt.* M. Rouyer thinks that thesegilded mummies are too numerous to produce assent to the opinion thatthey only are bodies of persons of the highest rank and importance. Hesays that mummies not having the ventral incision are never gilt. My specimencontradicts this assertion. Passalacqua regards all the mummiesthat are found gilt on the flesh as Greek mummies — the mummies of thoseGreeks who either in the time of the Pharaohs or Ladies were living inEg}q3t. Many have been found with Greek inscriptions or characters impressedon the bandages or cases. f Very thin plates of gold, or silver gilt,are sometimes found in mummies without any Greek inscription. Mons.CaiUiaud's mummy had a plate of gold over each orbit representing aneye, with the eye-lashes, &c., and another plate of gold in the shape of atongue over the mouth, which was effectually closed. According to Mons.Letronne all the Egyptian mummies have the mouth opens which is notthe case in the Gra?co-Eg}^tian mummies. " Lorsqu'une personne venitd'expirer, ses parens et ses amis avaient le soin de lui farmer la bouche.Nous voyons le disciple de' Socrates, Briton, s'empresser de rendre a sonmaitre ce pieux devoir, aussitot qu'il eut rendu I'ame ;§ c'est ce qu'on appellant(TvWafifidyitv to arofia. On allait meme plus loin : en ornant le corpspour Exposition, on servant ses machines avec des bandelettes de laine,attaches par dessus la tete." " Par Tisiphone (dit Lucien, en faisantparler un mort de ses parens), en vous voyant dire et faire tant de sottisha mes funerailles, j'aurais elate de rire, si les bandelettes de laine dontvous m'avez si bien serre les machines ne men eussent empeche."Rien ne me paroit plus propre (continue M. Letronne) a expliquer cettecirconstance. C'est vraisemblablement par une sorte expression symbohqueTravels, vol. II. p. 90. 't Passalacqua, Catalog. Nos. 1543, 1588. Augusteum; ou Description des Monumens Antiquesqui se trouvent a Dresden, par G. G. Becker, Leap. 1804, folio.J This was not the case in Dr. Lee's Egyptian mummy.§ Plat. Phffidon. § 66. fin. ubi, vide Wyttenb.ON EMBALMING. 65de ce dernier devoir rendu aux morts, qu'on avait place sur les livres de lamomie une lame door qui a la forme d'une langue, et dont Objet sembleavoir ete de seller la bouche"* M. Cailliaud's mummy had an artificialcrown of olive in copper gilt placed round the head. This appears to besomewhat in conformity with a custom of the Greeks, who were in thehabit of exhibiting their renowned dead with a crown of gold until the timeof their burial, when it was either placed on the tomb or in a funeral urn.The mummy I opened, and which from the character of its skull I amdisposed to conceive to be that of a Greek, had no inscription whatever onits bandages. There may probably have been one on some outer bandageor case that did not reach this country. It cannot be a matter of surprisethat the Greeks, who adopted so much of the mythology of the Egyptians,should also have adopted their manners in the treatment of their dead. Thebody of Alexander was preserved, not only free from corruption by theprocess of embalming, but from external injury by being cased in the mostprecious of metals, and the one of all others the least liable to alteration.Diodorus Siculus has given f an account of this splendid preparation. Thecovering of gold was a sort of chase-work, and of such a nature that itcould be applied so closely to the skin as to preserve not only the form ofthe body, but also to give the expression of the features of the countenance.The practice of wrapping the dead in sheets of gold, Dr. Clarke has remarked,J is strictly oriental. The Rev. Mr. Tooke § has also made usacquainted with the fact that among the sepulchres discovered on the banksof the Volga, the Tobol, the Irish, and the Ob, bodies are found wrappedin thin plates of gold. Sheets of the purest gold have been found extendingfrom the head to the feet, and so great a quantity has been seen in theseeastern tumuli, that the borderers upon the Siberian and Tartarean desertshave, for years, been in the habit of digging for the treasures containedwithin them. It is stated that in one sepulchre alone in Siberia, opened bythe order of the Russian government, two sheets of gold covering two bodieswere found amounting to no less than forty pounds' weight of fine gold. ||\ Mr. Forster supposes the prince and princess thus buried to have been Munga Meroe, Tom. IV. p. 13. t Lib. xvii. c, 26. J P. 51.§ Archaeological, VII. 224. || Forster in Archaeological, II. p. 233.K66 ON EMBALMING,gleans, of the family of Genghiz-Khan, and to have lived between theyears 1295 and 1370. Similar plates of gold, or this metal in the form ofvessels, bracelets, or other ornaments, have been found in the country nearthe Tanais, and in the territory near the Boeotia ;* and this it is that Dr.Clarke supposes has given rise to the erroneous notion of the body ofAlexander having been deposited in a golden coffin. The chase-work uponthe body of this hero was protected by a further golden veil or garment,which was placed immediately over it, then a splendid purple vest variegatedwith gold, and to this succeeded his armour, that he " might appear as hehad lived, and the whole be accordant with his past actions." In latertimes a covering of glass was substituted for that of gold by one of thePolemics, and the body placed in a sarcophagus, which, it is said, " bidsdefiance to the arts, at any other period than that of Ptolemy and in anyother country than that of Egypt. fPassalacqua says that the position of the bodies of Greek mummies variessomewhat from that of the Egyptians, that the arms were always extendedalong the sides, and that the fingers were invariably extended, and the limbsseparately bandaged. This was certainly not the case in my specimen.The nails of the fingers and toes of some mummies have been observed tobe stained, as if with henna. {Lawsonia inertia, Formal Flor. Egypt).Whether this be really the case is not at all clear ; the colour may probablybe produced by the medicaments employed in the process of embalming.M. Rouyer notices the staining of the nails, and also the palms of thehands and the soles of the feet, and attributes it to the henna. Mr. Davidson'smummy presented this stained appearance on the nails. Mr. Maddenalso says that the hands of many were dyed with the juice of the henna, asis the custom of the Arabs]: The henna is the gopher of Scripture andthe c\3)rus of the Greeks. The shrub is called the Tamar-vienne, and iscommon in Sharkiyyeh and Kelyiib. In the month of April, suckers properlyprepared are planted vertically, three feet apart, in land twiceploughed, and irrigated abundantly. In a year's time the plants have acquireda considerable size, and the leaves are then fit for gathering. TheseSee Kennel's Geographical system of Herodotus, p. 107. t Clarke, p. 75.J Travels II. 90.ON EMBALMING. 6/are dried and powdered, and formed into a paste, which is very commonly usedthroughout Asia to stain the nails of the hands and feet, and the palms ofthe hands and soles of the feet. The colour is a kind of scarlet. Sonnini hasfigured it in his Travels, Plate III. The flowers are extremely fragrant.Scarabeei or other amulets or ornaments are but rarely found in contactwith the body of a mummy, but in Mr. Davidson's specimen there was acollar adherent to the neck of the mummy, from the centre of whichhung a scarabseus an inch and a half in length and an inch in breadth,having the remains of some written (not carved) hieroglyphical characters.Impressed on it.* In the mummy of Horseisi, an incense-bearing priestof the temple of Ammon, unrolled by me at the Royal College of Surgeons,I found also a necklace and a scarabseus. The necklace appears tohave been composed of seven separate portions, which, by the pressure ofthe bandages, have been forced down upon the upper part of the breast.At the pit of the stomach there was a scarabaeus in the usual light greenstone,an inch in length, and proportionably broad ; no inscription wasupon this amulet.It is not a little remarkable that the scarabseus is more frequently found(upon the naked flesh than any other divinity or amulet.As to the position of the bodies of mummies, the only difference is to befound in the mode of disposing of the arms ; the body is always extendedand the head erect. The legs are invariably placed at their full length, andbrought close together. The arms are found either lying along the sides ofthe body, the palms of the hands in contact with the thighs, or placed uponthe groins, t or brought forward in contact with each other, or they areplaced across the breast, or, as in some rare instances, one arm extendedalong the side of the body, whilst the other is carried across the chest. 1believe these postures to have been indiscriminately employed ; for they areto be found in males, females, and children. Passalacqua says that thegreater number of instances in which the arms are crossed are those offemales, though my limited experience does not serve to support this opinion,Mr. D. has represented it in his Address on Embalming,t This was the position of the mummy of Horseisi.68 ON EMBALMING.and M. Jomard,* who enjoyed abundant opportunities, states the reverse tobe the case. Dr. Granville's female mummy had the arms crossed. Thiswas also the case in the female mummies described by Gryphons and Hertzog.In Dr. Perry's, Dr. Lee's, Mr Davidson's, and in the mummy opened atthe Mechanics' Institution, they were extended. Mons. ViUoteau, one ofthe members of the French Commission in Egj^jit, and who has communicatedto Mons. de Sacy an account of the observations he made duringhis stay in that country, a detail of which will be found in M. de Sacy'sinteresting edition of Abd'Allatifs History of Egypt, states, among otherthings, that in a female mummy, remarkably well preserved, and in whichhe observed the hair was of great length, and flowing in tresses which musthave hung down the back extending even to the waist ; the arms were extendedalong the sides — whereas in a male mummy they were crossed ; andhe adds that he had observed this to be constantly the case in male andfemale mummies. Passalacqua had the mummy of a boys with the armscrossed. Denon had the mummy of a female, in which one hand was inclinedtowards the sexual organ, whilst the other was carried to the throatin the position of the Venus di Medicis, and Passalacqua had one in thesame attitude. M. de Verneuil has suggested that women of a certain agehad the arms crossed ; but that virgins and younger females had themextended. § The arms were extended in M. Cailliaud's male mummy.Passalacqua has remarked that the Egyptians had the fingers of theright hand extended, and those of the left clenched, a remark I amnot able to confirm. The fingers of the left hand of Dr. Granville'smummy where bent inwardly, but the thumb was extended.The body being thus prepared, the bandages || are applied, and the wholeis placed in its proper case or coffinsThe Second mode described by Herodotus differs from the preceding inthe non-extraction of the brain, in having no ventral incision, and in theabsence of the resinous and aromatic substances. The intestines wereP. 42. + No. 1547. I No. 1546. § Catal. de M. Passalacqua, p. 284.II For particulars as to the nature of these, and the mode of application, see chap. VII.% See chap. IX,ON EMBALMING. 69filled with oil of cedar, after which the body was placed in a solution ofnatrum for the specified number of days,* at which time it is said the oilis Withdrawn, and along with it the bowels. M. RoueUef has doubted thepossibility of this injection into the body without the aid of incisions, andmy specimen of Greco-Egyptian mummy goes to confirm this opinion ; forthere have evidently been incisions made in the neighbourhood of therectum. It has been doubted whether the oil of cedar has the power ofdestroying the viscera. | A mummy opened at the Mechanics' Institute, in1832, presented the appearances described by Herodotus : the skin andbones alone remained, the flesh was entirely destroyed by the natrum.Abd'AUatif says that he saw human bones in so decayed a state that theyresembled the white fibres which surround the base of the leaves of thepalm-tree.The Third mode simply consisted in washing the inside (but in whatmanner is not stated) with syrmsea, or sarmatia (a purgative liquor, supposedto have been composed of an infusion of senna and cassia, both ofwhich plants are natives of Egypt,) and then salting the body for seventydays. Upon comparing the accounts given by modern travellers withthose of the ancient authorities, it will be seen that it is impossible to classthe whole of the mummies that have been discovered under one or other ofthe three modes above detailed. The observations I have made, en passant,are sufficient to show that in no one case have they been strictly true, andyet nothing has been described by Herodotus that has not in some instanceor other been detected. M. Rouyer, whom I have had occasion frequentlyto refer to, and whose " Notice sur les Embaumemens des Anciens Egyptians,"in the large and splendid work published in France, the result ofthe labours of the celebrated Commission, furnishes us with many curiousand interesting particulars, has endeavoured to class the mummies he sawin Eg\^t under two principal divisions, and these he subdivides into others.The principal divisions are : —Seventy days, the precise period of mourning for the dead. Joseph was mourned for duringthis time. See Genesis, chap. 1. ver. 3.t Mem. de I'Acad. des Sciences, 1750, p. 139.X See Chap. VI. on Medicaments.70 ON EMBALMING.I. Those having an incision in the left flank for the exasperating of thebody.II. Those without any incision.I. Of the mummies with the ventral incision, they are those preserved1 . By balsamic matter.2. By natron.Those dried by balsamic and astringent substances are filled with amixture of resin and aromatics, and the others with asphaltum or purebitumen. Those filled with resinous matter are of an olive colour, theskin dry, flexible, and like a tanned skin, retracted and adherent to thebones. The features are preserved, and appear as during life. The bellyand chest are filled with resins, partly soluble in spirit of wine. Thesesubstances have no particular odour by which they can be recognized ;but, thrown upon hot coals, a thick smoke is produced, giving out a strongaromatic smell. Tliese mummies are dry, light, and easily broken ; theteeth, hair of the head, and eye-brows preserved. Some of these are gilton the surface of the body, others only on the face, or the sexual parts, oron the hands and feet. The mummies filled with bitumen are black, theskin hard and shining, and as if coloured with varnish. The features perfect,the belly, chest, and head filled with resin, black and hard, andhaving little odour ; and, upon being examined, are found to yield the sameresults as the Jews' pitch met with in commerce. These mummies aredry and heavy. They have no smell, and are difficult to developed or break.They have been prepared with great care, and are very little susceptible ofdecomposition from exposure to the air.*The mummies with ventral incisions, and prepared by natron, are alsofilled with resinous substances, and also asphaltum. The skin is hard andelastic. It resembles parchment, and does not adhere to the bones. Theresins and the bitumen injected into these mummies are little friable,and give out no odour. The countenance of the body is little altered, andWhen the asphaltum incorporates with the body, it becomes brown and greasy, and easilycrumbles into powder ; when it does not incorporate with the flesh it retains its shining blackcolour.ON EMBALMING. 71the hair is badly preserved: what remains usually falls off upon beingtouched. These mummies are very numerous, and if exposed to the airthey become covered with an efflorescence of sulphate of soda. Theyreadily absorb humidity from the atmosphere.II. Those without the ventral incision.These are also of two kinds: — 1. Salted and tilled with bituminousmatter less pure than the others, and called pissasphaltum. — 2. Simplysalted. The mummies preserved with pissasphaltum are not recognizable ;all the cavities are filled, and the surface of the body is covered with thismineral pitch. It penetrates the body, and forms with it one undistinguishablemass. These mummies, M. Rouyer conceives, were submersed invessels containing the pitch in a liquid state. They are the most numerousof all kinds, black, dry, heavy, and of a disagreeable odour, and verydifficult to break. Neither the eye-brows nor hair is preserved, and thereis no gilding upon them. The bituminous matter is fatty to the touch,less black and brittle than the asphaltum, and yields a very strong odour.It dissolves imperfectly in alcohol, and when thrown upon hot coals emitsa thick smoke and disagreeable smell. When distilled, it gives an abundantoil, fat and of a brown colour and foetid odour. Exposed to the air,these mummies soon change, attract humidity, and become covered withan efflorescence of saline substances.2. The mummies simply salted and dried are generally worse preservedthan those filled with resins and bitumen. The skin is dry, white, elastic,light, yielding no odour, and is easily broken. The skin is blanched andsupple, and masses of adipocere are frequently found in them. The featuresare destroyed, the hair is entirely removed, the bones are detachedfrom their connexions with the slightest effort, and they are white likethose of a skeleton. The cloth enveloping them falls to pieces upon beingtouched. These mummies are generally found in particular caves, whichcontain great quantities of saline matters, principally the sulphate of soda.The state of preservation in which the hair has frequently been foundhas excited astonishment. M. Belzoni brought away from Gournou somehair from a well embalmed mummy that was plaited and measured eighteeninches in length. M. Villoteau, I have already stated, saw hair of great72 ON EMBALMING.length and flowing in tresses, which must have reached to the waist, and myfriend Dr. Sayer has a very fine specimen of the head of a female mummy, inwhich the hair hangs in elegant tresses. This head was taken from thetombs at Karnak. I have the head of a female mummy from Thebes, inwhich the hair is of considerable length, and what is more singular thereare three plaited portions turned up from behind over the skull, preciselyin the way the Egyptians of the present day wear their hair, and as it is commonlydone in this country. De Breves, who was French Ambassador atthe Porte for twenty-two years, mentions having seen the preservation ofthe hair and the nails in mummies. Count de Caylus only displayed hisown want of knowledge widen he called in question the veracity of thistraveller. " M. de Breves," says he, " etoit sans doute un bon ministre,mais un mauvais observateur. Cette conservation est physiquement impossible;et il aura ete trompe par les Arabes qui font metier dien imposeraux Francs. lis lui auront presente quelques corps embalmed selon lesusages qui se pratique aujourd'hui."*M. Rouyer, M. Passalacqua, M. Champollion, and many other travellershave expressed their surprise at the very small number of the mummiesof children in the tombs. Maillet states that separate caverns wereappropriated to males, females, and children; but this observation has notbeen confirmed by any traveller. M. Rouyer remarks that the bodies ofthe females differ from the males in the manner of their embalming, in thenature of the substances employed in the operation, and in the arrangementof the bandages in which they are enveloped. He has not, however,favoured us with any relation of these peculiarities, nor have I beenable to distinguish any, either by my own personal inspection of mummiesor by my enquiries among those of my friends who have enjoyed extensiveopportunities of examining the caves and tombs in Egypt, and who havefavoured me with their opinions on this subject.The smallest mummy in Passalacqua's collection measures fifteen inches.Denon had a mummy twenty-five inches and another thirty inches. At a latesale of Egyptian antiquities, I purchased, perhaps, the smallest knownmummy in the world. It measures only three inches and a quarter, and wasenclosed in a wooden case upon which was rather rudely carved a repressMem. de I'Acad. des Belles Letters, xxiii. 135. f P. 215.ON EMBALMING. 73sensation of the god Osiris seated. The eyes are in enamel. The figure hasoriginally been gilt ; but traces only of that operation are now visible. Ihave figured this (Plate IV. fig. 1) and the mummy as enclosed in itsbandages (Plate IV. fig. 2). Dr. Lee has the case of a similar one ratherlarger than mine, but varying very little from it. The opening in his isfrom the back part ; in mine it is from the bottom. There is no inscriptionon either. In Dr. Lee's specimen the mummy is wanting. The Earlof Munster has kindly shown me a case of the same description, but rathersmaller than my specimen. It measures barely four inches ; the back partand sides are wanting. It has also been gilt. In the Catalogue of theAntiquities of the late Baron Denon two cases of this description are noticed.They are numbered 107 and 108. The former was four inches and a halfhigh, and represented Osiris seated on a throne furnished with his ordinaryattributes. Behind the figure was a cavity like Dr. Lee's, with a little boardto open and shut at pleasure : the cavity contained a mass of bitumen.The figure had been gilt. The second specimen was also an image of thesame deity, in the same attitude, and of the same size ; it had been gilt andhad contained an embalmed object, which, I presume, is alluded to in thesame catalogue (No. 236), as "un foetus humain, enveloppe de lanes, etformant une petite momie." In the tombs of Thebes M.Cailliaud saw somehuman foetuses enclosed in small wooden cases, " eccles ^ des figuresassises et dorees."* Captain Hervey, R. N., favoured me with the sight ofa portion of a mummy case, the lower part of which was unfortunatelywanting. It had been obtained, I believe, from Thebes. The case wasformed of cloth plastered over, and then covered with hieroglyphics. Theface had been gilt. Alien entire it probably measured five inches. Amass of waxy substance filled the inside of this curious specimen.Voyage a Meroe, torn. I. p. 264.POSTSCRIPT TO CHAPTER V.Since writing the preceding chapter I have made a more minute examinationof the mummy of Horseisi at the Museum of the Royal College ofSurgeons. From the appearance of the outer table of the skull, Mr. Clift,the intelligent Conservator of the Museum, suspected that there had been afracture, and upon removing a portion of the skuU this was found to havebeen the case. The occipital bone had been broken, and on the inner surfacean exudation, or rather deposition, of bone, extending upwards of oneinch in length, was found to have taken place, thereby marking the processof nature in repairing an injury of the frame. The skull was half filled withthree bandages of cotton cloth, one of which measured ten feet three inches,the others eleven feet six inches each. These had been introducedthrough the right nostril, by which it appears the whole of the brain and itsinvesting membranes had been extracted. The inner surface of the skullwas entirely denuded and perfectly clean. Not an insect was containedwithin it. In the abdomen the viscera were found rolled up in three portions. One of these is easily recognized as the liverand gall-bladder ; a second consists of the intestines ; and the third probablythe spleen, stomach, &c. The cavity of the belly was filled with earthymatter and asphaltum. Specimens of all these may be seen at theMuseum.CHAPTER VI.ON THE MEDICAMENTS EMPLOYED IN EMBALMING.Imperfection of the present state of chemical knowledge — unable to detect the precise nature ofvegetable substances — bituminous matter in the head of a mummy — Rouelle's examination ofthe embalming materials of six different mummies — aspkaUum or Jezcs' pitch — description ofit by Dioscorides — Dr. Verneuil's examination of M. Passalacqua's balm — Mr. Davidson'sanalysis —particular kind of balsam found by Mr. Madden in the head of a mummy —aromatic mentioned by Diodorus Siculus — myrrh, cassia, cedar — pissasphaltum — balm —different species — of Judea — of Syria — of Egypt — of Mecca — powdered aromatics — colocynth— aloes — examination of the contents of canopy — natrum — its nature and effects — erroneousopinion of Rouelle pointed out — Blumenbach's analysis of mummies — crystals ofnatrum obtained — Bahr-hela-ma natron lakes — pure nitre in the heart of a mummy —cedria — description of it by Pliny and Dioscorides — embalming materials not mentioned byHerodotus — honey — wax — bitumen — resin — preservative powers of honey noticed by Alexanderab Alexandre, Columella, Lucretius, Josephus, Abd'Allatif — anecdote from this authorof a child found in a vessel of honey — body of Alexander the Great embalmed by honey —Statius allusion to it — wax — Dr. Granville's^ demonstration of it in mummies — body ofAgesilaus enveloped in wax.In entering upon the subject of the medicaments employed in the processof embalming, one cannot but express regret that the present state ofchemical knowledge is not sufficiently advanced to be capable of detectingthe precise nature of the substances, chiefly of a vegetable kind, that havebeen used in this ancient operation. A variety have been named merelyupon conjecture, and observations Lightly made have been regarded asauthorities of weight and consequence. In treating of these substances Ishall endeavour to preserve the same order as that pursued in the previouschapter on embalming, taking the accounts of Herodotus and DiodorusSiculus, as the most ancient, for a kind of text upon which comments can beconveniently made. According to these authorities, and particularly the76 ON MEDICAMENTS.former one, after the extraction of the brain the cavity of the skull wasfilled with " certain drugs."In the head of a well-embalmed mummy which Mr. Greaves caused tobe opened, there were found in the cavity of the skull two pounds of bituminousmatter, which by the heat of the sun had become soft. He conjecturesthat this could have been injected into the head only through thenostrils, according to the method described by Herodotus. The tongue ofthis mummy weighed only seven grains English, " so light was thatmember which St. James* calls a ' world of iniquity'"M. Ruelle has examined the embalming materials of six differentmummies. These resinous and bituminous substances he has carefullyanalysed. In the head of a mummy sent to him by the Count De Caylus,the substance taken was soft, as in Mr. Greaves's specimen. By distillationin a retort-the heat being applied gradually, it gave at first a little insipidwater, which, as the distillation proceeded, became more and more acid;then a limpid oil, slightly coloured, of an odour resembling that of amber.A further distillation produced a thicker oil, which, when congealed, alsoretained a similar odour to that of the first drawn oil. He tried whether itwere possible to make the acid liquor crystallize in the same manner as theliquor of amber does. He washed the oils in boiling water in order to separatethe acid and the liquor ; being filtrated, he evaporated it ; it civilised a smellof amber and all was dissipated — there was too little matter to furnishcrystals.From the head of another mummy, which belonged to M. de Jussieu, hedrew a clearer and more abundant oil, an acid more concentrated, and an oilwhich did not congeal as the oil in the former instance had done. TheChap. III. V. 6.t The memoir of M. Rouelle, inserted in the Memoires de Academic Royale des Sciences for1750, contains the hest analysis of the materials employed in the process of embalming by theEgyptians. The Memoir is styled the first, but it was not succeeded by a second, which wasintended to have embraced an account of the experiments Mons. Rouelle had made to imitatethe Egj'ptian embalmings, and some methods founded on the same principles for making anatomicalpreparations. The published Memoir is not confined merely to a chemical analysis of themedicaments used in the making of mummies, but extends to a history of the subject, beginningwith the account given by Herodotus.ON MEDICAMENTS. 77products were much the same with respect to the taste and smell of theacid and oils, and resembled the products of the distillation of amber. Thematter remaining in the retorts was rarefied like bituminous substances,more so in the latter than in the former experiment. In appearance thetwo substances very much resembled each other ; the first was ratherblacker and more shining than the second, which had precisely the charactersdescribed by Dioscorides* as belonging to the Jews' pitch. By bruising it, itbecame of a dirty red and like bullocks' blood dried. M. Rouelle comparedthis with a small specimen of true Jews' pitch, and found them to resembleeach other. From these experiments M. Rouelle infers that the mummy towhich the second specimen belonged had been embalmed with Jews' pitch,but that there was something mixed with it, though so inconsiderable inquantity that it was almost impossible to detect it without comparing, becausethe matter differs only in being a little more black, less reddish when crumbled,and in yielding by distillation an oil that congealed.Dr. Verneuil analysed the balm extracted from the head of a mummyin the collection of M. Passalacqua.f and found it to consist of a quantityof silicious sand mixed with argillaceous matter and asphaltum. Mr. Madden{ found in the head of a mummy of a superior kind a quantity of balsamdifferent from any hitherto described. In colour and transparency, he says, itwas not to be distinguished from pink topaz ; it burned with a beautifulclear flame, without leaving any residue, and emitted a very fragrant odour,in which the smell of cinnamon predominated. Mr. Davidson found fourounces and a half of soft matter in the head of his mummy ; it burned with adark red flame, leaving a considerable residue of carbon ; it was but slightlyacted upon by water, or spirit of wine, the latter dissolving a minuteportionsExDioscoride, cap. 100, et cap. 102. "Bitumen omne aliud antecedent Judaicum. Probate quodpurpura modo splendid, ponderosumque et firm adore est. Damnatur contra quod nigro coloresorte. Adulterate enim admit pice. Nascitur in Phaenice, Sidon, Babylon, et Zacyntho.Igitur et in Sicilia Agrigentinorum agro liquid, pontius supematans, quo ad lucernarumlumina vice ole income utuntur, Speculum oleum also appellants : equidem liquid Bituminous,genus est. Decatur et quondam bitumen naphtha, quae Babylonia bituminous distillation est,colore candid, inventor et nigrum."t No. 1556. : Travels, II. 88. § Address on Embalming, p. 20.78 ON MEDICAMENTS.Abd'Allatif * says that the balsam extracted from the heads and bodiesof mummies is black like bitumen. When exposed to heat, it adheres toall around it ; and if thrown on a fire it exhales an odour resembling that ofwhite pitch and myrrh, which, he says, are supposed to constitute its composition.The brain being extracted, and the " certain drugs" injected intothe skull, the next step, according to Herodotus, was to wash the body withpalm wine, and Diodorus Siculus adds, with "aromatic odours." The intestinesremoved, " pounded aromatics, pure myrrh, pounded cassia,!and all other perfumes except frankincense, which was forbidden, were employed.Diodorus Siculus bears his testimony to the employment of myrrhand cassia, and also that the body was anointed with oil of cedar. In aspecimen of mummy which belonged to M. de Jussieu, of which there wasonly a part of the thigh and the leg, black and very shining, and scarcelyaffording any red colour when bruised, M. Rouelle, by distilling it in thesame manner as in the former instances, obtained first an acid liquor and asmall quantity of lightly-coloured fluid oil, but in much less proportion thanin the previous experiments. The acid and oil he describes as having aresinous odour, and avery quick and penetrating. At the end of the distillationa thick oil was obtained, having the smell of amber, but in a much weakerdegree than in the experiments upon the masses taken from the skulls ofmummies. M. Rouelle also examined specimens of a similar nature to thatof M. de Jussieu, from the mummy of the Celestina and the mummy of St.Genevieve. That of the former was of the same colour and the same consistenceas the specimen of Jussieu, and by distillation the same productswere obtained. The latter specimen yielded the-same products, varying onlyin having the odour of the bitumen Judaicum a little less distinct, arisingperhaps from the nature of the specimen, for it was taken from the skulland contained several portions of bandages so closely connected togetherthat there was scarcely any thickness of bituminous matter between them.The sixth and last examination made by M. Rouelle was of the balsamicmatter found in a vessel preserved in the chambers of the mummies. Itwas of a black colour, brilliant, soft, and flexible. Upon handling it anP. 201, De Sacy's edition.t Probably the laurels cassia or bastard cinnamon.ON MEDICAMENTS. 79agreeable odour was diffused. Its nature was purely resinous, uniform inits . substance, not bitter like aloes to the taste, and perfectly soluble inspiritof wine. By distillation, a small quantity of water, slightly aromatic,was obtained, to which, upon an increase of the heat, some drops of anacid, and a light oil, scarcely coloured, but quick and penetrating in itsnature, such as that of the most essential oils, and retaining the smell ofthe balsamic matter, were produced. The quantity of the oil thus obtainedamounted to almost one-fourth of the weight of the balsamic matter. Thisoil was followed by another more thick, which had the smell of the Jews'pitch, and the acid accompanying this oil possessed the same odour. Thusit appeared that there entered into the composition of this substance somematter of an aromatic and resinous nature, abounding with an essential oilthe basis of the balsam is Jews' pitch.The Jews' pitch, or bitumen Judaicum, called also asphaltum, fromthe name of the lake whence it has been obtained, is a solid friable substanceof a brownish-black colour, brilliant in its fracture, and giving out abituminous odour. It has been named funeral gum, and gum of mummies,from its use in the preparation of mummies. Chemical analysis demonstratesthe composition to be a compound of oily matter and mineral acids.Pissasphaltum is a compound of asphaltum and common black pitch. It isknown also by the name of mineral pitch, pitch of the mountain, &c.* M.Rouelle distilled different mixtures of resins and pitch, with the bitumenJudaicum, and he found the odours produced in no manner to resemblethose of the mummies. As the resinous matter mixed with the Jews-pitchwas aromatic and very penetrating, he conjectured that it might be theliquor of the cedar. The matter of these mummies may be regarded as thepissasphaltum. Pursuing this subject with ardour, M. Rouelle obtainedanother specimen from a mummy in the custody of the Augustins cUchausses,and by distillation, as before, he obtained a light aromatic oil; then a thickeroil, more penetrating in its odour ; then one more thick, and having thesmell of the Jews' pitch. The results vary in a very trifling degree fromthe previous experiments. It results from the whole of these analyses thatSee chap. I.80 ON MEDICAMENTS.M. Rouelle has detected three modes of embalming, differing in the materialsused: — 1. With the asphaltum or Jews' pitch. 2. With the mixture ofasphaltum with the liquor of cedar or the cedria. 3. With this mixture,to which were added some resinous and aromatic ingredients. The mattercontained in the vessel found in the chamber of the mummies probablyfurnishes another method more balsamic, and perhaps more precious.Penicher* enumerates four species of balm, supposed to have been usedin embalming. 1. That of Judea. 2. Of Syria. 3.' Of EgjT)t. 4. OfMecca. The trees yielding these were formerly trained with as much carein the countries where they were cultivated as the vine ; they are now sorare as scarcely to be met with except in the gardens of the Grand Seignior.The mode of obtaining the balm is by making an incision through the barkof the plant during the dog-days, avoiding the use of any instrumenthaving an iron point. The liquor produced by this incision is describedas yielding a very fine and agreeable odour, aromatic, and abounding involatile oils. The colour is white, approaching to a yellowish tint, similarto that of citron. The taste is slightly astringent and sharp. Its odoiirand fluidity are lost by being kept any length of time, but its qualities aresaid to remain. Abd'AUatif gives a very detailed account of the treeyielding the balm, and of the mode of collecting and preparing it.fNo pounded aromatics have been found mixed with the bituminousmatter ; they would have destroyed the uniformity of the mass, and servedrather to attract humidity, and thus promote putrefaction than resist it.These vegetable substances were sprinkled into the cavities of the body.Resinous matters would afford the best protection against moisture, andsuch were evidently employed, forming a kind of varnish on the surface ofthe body.Mr. Madden's account of the penetrating nature of the particles ofmummy dust agrees in every respect with that of Belzoni. His throat wasTraite des Embaumemens, p. 2.t See also Prosper Alpinus de Balsam dialogue. Observations de P. Ballon ; Line Amoe-nitat. Acid. torn. VII., and various other authors, from whom M. De Sacy has cited the mostimportant passages in his valuable notes appended to his edition of Abd'AUatif s HistoriesEgj'pt.ON MEDICAMENTS 81frequently excoriated by it, and this, he says, tended to make him acquaintedwith the component parts of the balsam employed in the preparationof mummies, which he conceives essentially consists of powderedcolocynth, commonly called bitter apple. By analysis, he says, he has foundthis substance to form a very large proportion of the balsam. The resinbeing insoluble in water, he thought he might get an infusion of colocynth,if it existed in it, by pouring a quantity of water on four ounces of thecoarse powdered balsam. He then made an infusion of colocynth andfound the taste of the two mixtures to be the same. Colocynth, in the formof powder, he found was largely employed in Upper Egypt for destroyingvermin in clothes-presses and store-rooms ; and the ostrich feathers whichare sent to Lower Egypt are sprinkled with this substance as they arepacked.*The mention of aloes in the embalmings frequently occurs, but there isno positive authority for its use as relating to the Egyptian embalmings. Ihave already noticed that it is recorded by St. John that Nicodemusbrought about 100 lbs. weight of a mixture of myrrh and aloes to preservethe body of Christ (John xix. 39) ; and aloes is mentioned as a perfume inother parts of scripture: " I have prepared my bed with myrrh, aloes, andcinnamon" (Prov. vii. 17). "Spikenard and saffron; calamus and cinnamon,with all trees of frankincense; myrrh and aloes, with all the chiefspices" (Solomon's Song, iv. 14).Dr. Verneuil examined a compound found in two of the vases calledcanopy, containing the intestines, in M. Passalacqua's collection,! and hefound it to consist of the same materials as those of the substance takenfrom the head of a mummy. | Other vases contained the intestines simplyenveloped with asphaltum, and in some Dr. Verneuil found cloth impregnatedwith blood and filled with cedar dust and natrum. He also found theabdominal cavity of a mummy 1| filled with the dust of sandal wood. Theembalming matter in vases for the ibis and cynocephalus consisted of thebalm of Mecca, altogether different from that employed for human mummies.Travel II. 86 f Nos. 1422 and 1423. t No. 1556. § Nos. 771, 1553.II No. 15M,M82 ON MEDICAMENTS.M. Julia Fontenelle examined the contents of one of Passalacqua's vases,*consisting of a liquid matter, and, from various experiments, concludes thatit was not a balsam, but the asphaltum or bitumen of Judaea.The next part of the process to be remarked upon is that of salting thebody, or immersing it in a solution of natrum. M. Rouelle condemns the ideaentertained by many ancient writers, that the body being first salted wasthen embalmed in such a manner that the balsamic, resinous, and bituminousmatters united with the flesh, the fat, and the different fluids, so as to formauniform mass, as is observed in mummies: the inspection alone of thedryness and aridity of a mummy he conceives is sufficient to dispel thisopinion. "Tons ces corps," says he, " sont dans un tel eat de secheresseet d'aridite qu'il est impossible de pouvoir imaginer queene si grande quantityde differences liqueurs telles que celles de certains corps, morts demaladies inflammatory, qui sont, pour ainsi dire, dissents par des pourraet des corruptions suites, puissent etre absorbed par les mattersresidences et balsamiques, qu'on sait d'ailleurs ne faire aucune union avecI'eau : ainsi cette grande quantity humidity adroit ete, par la suite, unecause de destruction du corps. Si les momies avoit ete prepares suivantcette method, on detroit en trouver qui eussent conserve quelque trace decette humidity ; mais on trouve le contraire : tons ces corps sont tres-secs,et n'ont aucune humidity"! Now it is quite clear from this statementthat all the mummies seen and experimented upon by M. Rouelle have notbeen those in which the art has been carried to its highest degree of perfection; for had he seen Dr. Granville's mummy, or Dr. Lee's mummy, orMr. Davidson's mummy, or my Grseco-Egjqjtian mummy, he would havefound that they were all so well embalmed that the whole substance of thebody and its embalming materials had so coalesced as to form one uniformmass, and of a substance so soft and ductile that it could easily be dividedby the knife ; nay, further, that by proper management, as in Dr. Granville'sspecimen, and also in mine, the embalming material could be socompletely subtracted from the body as to display clearly the original textureof which it was composed, and then to run to decay, unless placed inNo. 708. t Mem. de I'Acad, des Sciences, 1750, p. 125.rVON MEDICAMENTS. 83spirit or some other material capable of resisting the process of decomposition.Professor Blumenbach obtained from John Hawkins, Esq., F.R. S., somepieces of mummy which he had bought of a druggist at Constantinople,one of which was covered and impregnated with a saline matter. Beingdissolved in water, the solution filtered, and evaporated, a true soda, ormineral alkali (natrum), was obtained, exhibited in very neat and regularcrystals. They are figured in the Philosophical Transactions for 1794.Tab. XVI., Jig. 4.The natron, natrum, or nitrum of the ancient Egyptians was used for thepurpose of cleansing, scouring, and bleaching the stuff's and linen, and itwas also employed in the manufactory of glass. It must, therefore, have ' '^'^'^'^ been a fixed alkali, and not a neutral salt like the nitre or saltpetre ofthe present day. Common nitre we know will act as an antiseptic andpreserve the animal matter ; but it wiU do this, retaining all the animaljuices. This is certainly not the case in the mummies ; and the presence ofthese fluids would necessarily, after a certain period, tend rather to promoteputrefaction. The fixed alkali, on the contrary, dries up the fibre,and without destroying it. The length of time in which the bodies aresaid to have been immersed in a solution of natron would be sufficient toincorporate the salt with the fatty matter, and thus form a kind of soap.Dr. Ure has been so kind as to make an analysis of a quantity of thissalt, which I collected from within the body of my Greco-Egyptian Mummy,and he found it to consist of common culinary salt, chloride of sodium,mixed, as usually happens in nature, with minute portions of sulphate ofsoda and muriate of lime, and imbued with much animal matter, derivedfrom the human body. When the crystalline matter was ignited in aplatina capsule, it emitted a copious flame by the combustion of that animalimpregnation, and lost about one-sixth part of its weight. No nitre orcarbonate of soda was present ; the antiseptic function of the salts is thereforetraceable entirely to the muriate of soda.The order of the process of embalming, as detailed by Herodotus, hasbeen justly considered obscure, and every one must admit that to fil thebody with aromatic and balsamic substances, prior to placing it in the84 ON MEDICAMENTS.saline solution, would be not only unnecessarily to waste a considerablequantity of the materials of the most expensive kind used, but also, by theunion which would be produced between these and the alkaline salt, asoapy matter very soluble in its nature would be created, and thus thepresenting effect of the aromatic substances prevented. The perfumingof the body we must therefore believe to have been a process posterior, notantecedent to the salting.My friend Mr. Davidson feels satisfied in his opinion as to the natureof the saline substance employed in this part of the process, from findingthat the Bahr-bahama (waterless sea), natron lakes, and saline incrustationof soil are confined to the Lydian side of the Nile, on which side the greatnecropolis of Thebes, of Memphis, and of Abydus are situated. TheFaioom to this day, and the natron lakes to the north, he tells me, continueto furnish abundant quantities of this salt ; and, about the period of andprevious to the visit of Herodotus, persons of consequence were buried onthe borders and islands of Lake Moeris, situate in the Faioom, whereas thenitre beds, combined with the muriate of soda, said to be a recent discovery,are situated on the Asiatic side, and where very few if any sepulchralruins are to be found. Sonnini* says that it is uncommon to meetwith natron perfectly pure, that earthy matter is almost always mixed withit, and that it is not entirely a free alkali, being usually combined withmarine salt, Glauber's salt, and in a small degree vitriolic tartar. fMr. Madden I states that he found in the heart of a mummy about threedrachms of pure nitre, which must have been injected through the blood-vessels,for the heart was entire. That the substance was nitre, he says heproved by the crackling noise it made on throwing it into the fire, and bythe peculiarity of its taste.The oil of cedar, mentioned by Herodotus as injected into the body inthe second mode of embalming is also noticed by Diodoinis Siculus asemployed in anointing the body. The Liquor from the cedar has beenVol. I. p. 320.t For an account of the natron lakes the reader is referred to the Appendix, No. VII., inDenon's Voyages, by General Andreossi. J Travels II. 88.ON MEDICAMENTS. 85called cedria, and this, we learn from Pliny, was obtained by burning thewood, cut into small pieces, in a sort of kiln. The liquor is not caustic,and could not therefore produce the effect ascribed to it by Herodotus,namely, that of destroying the entrails.* Nor could it be injected in sufficientquantity /)er anum to fill the cavity of the belly. It is clear, therefore,that an incision must necessarily have been made, either through the lowerbowel or on the side of it, to permit the free injection into the body. MyGraeca-Egyptian Mummy bears evidence of violence of this kind having beencommitted. Dr. Granville's also had similar appearances. The effect ofan injection of cedria would, I conceive, serve to destroy all insects, and todry up the animal fibre, by which the most powerful agent in putrefactionwould be overcome. The cedria is, doubtless, insufficient for the destructionof the bowels, and M. Rouyer has, therefore, conjectured that injectionswere used composed of a solution of natron rendered caustic prior tothe use of the cedria. That such an injection was used my GraecaMummy serves to confirm ; for I have removed from within thebody a very considerable quantity of this salt.Herodotus makes no mention either of honey, wax, bitumen, or resin.But another authority expressly names these substances along with othersas used in embalmings, and other writers strengthen the statement made.Confidant, enim cadavera myrrh, aloe, pedro, vielle, sale, card, bitumen,et remind odorous et unguent delibuta."t Columella speaks of theproperty of honey in preserving bodies for several years. |Lucretius also refers to the preservative power of honey :Nam si in morte malum est, males mosque ferrumTractari ; non invenit qui non sit certumIgneous imposition caliphs, threescore flames ;Pliny and Dioscorides describe the cedria as being so lively that it injures living bodies,but that its quality is to presence dead bodies ; hence it has been called the death of the livingand the life of the dead. " Defunct corpora incorrupt bevis servant, licentia corrupt : miradifferentia, cumvitam aubert spirantibus, defunctisque, pro vita sit." Plain. lib. xxiv. cap. 5.t Alexander. ab Alex., Die. genial, lib. iii. cap. 2. t Lib. iii. cap. 45.86 ON MEDICAMENTS.Aut in belle situs suffocate, atque rigereFigure, ci»in in summon gelid cuba Square saxe." *Josephus records that the Jewish king Aristobulus, whom Pompey's partisansdestroyed by poison, lay buried in honey till Antony sent him tothe royal cemetery in Judsea.t The Assyrians placed the bodies of theirdead in honey to preserve them from corruption. The Romans also usedhoney for the same purpose. { Abd'Allatif relates an anecdote of a manI who had found a sealed cruise, and, having opened it, he discovered itto contain honey, which he began to eat, until one of his companions observeda hair upon his finger, when the vessel was more closely examined,and a little child, all perfect, was withdrawn from it. The body was wellpreserved, and furnished with rich jewels and ornaments.The body of Alexander the Great was rubbed with and embalmed byhoney. Thus Stations : ||Due et Aemathios manes, ubibelliger urbisCondition Hyblao perfumes nectar durst."Dr. Clarke has remarked that the like application of nectar to fluid honeywas common both in Latin and Greek. Thus Virgil's,Qualis apes estate nova per flora ruralExerted sub sole labor ; calm gentis adultsEducunt flores, aut cii licentia bellaStipend et dulce descendant Nectar cells."" Grant the corse torn by ravening fangs a curse,Is hence no ill in funeral flames to burn ;Or, pent in cold obstruction, stiffening lieImmers'd in hornets, while entomb'd in stone."t Antiquity. lib. xiv. c. 7.J Montauban Antiquity Expliquee, tom. V. part ii., pp. 185, 186. § p. 199.II Lib. iii. care. 2., v. 1 17. f ^neid. lib. i. 433.And Euripides,ON MEDICAMENTS. 87'Pfi Ce ydXaKTi, TriSof'Pel S' olvip, pel St /juXiaadvNEKTAPI, '2,vpiac S' wc Xiftdyov Ka-rrvoc.Compare also Exodus, chajj. xxxiii., ver. 1 — 3; and Numbers, chap, xiii.,ver. 26, 27.Wax is also mentioned as an article used in embalming, but I believe Dr.Granville to be the first person who has demonstrated its existence in amummy. He observed a resin-bituminous substance between some of thefolds of the peritoneum, and, upon examination, he ascertained it to consistof bitumen, with wax, in a proportion sufficient to render it plastic. Dr.Granville succeeded in separating the wax from the soft parts, leaving themuscular fibres perfectly distinct and apparent.According to the quantity of this material used in the preparation would,of course, depend the softness of the mummy, and there can be no doubtbut that the body was perfectly soft at the time of the application of thebandages, since the folds and wrinkles occasioned by the cloth is, in allwell-prepared mummies, most distinctly visible.The body of king AgesUaus was enveloped in wax and thus conveyed toLacedaemon This is confirmed by Cornelius Nepos, and also by Plutarch,who ascribe the adoption of wax to the want of honey for this purpose.Cicero reports the use of it by the Persians. | " Peruse jam cera circulatesconduct, ut quam maxim permanent diuturna corpora."Bach. V. 142. t .amplius Probus. t Tuscul. I.CHAPTER VII.ON THE BANDAGES.Bandages not applied to all mummies — quantity of bandages — the use of woollen garments forbidden— bandages generally supposed to be of cotton, not linen — coarsest applied nearest thebody — fringed bandage — various kinds — different textures — colour of the , bandages— towhat attributable — hieroglyphical characters on the bandages — in the mummy of Horseisi —in Greek mummies — application of the bandages — compresses — applied wet — leathern amuletplaced over the heart — limbs sometimes separately bandaged — condensed bandages by theapplication of bituminous matter — varieties in the mode of bandaging — in the priests are ofdifferent colours — artificial eyes in mummies — masks for the hands and feet — varnishedbandages — ancient portrait attached to a mummy in the British Museum — branch of rosemaryfound in a mummy — bulbous root at the soles of the feet.The body of the mummy being washed, according to Herodotus, after itsimmersion in the solution of natron, and thus all superfluous salt likely toattract moisture removed, the bandages are to be applied. All mummies,however, were not bandaged. Many had only the covering of a mat whichsurrounded them. Denon states that he saw bodies without bandages inthe Necropohs of Thebes, and Belzoni saw the bodies of two females lyingon the ground in a corner of a chamber in one of the tombs in the valleyof Biban el Molouk without any bandages ; they were well preserved, theirhair long, and flowing in tresses. The quantity of bandages on some mummieshave been computed to consist of not less than 1000 ells.* AbdAllatifsays that in some mummies more than 1000 yards have been used, and thatthe Bedouins were in the habit of taking it away to make vestments, or tosell for the manufacture of paper for the grocers. The bandages on Mr.Davidson's mummy weighed twenty-nine pounds and a half. The mummyGreaves' Pyramidographia, p. 69.N90 ON THE BANDAGES.of Horseisi thirty-five pounds and a half. Herodotus states that it wasprofane for the Egyptians either to be buried in woollen garments or to usethem in their temples. " Les Presses ne pouvoient porter ni des habits delaine, ni des souliers de cuir ; parceque la laine entendre la vermine, et quele cuir vient d'une bete morte"*The bandages generally employed in the enveloping of the mummieshave been supposed to be of cotton. Jomard says that in the catacombsat Philse linen was clearly to be detected ; it was of a coarse description,and he conceives answered for the poorer class of people. Rouyer alsonoticed a difference in the texture of the bandages. Jomard has gonemore particularly into the manufacture of it.fI have invariably found the coarsest kind of bandage the nearest to thebody, both in the human species and in animals. The bandages havesometimes a border of a blue colour; this was the case in Dr. Lee's mummy.Jomard has represented some portions of bandage of this kind and othersfurnished with a kind of fringe and terminating in knots. J I have alsoseen this in bandages from a mummy.Mons. Cailhaud found in his mummy a kind of cravat tied with a flatknot round the neck. He also found four Egyptian chemises withoutsleeves, three feet eight inches in length, and well made. One had beenvery neatly repaired, and they were marked in characters in ink. Bet beenthe bituminous coverings were several napkins, and in such a state ofpreservation that M. CaiUiaud had one of them washed in lye, and hestates that it underwent this process eight times before it showed any sensiblemarks of deterioration. " C'est," says he, " avec une sort de veneration,je I'avoue, que chaque jour je deployais ce linge si perishable, quicependant avait ete tissu depuis plus de dix-sept cents ans."§ On a scarfof the same mummy he also observed the two initials of the Greek name ofthe defunct, A. M., embroidered " au crochet." The mummy opened atLeeds had also a chemise without sleeves ; the aperture answering to thecollar was cut out and hemmed round. The holes for the arms were alsohemmed like the collar. Round the bottom was a fringe an inch and aMartin. Religion des Egyptians, p. 168. f See Memoir sur les Hypogees, p. 36.t Plate 48. Description de I'Egypte. § Voyage a Meroe, torn. IV. j). 11.ON THE BANDAGES 91half in breadth. Several portions had been mended. In one of the bandswas an arm-hole, the hem of which had been sewed round with remarkableneatness, proving that garments which had been worn were used by theembalmers.The bandages vary very much in length, and are sometimes even a yardor more in breadth ; they do not, however, generally exceed seven or eightinches, and many are much less. They appear to have been indiscriminatelyused. Belzoni saw bandages as fine as muslin, and of a very strongand uniform texture. I have various specimens of these kinds. Count deCaylus and M. Rouelle state that they found aU the bandages to be ofcotton or byssus, and the latter enquires whether the cotton might nothave been consecrated by religion for the service of embalming. " Le lindes Egyptians etoit-il le coton ? ou le coton etoit-il conspire par la religionpour les embaumemens ?"*Larcher is of this opinion, and conceives the custom to have originatedin the circumstance of Isis having folded up in cotton the scattered membersof Osiris, killed by Typhon (see Diodorus Siculus, lib. i. § 85).Larcher regards cotton and the byssus as the same, and he quotes thefollowing from Julius Pollux in support of his opinion: — "The byssus,"says he, " is amongst the Indians a kind of linen. In Egypt, on a certainshrub is found a species of wool, of which cloth is made, which considerablyresembles linen cloth, but that the texture is more substantial. Onthis shrub grows a fruit much like a nut ; this fruit has three divisions ;when it is ripe it separates ; they then draw from it a substance resemblingwools And Arran says,| "The Indians make use of linen garments, asSearches says ; I mean that kind of linen which is gathered from trees,and of which I have before spoken." §Mem. de I'Acad. des Sciences, pour 1750, p. 150.t Onomasticon, lib. ^•ii. cap. 17. § 75. J India, cap. x\-i. § 1.§ Dr. Ure has been so good as to make known to me that wluch I conceive to be the mostsatisfactory test of the absolute nature of flax and cotton, and in the course of hismicroscopic researches on the structure of textile fibres he has succeeded in determiningtheir distinctive characters. From a most precise and accurate examination of thesesubstances he has been able to draw the following statement : — " The filaments of flax havea glassy lustre when viewed by daylight in a good microscope, and a cylindrical form, whichis very rarely flattened. Their diameter is about the two-thousandth part of an inch. They break92 ON THE BANDAGES.Greaves says that the habits of the Egyptian priests were made of linen,*and Plutarch tells usf that the priests of Isis used linen vestments, andwere shaved. So also Suetonius, | " Sacra etiam Isidis steps linea relicveste propalam caleb rasse." The goddess Isis is called by Ovidlinigera:"^Nee tu linigeram fieri quid posset ad IsisQuEBsieris."Mr. Hamilton gives his testimony in favour of all the bandages being ofcotton. The cotton-plant was successfully cultivated by the ancient Egyptians; and Apuleius, and Pliny the elder, tel us that the habits worn bythe priests were of this substances Larcher thinks Greaves had notexamined the bandages with sufficient care. He thinks also that Herodotus,Plutarch, and others are mistaken in asserting that the habits of theEgyptian priests were of linen. If they meant linen that grows on trees,he thinks they should have mentioned it, to obviate all doubt. Accordingto Pliny garments of cotton were very agreeable to the Egyptian priests :Vestes inde sacerdotibus iEgyjiti gratissimae."^ Apuleius says the initiatedwore garments of cotton : "In ipso sedes sacred medituUio, ante deesimulacrum constitute tribunal lignum justus superstition, messina quidem,sed florida depicts veste conspicuous**M. Rouyer says that he found a great number of mummies envelopedwith bandages of linen, and that he observed this especially in the mummiestransversely with a smooth surface, like a tube of glass cut with a file. A line of light distinguishestheir axis, with a deep shading on one side only, or on both sides, according to the directionin which the incident rays fall on the filaments.Tie filaments of cotton are almost never true cylinders, but are more or less flattened andtortuous ; so that when viewed under the microscope they appear in one part like a riband fromthe one-thousandth to the twelve-hundredth part of an inch broad, and in another like asharp edge or narrow line. They have a pearly translucency in the middle space, with a darknarrow border at each side, like a hem. When broken across, the fracture is fibrous or pointed.Mummy-cloth tried by these criteria in the microscope appear to be composed both in its warpand woof-yarns of flax, and not of cotton. A great variety of the swathing fillets have beenexamined with an excellent achromatic microscope, and they have all evinced the absence ofcotton filaments."Pyramidographia, p. 68. t De Iside et Osiride. J In Othone, c. 12.4 VII. Amor. Leg. i| See Egj^ptiaca, p. 320. 5[ Hist. Nat. lib. xix cap. 1.** Metamorphic. lib. xi. hn. 9.ON THE BANDAGES. 93of birds, and particularly that of the ibis. All the cloths taken from mummies,and not imbued with resinous matter, examined by M. Rouelle, he sayshe found to be entirely of cotton. This was the case with the bandages surroundingbirds, &c., as well as the bodies of the human species. Abd'Al-latin saw many skeletons of dogs, bulls, and cats, all enveloped in bandagesof hemp (chancre) , in the cemeteries of Bousir. In the Leeds mummy theremains of a covering of very fine white linen still adhered to the outermostof the folds.The bandages are variously tinged ; those nearest to the body are theonly ones saturated with bituminous matter. Greenish thinks the bandageshave been dipped in the cedria. Abd'AUatif thinks the bandages weresoaked in aloes and gordon. Dr. Granville made some experiments onportions of the bandages of his mummy, and found that they had beensteeped in some vegetable solution, which, when treated vfith. gelatine, exhibitedthe presence of tannin in considerable quantity. From this heinfers that the Egyptians were acquainted with the antiseptic powers ofastringent and vegetable infusions. What the precise nature of this vegetablewas, whether the bark of the acacia, the bark of the oak from thecoast of Syria, or the gum hinted at by Dr. Granville, does not appear ;but certain it is that a gum similar to that known by chemists as kino, wasfound by Dr. Granville in the belly of his mummy, and exhibited by himto the Royal Society.Mr. Davidson is of opinion that the colour of the bandages is derivedfrom the gum of an acacia, which Strabo calls the thorn of the Thebais —called by the Arabs " Count," and is very common all over Egj'pt andArabia : it grows to a considerable size, and Theophrastus in his Historyof Plants states that beams twelve cubits in length w-ere cut from it ; andPliny mentions that its seeds and bark were used instead of galls fortanning hides, &c. The several uses of the tree are well expressed by thisauthor: "Spina celebrated in eadem gente, duntaxat nigra, quoniam incorruptetiam iu aquas durst, oh id utilissima avium costs. Candidafacile putrescent. Aureus spinarum et in fois semen et in sihquis, quo coriaperficiuntur galls vice. Flos et colonies secundus et medicaments utihs.Manet et gummy ex ea, &c."The coarse bandages around the mummies of the poorer class M. Jomard94 ON THE BANDAGES.found charged with natron, not bitumen. M. Rouyer says the bandageswere impregnated with resin.Sometimes the bandages are found marked with hieroglyphical charactersor alphabetical letters. M. Jomard found on a mummy at Thebes a bandagenegligently written on in hieroglyphical characters.* In the mummy ofHorseisi I met with hieroglyphical characters on various parts of thebandages no less than five times — they all gave the name and profession ofthe deceased. These interesting specimens are preserved in the Museumof the Royal College of Surgeons. M. de Maillet caused a female mummyto be opened in the convent of the Capuchins at Memphis, and the filletswere imprudently cut with scissors. The bandages were very long andbroad, and were covered with hieroglyphical figures, and also some unknowncharacters written from right to left, and forming a sort of verses. Heobserved the same termination to several succeeding lines, and he presumesthis to have been an Hope on the person embalmed. f Some portions weresent into France and afterwards engraved ; but 1 have not been able tomeet with the specimen.The names of some of the Greek mummies have been found inscribed inGreek characters on the bandages enveloping the body. These mummiesM. PassalacquaJ regard, as the bodies of Greeks who have died in Egypt at amost distant period (the time of the Pharaohs) , and he conceives that it is notat all surprising that these people should have adopted, for the preservationof the deceased, the same method of embalming as that of theEgyptians, seeing that it formed so remarkable a dogma of the religion of apeople highly respected by the Greeks, and from whom they drew theorigin of their laws and their mythology. The most ancient customs, particularlyas it regarded the funeral obsequies, were preserved in Egyjit inthe time of the Ptolemy's, as we learn from Diodorus Siculus.§Count de Caylus has given || a fac-simile of a MS. taken from a bandalettefound upon a mummy. It is in the Enchorial character, is upon linencloth, coloured apparently by asphalt, and measures twenty-one feet inlength. He also describes another from the Cabinet of St. Genevieve, twoPlate XlNm.,fig. 4. Description de I'Egypte. t Maillet, Letter VII., p. 278.X Catal. p. 185. § Lib. i.§ 36.II Recueil antiquities Egyptians V., tab. xxvi — xxix. % Ibid. I. p. 65.ON THE BANDAGES. 95feet four inches six lines in length, and six inches seven lines in breadth.The bandage was terminated by a compartment, containing, besides somewords, various figures painted in red. I recognise two of the deities ofthe Amenti among them. This bandage also covered a mummy and wasstained with a brown colour.The bandages then we have seen are principally composed of cotton,though occasionally of Unenn. They vary in texture, the coarsest being alwaysnearest to the body ; they vary also in length and breadth, and they areeither endued-with bitumen, resin, gum, or natron. They are also occasionallybordered with blue and sometimes fringed and knotted, and theyhave also been found impressed with characters both hieroglyphical andalphabetical. Our attention must next be directed to their mode of application.This part of the process is done with a neatness and precision thatastonishes all who behold it.* Every method of bandaging is, perhaps, tobe found in the Egyptian mummies, and to effect their immediate applicationto the body compresses are placed in various parts that no space or deficiencymay be left. By this means the air is effectually excluded anddecay prevented. The bandages vary very much in thickness in differentmummies ; sometimes they are found twenty or thirty times around themembers and body. Mr. Hamilton examined several mummies from the pitsopposite Philse on the eastern shore, and in some instances he counted folds of cotton cloth, resembling exactly that which is now wornat this place by the common peasants, and is manufactured in Nubia, whereit is called Zabouk ; and at Es Soudan, GibbetDr. Granville says he has seen in the bandages of his mummy thecouvrechef, the scapulars, the eighteen-tailed bandage, the T bandage, aswell as the linter scissutn and castrum. I cannot say that I have witnessedthese in any of the mummies it has been my fortune to inspect.Throughout the whole the object has appeared to me to be close andeffective binding by compresses and rollers, and all shapes and positionswere adopted to effect this purpose, and I am perfectly satisfied that thePlate VI. Jig. 2, represents a mummy in the outer bandages. This was drawn fromDr. Lee's specimen, and shows the position of the leathern finger (amulet). Fig. .3, representsthe second lap-er of bandages, and marks the precision with which the rollers were applied.t Egyptian, p. 55.96 ON THE BANDAGES.bandages were applied wet. There is, however, something like regularityin their mode of application ; thus, upon the face we generally meet withsquare portions affixed by a long and broad envelope extending over thehead, and reaching down to the feet in one continued piece. But exteriorto this is an envelope like a sheet fastened at the back, and secured byfillets, and I must here allude to a curious circumstance I met with in theunfolding of Dr. Lee's mummy. Over the heart, and beneath one of thesefillets, I found that which I conceive to be an amulet in the shape of thefinger of a glove, composed of leather stained red.* At first I thoughtsome characters had been impressed on it ; but, upon closer inspection, itwas found to be only the structure of the leather. Belzoni says theEgyptians knew how to stain leather like our Morocco, and occasionallyembossed it. I am entirely ignorant of the meaning of this leathern finger —the manner in which it was placed forbids my attributing its presence toaccident, and I am at a loss to conceive that which it might imply. I canonly regard it as an amulet, and Dr. Richardson tells me has seen them notonly of leather but also of painted cloth. In M. Passalacqua's CatalogueI observe the following notices :1589. Matters diverses. Six paires de doigts accoupl^s deux pardeux et dont I'emploi nous est inconnu. — Memphis et Thebes. — Hauteurmoyenne, quatre pouces." " Les six paires de doigts, places sous lememe 1 589, dont on ne saurait assigned Sausage, furent recoveries enpartie, dans le ventre autant de momies, et en partie sur leurs poitrines."fI have obtained drawings of these, J and I regret to say that they throw nolight upon my accidental discovery. The " six paires de doigts" are reallyso many specimens of that which is erroneously described by Hertzog asthe .ethiopia stone, used in making the ventral incision. Hook upon themas benedictions for the deceased. A leathern amulet was found upon themummy opened at Leeds. A few folds of the bandages being removedfrom the head, a singular ornament presented itself. It is evidently anamulet, and consists of three straps of red leather sewed together by a singlestitch. One of these portions was attached to the others by two leathern*SeePlate iy.,fig. 4, and Plate \l.,fig. 2. t Pp 109—210.J One is represented in Plate \V.,fig. 5.ON THE BANDAGES. 97thongs, and resembled in form the portion of leather I have mentioned, asupon the breast of Dr. Lee's mummy. Upon the crown of the head of theLeeds mummy was another piece of leather, but of a different form ; itwas probably a continuation of one of the other straps, turned over thehead, and broken off by its brittleness. Upon these portions of leatherhieroglyphics were impressed, evidently by the application of heatedmetal types.* The hieroglyphics inscribed denote the name of the monarchduring whose reign the mummy was supposed to have been embalmed.Mr. Osborn has laboured with great assiduity to make out thesecharacters, as well as those upon the sarcophagus which contained the body,and by reference to the works of Dr. Young and M. Champollion he mayfairly be said to have ascertained the subject of his investigation to havebeen a priest f of the name of Natsif-Amon, and contemporary of RamesesV., who began to reign in the year 1493, Ac., and who continuedto do so for nineteen years and six months. He was the last monarch ofthe eighteenth dynasty of the kings of Egj^pt.To return to the bandaging : — Immediately beneath the envelope longand broad bandages are found to proceed somewhat in the figure of 8 fromthe head to the feet. Of these there are several folds, and then a moreregular application of the roller is observable around the body and limbsin a spiral manner. Compresses at the sides of the body and limbs extendthe length of two feet or more, to admit of the firm and steady applicationof the rollers, which now become of a finer texture, and some of whichare continuous for four, five, or even six yards together. I have seen onepiece measuring nine yards. After these succeeds a coarser kind, and thecloth increases in looseness of texture until the bandage comes in contact withthe body. Compresses will now be found between the thighs and legs,where occasionally papyri and other substances are met with. In themummy of Horseisi, at the Royal College of Surgeons, I found the remainsof an Egyptian idol. It was in a state of decomposition, although the bodyThey are represented in Plate II. of Mr. Osbom's Account of an Egyptian mummy, &c.Leeds, 1828.t This opinion is strongly supported by the appearance of the mummy ; the head, eye-brows,and beard were closely shaved, the aims were bent across, &c.O98 ON THE BANDAGES.had undergone no change. It measured in length eight inches, and in breadththree inches. In some instances the limbs are found separately bandaged,whilst in others they are included in the general bandaging. When distinctlybound it is done with exceeding neatness, beginning with theextremity of each finger or toe, and extending upwards. Compresses areplaced in the palms of the hands and in the soles of the feet. The bandagesin contact with the body are frequently so condensed by the applicationof the bituminous matter that they cannot be separated ; this was thecase in my Greco-Egyptian mummy and in Mons. CaiUiaud's mummy ofthe same description, in both of which they were so consolidated togetherthat it was quite impossible to unravel them, and indeed a very considerabledegree of force was necessary to separate them fi'om the body. M.Cailliaud states that he was occupied during four days in endeavouring toremove them, which at last he was obliged to do with the hammer and thechisel. Mummies of different classes it would appear are differently bandaged.An able writer in the Encyclopaedia Metropolitan * is disposed to considerthat as every thing in the religion of Egypt is symbolical,! so nodoubt was the mode in which the embalmed bodies were swathed. " Thebandages of mummies," says he, " are sometimes crossed, at others laidobliquely or straight." These, and their various ornaments and appendages,he regards as symbolical of the embalmed body of Osiris, whichwas carried about by Isis;J and Damascus expressly calls these "thebandages {ntptftuXai) of Osiris."Upon removing a few of the folds from the breast of the mummy examinedat Leeds, a wreath or fillet was discovered, exactly resembling informthe collars which are constantly represented round the necks ofEgyptian figures. It consisted of two garlands ; the upper one was composedof nine strings, each of which was double. A row of red berriesstrung upon a straw or stalk was connected, at, intervals of eight berries,with another string, by little loops of the same material, and to this stringwere sewed the petals of the lotus. Each petal had been neatly folded,Art. Mummy. f Peyron, Papyri Egypt, p. 82. J Plutarch, de Iside et Osiride.§ Phot. Biblioth. Cod. cc.\.lii.ON THE BANDAGES. 99and being bent over the string was completely secured in its place by twovery thin stalks, which passed on each side of it, and crossed each otherlike wicker-work. The strings were plaited together at the ends. Thelower garland consisted also of nine strings, with petals of the lotus, andwere likewise plaited ; but on the two higher ones (or those which werenext the throat, when it was worn round the neck) there was a small compoundglobular flower enclosed within each petal, and standing just aboveit. The execution of these intricate pieces of flower-work is described asbeing very neat and accurate. Upon examination Mr. Osborn found thatthe garland painted on the case was composed of strings and berries, andflowers arranged in exactly the same manner as that which was around theneck.*Some of the mummies Belzoni observed to have garlands of flowers andleaves of the Acacia-tree over their heads and breasts. This tree iscommon on the banks of the Nile above Thebes, and particularly in Nubia.The flower is of a yellow colour, and so hard m substance that it appearsartificial ; the leaves are strong, and though turned brown by being driedstill retain their firmness. fThe mummies of priests (respecting which, and those of kings, neitherHerodotus nor Diodorus Scales furnish us with any particulars) Belzoniconceives to be folded in a manner altogether different from that appropriatedto other classes. Greater respect appears to have been paid tothese personages, and the bandaging to have been performed with morecare and attention. The bandages, according to Belzoni, | are strips ofred and flute linen intermixed, covering the whole body, and forming acurious effect from the two colours. The arms and legs are not enclosedin the same envelope with the body, but are bandaged separately, even thefingers and toes being preserved distinct. Sandals of painted leather areapplied to the feet, and bracelets are fixed on the arms and wrists. Thearms are always found folded across the breast. The body is enveloped inavast quantity of linen, but the shape of the figure is most carefully preserved.The cases containing these choice specimens of mummy are alsoof much superior execution to the ordinary ones. Belzoni saw one withAccount of an Egyptian mummy, &c. p. 3. t Travels, p. 170. + P. 170.100 ON THE BANDAGES.the eyes and eye-brows of enamel, beautifully executed in imitation ofnature. Mr. Madden was fortunate enough to procure the head of amummy * in which enamelled glass eyes were substituted ; but he has notgiven us any description of the mummy. He states the eye-balls to be invariablywanting. I have in my own possession three specimens whichcontradict this statement, and I know of several other instances. Themummy at the Royal College of Surgeons had artificial eyes ; the scleroticcoat or white of the eye was represented by pieces of ivory, and the transparentcornea and dark part of the eye by portions of a black composition.The application of the bandages had disturbed the position of these, so thatone eye is placed two-thirds of an inch lower than the other, giving by nomeans a prepossessing appearance to the mummy.In addition to the bandages thus enumerated, M. Jomard tells usf thatsome mummies are furnished with masks for the hands and feet, as well asthe face, and that these coverings have imprinted in relief the several fingers,toes, and even the nails. It would appear that they had been formedin a wooden mould.In examining one of the cases transmitted to the British Museum severalyears since by Mr. Salt, I found in a highly-ornamented sarcophagus,covered with mythological emblems and hieroglyphical characters, themummy of a male, in which the bandages presented an appearance quitenew to me, and of which I can find no notice, nor have I yet met with anytraveller who has witnessed the same circumstance. The mummy appearedto have been bandaged with great precision and neatness, and overthe whole surface a coat of varnish of a dark leaden colour had been thicklyspread. It is in amazingly fine preservation, very few, and those exceedinglysmall portions, being detached, and it gives to the body the appearanceof a uniform coat of mail.In another case sent to the British Museum by Mr. Salt, I found a portraitof exceeding interest placed upon the bandages, and secured at theedges by the outer envelope. This painting is upon a thin plate of cedarwood,and presents probably the earliest portrait known. The trustees of• Travels II. 90. t P. 34.ON THE BANDAGES. 101the Museum have permitted me to have a copy of this interesting figure(see Plate VII.) , and it will .be clear that this must be a portrait of thedeceased, for there is no mythological emblem whatever attached to it.The colours appear to have been fixed by a strong gluten, and the mode ofreflecting light and marking shade exhibits more of the management ofmodern art than could have been expected. I presume the portrait to bethat of a youth. Mr. Sans has a portion of a similar portrait, which in thestyle, management of colour, &c., bears a strong resemblance to that in theMuseum.After the first or outer series of bandages, it is not at all uncommon tomeet with various idols, papyri, &c., which will be noticed hereafter. Ishall only stop here to introduce the accounts of two substances, one ofwhich was found in the chest of a mummy, the other in the bandages onthe sole of the foot. The former instance is recorded by Prosper Alpinus.It shows the perfection of the art of embalming by the Egyptians, and howgreat a length of time putrefaction or decay may be resisted by artificialmeans. In the breast of a mummy was found, according to this author,some branches of rosemary, so well preserved that they appeared as thoughthey had been but just gathered and dried. These are the words of ProsperAlpinus : " Nos intra quondam medicated cadaver ingenious scarabaeusmagnum ex lapide marmoreo efformatum, quod intra pectus cum lebanoncoronary ramis coUigatum, surat reposited. Incredible dicte, ra-morumdoris marine, qui una cum idol invent furent, folia usque adeoviridis et recent visa furent, ut ea die a planta decerpti et positi apparelM. Rouelle, quoting this passage, suggests that the embalmer, inplacing this plant in the mummy, might have had a mind to leave to posteritya proof of the excellence of his art. The other instance I have tonotice is recorded by Dr. Hadley in the Philosophical Transactions for1764.In Dr. Grew's catalogue of the rarities belonging to the Royal Society,the first article mentioned is an Egyptian mummy, presented by HenryDuke of Norfolk. This mummy had been greatly injured, and the body'' Hist. .egypt. Natural, pars. I., lib. i. cap. 7.102 ON THE BANDAGES.was in a very indifferent state. The feet had been broken off the legs, butthey constituted the most interesting part of the whole. On cutting into thebandages of the sole of the left foot, they were found to enclose a bulbous root.The appearance of this was very fresh, and part of the thin shining skincame off with a flake of the di'y brittle filleting with which it had beenbound down ; it seemed to have been in contact with the flesh : the base ofshe root lay towards the heel.* "The fillets were removed from this foot withgreat care ; they were much impregnated with pitch, excepting about thetoes, where the several folds united into one mass, being cut through,yielded to the knife like a very tough wax. The toes being carefully laidbare, the nails were found perfect upon them aU, some of them retaining areddish hue, as if they had been painted ; the skin also, and even the finespiral lines on it, were still very visible on the under part of the great toe,and of the three next adjoining toes. Where the skin of the toes wasdestroyed there appeared a pitchy mass, resembling' in form the fleshysubstance, though somewhat shrunk from its original bulk. The naturalform of the flesh was preserved also on the under part of the foot near thebases of the toes. On the back of the toes appeared several of theextensor tendons. The root just mentioned was bound to the foot by thefilleting that invested the metatarsal bones ; no more of this filleting wascut away than was just sufficient to show, without removing it from itsplace, a substance which had been preserved in so extraordinary a manner.The right foot had also had a bulbous root placed under the sole, for theimpression made by it was apparent, and some of the external shining skinstill remained. It is not a little singular that the feet were the only portionsof this mummy in any thing like a state of nature ; all other parts were lostin a mass of pitch.P. 8. and Tab. I.CHAPTER VIII.ON THE EGYPTIAN IDOLS, AMULETS, ORNAMENTS, &c.Hertzog's mummy — number of ornaments contained in it — description of them — necklaces —alass — manufactory of by the Egyptians — gold ornaments — shells — silver — precious stonesvarnished clay — ear-rings — rings — bracelets — metallic mirror — quantity of gold and silverin Egypt — alabaster vases, SjC. — Body of a soldier — poignard — hatchet — triangular stoneon the breast — ivoj-y bracelet— enamelled divinities and amulets — more fi ecjuent at Memphisand Hermopolis than at Thebes — scarabcei in various substances with and without hieroglyphics— breast-plates — singular mummy-case seen by Belzoni — the Amenti — statue ofwood lying over the heart of a mummy — no money under ths Pharaohs — medals found atMemphis and Lower Egypt struck under the Greeks, Romans, and Arabs— first currentcoin of Egypt struck by Grandes — no model found older than the reign of Alexander —brass coin of Ptolemy found in a mummy — leaden seals taken from a Greek mummy —emblems of different trades, Sc, found in the tombs — objects of the toilet and jewels —various utensils.Before I proceed to treat of the cases in which the mummies are contained,I must draw the attention of the reader to the idols, amulets, &c., that havebeen found within the mummies themselves, or among the bandages withwhich they are surrounded. These ornaments are of various kinds, andare found chiefly between the first and second layers of bandages. Thehieroglyphical and alphabetical characters impressed on the bandages, aswell as the name of the embalmed, in the Greek mummies, have alreadybeen considered.Christopher Hertzog, apothecary to the Duke of Saxe-gotha, openeda mummy in 1715, and published an account of the same under the title ofBiographia." The head of this mummy was wanting ; but the bodycontained probably more ornaments of its kind than any other on record."Tous les ongles des doigts des mains et des pieds cores, les bras entortilles104 EGYPTIAN IDOLS, AMULETS, &c.de plusieurs jjetils rubans large et straits, cores par-ci par-la, et sans lesbras, nous eames le plaisir de voir soissante et quatorze figures differencesdebase, d'agathe, et autres pierres rares et curieuses, qui representingtoutes quelque chose parti culture, comme on le voit dans la planche quenous avons," &c.* The stones were either lapis lazuli, agate, or jasper, andsome of them were gilt. The following were the most important : L.f Isis.A. Horus. J. Hippocrates. L. A. Apis. L. Scarabaeus. A. Frog. L. A.Diameters. L. J. A. Emblems of the Nile. A. Sceptre. A. Altar. A.Pyramid. A. Cross mounted on a heart. This mummy also contained theEthiopia stone in the form of two fingers. |Necklaces are found upon males as well as females. M. Passalacquamet with one at Thebes of large pearls in enamelled glass from which ascarabaeus in serpentine, with a human head and hands, was suspended. Ateach angle of this beetle there was the head of a hawk, and on the reversesix lines of hieroglyphics engraved on it. Another male had a necklace infine stones and gold, and a scarabseus in jasper, also engraved with hieroglyphics.Mr. Sans showed me a necklace entirely of gold, and of mostexcellent workmanship. He could not tell whether it belonged to a maleor a female mummy, but most probably the latter.On the mummies of children necklaces of natural shells, or shells figuredin gold, silver, precious stones, &c., are found. They are, according toPassalacqua, chiefly met with on young girls. ||M. Passalacqua has given the description of a very fine female mummyEssai de Mumio-graphie, 12mo, Goths, 1718, p. .55.+ The letters refer to the nature of the substances in which they are found.I Plate IV. fg. 5.§ In the manufacturing of glass the Egyptians excelled all other nations. This we have uponthe authority of Strabo (Geography. Ub. xvi), and it is supposed to have arisen from that countryaffording a superior kali, derived from the ashes of the Mesembryanthemiim Capsicum, whichsubstance was necessary to render the material beautiful. ■ The breast of Dr. Perry's mummywas ornamented with a net-work of beads formed of earth, and covered with vitrified matter,several of which are in my possession, as well as a necklace composed of the same material.In the Museum of the London University there is a very fine specimen of mummy, the wholefront of the body of which is covered with beads and bugles of this description.II See Nos. 581, 585, 588, 596, of his Catalogue.EGYPTIAN IDOLS, AMULETS, &c. 105he met with covered with ornaments of considerable value. The hair of thedeceased was very tastefully plaited and ornamented with twenty spangles.Three necklaces, composed of representations of the divinities, amulets, &c.,in lapis lazuli, coral, and other precious stones, and in gold in the form ofrosettes, &c., displaying great taste and symmetry. Fine ear-rings of 2;old,a ring (scarabaeus set in gold) for the forefinger of the left hand. An elegantgirdle around the body in gold, lapis lazuh, and coral similar to thenecklace, and a bracelet in fine pearls, precious stones, and gold on the leftwrist. With the exception of the two latter articles (which were stolenfrom the possessor at Thebes) the ornaments detailed are in the collectionof M. Passalacqua at Berlin. Under the head of this mummy was a metallicmirror, and near to it a chest in enamel, which contained a necklacecurious in its construction, being composed of extremely small rings ofivory, with pearls in gold, lapis lazuli, and coral ;* a square cistern in" The descriptions of golden ornaments and jewelled dresses might he considered over-rated,if ancient testimonies did not exist to evidence that Mizraim (Eg}-j)t), under the Pharaohs,abounded in precious metals and jewels. Of the immense quantity of gold which the Egyptianspossessed, and their elegant manufacture of it, we possess abundant testimony. Diodorus,describing a budding he calls the tomb of Osymandyas, informs us that the exact sum of the " s-i.c'S.?^, .?,gold and silver dug from the mines of the Thebais, as inscribed on the walls, amounted to3,000,000,000 of mince, or £96,000,000 of our money. Another instance is the stupendouscircle of wrought gold, 365 cubits in circumference, which surrounded this tomb. FromMoses may be adduced the golden chain which Pharaoh placed around the neck of Joseph, andthe exceeding riches in gold and silver" which Abraham carried out of Egypt : the multitudeof gold and silver vases, bracelets, and other golden articles offered to Moses by the Israelitesfor the temple, were doubtless carried out of Egypt. Her treasures were so great that theywere made the subject of a prophet's promise to Nebuchadnezzar, as a reward to his wholearmy for their incredible sufferings at the siege of Tyre. Much therefore of the Babyloniantreasures were derived from this source ; yet in a very few years afterwards Cambyses foundEgypt again so opulent as to be almost incredible. From the mere cinders of the burning ofThebes he had raked forth 300 talents of gold and 2300 talents of silver ; and at Memphis hefound such an immense treasure in bullion and ornamental vases, and statues of gold and silver,as perhaps no palace ever before contained. We read of a golden vine in Persia, on whosebranches hung clusters of emeralds and rubies ; but this was after the conquest of Egypt andof Babylon. Under the Polemics the same profusion of wealth may be found ; and the veracityof Theseus can scarcely induce the mind to accredit the particulars he narrates of a religiousprocession from his own ocular observation : it distances all the details of Peru, and surpassesPlOG EGYPTIAN IDOLS, AMULETS, &c.wood, supposed to be for washing the face ; three small alabaster vases,one containing a liquid balm or perfume, a second some paint to tinge theeyebrows, with a bundle of cloth made like a brush to apply it : the thirdhad also held perfume, but it was exhausted.Mons. Becker of Leipsic has given an account* of two mummies, maleand female, which were brought from Egypt by the traveller Pietro dellaVale. They are Graeca-Egyptian, and one was distinguished by a Greekinscription. Their antiquity cannot be dated further back than the time ofthe Polemics. They are in a high state of preservation ; but the bodieshave not been unrolled, on account of the beauty of the paintings on theircoverings. These have, however, been pierced ; and it is said that the bandagesare more coarse exteriorly than interiorly, and from the perforationsmade down to the bones, the flesh appears to have been entirely destroyedby the process of embalming adopted. The male mummy measures fivefeet three inches (French) in length ; the female three inches and a half less.The outer covering of the male is of a fine byssus covered with a masticvarnish sufficient to receive and to fix the painting. It abounds with gildingand other ornaments. The Egyptian symbols are few in number. Thecolours of the paintings are yellow, green, red, brown, and black. All thefigures are in relief. M. Becker does not recollect to have met with sucha kind of relief on any coverings of mummies before. The gold has beenlaid on upon a red ground covering the mastic varnish, fM. Passalacqua mentions the remains of apparently a soldier he foundnear to, but not within, the Necropohs of Thebes, and which he supposes,from its peculiar situation, to have been one to whom the rites of sepulchrehad been denied. It was lying under five or six feet of ruins of stones. Thethe wildest tales of the East. That military personages also wore and used such splendid appendagesis e^^de^ced by the accounts of Holofernes the Assyrian general, in the apocryphalbook of Judith, whose reduction of Egypt, Lydia, CDicia, Syria, and all Asia Minor, with theterror he impressed on these nations, prove him to have been no contemptible warrior ; yet wefind that the canopy of his bed was woven with purple and gold, and emeralds and preciousstones, and silver lamps were carried before him." — Note to Rameses, vol. I. p. 323.Augusteum, ou Description des Monument Antiques qui se trouvent a Dresden, fol. Leipzig.1804.t For a particular account of the paintings I must refer the reader to the " Augusteum."EGYPTIAN IDOLS, AMULETS, &c. 107means for providing honourable burial would appear not to have been wanting.The mummy was singularly rich in its ornaments ; for there was a poignarddescribed by M. Passalacqua as one of the richest ever found in the ruinsof Eg3'pt. This instrument was almost hidden in its scabbard, placed betweenhis thighs, the point inclined towards his knees. There was also ahatchet and a pointed stone of a triangular form placed on the breast, and alarge ivory bracelet on the left wrist. It is not a little singular that abovethe envelopes and within the coffin was a small vase containing a mineralmatter with which, at the present day, the Coptic ladies paint their eyebrows.The case was covered with fine paintings.The enamelled divinities and other amulets have holes pierced in them,and have been arranged as a necklace or collar round the necks of mummies.They are more frequently met with at Memphis and Hermopolisthan at Thebes. The art of varnishing and baking the varnish was in greatperfection among the Egyptians.Scarabcei are found in basalt, in verde antics, in ivory, in bitumen, inserpentine, in steatite, in olive, brown, and in green jasper, in slate, in talc,in rock crystal, in amethyst, in silex, in glass, in baked clay, &c. Thosewith hieroglyphics are scarce. *It is said that the Egyptians hung scarabsei round their necks when goingto battle. They are sometimes found as a ring on the finger of mummies, orare placed within the left hand closed. Mr. Greaves had a specimen cutout of a magnet in the form and of the size of a scarabseus. It is remarkablethat, notwithstanding its exceeding antiquity, it still possessed itsanti-action and magnetical virtue. The great scarabsei with hieroglyphics arealmost always placed on the chest of mummies and on the flesh itself, asin Mr. Davidson's specimen. Sometimes they are found under the eyelids.The scarabsei without hieroglyphics are found within the bodies of mummies.M. Henry has suggested f that the scarabtei with hieroglyphics beingalways placed without the body, and those without hieroglyphics within theMr. Rogers is in possession of the largest and finest scaraba^i with hieroglyphics I haveseen. He also possesses a very fine coral necklace, and other beautiful and curious ornaments,taken from mummies.t Lettre k Champollion, p. 189.108 EGYPTIAN IDOLS, AMULETS, &c.body, the former may be regarded as amulets recommending the deceasedto the protection of some divinities, whilst the others were placedsimply as amulets within the body, to sanctify the balm contained withinfor the preservation of the body. The scarabaeus upon the body of Horseswas however without any apparent characters.According to Belzoni tablets in the form of an Egyptian temple are sometimesthough rarely met with suspended on the breasts of mummies. Thesehe supposed to be the breast-plates of the kings ; but the inscription on the oneobtained by this distinguished traveller from an Arab who was said to havediscovered it in one of the tombs of the kings in Biban el Molouk, andwhich is now in the possession of Samuel Rogers, Esq., by whose permissionI am enabled to give a representation of it, would not warrant theinference thus drawn. This tablet measures four inches in length and threeinches in breadth, and is of black basalt. A scarabseus in alto relievo is inthe centre of a boat, at the extremity of which are represented the goddessesIsis and Nephthys. See Plate VIII. /^. 1. On the reverse, Jig. 2, is thehieroglyphical inscription, arranged so as to correspond with the shape ofthe scarabaeus, and, at the extremities of the boat, figures of the goddessIsis. Mr. Rogers is also the fortunate possessor of another tablet of asimilar nature to the one just mentioned. It was obtained at Rome, whitherit had been brought from Egypt by Mr. Basseggio, and was said by him tohave been found in a sepulchre at or near Thebes. He brought, togetherwith this interesting tablet (which I have had figured in Plate VIII. Jig. 3),a colossal head of Nephthys in red granite, of most beautiful execution, anda lion in calcareous stone, which were also found in the Thebaid, andwhich are both in the possession of Mr. Rogers. There is a tablet similarto that represented in Plate VIII., Jig. 1 and 2, in the British Museum,which is likewise of black basalt. It is rather smaller than Mr. Rogers'sspecimen, but of the same shape. In the centre is the representation of thescarabseus (or rather the copris), the goddess Isis on one side and Nephthyson the other. On the reverse are hieroglyphics corresponding to the reverseof the beetle, and also running along the top and sides.* These are funeralMr. Sans's collection contains three specimens of a similar nature to these, but differingentirely in the material of which they are composed. The largest, which measures four inchesEGYPTIAN IDOLS, AMULETS, &c. 109tablets from the breasts of mummies, and are not the breast-plates of kings,as supposed by Belzoni. Mr. Wilkinson has kindly shown me a drawingof a tablet of this description (Plate VIII. fig. 4); it is not funereal. Theemblem was suspended from the neck of king Osirei in Belzoni's tomb. Thegod Amunra (generator) wears a similar ornamental emblem at Karnak.In one of the tombs discovered by M. Belzoni, he saw a case over whichwas thrown a large covering, exactly like a pall upon the coffins of the presentday. The cloth on the mummy contained in this case was exceedinglyfine and very neatly applied. The mummy was ornamented with garlands offlowers and leaves, and over the heart was placed a plate of metal, soft likelead, covered with another metal, not unlike silver leaf. It had the eyes ofa cow (the symbol of Isis) engraved on it, and in the centre of the breastwas another plate with the winged globe. Both plates were nearly sixinches long. Little besides the bones were to be found of the mummy.*The four genii of the Amenti,t and other amulets and ornaments in waxgilt, are, according to M. Passalacqua, only found in Greek mummies.They are placed upon the chest and above the last envelope. The deitiesof the Amenti, together with the eye of Osiris, | have been found in theby three and three quarters, represents Osiris seated, and receiving an offering and libation froma female figure standing before the deity. On the back-ground are the four deities of theAmenti, and the hieroglyphics by which they are distinguished. On the reverse of this funeraltablet is the Agathodemon, forming the upper part of the temple, and in the centre is seen aboat bearing (a scarab£eus),§ and a deity on each side of it. The emblems of these deities(Isis and Nephthys, I presume) are not sufficiently distinct to be made out perfectly to one'ssatisfaction.The second tablet in Mr. Sans's collection measures three inches and a half square, and is ofvitrified earth. One side only is characterized by hieroglyphics, and represents the reverse of ascarabseus in a boat with a deity on either side. They are not sufficiently distinct to be madeout. Of the third tablet two fragments only remain. These consist of a talcose rock,and the figures are coloured blue, green, red, and white. The remains of an Agathodemon,a figure of Isis, and a figure of Pthah Sokari Osiris, are to be seen. A line of hieroglyphicsruns along the top of this tablet. The whole has been vitrified.Belzoni's Travels, p. 223. f See Plate III. fig. 1. 2, 3, 4. J Plate yill.fig. 5.§ There can be no doubt that this was the subject represented, although it has laden out.The whole tablet is composed of several portions, some of which are wanting. The substanceof the tablet is serpentine rock.110 EGYPTIAN IDOLS, AMULETS, &c.bellies of mummies. The deities of Amenti with legs conjoined and separate,the latter rare.The divinities are generally placed above or near to the mummies ;* therepresentations of men and women within the cases, and sometimes overthe heart of mummies outside the envelopes. The amulets of divinities instone, as well as enamelled earth, are found in the cases; the larger specimenson the ground in the tombs or in niches. The bronze statues ofdivinities! are more frequently met with at Karnak than any other place ;they are very rare at Thebes, but are found at Memphis and HermopoUs.Amulets in gold and silver around the neck are always strung and incontact with the flesh. Gold is more commonly met with than silver. Asmall statue in wood was found by M. Passalacqua lying over the heart ofa male mummy. J I have in the preceding chapter mentioned the findingof a bulbous root under the soles of the feet of a mummy. Dr. Gov. Bapt.Bonagente, a Venetian doctor, says he hath seen mummies often with anonion in their hands. This kind of onion, he says, is different from theordinary sort and hath little tastesM. Passalacqua never found any money in mummies or in their tombs.The commerce of ancient Egypt was conducted by exchange : we are ignorantof money under the Pharaohs. The greatest commercial transactionswere paid for in rings of pure gold of a certain weight and size, or in rings ofsilver, having a name and weight equally fixed. ||The medals that have been found in small vases at Memphis and LowerEgypt have been struck under the Greeks, Romans, and Arabs. The firstcurrent coin of Egypt was stick by Grandes, under the dominion of theBelzoni had some wooden cases from twelve to fifteen inches square, finely painted, andwell preserved. They contained idols in wood (some of which he was so kind as to present tome),and were found by him in the mummy-pits at Gournou, near the mummies' cases. At alate sale of Egyptian antiquities by Messrs. Southey and son there were cases of a similardescription, containing a great number of figures in baked and varnished clay, &c.t See Plate VIII. fig. 6, a representation of Osiris in my possession.{ Catal. No. 123.§ Observations made by Mr. Greaves in his Travels, extracted from his MSS. in the CivilianLibrary at Oxford.II Champollion Lettres, p. 444.EGYPTIAN IDOLS, AMULETS, &c. 1 1 1Persians ; and Sterling observes that they never had any great quantity ofspecie in circulation. M. De Pauw affirms * that what had been issued wasentirely drawn back by the annual tributes ; for the Arabs who searchamong the ruins of Egj'pt, and even sift much of the loose sand, havenever discovered one single piece. None of the medals found there areolder than the reign of Alexander. They either belonged to the Polemicsor to the Egyptian towns which were allowed the privilege of having theirown coin under the dominion of the Greeks : these were Pelusium, Memphis,Abydus, Thebes, Hermopolis, and the great city of Hercules. f I amenabled, through the kindness of Mr. Abraham Kirkmann, of Lincoln's-inn,to figure a brass coin of Ptolemy which he purchased at the sale of M.Belzoni, and obtained by him from the wrappers of a mummy, the remainsof which are visible, on Jig. 1, 2, Plate XI. Some years since Mr. Kirkmannpurchased another (also of one of the Polemics) of a dealer in Hamburgh,said to have been found under similar circumstances, and which he thinkshe afterwards gave to Archdeacon Payne, j Mr. Biu-gon has also enabled me torepresent in Plate XI., /jr. 3, some leaden medals taken from a Greek mummy.To perpetuate the memory of the deceased we find in the tombs theemblems of the profession or trade of the defunct. Thus we have pick-axesand various instruments for agricultural and mechanical purposes, the netof the fisherman, the razor and stone to sharpen it of a barber, cuppingglasses, vases of perfumes, pottery and wooden vessels of all kinds, basketsof fruits, seeds, &c. Loaves of bread near to the mummy of a baker,paints and brushes along-side of an artist, various instruments of surgery bythe body of a physician, a bow and arrow by the side of a hunter, a lanceby the soldier, a hatchet and a poignard by another, and the style and thereceptacle for ink by the clerk. The distaff has been found in the cases ofmale mummies, which woidd appear to confirm the statement of Herodotus1271.f Vaillant, Hist. Ptolemy. ad Fidem Niimismatum accommodate, 104.X Of the situation in which the coins were placed I know nothing ; but common reportassigns them either to the mouth, under the tongue, or beneath the clun.§ On pieces of potter' and calcareous stone, fragments in the Enchorial, Greek, and Copticcharacters are very often found. I have, by the kindness of Mr. Wilkinson, several specimensof these.112 EGYPTIAN IDOLS, AMULETS, &c.that the men were employed in the manufacture of the cloth, whilst thefemales were engaged in commerce. Combs, paints, mirrors, and otherarticles of the toilet, have been found with the mummies of females. In abox of wood placed in the neighbourhood of a mummy, almost entirelydecayed, M. Passalacqua found nine instruments in silex, which he conceivedto be knives for making the incision in the flanks of the dead. Ihave figured three of these in Plate lY. Jig. G, 7, 8.The following list, although doubtless very imperfect, will yet enable thereader to form an idea of the extent of objects that have been found in thetombs : —OBJECTS OF THE TOILET AND JEWELS.Spangles, copper gilt.Combs in ivory and in wood.Necklace of glass of different colours.Necklace of enamel of different colours.Necklace of cornelian.Necklace in form of shells.Necklace of lapis lazuli.Necklace of cornelian and gold.Necklace of ivory.Necklace of gold.Necklace of lapis lazuli, cornelian, and ivory.Necklace of gold, lapis lazuli, cornelian, and ivory, representing differentdivinities and sacred animals. (Thebes.)Ear-rings in gold, in i-ed and white enamel, in alabaster, in bronze, incrystal, and in coloured glass.Bracelets in gold, in ivory, in iron, and in bronze.Rings of gold, in cornelian, in bronze, in irori, in ivory, and in enamelledearth.Various engraved stones, onyxes, amethysts, &c.Pin for the head, ivory and wood.Mirror of bronze.Tweezers and scissors in bronze.EGYPTIAN IDOLS, AMULETS, §-c. 113Vestments, tunics, sandals of wood and skin, and leaves of palm andpainted cloth. Slices of similar materials.Box containing blaclv paint for the eyebrows, and brush for using thesame.VASES, SEALS, &C.Vases in black basalt, in bronze, in alabaster,* in serpentine, in glazedearth, in terra cotta, in slate, in wood, and in calcareous stone.Seals in terra cotta, in bronze, and in glazed earth.Ball of skins Mr. Sans has one composed of different colours likethose now used as playthings by children.Males in wood, nails in bronze, ladle in wood, little mortar in agate,moulds in calcareous stone for casting the figures of birds, &c. Key inbronze, pillow for the head in wood, cistern in wood. Knives in silex andin wood. Spatula, spoons, medicine-chests, baskets, stools, wooden bow,arrows of reed pointed with wood, hatchet in bronze, a musical reed or pipe,bells, sistrum, &c., &c., &c.P. S. Since the preceding chapter was composed, I have seen two morefuneral tablets taken from the breasts of mummies. They belong to Mr.Bm-gon, to whom I am indebted for the leaden seals figured in Plate XI.fig. 3. 1 The largest tablet measures six inches by four inches and a half,and is composed of earthenware varnished and baked. The shape is, likeaU the others, that of an Egyptian temple. There is a space in the centrewhich I presume to have been supplied by a scarabseus that is now want-thealabaster vases are most frequently found at Eleithia, those of terra cotta at Memphisand Saccara. Tliese are the vases for the purposes of civil life.t M. Passalacqua found a ball of this description in the case of a mummy of a little child.There were also different kinds of fruit.X Mr. B. has kindly favoured me with the following note on the subject of these impressions."The outward covering of the mummy was sealed with wax in several places, but theimpressions were effaced. There were also appended at about equal distances down the backof the mummy, several leaden seals on twisted string, of which nine remained. They were allimpressed with the same representation of a naked bearded bust in profile, apparently a portrait,with the inscription KonPHC The bust slightly resembles that of the emperor Hadrianas it sometimes occurs on his coins'' Mr. B. thinks he could assign more accurately a laterperiod to the seals.Q114 EGYPTIAN IDOLS, AMULETS, (!j-c.ing ; this would have occupied the centre of a boat, at the extremities ofwhich are figures of Isis and Nephthys with their appropriate emblems, andtheir arms are extended towards the beetle. The boat is floating uponwater represented green. At each of the upper corners are representationsof the sacred eye of Osiris. On the reverse, painted in black, are theemblem of stability and a figure denoting the soul of the deceased. Thistablet is of a white colour ; the faces, arms, hands, and feet of the deitiesare painted red, the eyes of Osiris and other ornaments green.The second tablet is similar to one of Mr. Sans's, but in better condition.It is of vitrified earth, of a bright green colour. There is a scarabaeusin black in very high relief placed in the centre of a boat, on one sideof which is Isis and on the other Nephthys. The reverse presents thereverse of the scarabaeus covered with hieroglyphics, and on each side afigure representing, I presume, the soul of the deceased. These are ofrude execution, and are merely marked, not engraved, on the tablet. Theshape is like that of the other specimens of this kind I have described, andmeasures four inches and a half by three inches and a half. There cannot,I conceive, be any doubt as to these tablets being funeral emblems, andnot the breast-plates of kings, as conjectured by Belzoni.CHAPTER IX.ON THE CASES AND SARCOPHAGI.Mummy cases become rare — various kinds — est, or linen cloth case — paintings and inscriptionsupon them — splendour of the colours — subjects of the representations — description ofthe case of M. Cailliaud's Grteco-Egi/ptian mummy — cousins of sycamore in human shape —description of the subject of a Papyrus MS. belonging to the Earl of Mountnorris — 2nd,or sycamore case — sometimes painted — occasionally made of cedar, an emblem of eternity —history of Dr. Perry's mummy — sycamore-tree — description of it— stone sarcophagi — tohold the bodies of kings — tombs of black marble — sarcophagi oj' stone — marble — granite —pietro dura — Egyptian breccia — green basalt — Mr. Sams''s marble sarcophagus with gilthieroglyphics — the tomb of Alexander — the lover's fountain — alabaster sarcophagus foundliy Belzoni.The mummies being properly prepared and bandaged are ready to beplaced in their cases or sarcophagi. The accounts given to us by travellers,however, teach us that all the bodies made into mummies were not enclosedin cases, but that some, after having been soaked in the natrum solution,were swathed in a bandage and then deposited in the tomb — so imperfect arethe greater number of these that only the mere bones are to be met with,scarcely held together by the rotten condition of the cloths enveloping them.Mummies in perfect cases are now rarely found, the remains of them aloneare to be met with. It is only the rich who could have been so deposited, andaccording to the rank and importance of the deceased was the number ofcases, sometimes two, three, or even four, in which the body was deposited.The Arabs have destroyed all of this description they could meet with, insearch of the treasures supposed to be contained within them.The cases are of different kinds and shapes. The first is generally composedof folds of linen cemented together; the others of sycamore, cedar,deal, or still more durable materials.116 CASES AND SARCOPHAGI.The first cases are made of many layers of cloth cemented together, andplastered with hie on the inside. They are as firm as a board, and requireto be sawed through in order to get at the body. The cloths have been supposedto be dipped in sound, or gum of the acacia, and so pressed togetherthat twenty folds would not yield a thickness beyond that of the third of aninch : their hardness and durability may be easily estimated by theirdensity. The shape of the case corresponds to that of the human body withoutthe arms or legs being rendered apparent.* On the head is represented aface, either male or female, and the whole figure terminates in a kind ofpedestal, in shape somewhat resembling the feet when closed together.This case is always painted, and the subjects are deserving of particularnotice. But before I proceed to these I would observe that the features ofthe face, either male or female, are depicted often in gold and colours. Thecountenance seems principally to have been formed upon a model and usedfor various individuals, rather than affording a resemblance of the deceased.They, however, do vary, but not in my opinion sufficiently so to mark themas being portraits of the deceased.! The case I am describing is called bythe French the " Parsonage," from the resemblance of its composition topasteboard. It must have been placed on the body whilst soft, and isfound to be laced up the back and along the bottom of the feet, by which afoot-board is secured. This part frequently contains the representation ofsome figure. In Mr. Saunders's mummy I found a very spirited delineationof Apis. Great care seems to have been taken that the body should not inany way be disturbed ; for, in order to render it steady, small portions ofwood and of cork have been found passing from the case to the side of thebody to fix it, as well as the plaster with which the inside of the case wasliberally smeared, and which generally, upon removal, is found to fall out inlargedried portions.Some of these cases are very handsome, I may fairly say splendid. Thecolours with which they are decorated have retained their liveliness andbeauty in a most surprising manner. The green is the only colour thatThis inner case, together with the manner in which it is secured, is well represented in afront and back view in Plate IX. It contained Dr Lee's mummy.t For masks of mummies, see vol. V. Description de I'Egypte. J Plate IX., Jig. 2.CASES AND SARCOPHAGI. 117appears to have faded ; it is sometimes confounded with the blue ; theblue is metallic, the yellow vegetable ; the nature of the white, which ismost durable, has not been discovered ; the red is very brilliant. Red,blue, yellow, green, white, and black, are the colours to be found both onthe cases and on the walls of the tombs;* the drawings are in profile, theEgyptians being ignorant of perspective ; their reliefs are, notwithstanding,full of vigour, life, and expression. An opinion has commonly prevailedthat the subject of the representation upon the cases is a history of the Useof the person embalmed within. Sufficient is known of the hieroglyphicsnot only to question this opinion, but to establish its inaccuracy. They arevery similar in most cases, and usually commence with the same symbols.Mr. Davidson considers them as no more than a collection of homagesoffered by the deceased to Osiris, the deceased sometimes taking to himselfthe name of the god. There can be no doubt, I think, that an attentiveexamination of the characters and subjects will satisfactorily convince anyonethat the subject bears relation to the trial which the soul was to undergo,and the deities through whose intervention, or by whose intercession, it wasto pass through the different stages of its progress towards another state ofexistence. This is well illustrated by a reference to the description of theinner case (a painting on cloth) of the Graeca-Egyptian mummy broughtfrom Egj-pt by Mons. Cailliaud.f It is as follows : —At the upper part of the case is a sacred boats on which is the scarabseusor beetle, a symbol of Phtha, Tho, or There, father of the gods, upon thedisk of the sun, to which the head of the deceased is consecrated ; and thedisk is encircled by a serpent, the emblem of Eternity, two deities withoutany characters attached to them being seated on each side of it. Near thefeet is the same S}Tnbol of Phtha, their guardian ; and beneath it are the[emblems of Anubis, the keeper of the guardians, two jackals with the keyAt Kalabschi M. Champollion observed for the first time a violet colour employed in thebas-reliefs painted in the tombs. This colour, he says, formed a mordant, and was appliedon those parts-which were intended to be gilt. — Lettres (Egypt, &c., p. 158.t Voyage a Meroe, Paris, 1827. Tom. IV., Svo., p. 45, et seq.X Bari (divine barge) guided by a steersman (npuptvg) called by the Egyptians, in their ownlanguage, Charon. See also Plate III.118 CASES AND SARCOPHAGI.,of Hades hanging from their necks. On each side of the lid the lowerregion is typified by a bunch of lotus flowers. Osiris Petempamentes,*i. e. the Western or Infernal, the true Egyptian Serapis, is seated on histhrone, beside his wife and sister Isis. An altar covered with flowers,loaves, fruits, and liquids is before them ; and Anubis, whose tiara markshis rank in the upper regions, presents the deceased as a suppliant beforethe judge of the Amenti (the West, i. e. the Infernal Regions). This is to1 represent the trial of his corporeal offences, as he appears here in his bodily,form : the trial of his mental transgressions is represented on the otherside, where Osiris, in the character of Phtha-Sacri or Socharis, indicatedby a hawk's head, surmounted by the inner part of the tiara and twocoloured plumes, is sitting as judge, and before the altar stands the soulof the deceased in the form of a hawk with human hands and head, onI which the funereal cone and lotus are seen. The soul, thus symbolized, ispleading its cause, aided by Sie (Truth and Justice), represented by afemale figure of a green colour, with a plume (the symbol of Sie) in theplace of a head. The seven gates, guarded by seven genii, having a hawk's,baboon's, man's, jackal's, crocodile's, lion's, and vulture's head, are theShe Heth, or seven gates mentioned in the ritual (the funeral papyrus).These mystic dwellings were situated in the fields of Oen-ro, before thepalace of Osiris. The guards are twenty-one in number ;f and one ofthem is the god Atmil, with the title of Hfe, i. e. the serpent, and the formof a winged dragon with human arms and legs. Inside of this case, nearthe head, is the hawk with expanded wings sailing through the starry sky,and bearing a red disk, i. e. Pure, the sun, symbolical of the spiritwhich gives life and action to the universe. Over the feet is the goddessHathor (Venus), in the form of a yellow cow, couchant on an altar; inan act of adoration before her is a bird with a human head crowned by a" Petempamentes (UeTSfiwaftciTqc, Lctronne, Recherches, p. 345) is the Dionysius orbacchus of the Greeks, and in Coptic P-ete-m-p-amente, signifies " he who belongs to theAmenti," " he who presides over Amenti." This is a very sufficient evidence that the Copticwas the vernacular language of Eg3-pt, 150 years before the commencement of our era'' —Enci/c. Met.t But this lid represented only eighteen.CASES AND SARCOPHAGI. 119disk, i. e. one of the purified spirits united with the sun, whose leader isHarris (Arteries), "the beneficent eye of the sun." This figure is probablymeant to represent the soul of Ammonius (the name, as translated byChampollion, of the mummy enclosed in the case now being described)raised to that exalted rank in the course of its transmigrations. On thebottom of this case is Netphe, distinguished by the vase [i. e. the letter N)on her head, seated with her daughter Isis, and Hathor, in the Glebakh(Persia), pouring out streams of nourishment for the blessed. At her feetare the guardian jackals, emblems of Anubis. On the right side of thesame coffin, the disk of the sun, in the centre of which is Ammon. Cnuphis(the intellectual sun), borne on a sacred bari, di-awn by four jackals, andadored by four baboons fcynocephalij , the former referring to the solstices,the latter to the equinoxes. On the left side, the bari, accompanied asbefore, bears an image of the sun and moon united. The interior of thiscase has also astronomical symbols. In the centre is the goddess Tpe orTithe (the heaven personified) extending her arms and legs as if to occupyall space. Over her head rays of light issue from the sun placed in thesign of Capricorn, to indicate (January) the month in which Ammonius wasborn.* The serpent-headed beetles near the brow of Tithe are still uninterpreted,but probably conceal some astrological mystery. Twenty-fourfemale figures, twelve on the right and twelve on the left, each having asolar disk on her head, represent the twenty-four hours of the astronomicday ; eight are painted yellow, eight green, and eight red, the meaning ofwhich is not yet known. f On the wrapper round the body of Ammonius" Pet-amen-oph, or Petemenon (Ammonius), was born 12 Tibi (12 Jan), Ad. 95, in thefifteenth year of Domitian, not in the fifth of Hadrian as M. Champollion (CaiUiaud IV. 51)says. It may also be remarked that this zodiac is evidently astrological, as are all othershitherto discovered in Egypt, which all belong to the Roman period: astrology, as Letronne hasjustly observed {Ecclaircissements, p. 98), was*.a Chaldean science, scarcely known among theGreeks before the beginning of our era, never much in vogue among them, but eagerly cultivatedby the Romans so soon as they had any intercourse with the East." — Encycl. Detroit" If the Egyptians subdivided their months into halves, these figures might represent theyear, and then this triple division would indicate the three seasons ; the green the first, redthe second, and yellow the third, marked by a garden, a house, and water, in the hieroglyphiccharacter. On other monuments the hours of night are represented as following a crocodile,the symbol of Darkness and the West (Horapollo, I. p. 70, 89)."— E/JCj/c/. Metrop.120 CASES AND SARCOPHAGI.the central figure is that of Osiris-Socharis, with his complexion, as usual,green; and near his head the bm-is or sacred boats of the sun and moon,symbolized by a right and a left eye. The god is adored by two images ofthe deceased, in the form of mummies only half-bandaged up. On theright and left are all the deities who take a part in the final judgment. Onthe right Osiris-Serapis and his wife Isis; on the left Anubis, crowned nththe tiara, presents the deceased to the god. Further towards the right,Thoth is recording the sentence on his tablets, and, on the left, appears theEgyptian Cerberus, a compound of a crocodile, lion, and hippopotamus, theguardian of the palace of Osiris. Near him the four sons of Osiris, hisassessors in Amenti, Amset, Hai, Sumautf, and Keb'h Snip, having blue,green, or yellow fillets in their hands, as if ready to bandage up the bodiesof the deceased, whose intestines were considered as peculiarly their property.*In this mummy was also found a MS. on papyrus, of which Ihave given an account in the chapter on papyri, drawn from the observationsof Mons. Champollion.The most commonly-represented figures on the inner mummy cases arethe four genii of the Amenti, the human, the dog-faced baboon, the jackal,and the hawk-headed ; this is their constant order, but when they are placed,vis-davis then the cynocephalus faces the human, and the hawk the jackal,as seen in Plate IX.There are instances in which mummies have been placed in sycamorecoffins or cases, without being previously enclosed in the description of casejust described. These have generally been furnished with paintings on theface, chest, and body, accompanied sometimes by hieroglyphical charactersand other writing. This was the case in the mummies belonging to Dr.Perry, Dr. Mead, and Captain Lethieullier.Captain Lethieullier's mummy resembled that of Dr. Perry. It wasenclosed in a case of sycamore, highly ornamented with hieroglyphicalcharacters and emblems of the divinities. Upon this, which contained amale mummy, there was a representation of the embalming which is not anThis account of the hieroglyphics upon the case of the mummy of Petemenoph has beendrawn up by M. Champollion le jeune, and appended to the Voyage k Meroe, by M. Cailliaud.The mummy and cases are represented in the folio plates attached to that interesting andvaluable work.CASES AND SARCOPHAGI. 121infrequent subject upon the inner cases. The body is stretched out upona bier or table formed of the body of a lion, the limbs of which answer tothe legs of the table. The embalmer holds a cup in one hand, and appearsto be in the act of making the incision into the flank with the other. He isusually represented with the head of a jackal, and painted black. On this casethere is also a representation of the judgment, similar to that so well depictedfi-om a papyrus belonging to the Earl of Mountnorris, and publishedin the collection of hieroglyphics arranged by the late learned Dr. Youngfor the Egyptian Society (Plate V.) In this representation Osiris is seenseated, armed with his crook and flagellum. Before him is a kind of mace,around which is the skin of a leopard. On the left is a female Cerberus,and over her are resemblances of the four deities of the Amenti, having theirproper denominations placed over them. Thoth, or Mercury, with thehead of an ibis, holds in one hand a roll or tablet, and in the other astyle, with which he has apparently commenced writing the judgment. Uponthe balance behind him is seated a cynocephalus, probably in allusion tothe nome* (Hermopolis) to which the deceased belonged, and under thebeam, as representative of the good and evil genii of the deceased, areCherishes and Hyperion, adjusting the balance by which the merits anddemerits of the deceased are to be weighed. In one scale is placed afeather, the figure of Truth and Justice, and in the other a vase, supposed tocontain and to represent the just actions of the deceased. The deceased isrepresented as standing with his left arm raised in token of respect betweenRhea, the wife of the sun, who holds the sceptre of Isis, and another goddess,who holds up her right arm in token of respect, whose hieroglyphical nameDr. Young conceives to be a personification of honors and glory, and, perhaps,intended simply to signify " a divine goddess." Some of the tabletsof this description are furnished with the judges, but they do not appearin this instance.But it must not be disguised that a different interpretation may be put upon this appearanceof the cynocephalus. This animal is the symbol of the Egyptian Anubis, and may intimatewatchfulness, or more probably be typical of time, which Anubis also represents, metingout the award upon its good or evil application in the life of the individual whose actions arethus weighing in the scales before the throne of the judge.R122 CASES AND SARCOPHAGI.Some mummies have only a large envelope with a square piece coveringthe head, which is sometimes painted and gilt, and has been supposed torepresent the person embalmed.The second case is usually found of sycamore. In the instances inwhich the painting has been depicted upon cloth placed immediately uponand not enclosing a mummy, the sycamore case or coffin is generally he^Tiout of a solid trunk as in Dr. Perry's, Dr. Mead's, and Captain Lethieul-lier's mummies. When, however, the sycamore case encloses a paintedone it is composed of several pieces glued together, and fastened as thesingle-think ones are with wooden pegs fitting into correspondingcavities, and thus closing the whole in the most perfect manner Wherethe coffin has been scooped out of one trunk, the surface is found to befurnished with a kind of varnished plaster, upon which the representationsof the divinities and the delineation of the hieroglyphical characters areaffixed. In Dr. Perry's mummy the colour of this plaster is very darkbrown, approaching to black, and the figures are all in yellow. In CaptainLethieuUier's the ground is white and the characters are of various colours.Plate VI. Jig. 4 is a reduced representation of the loculus serapis or coffinfrom Dr. Perry's work ; it has been carefully compared with the original.The upper part of course presents the head, which, from the coiffure, oneeasily sees is intended for a female. Dr. Perry has made out (apparently tohis own satisfaction) the history of the embalmed person who, from therichness of the ornaments, he infers must have been " an Ethiopianprincess, or at least a person of very illustrious rank and condition"* Hegoes on to remark that in very early times a strict amity and commercesubsisted between the Egyptians and Ethiopians, and therefore presumesthat she had come down to Egypt on a visit to some of her friends, andthat, happening to die there, her remains were conserved in this pompousmanner, either by order of her relations, or else by the care and affection ofher friends whom she came to see. But to proceed with the case : Immediatelybelow the neck is the ephod or breast-plate. This consists of tensemicircular compartments : the major part of these are merely ornamental ;but the seventh, ninth, and tenth, are undoubtedly symbolical. In the first ofPerry's View of the Levant, p. 472.CASES AND SARCOPHAGI. 123these is a string of the flowers of the lotus ;* in the second of the leaves ofthe persea,t and in the third of pendants or precious stones. Above theephod, on each side, is represented the head of a hawk, supporting a fierj'^-coloured globe, which symbolizes Osiris, or the sun. Beneath the breastplateis the goddess Isis in a kneeling posture, with her wings and armsexpanded. Her head is bound with a vitta or riband. She supports aglobe upon her head, and in each hand there is a knife for sacrifice. Oneach side there are four figures ; on the right side there are human representations,but the fourth is a human body with a jackal's head upon itsshoulders. On the left are the cynocephalus, the hawk, a human head, anda jackal, the four Amenti, all holding bandages in their hands. All the frontpart of the coffin, below the figure of Isis, and all the back part below theshoulders, are adorned with various hieroglyphical characters. The otherkind of cases have usually the face carved out, and sometimes arowofhiero-glyjihics down the centre ; occasionally they are found without any. | It isnot unusual to find a figure painted in the inside of this case upon thebottom partsThe third case I have observed to be more generally covered withhieroglyphics both inside and out, and Mr. Sans has an exceedingly finespecimen of this kind. This case is generally composed of sycamore. ||Nelumbium specious. Vide Lancet Rescript. de CEgyple. Antiq. I. p. 25.t The persia was in a particular manner consecrated to the goddess Isis, because its fruitresembles a heart, and its leaves a tongue plutarch de hide et Osiride). The lebakh, supposedto be the persia, is very common ia Upper Nubia. Mons. Cailliaud (tom. III., p. 288)thinks that the tree consecrated to Isis wasn't the persia, but the baobab {Adansonia diyitata).% Plate X.Jig. 1. This formed the outer case of Dr. Lee's mummy.§ Plate X.Jig. 2. The female figure thus represented is Netphe.II An attentive examination of these cases has led me to suspect that those of sycamoreconsist chiefly of such as are scooped out into the human form, as in Dr. Perry's specimen, andthat those in which carpentry has been employed to affix many pieces together are composedof a wood of a much harder nature. It is probably the cordia myra of Linn., the cordiaSebestena of Formal, and the Sebestena domestica of Prosper Alpinus. It is figured in theDescription de I'Egypte (Plate XIX. Jig. 1 and 2), and described by M. Delle hist. Nat.tom. II., p. 191). It is a tree growing to the height of thirty feet; its trunk is straight, cylindrical,and about a foot in thickness ; the branches extend from ten to twelve feet. The woodis white and very solid. It is common in Egypt.124 CASES AND SARCOPHAGI.Some, however, of the second and third cases are found to be of cedar.I have seen two instances of this sort. The outer case is generally paintedyellow, the figures and hieroglyphics being blue, green, red, and black : thelatter is seldom used. The whole is varnished. Cedar is, according toPiers, an hieroglyphic of Eternity : it is esteemed the least corruptible ofwoods. The temple of Solomon, and the temple of Diana at Ephesus, Averseboth constructed of it. The sycamore tree (Ficus fata) is described byNorton* as being of the height of a beech, and bearing its fruit in a mannerquite different from other trees. The fruit, which is a kind of fig, shootsout from the trunk itself, suspended by little sprigs in the form of grape-stalks:they lie in clusters almost like bunches of grapes. The tree is alwaysgreen, and bears fruit several times a year, without regard to certain seasons.The fruit has the smell of real figs ; but is inferior to them in taste, beingof a disgustful sweetness. The colour of the fruit is a yellow, inclining toan ochre, shadowed by a flesh colour. Internally it resembles the commonfigs, except that it has a blackish colouring, with yellow spots. The treeis very common in Egypt,! and the people, for the greater part, live uponthe fruit. They think themselves well regaled when they have a piece ofbread, a couple of sycamore figs, and a pitcher filled with water from theNile.In the structure of the massy sycamore sarcophagi the ancient Egyptiansappear to have been as anxious to afford protection and security to thepreserved remains as by the processes adopted in embalming they hadsucceeded in making them durable. The bodies of their kings were in anespecial manner protected ; for not only were they enclosed in linen and inwooden cases, but these were deposited in sarcophagi of a more durablematerial, as is evidenced by the specimens preserved in the collection ofantiquities at the British Museum. The sarcophagi were also deposited intombs constructed of various substances, and remain until this day, defying,as it were, the power of time. Diodorus Siculiis speaks { of their magnificenceand of their wonderful sepulchres : their houses they called inns, andVol. I. p. 50. Plate XXXVIII.f Sycamore wood appears the most plentiful in the country, for not only most of the casesbut various utensils are made of it.X Lib. i.CASES AND SARCOPHAGI. 125bestowed little attention upon them, but the tombs they denominated EternalDwellings — Eternal Habitations. Strabo is not less laudatory in hisdescription of the tumuli, near Syene, in the upper parts of Egypt.* Thetombs were constructed of hard black marble, rendered very smooth and ofa spherical figure: one was not less than twelve feet in diameter, and thewhole of them not less than half that size. They were arranged on bothsides of an even plain of considerable extent on the road from Syene toPhilse. Sarcophagi of stone, marble, and granite are mentioned by Abc'Alsatia : Dr. Richardson and Mr. Wilkinson assure me that they have alsoseen sarcophagi of limestone and slate, the latter of a small size. It is notaUttle singular that the term sarcophagus should have been adopted for thosereceptacles chosen for the preservation of the dead, as it is derived from theGreek Sapco^ayoc flesh-eater) , denoting a quality direct opposed to conservation.!The stone sarcophagi, which may fairly be called tombs, haveusually other cases within them: They are sculptured out of one piece, andsometimes represent either a male or a female figure. Occasionally, likethe sycamore cases, they are fashioned into the human shape ; this was thecase with one in pietro dura, discovered in the Nile at Boulac by Mons.Mongrel He says it was in the form of a mummy. Mr. Sans has one ofa similar shape in white marble, upon which there are hieroglyphics gilt.All others that I have seen have been rounded at the head and square at thefeet, and the image has been sculptured on the cover. I must refer thereader to two very fine specimens in red granite now lying in the court-yardLib. xvii.t The stones used by the ancients for tombs were supposed to have the power of consumingthe flesh. The lapis cassius was much used by the Greeks for this purpose, and it was saidto be able to destroy a body (except the teeth) in forty days. All the ancient naturalistsspeak of it, and describe it as a reddish pumice-stone, having a saltish taste. The quarrieswhence it was obtained were at a place near the city of Troas, named Assume. Theophrastusspeaks not only of its power of consuming the flesh placed within it, but also of a singularquality it possessed of turning into stone any thing that was put into it. This effect has beenexplained on the very reasonable supposition that a kind of incrustation might be producedfrom the water permeating the stone, and carrying along with it particles of its spar to bedeposited upon the substances enclosed.J See Description de rEg)'pte, vol. V., Antiq.§ The quarries of Philae, Elephantine, and Syene, have been remarkable for the beautiful126 CASES AND SARCOPHAGI.of the British Museum. These have no hieroglyphics within. The bodiescontained within these massy blocks are supposed with great justice to havebeen those of the kings of Egyj^t. They are of course very rare.Mr. Hamilton states* that in the royal tombs where no sarcophagus isfound there is always a large granite lid, placed over a hole or grave, cutin the rock, of from six to thirty feet deep. All the lids he found to havebeen removed or broken. The largest sarcophagus he saw measured elevenfeet seven inches in length, six feet ten inches in breadth, two feet twoinches thick, eight feet two inches in height, and the lid one foot sixinches.The British Museum contains two of the most magnificent specimens ofsarcophagi in the world. Upon one of these a very learned and a veryelaborate dissertation has been written by the traveller, the late Dr. Clarke,to prove that it was the tomb of Alexander, f removed from the mosque ofSt. Athanasius. The other was taken by the French from Cairo toAlexandria, whence it was brought to this country. It has been describedby various travellers]: and was called the " Lover's Fountain." Theseprecious monuments, which I presume to be familiar to all my readers, arerounded at the head and square at the feet, and are decorated within andwithout with numerous hieroglyphical characters. The material of whichthey are composed is a breccia,^ and formed out of a single block of thisoriental or rose-coloured granite. The chief part of it consists of felspar, varying in colourfrom a pale pink to that of a brick red ; portions of mica and translucent quartz give it a shiningappearance. Pliny calls it the Thebaic stone, from its frequent occurrence at that place, thoughthere are no quarries of it in that neighbourhood. The hardness of this stone is very great ;and in a climate like that of Egypt, where the air is of an almost uniform dryness, and no rain,its surface would suffer but little change from exposure during many ages.Egyptian, p. 155.t That the body of Alexander may have been laid in this sarcophagus is exceedingly probable; but that it was made expressly for him the knowledge now possessed of the hieroglyphicsmost satisfactorily disproves. Mr. Wilkinson has pointed out to me the repeated occurrenceof the name of Amyrteus upon the sarcophagus. He reigned from about 414 to 408B, C; whereas Alexander conquered Egypt 332, and died 323 years B. C, which so far, in myopinion, settles this part of the enquiry. J Pococke, Maillet, Niebuhr, and Browne.§ See a particular account of this substance by Professor Hailstone in the Appendix toDr. Clarke's Dissertation.CASES AND SARCOPHAGI. 127material. Lids of the same substance were doubtless applied to them asthe grooves for their reception are apparent.Alexander was worshipped as an Egj'ptian god ; a superstitious venerationwas paid to his tomb, and his image was worn as an amulet. Augustusdid homage to his tomb, and had afterwards on his signet ring an engravedhead of Alexander. This occurred three centuries after the death of Alexander,and thirty years before Christ. We have the authority of Dio Cassiusthat the Roman emperor saw and touched the body of the hero : " He sawthe body of Alexander and touched it, so that a part of the nose, as theyrelate, was broken off"* And Suetonius adds that when the body wasTaken from the sarcophagus Augustus placed a golden crovvn upon it, andscattered flowers over it. A superstitious notion prevailed that whatsoevercountry possessed his body it should flourish most. Perdiccas would havesent it to the sepulchres of the Macedonian kings. Ptolemy arrested it inits passage to the Oasis, and conveyed it to Alexandria, the city of which hewas the founder. f His tomb must be described in the words of Dr. Clarke :This surprising sarcophagus is one entire block of green Egyptian breccia.There is not perhaps in the world another of such magnitude. We are notacquainted with the name which the ancients gave to this beautiful productionof the Egyptian quarries : when their historians mention, that, fromone entire emerald, columns and statues were constructed of a size that contradictsall our knowledge of the mineral kingdom, the stone thus named*Lib. K. c. 16.t Dr. Clarke's Dissertation, p. 45. Dr. Clarke quotes from Rebellious Folio regarding thesuperstition of the Marian family. " Tliey had Alexander's portrait, as a talisman, in theirears, 'upon their hands, upon their clothes, and upon every article of external ornament,whether of their persons or their palaces. ' The men,' says he, speaking of that family,had Alexander the Great, the Macedonian, wrought in gold and in sever ; the women innet work, on their bracelets, their rings, and in all kinds of ornaments ; so that the garments,embroidery, and matron vests of the family exhibit at this day the image of Alexander, viithvarious elegancies. We have lately beheld Cornelius Macer, a member of the same family whogave a supper in the temple of Hercules, present to the high priest an electrical pater, in themiddle of which was Alexander's portrait, encircled by a representation of his whole historyin minute figures, which he ordered to be carried round to all those who were his warmestvotaries. I have mentioned this because they are said to be benefited in all their actions zerowear the portrait of Alexander expressed in gold or stiver." Dissert, p. 13.128 CASES AND SARCOPHAGI.has been sometimes supposed the green fluor. But none of the varieties ofthis substance are found in Eg}T)t; and from the nature of their formation,as stalactites, they are not likely to appear any where in very large masses.From a frequent view of the materials used by ancient artists, and particularlythose of Egjqjt, the country to which reference has been made for thesepretended emeralds, I am disposed to believe it was the green breccia. 'Hieancients used this substance only in their most sacred and sumptuous works ;and the remains of it are extremely rare. In the whole city of Constantinople,adorned as it was by the munificence of its emperors, only twocolumns are found of this stone. They support a part of the seraglio, facingthe sea, among several other columns of the beautiful green marble of Laconia,called by the Italians verde antics. I do not recollect it among theruins of Greece, nor in any collection of the antiquities of Rome, either inthat city or any other part of Europe. We have thus a proof that the stoneused in this sarcophagus was of a rarity and price equal to that of the mostprecious materials of ancient art. The expense of working it could beundertaken only by sovereigns, who might procure, among the renownedartists of those times, talents and perseverance adequate to the achievementof such a surprising work. In these days, the substance itself, and the processby which it was wrought, being unknown, a notion of supernaturalagency is excited in unenlightened minds ; while the refined part of mankindexpress their astonishment. If at any period in the history ofthe ancient world a work of this nature particularly corresponded with thegenius of the age, and the wishes of the people, it must have been at thatimportant crisis when the body of the deified Alexander was receivedBY Ptolemy to be enshrined as the son of Ammon by the priests ofEgypt. That the construction of the tomb would demand every thing admirablein materials and in workmanship cannot be disputed; but uponthis subject we have sufficient proof from the testimony of ancient historians.Diodorus, whose description of the funeral pomp seems to conveyan adequate idea of the magnificence with which it was celebrated, representsit in magnitude and workmanship worthy the greatness and glory ofAlexander"*Dissert, p. 41.ON THE SARCOPHAGI. 129M. Champollion examined a third necropolis at Sais which had containedthe remains of a person of quality, a keeper of the temples under Psamme-titus II. In it there was a large sarcophagus of green basalt. Exteriorlyand interiorly it was covered with fine sculpture in has relief, and it isaltogether described as an exquisite specimen. It is deposited in theEgyptian Museum of the Louvre.*The most beautiful sarcophagus yet discovered is that in the possessionof Sir John Sane. It was taken by M. Belzoni out of one of the chambersof the tombs (or rather gates) of the kings in the valley known by the nameof " Biban el Molouk." The chambers in these tombs were very numerous,and extended to 309 feet, the whole extent of which had been cut out of theliving rock. The walls or sides were as white as snow, and covered withpaintings, all beautifully h'esh,f fresco, and abounding with hieroglyphics-thesarcophagus was within the innermost chamber, and measured ninefeet five inches in length, by three feet nine inches in width. It is two feetone inch in height, and carved both inside and outside with hieroglyphicsin intagho, 'coloured dark blue, which are in great preservation. It is ofalabaster or arragonite, very transparent, and sounds like a bell. It wasplaced over a staircase communicating with a subterraneous passage,leading downwards 300 feet. The tomb M. Belzoni conceived had beendedicated to Apis, as the remains of the carcase of a buU embalmed withasphaltum were found in the innermost chamber. I have some portions ofthe tomb, which correspond with this account : the hieroglyphics being inhigh relief. The walls of the tomb, I lament to say, have been literallyknocked to pieces.Lettres secretes d'Egypte et de Nubie en 1828 et 1829, par M. Champollion le Jeune, 8vo.Paris, 1833. pp.51 and 400.t Mr. Salt says that the tints of the paintings were so resplendent that it was found scarcelypossible to imitate them with the best water-colours made in England, and that they have beenexecuted on a principle and scale of colour that would make them retain their lustre even bythe side of a Venetian picture. — Quart. Rev., No. 37.CHAPTER X.ON THE PAPYRI Manuscripts.Papyri MSS. — erroneous opinion as to the nature of their contents — Cyprus papyrus — itshistory— mode of manufacturing it into paper — different kinds — situations in which thepapyri are found — Egyptian literature — rosetta stone — labours of De Sacy — Akerblad —Youn<r—his method of investigation— Champollion — his phonetic alphabet based upon theresearches of Br. Young — labours of Salt — Wilkinson — Burton — passage from St. Clementof Alexandria— Warburton — description of the characters— hieroglyphic— hieratic— enchorialReuvens' account of tzco bilingual MSS. — Champollion' s account of the great] funeralritual— Greco-Egyptian MSS. at Leyden— papyrus of M. Saltier of Aix—Mr. Grey'sGreek autograph — papyri at Turin.The Papyri constitute not the least interesting objects that have beenfound enclosed in mummies, or within cases placed near to them ; and theresearches of Dr. Young, M. Champollion, Signor Rosellini, Mr. Wilkinson,Mr. Burton, and a few others have rendered these documents of singularimportance as it respects Egyptian history and antiquities. Mr.Madden has stated that all the papyri hitherto discovered have containednothing of the religion or sciences of the Egyptians, that law processes,accounts, narratives of funerals, and title deeds have generally been thesubjects of these MSS. This, however, is far from being the case, as areference to the labours of those whose names I have just mentioned willsatisfactorily demonstrate. But, further, M. Reuvens has shown* that oftwo lingual papjTi which he minutely examined the one treats of magicaloperations, and contains upwards of 100 chemical and alchemicalfortune, and the other relates to some of the mysteries of the ancientEgyptians. I allude here to the opinion expressed by Mr. Madden, be-lettresa M. Letronne sur les Papyrus bilingues et Grecs, &c., 4to. Leide, 1830.132 PAPYRI MANUSCRIPTS.cause it does not rest upon his authority alone, for he expressly states*that he had seen for the last two years every papyrus that had been foundin Eg}^3t, and had the advantage of Mr. Salt's interpretation of them, andthat none of them contained any thing relating to the religion and sciencesof the Egyptians. Captain Caviglia, with whom Mr. Madden lived forsome months at Mr. Salt's, is stated also to be strongly of this opinion.I have, therefore, thought it proper thus particularly to notice this assertion,which I believe to have been made upon imperfect information.Previously to entering into any description or consideration of the papyri,it will be proper to say a few words on the substance of which they arecomposed, and the characters with which they are found to have beenimpressed.The papyrus plant, the cyprus papyrus, according to Champolhon,! hasceased to grow in Egypt. The ancient Arabs called it herd ; it grew principallyin marshy places, and its culture was a source of riches for the inhabitantsof the borders of the ancient lakes of Bourbon, and of Menzalehor Terms. The baroness Minutely says that it is to be met with in theenvirons of Damietta and on the banks of the lake Menzaleh. It is, however,exceedingly scarce. M. Savary states || that it is only to be met withabout Damietta and the lake Menzaleh, and observes that all the travellerswho have not visited this part of Egypt make no mention of the plant.This author quotes from Strabo who calls it bibles, and says that it isindigenous to Lower Egypt ; he describes it very clearly, and alludes to arestriction of its growth to particular places. It grows abundantly in Syracuseand Captain Smyth has figured it, and described it with greatTravels I. 361. t Lettres, p. 444. J Recollections of Egypt, p. 194. || Lettres!. 286.§ Strabo, speaking of the environs of Alexandria, says, " Hoc in loco bibles non multa nash: non enim excolitur. In infeiioribus vero ipsius Delta partibus permulta est, alia interior,alia melior : Heretics appellate. Nonnulli ut reditus augment, Judaiacam versutiamhue adliibucrunt, quam Oli in palma caryotica, atque balsam excogitaverant : non enim permittingmulti in lochs nasci : quo fit ut raritati pretium opponents, rectum quidem agent,communi vero usus damnum adherent." Lib. xvii., p. 1134. Ed. Falconer. fol. Oxon. 1807.5[ Specimens of paper are made at this day at Syracuse from the papyrus plant, and sold totravellers. The sheets do not extend beyond eight or nine inches in length, and five inches inPAPYRI MANUSCRIPTS. 133precision.* It floats as it grows ; the principal root runs horizontally nearthe surface of the water, and throws out long filaments, which descend perpendicularlydownwards, whilst numerous triangular green stems shoot upwardseight or ten feet, and bear on the crown a fibrous tuft of fine filaments,which, near their extremities, are again subdivided into others,bearing small seedy flowerets. This plant is supposed to have been sentfrom Egypt by Ptolemy Philadelphus as a present to Hero. Paper is supposedto have been made of the yellow pellicle that surrounds the stem nearshe root ; but Captain Smyth was more successful, by following the directionsof PUny, with the cellular substance of the whole stem cut thin, theslices laid over each other transversely at right angles, and well pressed.The ancients extracted sugar from this plant, and made cordage and canvasof its fibres. It served as a medicine for the sicken as an article offood, I and also for fuel.§ The monopoly of this useful plant by the governmentof Egypt, alluded to by Strabo, probably occasioned its scarcity.M. de Sacyll quoting from an Arabic writer, whose MS. is in the ImperialLibrary, states that the Egyptians wrote on the paper of Egypt, and that itwas made from a reed called berth. Joseph is said to have been the firstfabricated of this paper. The Greeks wrote upon silk, parchment, andMother substances, and also on the paper of Egypt.Pliny gives ^ a very ful description of the mode of preparing the paperfrom the papyrus plant. He says. The stem of the plant is divided with akind of needle into thin plates or slender pellicle, each of them as large asthe plant will admit. Tliese form the elements of which the sheets of paperare composed. The pellicle in the centre are the best, and they diminishin value as they depart from it. As they were separated from the reed,they were extended on a table and laid across each other at right angles.In this state they were moistened by the water of the Nile, and while wetwere put under a press, and afterwards exposed to the rays of the sun.breadth. The texture appears to be less unison, and of a coarser description than thatmanufactured by the ancients.Travels in Sicily, p. 175. f Dioscoridss, liberi. cap. 116.I Guilandin (Welch.) in C. Plain., 8vo. Lausanne, 1576.§ Theophrastus, Hist. Plant. IV. 9. || Notes to Abd'AUatif, p. 109.% Lib. xiii. cap. 1 1 .134 PAPYRI MANUSCRIPTS.The water of the Nile was said to have a gummy quality sufficient to makethe layers of the plant adhere to each other ; but Mr. Bruce has shown thatthe plant itself is adequate to this from the quantity of saccharine matter itcontains, and that the water of the Nile does not in any degree possessthis property. Sometimes however, perhaps when the plant did not containa sufficient portion of sugar, a kind of paste made of wheat flour wasused for this purpose. The size of the paper seldom exceeded two feet, and itwas frequently much less. Mr. Nice made paper of the plant which he sawgrowing in Egypt and Abyssinia. The plant must formerly have been veryabundant, for Cassiodorus* speaks of it as forming a forest on the banks of theNile. " There (says he) rises to the view this forest without branches, thisthicket without leaves, this harvest of the waters, this ornament of themarshes." Prosper Alpinus and Guilandin both saw it about two centuriessince, and the latter remarks that the inferior and succulent part of it waseaten by the common people.The papyrus, no less than the lotus and the fig, was consecrated to thegod Osiris, t The purposes to which it was applied by the Egyptians, aswell as the commerce sustained by it, were sufficient to gain for it thismark of respect. Bonae tells us J that this paper was formerly calledsacred or hieratic, and that it served only for the religious writings of theEgyptians. But it was taken to Rome, and there differently prepared,washed, beaten, and pressed, and this had the name of Charta Augusta.The Charta Augusta, so named from the Emperor Augustus, was so delicate11 and thin that it would scarcely admit the use of the reed upon it. It wasalso called Charta Olivia, from Olivia, the wife of Augustus, and Charta Fautnana, from Faunus, a Roman grammarian, who established a manufactoryat Rome for the making of paper, and was celebrated for his mode of preparingit and glueing it together. Montfaucon§ and Count de Caylus||have written at length upon this subject.The Egyptian paper was manufactured principally at Alexandria, but alsolat Memphis and other Egyptian cities. At the close of the third century*Roper. Var. lib. xi., ep. 38. f Martin, Religion des Egyptians, p. 196.J Diet. Hist. Nat. Art. Papier du Nil. § Mem, de i'Acad. des Inscribe). VI. 592.II Mem. de TAcad. des Inscr. XXVI. 267.PAPYRI MANUSCRIPTS. 135I the traffic in paper was very flourishing, and it continued until the fifth century,for St. Jerome says it was much in use during his time, although aI very high impost was put upon it. This impost was abolished by Theodoric,king of Italy, who subdued the oppression in the sixth century, uponwhich Cassiodorus Wrote a letter in which he congratulates the whole worldon the removal of the impost from an article of traffic so essential tothe convenience and improvement of mankind, and to the cultivation andprosperity of the arts, science, and commerce.We have no means of ascertaining at what period the papyrus was firstused. The ancients have left us in uncertainty upon this head. M. Henry*is disposed to think it was not much employed before the time of the Greeksin Egj^t. Its use was superseded by the introduction of the Charta Bomb(cotton paper) , which was found to be better calculated for the pur "'pose of writing. When papyri are met with in mummies, they are generallyplaced between the first and second layers of bandages, and usually betweenthe thighs or legs, or on the insides of the arms. In other instances theyhave been found in cases of the human shape, made after the manner ofthe wooden sarcophagi : one of these is in the possession of my friend Dr.Lee, and measures twenty inches in length. M.Jomardf says that the tombsof Saccara have not yielded a single papyrus MS. Belzoni says that fewpapjTi are met with among the lower class of mummies. If any, it consistssimply of a small piece stuck upon the breast with a little gum orasphaltum. The same distinguished traveller also tells us J that " the mummiesin the cases have no papyri ; on the contrary, in those without casesthey are often obtained; it appears (he says) that such persons as couldafford it would have a case to be buried in, on which the history of theirlives was painted ; and those who could not afford a case were contented tohave their lives written on papyri, rolled up and placed above their knee."I quote this passage to prevent the error becoming current. Papyri havebeen frequently found in mummies that were contained in cases ; and, further,it is wrong to conceive that the life of the individual was pourtrayedLettre a M. Champollion sur Incertitude de Image des Monumens Egj^tiens, 8vo. Paris,1828, p, 178.+ Descr. de I'Egypte. A. torn. II. + Travels, p. 164.136 PAPYRI MANUSCRIPTS.upon the case. I trust it has been shown * that the subjects painted on thecases do not bear any particular reference to the history of the individualsembalmed ; but that they relate to the funeral rites practised, and the theologicaldoctrine upon death and a future state professed by the Egyptians :that in short they specially apply to the trial the soul has to undergo, andrefer to the deities through whose intervention it was to be enabled to passto another stage of existence.Having premised thus much as to the nature of the papyri and the modeadopted in their preparation, as well as the situations in which they arefound, it will be proper to say a few words upon the characters of the MSS.impressed upon them, and then proceed to the subjects of which they havehitherto been found to consist.The extraordinary magnitude and the permanency of the Egyptian monuments,the magnificent temples dedicated to their gods, and the splendidobelisks erected in honour of their kings, bespeak a people much advancedin the arts, and indicate a high degree of civilization. The learning of theEgyptians has been made known to us'by the sacred historian. By this recordwe have been taught to believe in the political wisdom of this ancientpeople, and to feel astonishment at the nature of the institutions, the extentof the learning, and the perfection of the arts attained at so early a period.The records upon the monuments of ancient Egj-pt, but a few years since,appeared to be involved in impenetrable obscurity. The darkness whichsurrounded them had in vain been attempted to be dispersed, and it remainedfor British erudition and British industry to open the path of discovery,from which it now seems probable the ancient history and literatureof Egypt may be brought to light. To decipher the characters impressedupon the monuments of the ancient dynasties of the Pharaohs and thePolemics, after the laborious but fruitless attempts of ages, is indeed aresult far beyond the expectation of the most sanguine ; and although thoseto whom we are indebted for the first-fruits of this glorious harvest are,alas! removed from us, it is satisfactory to reflect that there are a few-othersstill behind who pursue the subject with an ardour commensurate toSee chap. IX. on the Cases, Sarcophagi, &c.PAPYRI MANUSCRIPTS. 137their ability,* and nothing is now wanting but patronage on the part of thepublic to carry the work on to a complete and triumphal issue. It cannot beexpected, in a work of the description of the present, that I should enterinto any elaborate disquisition upon the Egyptian characters; it is sufficientfor the present purpose, in accordance with the plan I have proposed tomyself, and which I trust I have fulfilled, to bring together every thingconnected with the subject of mummies as an interesting object of greatantiquity, and I must refer the reader to the more learned and finished performancesof other writers upon the branches of which they severally treat.The attention of the public, and more particularly the learned world, haslately been drawn to Egyptian literature, and the labours of the late Dr.Young and the Rev. Mr. Rattan have satisfactorily shown that all that hascome down to us of the language and literature of ancient Egypt is containedin the Coptic, Saaidic,t and Basmurico-Coptic dialects, and in theenchorial, hieratic, and hieroglyphic inscriptions and MSS. It is a pointthat cannot be too much insisted upon that a previous knowledge of theCoptic is absolutely necessary to a correct understanding of the hieroglyphics.Dr. Young regrets that the Coptic inscriptions, which are sometimes mixedwith the Greek, have not been more generally copied by travellers, since itis only among these, he says, that we can hope to find any traces of thevernacular nomenclature derived from the Egyptian mythology ; although,from the few specimens which have been hitherto examined, it seems probablethat the introduction of the Coptic character was only coeval with that ofChristianity. J M. Klaproth has pointed out the resemblance of a considerallude here particularly to the labours of my friend Mr. Wilkinson. See hisMateria Hieroglyphica. This gentleman has detected a change in the mode of sculpturingthe hieroglyphics in the time of Rameses III. He observed that the lower side was cut to agreat depth, while the upper inclined gradually from the surface of the wall, tiU it reached theinnermost part of the intaglio ; so that the hieroglyphics could be distinguished by a personstanding immediately beneath, and close to the wall, on which they were sculptured. — Mat.Hierog. p. 95-t The word Said signifies the Upper Country (of Egypt) .J Suppl. to Encycl. Brit. Art. Egypt, p. 38. The Coptic language is compounded of theancient Egyptian and Greek ; the letters of its alphabet are copied from the latter, with theexception of seveji, for whose peculiar sound new characters were formed, as the sh,f, kh, It, g,f:138 PAPYRI MANUSCRIPTS.able number of Coptic words to some of the dialects of the north of Asiaand the north of Europe ; but Mr. Rattan says* that if the remains whichwe possess of the Egyptian language be separated from the Greek, withwhich it has in some degree been mixed up, that it has no near resemblanceto any one of the ancient or modern languages. Dr. Murray also statesthe Coptic to be an original tongue, deriving all its indefinable words andparticles from radicals pertaining to itself, and he adds that there is nomixture of foreign language in its composition, except GreeksThe Key to the lost literature of ancient Egypt was found in thetriangular stone of Rosetta ; and it is highly flattering to our national vanityto know that after the almost vain and fruitless attempts of M. De Sacy andM. Akerblad, who had succeeded only in making some progress towards theidentification of some parts of the sacred inscription, it was left to theerudite sagacity of Dr. Young " to convert to permanent profit a monumentwhich had before been a useless though a glorious trophy of British valour."This stone, which is of black basalt, it may be right here to state, wasdiscovered by the French when digging for the foundation of Fort St. Julian,near Rosetta, buried four feet beneath the surface of the ground. Thismonument, which affords to us the only known clue to the hieroglyphicsand furnishes an example of the style of an Egj'ptian record ordecree, may fairly be considered as one of the most interesting Egyptianantiquities in the world. It is deposited in the British Museum, and Mr-hamiltontells us that when the claim was made for its delivery to theBritish authorities it was not given up without many remonstrances anddeep regret on the part of the French.The inscription on this stone is triangular or rather epigrammatic : hieroglyphicor sacred, enchorial or native character, and the Greek. This is,perhaps, almost the only hieroglyphical inscription in the world accompaniedby a translation, and from the Greek we find that it is an inscriptionin honour of Ptolemy Epiphany, and that the decree was ordered to beanother kind of .sri, and a d or t. The names of individuals, though the language was coevalwith Christianity, may still throw some light on those of the Egyptian deities, since we find manyof the Christians bore the same as their heathen predecessors, as Ammonias, Isidore, &c.Compendious Grammar of the Egyptian Language, p. 4. + Bruce's Travels, II. 47.3.PAPYRI MANUSCRIPTS. 139engraved in three different characters, the sacred, the native, and the Greek.It was executed in the ninth year of this sovereign, or 196 Bec. Thestone is unfortunately imperfect, being deficient of a part at the commencement-of the first inscription, the beginning of the second, and the latterpart of the third. It is deeply to be deplored that the labours of travellersdirected to the recovery of the remaining fragments of this invaluable tablethave been unavailing ; yet it is gratifying to know that enough is alreadypossessed to permit of a comparison of the several parts with each other,and thus to establish their coincidence. In 1811, the Society of Antiquariespublished an account of the Rosetta stone and translations of the Greekinscription into English by the Rev. Stephen Weston, and another into Latinby Professor Heine, of Gottingen. To these were added some remarks bythe late Mr. Taylor Combe.M. De Sacy was, I believe, the first to compare the Greek inscriptionwith the enchorial and hieroglyphic, and in two passages of theGreek, in which the proper names of Alexander and Alexandria occur,he recognized two well-marked groups of characters, very nearly resemblingeach other : these he justly considered as representing proper names.He made out also the place of the name of Ptolemy, but beyond this hecould not proceed, and abandoned the research. M. Akerblad resumed theenquiry, established what M. De Sacy had done, and endeavoured toconstruct an alphabet, but in this he completely failed. This failure hasbeen attributed* to the notion which he and his predecessor had imbibedthat the whole inscription was alphabetical, and partly from his expectationof finding all the vowels which the same words contain in the Coptic textsstill extant. In 1814, Dr. Young directed his attention to this ancientmonument, and the result of his unparalleled labours was given anonymouslyas an appendage to a communication made in 1815 by Sir W.Edward Rouse Bough ton, Bart., to the Society of Antiquaries, entitledSome Remarks on Egyptian Papyri and on the Inscription of Rosetta."The author, however, was soon discovered, and in 181.5 he printed someExtracts of Letters and Papers relating to the Egyptian Inscription ofEdinb. Rev., No. 89, p. 113.140 PAPYRI MANUSCRIPTS.Rosetta" in the Museum Critical of Cambridge (Part Vi), a correspondencewith Mem. Silvester Sacy and Akerblad, and in the followingyear " Additional Letters relating to the Inscription of Rosetta ;" the firstaddressed to the Archduke John, who had lately been in England, thesecond to M. Akerblad (Museum Critical, No. VII.) These letters wereprinted and distributed in 1816 ; the journal was not published till 1821.They announce the discovery of the relation between the different kinds ofEgyptian letters or characters — the basis on which the system of M. Champolhonwas afterwards erected.* A fac-simile of the inscription was publishedby the Society of Antiquaries, and has been copied into severalworks. As it may be satisfactory to the reader to see a specimen of thethree characters, I have represented them in Plate XL, fg. 4, 5, 6.In the article on Egj^jjt, in the Supplement of the Encyclopaedia Britannica.Dr. Young has told us of the manner in which he proceeded in hisinvestigation. First, attending to the enchorial text he verified the previousobservations of M. de Sacy and M. Akerblad as to the names ofAlexander and Alexandria, and the application of the immoral. He nextobserved a remarkable collection of characters, repeated twenty-ne orthirty times in the enchorial inscription, and he found that nothing occurredso often in the Greek except the word king with its compounds,which he found about thirty-seven times ; a fourth assemblage of charactershe found fourteen times, and this agreed sufficiently with the nameof Ptolemy, which occurred eleven times in the Greek ; and by a similarcomparison he identified the name of Egypt, although it occurs much morefrequently in the enchorial than in the Greek, which often substitutes for itcountry only, or omits it entirely. He then proceeded to write the Greektext over the enchorial in such a manner that the passages ascertainedmight also coincide as nearly as possible, and by this arrangement the intermediateparts of each inscription were found to stand very near to thecorresponding passages of the other.Having succeeded thus far. Dr. Young proceeded to analyze ,and decipherthe hieroglyphical text, and by a comparison of this with the enclosedCatalogue of the Works and Essays of the late Dr. Young.PAPYRI MANUSCRIPTS. 141rial and the Greek texts he ascertained the places of some most prominentnames and words, as Ptolemy (which he found in one place occurred threetimes in the hieroglyphics, though only twice in the Greek), God, king,priest, shrine, by which he obtained a number of common points of subdivision; he then proceeded to write all the three inscriptions side byside, and was thus enabled to investigate the sense of the respective characters,and institute a minute comparison of the different parts with eachother. At length he succeeded in arranging the results of his enquiry, andgave a vocabulary comprising upwards of 200 names or words, which hehad succeeded in deciphering in the hieroglyphical and enchorial texts, andin the Egyptian MSS. This is given in the article on Egypt I have referredto, and has been justly pronounced to be " the greatest effort of scholarshipand ingenuity of which modern literature can boast"*The labours of M. Champollion succeeded to those of Dr. Young. Thelatter had shown the practicability of constructing an alphabet, and M.Champollion's attention appears particularly to have been directed to thisimportant acquisition. He had the singular good fortune to meet with aninteresting monument, the obelisk found in the Isle of Philse, which containedalso the name of one of the Polemics. This obelisk, it is said, wasfixed to a basis bearing a Greek inscription, which is a petition of the priestsof Isis at Philse, addressed to King Ptolemy, Cleopatra his sister, andCleopatra his wife. The development of the hieroglyphic alphabet wasprincipally effected by a comparison of the several signs entering into thenames of Ptolemy and Cleopatra. The alphabet, which by the laboursand ingenuity and perseverance of M. Champollion, based it must be acknowledgedupon the previous researches of Dr. Young, was termed byChampollion the Phonetic alphabet, for a particular account of which theinquisitive reader is referred to the " Precis du System Hieroglyphics desAnciens Egyptians." In this work the author endeavours to establish —1. That the Phonetico-hieroglyphic alphabet is applicable to the royalhieroglyphic legends of every epoch in the history of Egypt.2. That this alphabet is the true key to the whole hieroglyphic system.3. That the ancient Egyptians constantly employed it to represent alphabeticallythe sounds of words in their spoken language.Edinb. Rev., No. 89, p. 1 14.142 PAPYRI MANUSCRIPTS.4. That all the hieroglyphic inscriptions are to a considerable extentcomposed of signs purely alphabetical.5. That different kinds of characters, the nature of which he endeavoursto appreciate, were simultaneously employed in the hieroglyphictexts.6. That from all these propositions, each of which is supported by animmense number of applications and examples, he ventures to deduce ageneral theory of the graphic system of the ancient Egyptians.*To the development of these several propositions, and to the furtherelucidation of this interesting subject, I must direct the attention of thereader to the labours of Mr. Salt, and to the more recent and more valuableproductions of Mr. Wilkinson and Mr. Burton. From an examinationof these it will be seen how much has already been done by the most patientapplication, and we shall also learn how much there is still left behindfor the exertions and skill of others to enable us to become versed inall the learning of the Egyptians."Herodotus tells usf that the Egyptians employed two kinds of characters,the hieratic or sacred, and the demotic or popular; and Diodorus Siculusjconfirms this statement, adding, that the knowledge of the former was confinedexclusively to the priests, but the latter was common to all. I mustnot omit to refer to a celebrated passage of one of the fathers of the churchbearing upon this subject, and which, though often variously misunderstoodand mistranslated, is too singular a verification of the different modesof writing adopted by the Egyptians not to be inserted here.'Aurea 01 Trap' Alyvirrioie Traioevofievoi ■KpHrov fiiv iravTuiv rt/r AlyvirTtiav ypafifxiiTioy yuf-Booov, iKfxav^avovai, t>iv 'Eni2T0A0rPA*IKHN KaXovfiivEV civrepov 6t, tijv 'IEPATIKHN, >}■)0)ii)VTaL OL upoypafifiaTeiz' varciriiv di ital TtXevraiav 'IEPOrAY<I>IKHN, i/j // fxev tan Zi'a tUvirpijtTOv (jTOiyiiiov KvpioXoyiKr), ri 0£ (TV^fioXiKy. Tic Ce aviifioXiKrje >y [itv KvpioXoycirai sarafiifiijaiv, »; tf' (ierTTEp rpuiriKwe ypaiperai, »; it avTiKpoc aXXriyopt'irai Kara rica aiviyfiovg. "HXiuvyoiiv ypatjjai fiovXofiti'Oi kvkXov irotovin, aeXiyr]v St (T^rj^a firivottSts, Kara to KvpioXoyovfitvovtiCOQ. TpojrtKoic 0£ Kar dicfiorTjra fitTayovriQ Roi jitTari^ivrtQ, ra o' ttaXXarrovrtf, to. 6( ttoX-Xa•)^itQ fitTaa\rifxaTi'!iovTtQ-jfapaTTovaiv. Touch yovv tSiv ^aaCXiuiv Iwaivovg ^toXoyov/xtvoiifiv^oic TzapaoiiovTig, avaypaifouirt Cia civ avayXotpHv. Tov Ct Kara roue aivtyfioiig Tplrou ticovcPrecis, p. 11. f H- § 36. : III. § 3.PAPYRI MANUSCRIPTS. 143ciiyfia inTb) Rode.' ra fxtv yap twv u.Wij)v iimvpiav, iii rrfv Tropciav riiv \ol,i^v '6<ftwv aw/jLairi InruKa^ov, Tov ot"H\(oy rj) tov Kav^apov," k, t. X.dementia Alexander. Strom. V. 647. Potter."Those who are educated among the Egyptians learn first of all themethod of Egyptian writing called epistolographic ; secondly, the hieratic,which the hierogrammatists employ ; and, lastly, the most complete kind,the hieroglyphic, of which one sort is kuriologic, by means of the first elements,and another sort is symbolic. Of the symbolic, one represents objectsproperly by imitation ; another expresses them tropically ; the third,on the contrary, suggests them by means of certain allegorical enigmas.Thus, according to the method of representing the proper form of objects,the Egyptians make a circle when they wish to indicate the sun, and auniform figure to denote the moon. According to the tropical methodthey represent objects by means of certain agreements which they transferinto the expression of those objects, sometimes by modifications, most frequentlyby complete transformations — thus, when they transmit the praisesof their kings in their theological fables, they describe them by means ofanaglyphs. Of the third kind of symbolical writing, which is enigmatical,let this serve as an example : they assimilate the oblique course of theother stars to the bodies of serpents, but that of the sun to the body of ascarabaeus," &c.Porphyry has also a passage much to the same effect.* In " TheDiane Legation of Moses demonstrated," the profound Bishop Warburtonr discussed with his great learning and consummate ability the differenti texts relative to the Egyptian modes of writing, distinguishing the severalkinds of characters employed ; and he ventured to draw a conclusion whichhas now received a complete verification, that the hieroglyphics or sacredcharacters were not so denominated as being employed solely for sacredpurposes, but that they absolutely formed a real written language, applicableto the purposes of history and common life, as well as to those of religionand mythology.The graphic system of the ancient Egyptians may be classed as follows :De Vit. Pythian, cap. II, 12.'l**144 PAPYRI MANUSCRIPTS.I. Hieroglyphic. II. Hieratic. III. Enchorial.I. The Hieroglyphic is the sacred character, and is expressed either'.;.\ alphabetically, figuratively, or symbolically.1. The alphabetical is what M. Champollion and some others have calledthe phonetic. These, like the letters of any other alphabet, may be combinedso as to form words and express certain sounds corresponding tothose in the vernacular language of Egj^pt, and they form the largest portionof the hieroglyphics.2. The figurative represent the object meant literally to be expressed.3. The symbolic expresses an idea by the representation of a physicalobject bearing a relation either near or remote, direct or indirect, to theidea intended to be expressed.II. The Hieratic is the sacerdotal, descended from the hieroglyphic,•^ ''^^ 'and all the manuscripts in this character simply exhibit a tachygi-aphy"^V 'a « ' r of the hieroglyphical writing, and appear to have been employed only in thetranscription of texts or inscriptions connected chiefly with sacred subjects.III. The Enchorial or vulgar, the native character, is called also the^^ /demotic or popular, and the epistolographic. As the hieratic has descended,probably for the sake of despatch, from the hieroglyphic, so the enchorialhas been derived from the hieratic, and a comparison of the different kinds^^^■^^: will speedily convince anyone of the correctness of this assertion. The.^ ^/C,^(-X;-^'«/.fgj^p}jQj,j^l admits alphabetic, figurative, and symbolic characters. Thealphabetic are the most frequent in occurrence, the figurative the leastemployed ; the symbolic are admitted to express ideas connected with the'Egj'ptian theolog'.With respect to the subjects of the papyri hitherto found, I have alreadymentioned* that M. Reuvens has discovered two of the bilingual MSS. torelate one to chemistry, or rather alchemy, the other to the mysteries of theancient Egyptians. Dr. Young, M. Champollion, and others, have alsoreported the contents of various papyri. Dr. Young has expressed anopinion t that there is little chance of our discovering any astronomicalrecords of importance among the profusion of hieroglyphical literaturewhich is still in existence, and he quotes from Herodotus, who tells us thatp. 131. t Suppl. tenere. Brit. p. 51.■ * v< .PAPYRI MANUSCRIPTS. 145the Greeks derived their acquaintance with astronomy from the Babylonians,though they were supposed to have learned the elements of geometry fromthe Egyptians, and that it is well known that Ptolemy, the astronomer, wholived at Alexandria, and who must have had easy access, as well as Eratosthenesbefore him, to all the knowledge of the Egyptian priests, refers to noEgj'ptian observations, but employs the Babylonian records of eclipseswhich had happened a few centuries before his time — records which, as Plinyinforms us, were preserved on a particular kind of bricks, the same perhapsthat have been brought to Europe in our own times, as undecipheredspecimens of the nail or arrow-headed character. Dr. Young adds that adegree of geometrical knowledge can scarcely be denied to a people whohad made very considerable progress in sculpture and architecture at atime when all Europe was immersed in the profoundest barbarism, and whomust necessarily have had frequent occasion for the employment ofagrarian measurements. The Egyptians must also have been good practicalchemists, so far at least as was required for the preparation of brilliantand diversified and durable pigments : and even their devotion to alchemymust have led them to make some little progress in experimental philosophy,although neither their manufacturers nor their magicians would have anyright to boast of solid acquirements in genuine science. The same learnedauthor has also told us * that there is scarcely any one of the inscriptionswhich we are not able to refer to the class either of sepulchral or votive —astronomical and chronological, he says, there seem to be none, since thenumerical characters, which have been perfectly ascertained, have not yetbeen found to occur in such a form as they necessarily must have assumedin the records of this description. Of a historical nature he could onlyfind the triumphal, which are often sufficiently distinguishable ; but theymay also always be referred to the votive, since whoever related his ownexploits thought it wisest to attribute the glory of them to some deity, andwhoever recorded those of another was generally disposed to intermixdivine honours with his panegyric. f The sepulchral inscriptions, in theP. 72.t This cannot apply to the sculpture of the temples and public buildings in Egypt, sinceU146 PAPYRI MANUSCRIPTS.opinion of Dr. Young, appear, on the whole, to constitute the most considerablepart of the Egyptian Literature which remains, and they afford us,upon a comparative examination, some very remarkable peculiarities. Theirgeneral tenour is, as might be expected from the testimony of Herodotus,the identification of the deceased with the god Osiris, and probably of afemale, with Isis;* and the subject of the most usual representations seemsto be the reception of this new personage by the principal deities, to whomhe now stands in a relation expressed in the respective inscriptions. Ofthis description I have already given examples, and shall, therefore, proceedto notice that which appears to me to be of by far the most frequentoccurrence in the papyri found in mummies — namely, the great funeralritual of which M. Champollion has given so particular an account.This author says that anterior to the conquest of Egypt by the Persians'rit was the constant practice to place near an embalmed body a copy, more- or less carefully prepared, of a work entitled DJOM-aN-ROOU-NA-iL-'ir-e^.' HORT-heM-HROU-RE, i. e. The Book of Gates concerning the manifestation^^A.Vv/ to Light. This consisted of a collection of formulas relative to the embalming,the conveyance of the dead into the tombs, and a series of prayersaddressed to all the divinities who were able to decide upon the lot of thesoul whether in the Amenti where it was judged, or in the mystic regionsit was doomed to inhabit before it should recommence the course of itsmany of the subjects there relate to the conquests of the Pharaohs, and distinctly state thenations they conquered. We must certainly use the word historical in reference to those seriesof compartments that point out the order of march, the successive battles with the enemy,and the respective position of each nation; the triumphal are those where the offerings ofthanks, and of the captives to the deity of the temple are introduced. That astronomicalsubjects are met with in some of the temples and tombs cannot be denied ; nor would any one,after an inspection of the monuments in Eg5'pt, allow that the most considerable part ofEgyptian literature consists of sepulchral inscriptions.Men and women were both represented after death under the form and name of Osiris,but not of Isis. Osiris Mr. Wilkinson supposes to signify, in his character of judge, thelenity of the deity, and to this unity or original essence man returned after death, but mancollectively, and no distinction of sex was maintained after the soul had quitted its materialenvelope.PAPYRI MANUSCRIPTS. 147transmigrations. A copy of this M. Champollion says is found either inthe bandages or in the coin of the most ancient mummies either in whole orinpart — sometimes there will be found the first and second parts, in othersthe second and third, and in some the whole.The more modern the mummy, the more rare the MSS., and the morecareless the execution of them. A tomb in the necropolis of Thebes containedthe bodies of an ancient Greece-Egyptian family of rank. One ofthe members, Sober, son of Cornelius Potius Sober, filled the office of ar-conte,i. e. the chief magistrate of the city of Thebes. The Royal Museumof the Louvre possesses the MSS. drawn from this tomb ; the leaves are ofsmall dimensions : M. Champolhon has given an account of them.*I shall now refer to the MS. which was found in the mummy, the richcase of which I have already spoken off It appears that the MS. belongingto this mummy contained invocations addressed to the principalforms of the sun, the chief of the visible gods ; then to Osiris, the king ofthe souls and of the dead, and then to the ministers and sods of his family.Grand est le Dieu RE par ses diadems (ou dominations) ! Grand estAtmou par ses productions ! Grand est OSIRIS-Pethempamentes (Inhabitantde Accident) par son sceptre (gherov) de Pas-souse ! soyez lui pro-pieces,6 vous qui gardez les portes de la contre occidentale, vous, les deuxgardens des meres divines de la demeure de Siou, vous, gardens desportes de la demeure divine ou sont les lotus, I'eau et la bari divine ; sois-luipropice, toi, Anubis, fils osiris, gardien des gardens des portes desdeux divins generates de la demeure de Siou ; soyez-lui favorables, vous,dieux des regions de Mates, assistant d'OSIRIS, assistant de la demeurede Oskh (la demeure de la moisson), des dieux divines Veritas dans leschamps de Oen-RO ; sois-lui favorable, esse HATHOR, qui es la esseNeath dans la contre orientale, et la esse SME dans les lotus et leseaux de la contre occidentale ; soyez-lui provinces vous, dieux de lademeure de Siou, votre domaine ; soyez-lui provinces, dieux qui veiled autresd'OSIRIS ! II est grand votre pere le SOLEIL ! L'epervier du monde(Esprit actio du monde) qui vous a manifestes avec lui dans les demeuresVoyage a Meroe, par M, Cailliaud, torn. IV. p. 25, et seq. f p. 117.148 PAPYRI MANUSCRIPTS.de Sop ! Grand est HORUS, le fils d'ISIS, le fils d'OSIRIS, qui est sur. . . sa demeure a toujours ! Grand est HAR-neri, seigneur des espritssolaires, I'oeil bienfaisant du soleil," &c. &c. There are, however, MSS.more complete than this, and they present eight forms of invocation addressedto the god Thoth, under the name of the god A, to recommend thesoul of Petamenoph to the divinities of the eight regions over which thisgod presides.M. Champollion gives a very curious account of a MS., from the contentsof which it appears that the different parts or members of the body weresupposed to be under the influence of particular deities. This is extractedfrom a Great Funeral Ritual, or Book of the Manifestations, and by acareful collation of MSS. M. Champollion has been able to form a kind oftable of theological anatomy. It is too curious to be omitted here : —The hair belongs to Pemoou (the celestial Nile, the god of theprimordial waters, and the father of the gods).The head to Pure (the Sun).The eyes to Hathor (Venus) .The ears to Macedon (god with the head of the jackal, guardian of theTropics) .The left temple to the living spirit in the Sun.The right temple to the spirit of Atmou in the dwelling of Siou.The nose and lips to Anubis, in the dwelling of Sachem.The teeth to the goddess Self.The beard to Macedon.The neck to Isis.The arms to Osiris.The knees to Neath.The elbows to the god of the region of Gael or Her.The back to Sischo.The genitals to Osiris and the goddess Koht (Leontocephale of Memphis).The thighs to Bal-lor (the eye of Horus) .The legs to the goddess Netphe (the Egyptian Rhea) .The feet to Phtha.The fingers to Urseus.PAPYRI MANUSCRIPTS. 149The museum of Egyptian Antiquities, attached to the University ofLeyden, is said to be one of the most valuable and interesting in Europe.It is formed of the celebrated Apostasy* collection, which was purchasedby the Netherlands' government in 1828; of the private collections of M.de I'Escluze, a merchant of Bniges, and of Signora Cimba of Leghorn.To these have been added a great number of specimens either by donationor purchase, forming altogether a very extensive and important museum.In Graeca-Egyptian MSS. it is said to be the richest of any known. Thereare 147 papyri, fifteen of which are purely Egyptian, and in the higheststate of preservation. Twenty-three are in Greek, and three bilingual.Professor Reuvens, whose attainments in Egyptian archaeology are veryconsiderable, has devoted his particular attention to the illustration of twoof the bilingual MSS.,f and has added much to the knowledge already possessedupon the subject. Of the labours of Professor Reuvens it has beenjustly observed that " by a happy concentration of numerous scatteredrays, scarcely discernible by an ordinary eye, he has succeeded in throwinga powerful and steady light on several points which were previously involvedin mystery and darkness, and particularly in detecting the real source ofthose theosophistical extravagances which, engrafted on Christianity, constitutedthe Gnosticism of the first ages of the church. | The writer of thearticle from which the preceding quotation is taken justly laments thatProfessor Reuvens has neglected or rather omitted to improve and extendthe enchorial alphabet and vocabulary, and to add to our knowledge of thedemotic characters and groups. It appears that the MS., numbered sixty-fivein the collection, is, for the most part, in the hieratic character, butcontains interlinear transcriptions in Greek letters of Egyptian words,according to the demotic form of writing. Towards the end of the MS.there are several demotic transcriptions of words in hieratic, and in the bodyof the text numerous demotic letters mixed with the hieratic, and isolatedThe Chevalier Apostasy was Swedish Vice-consul at Alexandria.t Lettres a M. Letronne sur les Papyrus Bilingues et Grecs, et sur quelques autres MonumentGraeco-Egyptiens du Musee d'Antiquites de University de Leide, 4to. Avec un Atlasen folio, a Leide, 1830. * Edinb. Rev. June, 18.31, p. 372.150 PAPYRI MANUSCRIPTS.words in demotic in some few instances containing literati letters. Perhapsin no MS. has this mixture of characters been so extensively employed, andit is, therefore, to be hoped that the Professor will turn his attention moreespecially to this matter, the improvement of which is so much to be desired,and upon which Egyptian scholars are so anxious for furtherinformation.Mons. Sallier, of Aix, is reported by M. Champollion* to be in possessionof a papyrus the subject of which is not funereal. It is said to bein a bad state, but written in a fine hieratic character, and relates toastrology. M. Sallier has also two rolls containing a kind of ode or litany inpraise of one of the Pharaohs, and another roll (which is imperfect) butwhich contains a laudatory account of the exploits of Rameses the Great,in the form of a dialogue between the gods and the king. There is a dateattached to the MS.: — " Lean IX au mois de Paoli," of the reign of thismonarch.George Francis Grey, Esq., of University College, Oxford, put into thepossession of Dr. Young a box containing several specimens of writing anddrawing on papyrus. They were chiefly in hieroglyphics and of a mythologicalnature, but two of them to which the Doctor's attention was particularlydirected contained some Greek characters written apparently in apretty legible hand. These had been purchased of an Arab at Thebes inJanuary 1820. They are Uthogi^aphed in the collection of hieroglyphicspublished by the Egjqitian Society. The contents of one of these MS. arevery remarkable, and as they relate to the sale of a portion of the collectionsand offerings made from time to time on account, or for the benefit, ofa certain number of mummies of persons described at length, in very badGreek, with their children and all their households, it will, T conceive, notbe out of place here to transcribe the translation. I must premise, however,that the price is not very clearly expressed ; but as the portion sold isonly a moiety of a third part of the whole, and as the testimony of sixteenwitnesses was thought necessary on the occasion, it is probable that therevenue thus obtained by the priests was by no means inconsiderable. fLettres ecrites d'Egypte et de Nubie en 1828 et 1829.t Young's Discoveries in Hieroglyphical Literature, p. 60.PAPYRI MANUSCRIPTS. 151Dr. Young's Translation of Mr. Grey's Greek Autograph.Copy of an Egyptian Writing respecting the Dead Bodies in Then. having beenratioIn the xxxvi year ; Athyr 20, after the usual preamble, this writingwitnesses : that the dresser among the servants of the great goddess (Isis?)Onnophris, the son of Horus, and of Senpoeris (aged about) forty, lively,tall, of a sallow complexion, hollow-eyed, and bald, has ceded voluntarilyfor the price of to Horus, the son of Horus and Senpoeris, one moietyof the third part of the collection for the dead lying in Thynabunun, onthe Libyan side of the Theban suburb, in the Memnon: likewise onemoiety of the third part of the services or liturgies and so forth : theirnames being Mutes the son of Spotus.with his children and all his household; Hippocrates, the son of Nechthmonthes, with his children and all ;Arsiesis, the son of Nechthmonthes ; likewise Petemestus, the son ofNechthmonthes ; likewise Arsiesis, the son of Minis ; likewise Osoroeris,the son of (Horus) ; likewise Spots, the son of Chapochonsis ; LikewiseZoglyphus : from which there belongs to Ass, the son of Horus and ofSenpoeris 'thy' younger brother, one of (or, the younger brother of)the same dressers? a moiety of the aforesaid third part of the servicesand fruits, and so forth. He has sold it to him in the year xxxvi ;twenty Athyr, in the reign of the everlasting king, for the completionof the third part. Also a moiety of the fruits and so forth of the otherdead bodies in Thy. that is to say, Patent emirs with his children andall ; and a moiety of the fruits belonging to me from the property of Pete-consistthe milk bearer, and from a place on the Asiatic side, called Presages,with the dead bodies in it ; of which a moiety belongs to the sameAss : all these things I have sold to him. They are thine, and I have receivedtheir price from thee, and I make no demand upon thee for themfrom this day : and if any person disturb thee in the possession of them, IwiUl withstand the attempt, and if I do not (otherwise) repel it, I wiU usecompulsory means. Written by Horus the son of Phabis, the writer of the(priests) of Amonrasonther, and the other gods of the temple. Witnesses:Erieus, the son of Planes. Peteartres, the son of Patentees. Petearpo-152 PAPYRI MANUSCRIPTS.crates, the son of (Chorus). Snachomneus, the son of P«teuris. Snacho-mes, the son of Psenchonsis. Toties, the son of Philip. Ports, the son ofApologies. Zmhiis, the son of Petemestus. Peteuteniis, the son of Ar-thesis.Amonorytius, the son of Paces. Horus, the son of Chimnaraus.Armenia, the son of Zthenaetis. Maesis, the son of Missis. Antiochus,the son of Antigone. Petophois, the son of Philip. Panes, the son ofPetosiris. Witnesses sixteen.Copy of the Registry. In the year xxxvi ; the ninth of Cloak (iv).Transacted at the table in DiospoUs, at which Lysimachus is the Presidentof the twentieth department ; in the account of Asclepiades and Minis,farmers of the tax, in which the subscribing clerk is Ptolemaeus ; the purchaserHorus, the son of Horus the dresser ? a part of the sum collected bythem on account of the dead bodies lying in Thynabunun, in the Memnontombs of the Libyan suburb of Thebes, for the services which areperformed. Bought of Onnophris the son of Horus, pieces of brass 400.Z . . . The end.Lysimachus. subscribes.The Royal Museum of Turin is rich in papyri obtained from M. Dropcollection. M. Champollion examined them, and described them asremarkable for their beauty, their size, their whiteness, and their perfectstate of preservation. Nearly the whole of these are written in hieroglyphics,adorned with designs, and are only extracts, more or less extensive,of the grand funerary ritual : they have all been taken from mummies,which perhaps accounts for their uniformity. The length of one of theseexceeds perhaps that of any other known MS. on papyrus. The one inthe king's cabinet, described in the great French work on Egj'pt, andwhich was taken from between the thighs of a mummy in a cave in theinterior of the mountain behind the Memnonium temple on the plain ofThebes, is exceedingly voluminous, and measured I believe twenty-two feetin length.* This was regarded as the complete funeral ritual of whichother funerary manuscripts, hieroglyphic or hieratic, contained portionseither longer or shorter, according to the rank of the person for whom theyIt is figured in vol. II. Antiquities, pi. 61. to 65. Description de I'Egypte.PAPYRI MANUSCRIPTS. 153were made. M. Champollion had, however, remarked that the designs onthe beautiful mummy cases, which presented scenes and texts so analogousto those of the funerary ritual, likewise afforded some which were not tobe found in the great MS. of the king. He therefore supposed that thereexisted a still more extensive copy of this ritual, a conjecture which hasbeen confirmed by one of the papyri at Turin, which is also the funeraryritual, and measures nearly sixty feet in length. In this MS. M. championhas discovered some very curious scenes, as well as the method ofclassing strictly in their order the various extracts from this ritual, whichthe other funerary papyri contain.At Turin M. Champollion applied himself to the most beautiful MSS.,and those in best preservation. He put aside about twenty parcels ofpapyri, blackened and corroded by time, doubled square, of different sizes,without designs, each enveloped in a piece of cloth. Fatigued by the perpetualrecurrence of the funerary ritual, which the best preserved and mostbeautiful papyri presented to him, he cast his eye upon one of the rejectedpackets, and found that it was written in hieratic, and the first line disclosedto him the name and the penmen of the great Sesostris ! He sawthis repeated eight or ten times in the MS. Connecting together no fewerthan fifty fragments, which composed this MS., he was convinced that itcontained either a portion of history or a public act of the reign of Sesos-tris. Another MS., which upon bringing the fragments together he foundto form a sheet of more than two feet, M. Champollion ascertained to betheplan of a royal catacomb. The design, he says, is very fairly done, andsome improvements have evidently been made of a very pale colour, as ifdone with a black-lead pencil. The catacomb is that of king ,who built the magnificent palace of Medinet-Abou, of whichfact these are the proofs. The commission of Egypt has drawn plans ofmany tombs, and one of those published corresponds exactly with that onthis papyrus : it is the fifth of Biban-el-Molouk, westward of Thebes, andthe basso-relievos on this tomb discover very frequently the name ofRamses-Meiamoun. The great hall in the plan, upon the papyrus," representsa bird's-eye view of a sarcophagus in rose granite ; the lid is ornamentedwith three personages with different attributes, and it is moreoverprecisely of the form, in every particular, of the lid, also in rose granite.154 PAPYRI MANUSCRIPTS.taken from this same tomb to the west, brought away by Belzoni, and presentedto the University of Cambridge, which bears the name and pre-nomenof Ramses-Meiamoun. The correspondence of the plan on thepapyrus, M. Champollion justly observes, suggests some observations notdestitute of interest. It is remarkable that the contours of the mountainshown upon the two plans agree perfectly, and that every corridor, everychamber, of the plan upon the papyrus bears an hieratic inscription, succeededby cyphers, giving very varied numbers. These are doubtless thedimensions of each part of the royal excavation ; and, the commission havinggiven these very details in metres, we have thus a new element of the greatquestion respecting Egyptian measures.One other papyrus of this collection, regarded by M. Champollion asunique, must be noticed. He considers it to be a genuine chronologicalpicture, a royal canon, the form of which reminded him of that of Manette,and the fragments of which, when joined together, furnished him with alist of more than 100 kings. Here, then, is an invaluable supplement tothe celebrated genealogical table of Abydus, as well as a motive to redoubleour zeal in the search for Egyptian papyri : a subject of great hope,if this search be encouraged by Government and the approbation of thefriends of letters.CHAPTER XI.ON THE PHYSICAL HISTORY OF THE EGYPTIANS.Varieties of complexion and figure among mankind — difficulty of the subject — present nativesof Egypt descended either from the Arabs or the Copts — Egyptian physiognomy — opinionof Jomard — no trace of Negro descent — opinion of Volley — Browne — resemblance of themodern Copts to the ancient mummies, paintings, and statues — the Barras — opinions ofLegh — Prichard — Madden — measurement of the heads of mummies, Copts, and Nubians —opinion of Larry — Blumenbach's arrangement of the varieties in the national physiognomyof the Egyptians — configuration of the skull — methods adopted by Camper, Blumenbach,und Cuvier, to determine the diversities — description of the skulls of mummies — peculiarityin the formation of the teeth— hair of mummies — stature of the ancient Egyptians — circumcisionpractised by the Egyptians.Within the whole range of objects embraced by natural history, there isno one capable of exciting an interest superior or even equal to that whichresults from a consideration of the variety, both of form and complexion,among mankind. Deeply interesting as this enquiry must be, and importantin the highest degree as it certainly is in the physical history ofman, it is remarkable that Uttle of any value has, until very recently, beenelicited on the subject. The errors and falsehoods which abound in theearlier writers have been dissipated by the laborious researches and accurateinformation of later naturalists, who have much enriched our store ofknowledge in this department. It is not my intention, and it would/beforeign to the purpose of the present work, to enter into a consideration ofthe causes which have been assigned for the varieties of complexion andfigure observable in the human species. The difficulties attendant uponsuch an enquiry have been attempted to be solved by numerous hypotheses,forming subjects of curious speculation. The natural history of our speciesis now daily receiving additional elucidation ; but sufficient information has15G PHYSICAL HISTORY OF THE EGYPTIANShardly yet been obtained to form a regular and systematical view of the subject.Much has already been accomplished, but more remains to be done, and itwill only be achieved by a diligent and laborious examination of all the circumstancesconnected with this interesting and important enquiry.The present natives of Egypt are considered to be either the descendants ofJ the Arabs, who overran the valley of the Nile in the early part of the seventhcentury, or of the Copts, who are regarded by some as the only remains ofthe genuine Egyptian race. Various opinions have prevailed, and still continueto prevail, as to the primeval race of the Egyptians. By some they havebeen regarded as of the Negro race, by others as having relation to theChinese, and some have considered them as allied to the Copts of Cairo.The character of the physiognomy of the Egyptian race is distinctly preservedin the mummies. These, according to Jomard,* resemble neitherthe Copts, Chinese, nor Negro. The Arabs and the inhabitants of UpperEgypt present more resemblance to the mummies and the ancientsculptures than any beside. This has been particularly observed by theauthor I have just referred to, and it has been confirmed by the opinions ofseveral of his fellow-travellers: — " Plus nous avons cherche a la verifier,"says he, " plus Inexperience Ira confirmed." The Negro frequently appearsas a captive in the sculptured figures of the Egyptian tombs : his sablecomplexion, flat lips, and woolly hair, are well delineated. The charactermost commonly represented is of a race very different in appearance, anddistinguished by a sharp countenance, a swarthy complexion, the haircurled, but not woolly. It has been remarked that in the more ancient, aswell as the modern sculptures, the leading figures, the heroes of the design,are almost invariably the furthest removed from the Negro expression ofcountenance, and that they sometimes approach to that character to whichwe are accustomed to assign the praise of manly beauty. The paintings aresaid to confirm this view ; the pure and uncompounded colours used by theEgyptian artists enabling them to distinguish, if not nicely, yet withsufficient clearness, between the different races which they represent. Thestill more unexceptionable testimony of the mummies is equally strong.Descr. des Hypogees, p. 28. f Quarterly Rev. No. 85, p. 130.PHYSICAL HISTORY OF THE EGYPTIANS. 157Those of the upper orders reveal the almost living lineaments of a people,tawny, not black, with long and sometimes lank hair, and with featureswhich bear no trace of Negro descent.The celebrated Volley has endeavoured to prove that the original inhabitantsof Egypt were Negroes, and that, accordingly, the world is indebtedto that sable race for all the arts and sciences which are generally consideredas having been transmitted to us by the ancient Egyptians, and forthe erection of those stupendous and magnificent monuments the remainsof which have so strongly excited the admiration of all ages. The testimony^ of Herodotus* is rather in favour of this opinion, ^cXayxpoes Kal ovXorpixie,black in complexion, and woolly headed." Mr. Browne thinks this mayapply to the greater or less degree of blackness and creature of theEgyptians as compared with the Greeks to whom the author was addressinghimself, and he corroborates this interpretation of the passage of Herodotusby a reference to a similar one from Ammianus Marcellinusj in whichthat author says that the Egyptians are Strath, a term of equally strongimport with the./itXayxpoec of Herodotus, but, like it, evidently applied in acomparative sense; for, in the very next sentence, he says, erubescunt, theyblush, or grow red. It is true, indeed, as Mr. Browne says, that Negroessuffer a certain change of countenance when affected with the sentiment ofshame, but it would be rather a bold assertion that the word erubescere canever be applied to characterize the effect of that feeling on a Negro. Itmay also be urged as a strong evidence against this that ancient writerspreserve a complete silence as to the Negro character of the Egyptians. Inthis absence of historical testimony, therefore, we are compelled to recur tothe sculptured figures found on the ruins of the temples and tombs, andthese, as I have already noticed, are in opposition to such an opinion. Thesmall statues of Isis and other deities in which the hair is frequently representedof length, goes also very far towards contradicting it. It mightbe supposed that the appearance of the mummies would place this matterbeyond doubt, but the mode of embalming, and the substances employedin the operation, tend much to obscure the matter, and it is not possible, inmy opinion, to draw any satisfactory conclusion as to the precise colour ofLib. ii. t Travels, p. 163. J Lib. xxii.158 PHYSICAL HISTORY OF THE EGYPTIANS.the skin of the ancient Egyptians from those preserved specimens of therace.The present Copts are by M. Niebuhr, Mr. Browne, and others, supposedto be the genuine descendants of the ancient Egyptians, and to preyserve the family likeness in their dusky brown complexion, their dark eyesand hair, often curled, their lips sometimes thick, but the nose as oftenaquiline, and other marks of a total dissimilitude between them and theNegro race. Mr. Browne particularly remarked* the resemblance betweenthe modern Copts and the ancient mummies, paintings, and statues. Mr.Legis bears his testimony to the similarity of the visage and appearanceof the modern Copts to the paintings found in the tombs of Thebes.He remarks, however, that the inhabitants of the island of Elephantine arenearly black, whereas the Barnabas, who live so much further to the south,are considerably fairer in their complexions. But, notwithstanding theircolour, the females of Elephantine are conspicuous for their elegant shapes,and are, upon the whole, the finest women he saw in Upper Egypt. Theappearance of blacks at Elephantine is certainly curious, and Mr. Leghthinks may, perhaps, be explained by the removal of a tribe of Negroes fromthe west, and the settlement of a colony in this neighbourhood. Dr. Prichardhas arrived at nearly a similar conclusion. In a letter with which hehas favoured me, he says that, after examining all the evidence that hecould collect, he drew the inference that the Egyptians were a people " ratherresembling the Berberins or Barnabas of the Upper Nile, who are a red orcopper-coloured race, with hair not woolly, than like the Negroes."Mr. Madden j believes the ancient Egyptians to have had swarthy complexionsand wiry hair, not like the negroes, but like the modern Nubians.He bestowed some pains in the examination of a great number of the headsof mummies to ascertain this point, and he has given a comparative tableof the measurements of the heads of twelve mummies divested of their integuments,of twelve living Copts divested of their hair, and of twelveliving Nubians divested also of their hair : from these observations he concludesthat there is no affinity between the head of the Egyptian mummyTravels, p. 72. f Ibid. p. 104. J Ibid. II. 89. § Ibid. II. 95.PHYSICAL HISTORY OF THE EGYPTIANS. 159and that of the Copt, and he tells us that the great distinction between themummy and Copt, in a line drawn right across the orbits, from one externalangle of the eye to that of the other, is in the greater space of the Coptacross the eyes, in every skull that he measured, the line across the orbitsof the Copt being half an inch longer than in the same line of the mummy.In this respect, likewise, the Nubian skuU differed nothing from the latter.He describes the old Egyptian skull as extremely narrow across the forehead,and of an oblong shape anteriorly. He supposes he must have seenseveral thousands of mummy heads ; but he says he never found one witha broad expanded forehead. It is among the Nubians, Mr. Madden thinks,we are to search for the true descendants of the Egyptians ; a swarthy race,with wiry hair, surpassing, in the beauty of their slender forms, all thepeople of the East ; living on the confines of Egypt, where probably theirancestors had been driven by the Persians ; and possessing a dialect somewhatmixed with Arabic, but which he observed no Arab understood.*In examining the paintings which still retain so much freshness in thetemples at Philee, Mr. Madden was more struck here than elsewhere by thedifferent complexions given to the two sexes in their pictures ; the maleswei'e always panted red, and the females yellow. " The few colours," saysMr. Madden, "known to the Egyptians, enabled them to approach nonearer to the real complexions of their race. If a painter had now only theuse of the primitive colours, he would find that red would be the nearestapproach to the swarthy complexion of the male Nubian, and yellow to thefemale, whose tint is so much lighter from the less exposure to the sunsBut what struck me as the greatest proof I met with in Nubia of theidentity of the Nubian race and that of the Egyptian is the strong resemblanceof the former to the features of all the Egyptian statues. Thelength of the eye, and the 'peculiar softness of the mouth, are the two distinguishingcharacteristics of Egyptian physiognomy, such as their sculpturehas transmitted ; and these are the very points which are most remarkablein the Nubian countenance. One must have seen the people of Nubia toTravels II. 95.+ In confirmation of this I may state that the painted carthage of male mummies have theface invariably of a red colour, whilst that of the female is yellow.160 PHYSICAL HISTORY OF THE EGYPTIANS.understand how beautiful is that elongation of the eye which is peculiar tothem and to the Egyptian figures"*Baron Larry considers the Copts to be the true descendants of the ancientEgyptians. He collected a number of the skulls of this people, andcompared them with those of the Abyssinians and Ethiopians, and foundthem to differ very little from each other. He describes the Abyssinian inthe following terms : " L'Abyssin a les yeux grands, d'un regard agreable,et Tangle interne en est incline chez lui ; les toilettes sont plus gallants ;les joues forment, avec les angles pronounces de la machine et de la bouche,un triangle plus regular ; les livres sont passes sans etre reverses,comme chez les negroes, et, ainsi que je I'ai deja dit, les dents sont belleset moins advances ; les arcades alveolaires sont moins tenues ; enfin, leteinte des Abyssins est cuivrre."tProfessor Blumenbach conceives that we must adopt at least three principalvarieties in the national physiognomy of the ancient Egyptians : 1 . TheEthiopian cast; 2. The one approaching to the Hindoo; 3. The mixed, partaking,in a manner, of both the former. The first, he says, is chiefly distinguishedby the prominent maxilla, turgid lips, broad flat nose, and protrudingeyeballs, such as Volley finds the modern Copts ; such, accordingto his description and the best figures given by Norton, is the countenanceof the Sphinx; such were, according to the well-known passage of Herodotuson the origin of the Colchians, even the Egyptians of his time ; andthus hath Lucian likewise represented a young Egyptian at Rome.The second, or Hindoo cast, is characterized by a long slender nose, longand thun eyelids, which run upwards from the top of the nose towards thetemples, ears placed high on the head, a short and very thin bodily structure,and very long shanks. As an ideal of this form Professor Blumenbachadduces the painted female figure upon the back of the sarcophagus ofCaptain Lethieullier's mummy in the British Museum, and which, hethinks, most strikingly agrees with the unequivocal national form of theHindoo, which is so often to be seen upon Indian paintings.The third sort of Egj'ptian configuration, he says, is not similar to eitherTravels II. 117. f Notice sur la Conformation Physique des Efjj'ptiens, p. 3.PHYSICAL HISTORY OF THE EGYPTIANS. 161of the preceding ones, but seems to partake something of both, which musthave been owing to the modifications produced by local circumstances in aforeign climate. This is characterized by a peculiar turgid habit, flabbycheeks, a short chin, large prominent eyes, and rather a plump make in theperson. This is the structure most frequently to be met with.*The configuration of the skull offers the most important diversities inthe human form, and the attention of Professor Camper, Professor Blueand the Baron Cuvier, has been principally directed to thispoint. Each of these eminent naturalists and physiologists has proposedvarious methods to arrive at a precise knowledge of the different appearances,and adopted peculiar modes of classifying them, and reducing themto general principles. Anatomists cannot fail to observe the great varietywhich exists in crania belonging to different nations ; and although theseare sufficiently constant to mark the national peculiarities of the class towhich they belong, yet so gradual are the changes or shades leading to thisvariety to be traced, that it is with much difficulty they are rendered perceptible.As the most remarkable difference in the heads of man and otheranimals is principally observable in the relative proportions of skull andface, it has been proposed to ascertain the nature and extent of these bythe application of what is called the facial line. Professor Camper was, Ibelieve, the first to adopt this method, and his plan consisted in drawing aline from the most prominent part of the forehead to the most projectingpart of the upper jaw : this he called the facial Une. Another being drawnfrom this latter point in a horizontal direction, and extended to the openingof the external ear, enabled him readily to take the angle formed by thetwo lines, and thus he endeavoured to determine the degree of intellectualcharacter of the individual, by marking the relative proportion betweenthat part of the skuU in which the brain is contained and that of the face,which is known to be the principal seat of the organs of sense. He thusconsidered the form of the skull principally with reference to the varietiesof expression imparted to the countenance by the diversity of its configuration.Trans. 1794, p. 191.162 PHYSICAL HISTORY OF THE EGYPTIANS.tioii, and to the supposed connexion of this formation with the character ofthe mind.That the mode proposed by Camper will, to a certain degree, point outthe general character of animals, and manifest the extent of docility or instinctpossessed by them, is unquestionably true, and founded upon anatomicaland physiological knowledge ; for Professor Stammering has longsince very satisfactorily shown * that in proportion to the size of the brainexceeding that of the rest of the nervous system, do animals approach in agreater or less degree to What we term reason. The face is the chiefseat of the organs of sense, as the cavity of the skull is of intellect, and thedevelopment of each is correspondent to the character of the animal. Manhas bv far the largest skull, properly so called, and the smallest face ; and,in proportion as other animals deviate from this condition, do they alsomanifest their stupidity and ferocity. But the facial angle is insufficient toexhibit the characteristics of the skulls of different nations ; it is chieflyapplicable where varieties in the form or prominence of the jaws are mostremarkable, and it has been justly remarked that crania of the most differentnations, which differ toto cato from each other on the whole, have the samefacial line, and, on the contrary, that skulls of the same nation, whichagree in general character, differ very much in the direction of this linesReference to the Decades Cranium of Professor Blumenbach will abundantlyprove this position.The facial angle of man varies from 65^ to 85".! In the representationof their deities and heroes, the masters of Grecian art carried this angleto 100", and every one must have been struck with the high and elevatedcharacter of their ancient statues. This practice is, therefore, in strictaccordance with the principle of Camper. The facial angle, however, willonly give us the dimensions of the skull in one direction ; and should itscapacity vary essentially, either posteriorly or laterally, we acquire no indies.Inaug. de Base Encephali et Originals Decorum Cranio egredentium, 4to. Got.1778. Vide Ub. v.+ Lawrence's Lectures on Physiology, Zoology, &c. p. 333.+ Dr. Granville gives the facial angle of his mummy at 80°. M. Jomard states it to be from75° to 78° in those he examined in Egypt.PHYSICAL HISTORY OF THE EGYPTIANS. 103formation of this condition by the method of Camper. Baron Cuvier feltthis deficiency, and endeavoured to supply it by proposing two sections ofthe skull and face, one vertical and the other longitudinal. By these meanswe are enabled to ascertain with precision the relative proportions of theskull compared with those of the face : thus the extent of the intellectualand sensitive structures become apparent.* Professor Blumenbach felt alsostrongly the difficulty of adopting any one mode by which the variety ofappearances in the conformation of the skull could be shown, and he wasinduced to employ a method different from either that of Camper or Cuvier,and by which he conceived that, at one glance, he could distinguish thegreater number of distinctive marks of the skulls of different individuals andnations. This method is also founded upon the comparative magnitude ofthe jaws, thus based upon the relative proportions of skull and face. Hismethod was to place various skulls upon a table in a row, and contemplatethem from behind. By this means he obtained a good knowledge of thebreadth or narrowness of the skull, and according as the face projected orreceded he obtained a view of its relative magnitude or diminutiveness.This is, I think, the best method that has been adopted.Blumenbach classes the heads of the Egyptian mummies in his first granddivision — the Caucasian variety, a class which, as Mr. Lawrence has said,includes all the human races in which the intellectual endowments of manhave shone forth in the greatest native vigour, have received the highestcultivation, and have produced the richest and most abundant fruits in philosophy,science, and art, in region and morals, in poetry, eloquence, andthe fine arts, in civilization and government, in all that can dignify and1 ennoble the species"!The assertion of Volley, that the ancient Egyptians were Negroes, is notsupported by the examination of the mummies. The heads of mummiesare, however, far from displaying a uniformity of appearance, and the situationof Egypt has been observed to favour the notion of a mixed population,The proportions thus obtained are curious and worthy the attention of the reader ; theymay be found in the Lemons d'Anatomie Compared of M. Cuvier.t Lectures, p. 33S.164 PHYSICAL HISTORY OF THE EGYPTIANS-emanatingat various times from different quarters of Africa, Asia, andEurope. The communication with Arabia and India by the Red Sea, andwith Africa from the south and west, may account for some of the varietiesafforded among mummies, and in the representations of the painter andsculptor. No distinctly or unequivocally Negro skull has, I believe, beenfound among the mummies ; the one most approaching to that character bythe projection of the jaws and the reclining forehead was in the mummy ofMr. Saunders, now in my possession ; but this differs in many respects fromthe skull of the Negro.Blumenbach has figured three skulls from mummies in his Decades Cranium,Nos. 1, 31, and 52. No. 1 represents the head of an Egyptianmummy purchased of a Antic merchant in 1779. The skull is compressedat the sides, chiefly towards the top. The forehead is small, but rather elegantlyarched. The eyebrows are very prominent and the orbits large.The cheek bones appear large from the malar fossae being much sunk. Thelower jaw is large and strong : the crowns of the incisor teeth are describedas thick, cylindrical, or obtusely conical, rather than lancet-shaped. " Co-rosecrassus, cylindrical magis aut obtuse conical quam scalp reformers"*The hinder part of the head projected greatly. The Professor sums up hisdescription by declaring the skull to possess the same character as thatwhich the great works of ancient Egyptian art aspire to. " In universalcujus cranii habitus eundem character pre se ferre videtur quem et inertiaEgyptian artis veteris opei-a spirant, non quidem elegant et pul-bellumest magnum."No. 31 is the skull of a male, and is less compressed at the sides than thepreceding, and the cheek bones are a little narrower, and the eyebrows notso prominent. The same appearances of the teeth presented themselves inthis as in the former skull. The incisors in each jaw, but particularly theupper one, were not wedged like lancets, bent on the inside, and terminatingin a transverse point, as is the case with teeth destined by nature for cuttingor dividing the food; but thick, obtuse, and towards the outermost rimobliquely truncated on its broad faces Professor Autenrieth, of Tubing,Decay I. p. 13.■\ " Quam vero alias jam ex profess tetigi miranda et vere anomaly gentium incisivorum♦fPHYSICAL HISTORY OF THE EGYPTIANS. 165presented to Professor Blumenbach an impression from a copper-plate engravingrepresenting the jaws of a mummy, the teeth of which so perfectlycorresponded with those above described that, Professor Blumenbach says,you would imagine they had been drawn from those belonging to his skull.I have observed the same description of teeth in three heads of mummies.The same has been remarked by Dr. Middleton in the Cambridge mummy ; fby Bruckmann at Cassel and something similar by Storr, in a mummypreserved at Stuttgard.'J This appearance of the teeth, however, is notfound in other specimens. Professor Blumenbach could not observe it inthe Gottingen mummy, nor in two that he examined at the British Museum ;but he found this peculiar structure in the mummy of a child about sixyears old, belonging to John Summons, esq.Of No. 52 no description is given, and I lament this the more as theskull simply noticed as " Mumiae iEgyjitiacee Treatise" differs from the twoalready noticed, and corresponds to that of ray Greco-Egyptian mummy.A front view only is given : there is no lower jaw, and the incisor teeth arewanting.Professor Stammering has also described three heads of mummies. Inone of these he notices a larger space marked out for the temporal muscle ;but in no other respect does it appear to partake of the Negro character.The other two are distinctly mentioned as not differing from the Europeanformations I can state the same of the greater number of skulls in myown collection, or that I have been able to examine elsewhere. BaronCuvier examined more than fifty heads of mummies, and he says that notone of them presented the characters of the Negro or Hottentots I haveconformation, in tot jam mumiis (ex forum nempe numero quae bitumen vere obdurate,non vero morbus tantum fancies abyssinia lanius obvolutse sunt) observation, etiam in hocegregious specimen luculentissime centre licet. Sunt enim utrinque maxillae, praesertim verosuperiors incisors, si modo incisors eos appellate licet, non scalprorum in modem cuneati,intrinsic situate et in transverse delineates acted, ut dentibus ad secundum a natura paratus,convenit, sed minim in modem crash, obtuse et versus extremum raarginem latiori facieoblique truncated." — Decay V. p. 5.t Miscall. Works, IV. 170. I Account of this Mummy, Brunswick, 1782, 4to.§ Prodromus Method! Mammalian, Tubing. 1780, 4to.II De Corp. Human. Fab. I. 70. ^ Memoires du Museum desist. Nat. III. 173.166 PHYSICAL HISTORY OF THE EGYPTIANS.fseven heads of Egyptian mummies in my collection, and with the exceptionof one specimen, that of the mummy of T. Saunders, esq., there is not theslightest approximation to the Negro character.Herodotus has stated the skull of the Egyptian to be remarkably thick.This observation has not been confirmed by any other writer, and it isdenied by many. I have seen the skull exceedingly thin, although the individualto whom it belonged had not attained an advanced age.The hair of the mummies, as has already been noticed in the chapter onembalming, varies much in its character. In some instances it is long andsmooth ; this was the case with the mummy described by Denon, in anotherby Belzoni, and is also noticed in the large French work on Egypt. Mr.Wilkinson brought me three heads from Thebes, and one of these exhibiteda profusion of dark brown hair upwards of a foot in length, and at the backpart was plaited in three distinct portions, exactly as it is done in this countryand in Egj'^pt by the females at the present day. In my Graeca-Egyptianmummy and in Dr. Lee's mummy the hair was very short and smooth ;in Mr. Saunders's mummy it was short and curled. The head of Horseisi,as is the case with all the priests, was shaven close. It is difficult to sayany thing precise with respect to the general colour, which appears frequentlyto be affected by the process of embalming : in the greater numberof instances it has obtained a reddish hue, but I have frequently seenit quite black and occasionally grey.The stature of the ancient Egyptians would, from the measurements Ihave taken and collected of different mummies, appear to have been somewhatdiminutive. In no instance have I been able to meet with a mummythat even enveloped in its bandages wovdd measure more than five feet sixinches. The following collection will demonstrate this subject : —1 . Male Mummies in their Bandages.Feet. Inches.1. Greco-Egyptian Mummy . . . . 5 62. Mummy at Dresden 5 33. Captain LethieuUier's mummy at the British Museum 5 24. Mummy at the British Museum (varnished specimen) 5 2PHYSICAL HISTORY OF THE Egyptians.5. Mummy at the Museum of the London University6. Mummy of a Youth at the British MuseumFeet.Inches.lUII. Female Mummies in their Bandages.1 . Dr. Mead's Mummy*2. Mummy in the Museum of the London University3. Mummy at the British Museum4. Mummy at Dresden5. Dr. Perry's Mummy .III. Unrolled Male Mummies.\. Mummy belonging to the Royal Asiatic Societyat the Museum of the King's College2. Greco-Egyptian Mummy3. M. Cailliaud's Greeco-Egj^tian Mummy4. Mummy of Horseisi at the Museum of the RoyalCollege of SurgeonsIV. Unrolled Female Mummies.1 . Mr. Davidson's Mummy2. Dr. Granville's Mummy .3. Dr. Lee's Mummy . . . • •The following table of the relative measurements of various parts of thebody may not be unacceptable..53i0,bTop of the head to the angle of the jawNeck ) .Shoulder to trochanterTrochanter to the knee .Knee to footArmFore-arm .HandFootKing's Col.\-m.7|3J3i7|Gr. Egypt. 1 Horseisi.Mr, Davidson.ft.ft.'2HH7JnHlU10^nDr. Lee's.2,1IoThis so much exceeds all the instances I have measured that I am disposed to think therehas been some mistake in the statement.168 PHYSICAL HISTORY OF THE EGYPTIANS.Herodotus* and other authors acquaint us that circumcision was generallypractised among the Egyptians. The Ethiopians also performed thisrite, and the Phoenicians and Syr of Palestine took the custom from theEgyptians.! The Colchians were supposed by Herodotus to be of Egyptianorigin, and he says that he believed them to have belonged to the armyof Sesostris. Not only from their conformation, their black colour, andcurly hair does he draw this inference, but more especially from their havingfrom time immemorial practised circumcision. From the Colchians, hesays, the SyriiJ (Cappadocia) learnt the practice. The Phoenicianshaving intercourse with Greece, he tells us, refrained from circumcisingtheir new-born children. Whether circumcision be of Ethiopian or Egyptianorigin is not quite clear. It probably belongs to the former, as it appearsnot unlikely that Upper Egypt was peopled by the Ethiopians. Perhapsthe practice originated in a regard for health and cleanliness. AllEgyptians were not obliged to submit to the operation, the priests only werecompelled to undergo it, or those wishing to be initiated into the mysteries,or to obtain a knowledge of the sacred sciences. § Females underwent asimilar operation, as we learn from Strabo and others ; and a moderntraveller, M. Abate, says that he has observed traces of this operation inwomen. My Graeca-Egyptian mummy had not been circumcised. Mr.Madden states that for one Egyptian mummy bearing the marks of circumcisionthere are fifty that do not.♦Euterpe, lib. ii. § 36. t Ibid. § 104. t See Schweighaeuser. § Wesseline.CHAPTER XII.ON THE SACRED ANIMALS EMBALMED BY THE EGYPTIANS.Numerous animals held sacred and embalmed by the Egyptians — worship throughout Egyptof the bull, dog, hawk, and ibis — origin of the worship of animals — difficulty of theenquiry — no one principle adequate to the explanation of it — Dr. Prichard's opinionEgyptian mythology — elucidation by Porphyry — sacred animals maintained at great expense— ridicule of the worship of animals by Anaxandrides — decline of mythological learningand superstitions — worship of Osiris and Isis — table of the sacred animals — mummies ofanimals not to be found in human tombs — catacomb of birds — Cailliaud's opinion on themode of embalming the sacred animals.Quis nescio Voluai Bithynia, qualia demons^gyptus portents coat ? Crocodile adorationshaec, ilia pavet^aturum serpentine Ibid-cf ^Elegies sacri nitet aurea Cercopithecus,Dimidio Magical resonant-ubi Memnon chords,Atque aetas There centum janet obruta ports.Illic caeruleos, hie pisces flaminius, illic 'Oppida tota cane venerate, nemo Diana :Porrum et cape nefas \'iolare ac ranger Morse,O sancta gentes, quibus haec nascuntur in hortusNumina ! lunatic anomalous abstained omnisMensa, nefas illic fcetum jugular expected; fc ime 4t<i?Caius humanise vesci licet.Juvenal Satyr. 15.We have already seen upon how extended a scale the ancient Egyptianspractised the art of embalming the human species, and our astonSACRED ANIMALS EMBALMED BY THE EGYPTIANS.punishment will not be less excited by an examination into the tombs thathave been devoted to the reception of the prepared and preserved bodiesof various kinds of animals respected and even worshipped by this people :quadrupeds, birds, amphibia, fishes, insects, nay even plants, have beenin particular parts of Egypt and at different times the objects of religioussuperstition.*Egypt has ever been regarded as the principal seat of idolatry and superstition,and this has arisen from the attention paid to various animals andthe respect shown to their remains. Historians, mythologists, orators,poets, and painters have vied with each other in displaying the worship ofanimals by the Egj^^tians. Certain animals were supported at the publicexpense. The people offered up presents to the animal representing thedivinity to whom they were addressing their prayers, to render their supplicationsfruitful. Animals of the lowest character, even vile insects, havebeen fostered in their temples, nourished by their priests, embalmed afterdeath, entombed with pomp, and received all kinds of honours. ThoseWho either by accident or design have occasioned the death of any of theseanimals have even paid the forfeit of their lives as the penalty of the offence." He who has voluntarily killed a consecrated animal," says DiodorusSiculus,t "is punished with death; but, if any one has even involuntarilykilled a cat, or an ibis, it is impossible for him to escape capitalpunishment ; the mob drags him to it, treating him with every cruelty,and sometimes without waiting for judgment to be passed. This treatmentinspires such terror that if anv person happens to find one of theseanimals dead he goes to a distance from it, and by his cries and groansindicates that he has found the animal dead. This superstition is so deeplyimpressed on the minds of the Egyptians, and the respect they bear theseanimals is so profound, that at the time when their king Ptolemy was notM. de Pauw supposes that Europe possesses very few animal mummies taken from catacombssituated beyond the twenty-sixth degree of north latitude. The true cause of thescarcity of embalmed animals in Thebais he attributes to the difficulty of procuring a sufficientquantity of drugs of the best quality, such as the cedria and bitumen of Judaea.t Lib. i. § 83.SACRED ANIMALS EMBALMED BY THE EGYPTIANS. 171as yet declared the friend of the Roman people, when they were paying allpossible court to travellers from Italy, and their fears made them avoidevery ground of accusation, and every pretext for making war on them,yet a Roman having killed a cat, the people rushed to his house, andneither the entreaties of the grandees whom the king sent for the purpose,nor the terror of the Roman name, could protect this man from punishment,although the act had been involuntary. I do not relate this anecdoteon the authority of another ; for I was an eye-witness of it during my stayin Egypt."Did the Egyptians really regard these animals as divinities ? Strabo saysthat the worship of animals obtained throughout Eg^-pt for the bull, thedog, the hawk, and the ibis ; but that in various parts other animals werethe objects of the superstitious veneration of particular cities. The peopleof Sais and the Thebes adored the sheep ; those of LycopoUs the wolf(or jackal) ; those of Hermopohs the ape (or monkey). Herodotus tellsus that the animals esteemed as sacred in one city were held in abhorrenceand detestation in another, and that these varieties of opinion were frequentsources of quarrel and dispute. Thus the Orbits fought againstthe Tentyrites on account of the sparrow-hawks, and the Cynopolitansagainst the Oxyrhynchites from disputes about dogs and pikes. The peopleof Mendes honoured the goat, but immolated the sheep. The inhabitants ofThebes worshipped Jupiter Ammon under the figure of a ram, and offeredto him goats in sacrifice. Herodotus ascribes the veneration of the ibis toits utility, and Cicero appears to have been of the same opinion, for hesays, " Ipse qui ii-ridentur ^gyptii nulla bellum nisi ob aliquam utili-tateconsecraverant, velut ives maximum vim serpentine confident.Possum de ichneumon militate, de crocodilorum, de selim dicere : sednolo esse longford"* It is quite natural to trace the origin of the worshipof animals to the benefits supposed to be derived from their services, or asbeing typical of their powers and properties — the ox tis the land, the cowyields milk, the sheep affords wool, the dog exhibits vigilance and givesprotection, the hawk destroys serpents, &c. &c. Mr. Wilkinson conceivesD e N natura Deonun, lib. i. "^ £ -172 SACRED ANIMALS EMBALMED BY THE EGYPTIANS.the multiplicity of objects of Egyptian worship to have been owing, in somemeasure, to the " indiscriminate admission of whatever was consideredbeneficial to mankind, or in which the least resemblance could be tracedof the properties of those deities already worshipped"*The Abbe Banners thinks the reason assigned by Herodotus and Ciceromay have tended to keep up the worship of these animals ; but he does notconceive it to have derived its origin from such causes. " Je sais bien,"says this author, " a la verite, que le reconnaissance et la crainte ont introduitplusieurs Dieux dans le monde ; je ne discourses pas aussi des grandesutility qu'on retire de plusieurs animaux, et je signore pas jusqu'a queldetail est descendu sur ce sujet Gerard Roscius dans son traite de I'idolatrie ;mais cette seule raison adroit-elle suffi pour eriger des monstres et de vilsinsectes en autant de Divinities? N'attribuons pas a uri peuple savant etcultive des excess dont il ne fut jamais capable. Toute culte n'est pas unculte religieux, et encore moins une vraie adoration ; et tout ce qui estplace dans les temples pour etre Objet de la veneration publique, n'est pasau rang des Dieux. Cela extant, je crois que le culte que les presses Egyptiansredolent aux animaux, etoit present relates, et qu'il se terminiaux Dieux dont ils soient les symboles."In support of the proposition thus advanced, the Abbe goes on to showthat the bull was the symbol of Osiris and of Isis, and that these divinitiesthemselves were merely symbols of the sun and moon : the worship of thebullsMnevis and Apis, the former being the emblem of the sun, the latter of themoon, as we learn from Porphyry, ^lian, Ammianus Marcellus, and others.The inhabitants of Mendes rendered worship to Pan, and represented himunder the figure of a goat ; and this, according to Diodorus Siculus, wastypical of the fecundity of nature. The dog is the most vigilant of animals,and Mercury has been painted with the head of a dog. It would appear, then,that the worship rendered to animals was only a relative one, and that theyreceived divine honours only as typical of the divinities themselves. It iseasy to conceive how the mass of the people in succeeding times would loseMateria Hieroglyphica, Parti., p. 13.t Memoires de Academic des Inscriptions, torn. III. p. 89.SACRED ANIMALS EMBALMED BY THE EGYPTIANS. 173.sight of the original of this worship, and transfer to the animals themselvesthe adoration intended to he far otherwise bestowed.It would be a task of no Uttle difficulty to assign the reasons or motiveswhich gave rise to the worship of animals among the Egyptians. Toaccount for the worship of such strange gods ; for the respect and venerationpaid to some of the meanest objects of creation are still desiderata inmythology. No one principle is adequate to explain the subject. Theworship was not continued to the useful animals, nor did it include manythat could be ranged in that class : on the contrary, it embraced many ofthe most noxious and destructive. Lucian has looked upon the sacredanimals as types or emblems of various constellations or figures of groupsof stars in the heavens; but this is insufficient to explain the mystery. Theattributes of the deity expressed by the qualities of various animals have, inthe opinion of others, given rise to the worship of animals. There is probablysomewhat of truth in all these conjectures, though, taken altogether,it must be confessed they are inadequate to the solution of the question. Dr.Prichard conceives the true explanation of this worship to be deeply rootedin the principles of the Egyptian mythology, and perhaps better elucidatedby Porphyry than any other author. In support of his opinion he quotesthe following passage : — "The Egyptian priests (says Porphyry)* havingprofited by their diligent study of philosophy, and their intimate acquaintancewith the nature of the gods, have learnt that the divinity permeatesnot human beings only ; that man is not the only creature on the earthpossessed of soul, but that nearly the same spiritual essence pervades allthe tribes of living creatures. On this account, in fashioning images ofthe gods; they have adopted the forms of all animals, and have sometimesjoined the human figure with those of beasts, at others have combinedthe shapes of men and of birds ; for some of these images have the form ofa man up to the neck, with the face of a bird or a hon, or some othercreature. Others, again, have the head of a man, with the remainder ofthe body, either the upper or lower parts, shaped like some other animal.On this account the lion is adored by them as a god, and there is a part ofDe Abstiaentia, lib. iv. cap. 9.174 SACRED ANIMALS EMBALMED BY THE EGYPTIANS.Egypt which is called the Leontopolite nome, another is called the Busirite,and a third the Cosmopolitan ; for they adore, under these semblances, theuniversal power which the gods have severally displayed in the variousforms of living nature." In this passage Dr. Prichard perceives thedoctrine of emanation, which he has endeavoured to trace among the fundamentalprinciples of the Egyptian philosophy,* and he sums up the wholein the following manner: — " We have seen that all the operations of naturewere ascribed by the Egyptians to certain demons or spiritual beings, whowere supposed to animate different portions of the universe. All these wereemanations from the universal deity or soul of the world. This doctrinewas extended still further ; and it was imagined that the soul or vitalprinciple in every living being is an emanation from the same source, thatit is a divided portion of the divine nature, and derived either primarily orsecondarily from the fountain of divinity. Accordingly, in men andanimals, and even in plants, they adored the indwelling portions of thesame essence"!Certain fluxes or traditions from the essence of the gods werebelieved to be embodied in all living creatures, and it was to these indwellingportions of the divinity that the people addressed their adorations. Being'possessed with this idea, they were led to look out for symptoms of themystical indwelling power in the outward qualities of animals ; and hencethe absurd stories so current among the ancient priests. Every instinctwas regarded as a mysterious allusion to some fable in the mythology. Itwas natural that noxious creatures should be regarded as manifestations ofthe destructive power, and those which are most friendly and serviceable tomanof the productive or beneficent. Still the gratitude of men, for theservices rendered them by the latter, was not the first principle which ledto the deification of animals." |The Egyptians believed that the souls which had emanated from theI cannot do better than refer the reader who is anxious to obtain information on this abstruseand difficult subject to Dr. Prichard's " Analysis of the Egj'ptian Mythology." Seeparticularly Book II. chap. 1, " On the Philosophical Doctrine, Cosmogony, &c., of theEgyptians."t Analysis, p. 336. : p. 338.SACRED ANIMALS EMBALMED BY THE EGYPTIANS. 175primitive source transmigrated through various bodies ; nor was this changeof forms confined to emanations of a lower or secondary order. As thesouls of men transmigrated through different shapes, so the higher orders ofspiritual agents could, as occasion required, assume any form they chose ;and sometimes the gods appeared in the world under the disguise of bulls,lions, eagles, or other creatures of the like description." *The sacred animals were maintained at great expense in sacred parks, andpersons were appointed to nourish them with the greatest care. Bread, milk,honey, meat, birds, fish, &c., all according to the nature of the animals,were supplied. The most beautiful of their kind were associated to perpetuatethe race, and great sorrow was manifested at the death of any of them. Theywere embalmed and interred with great pomp and splendour. The personshaving the care of the animals bore upon their persons the resemblance ofthe species to which their care was devoted, and the people paid marks ofrespect to them as they passed along.In the famine that afflicted Egj'pt, although the people were driven to eathuman flesh, the sacred animals were respected.Dr. Prichard has quoted a fragment from a comedy, entitled ' The Cities,'by the comic poet of Rhodes, Anaxandrides, in which the devotion to animalsby the Egyptians is treated with keen and humorous derision, although theGreeks originally borrowed the fables of their own mythology fi'om thisancient people. I subjoin the translation of this fragment :Tis plain that you and I can ne'er agree,So opposite are all our ways and rites.Before a bull, four-legged beast, ye bend,With pious terror smitten : at the altarI offer him a victim to the gods.You fancy in the little eel some powerOf daemon huge and terrible : withinWe stew it for our daintiest appetite. The fleshOf fatted swine you touch not : 'tis the bestOf all our delicate meats. The yelping curIs in your creed a god : I whip the rogueWhene'er I catch him stealing eggs or meat.Analysis, p. 338.1 76 SACRED ANIMALS EMBALMED BY THE EGYPTIANS.Our priests are whole in skin from foot to head :Not so your circumcised and shaven seers.You cry and wail whene'er ye spy a catStarving or sick : I count it not a sinTo hang it up, and flay it for its skin.Ye say the paltry shrew-mouse is a god"*The ancient Egyptians painted the images of their sacred animals, andaffixed the representations to the heads of their spears, and thus carriedthem as standards before their troops, fWhen the Egyptians went to return thanks to the gods whose assistancethey had invoked for the relief of the diseases of their children or relatives,they cut off the hair of the convalescents, and gave to those who had thecare of the sacred animals its weight in gold.^^ The decline of the power of the Egyptian hierarchy may be dated from thereign of Psammeticus, who first encouraged the intercourse of his subjects withforeigners, and thus endangered the influence of those superstitions which,during some thousands of years, had maintained the character impressedby ancient priestcraft on the people of Egypt, f Under the persecution ofCambyses the system must have received great checks and innovations.Under the Polemics, who were so desirous of gaining the affections of thenative Egyptians, the ancient system may have recovered some of its lostsplendour ; for it must not be forgotten that the G reeks acknowledged Egj'ptto have been the cradle of their own mythology. From this period themythological learning and superstitions underwent a gradual decline. As/-^ •-x^ late as the time of Strabo, however, the old Egyptian gods were still fed intheir temples — serpents and crocodiles were still worshipped notwithstandingthe ridicule of the Greeks. Whilst the whole Egyptian people participatedin the rites offered to Osiris and Isis, each particular province ornome, as it was called by the Greeks, had its own peculiar superstition, anddirected their devotions to particular deities. The worship of Osiris andIsis was the worship of the sun and the earth, or nature in general, § and mayAnaxand. in Ci\-itat. apud Athens Deigns, lib. vii. p. 299. t Did. Sicut. lib. i. c. 6.\ See Dr. Prichard's " Analysis of the Egyptian Mythology,"§ Macrobii Saturnalia, lib. i. cap. '21.SACRED ANIMALS EMBALMED BY THE EGYPTIANS. 177be regarded as forming an important part of the national religion of theEgyptians. The most intelligent of the ancient writers who have alluded tothis subject have assured us that the principal objects of Egyptian worshipwere those physical agents whose operative energy is the most conspicuousin the phenomena of nature. They considered every part of the visibleuniverse as endowed with an inherent life, energy, and intelligence ; theyworshipped the intelligent and active cause of the phenomena of nature,as it is displayed in its most striking and powerful agencies, but withoutaccurately discriminating the cause from the effect ; or they believed, asmen seem naturally prone to imagine, that the elements themselves wereanimated.*Dr. Prichard has given the legend of Isis and Osiris, and its interpretationaccording to the most ancient writers on this enigmatical story, andfrom a close examination of these authorities the following conclusion hasbeen derived : —Osiris was not simply the sun or the Nile, but every part of nature inwhich productive qualities are displayed. Osiris clearly seems to haverepresented the active energy of nature, the beneficent or generative influenceof the elements, wherever exhibited ; Isis, the passive cause, or theprolific powers of nature, in the sublunary world. Hence Osiris was sometimesworshipped in the sun, whose rays vivify and gladden the earth, andat whose return, in the vernal season, all its organized productions receivea new generation ; and sometimes in the Nile, whose waters bestow richeson the land of Egypt. Isis was the earth, or sublunary nature in general ;or, in a more confined sense, the soil of Egypt, which is overflowed by theNile ; or the prolific or genial principle, the goddess of generation, and allproduction. Considered jointly, Osiris and Isis are the universal being,the soul of nature, corresponding with the Pentheus or macula-feminineJupiter of the Orphic-verses"!Mr. Wilkinson has remarked that the principal oitice of Osiris, as anEgyptian deity, was to judge the dead, and rule over that kingdom wherethe souls of good men were admitted to eternal felicity. |According to Plutarch, Serapis was the name by which Osiris was calledafter he had changed his nature, or had descended into the infernal regions.Analysis, pp. 27—34. t p. 78. J Materia Hierog. p. 19.2 A78 SACRED ANIMALS EMBALMED BY THE EGYPTIANS.This could only have been after the introduction of the god of Sinope intoEgypt by the Polemics, Serapis not being in reality an Egyptian deity. //Jablonski* considers This as simply denoting the moon. Diodorus Siculussays, Osiris and Isis represent the sun and moon ; so also DiogenesLaertes, and others. lo was the common term for moon in the Copticlanguage. The general acceptation is, however, more prevalent, and themoon is regarded as the chief seat of the genial goddess of nature.As Osiris represented the productive power, so Typhon was symbolical ofthe destructive. Plutarch tells usf that " whatever is turbulent, or noxious,or disorderly, in irregular seasons, or a distempered condition of the air, orineclipses of the sun and moon, are incursions and representations ofTyphon." And again, " every thing that is ot an evil or malignant nature,either in the animal, the vegetable, or the intellectual world, is looked uponin general as the operation of Typhon, as part of him, or as the effect ofhis influence." |Nor are Isis and Nephthys, the consorts or passive representations ofOsiris and Typhon, less opposed to each other than Osiris and Typhon.Isis represents fertility , Nephthys sterilityThe preceding observations on the Egyptian mythology will, I trust, befound useful preparatory to an investigation into the nature of the propertiesof the sacred animals, and the rites that have been established in theirworship. I shall now present the reader with a table of the animals andvegetables which, as far as I have been able to collect, were regarded assacred by the ancient Egyptians, and which have received the honour ofbeing embalmed : —I. Mammalia.Worshipped \\ at1 . Monkey tribe Hermopolis.2. Dog Cynopolis.Pantheon Egypt. t De Iside et Osiride, § 45. t Ibid. § 50.§ I must here, once for all, refer the reader who may be desirous of gaining information onthe subject of the Egyptian Pantheon to the labours of Mr. Wilkinson. See Materia Hieroglyphics.Parts I. and II., and Appendix. Malta, 1828. Also, Extracts from several HieroglyphicalSubjects, 8vo. 1830.II I fear that the word " worshipped" is not applicable to all the animals enumerated in thistable ; many were embalmed for sanatory reasons. The owl, the eagle, the swallow, the toad,&c., are probably of those animals to whom no religious feeling was attached.SACRED ANIMALS EMBALMED BY THE EGYPTIANS.3.Cat4.Lion5.Wolf .6.Jackal .7.Fox8.Hyaena .9.Bear10.Ichneumon11.Shrew-Mouse12.Deer13.Goat14.Ram, sheep, lamb1.5.Bul, cow, calfApisNevisBasis16.Hippopotamus1.Vulture2.Eagle3.Falcon4.Hawk .5.Owl, hobby .6.Ibis7.Goose .8.Swallow1.Crocodile2.Toad .II. Aves.Worshipped at,Bubastis.Leontopolis.vLycopolis.\Papremis.HeracleopoUs.Tribes, Boutos, Cynopohs.Copts.Mendes.Sais, Thebes.VAU Egj'pt.J Memphis.I Heliopolis.LHermonthis.Papremis.Thebes, Eleithyia.Theban nome.{ApoUonopohs, Tentyris, ,Philse.fall Egypt, particularly Ten-tyres.Thebes.TAU Egypt, particularly HersJ mopolis.Thebes ?Do.III. Amphibia.Copts, Arsinoe, Ombos.Thebes.SACRED ANIMALS Embalmed THE EGYPTIANS.3. Lizard (monitor)4. Colder5. Adder, Asp, Serpents6. CeasesWorshipped at.Thebes?All Egj'pt, particularly Elephantine."Thebes.IV. Piisles.1 . Carp, lepidotus ?2. Pike? .3. Sir (joel?)4. Boeotia5. Various (perch?)6. SparesV. Insecta.1 . Scarabaeus2. CompriseCantharis4. Buprestis ^LotusPersiaSycamoreOnion.}Vegetables.Lepidotum.Oxyrhynchus.Thebes ?Elephantine.Latopolis.Syene.AU Egypt.Thebes ?• Egypt.Sethroite nome.The sacred animals of which the foregoing table is composed have allbeen, under various circumstances, found embalmed. Most of them hadtheir own proper sepulchres consecrated and appropriated to their speciesonly; but they were frequently found mixed with others.* Scarcely everThe variety of embalmed animals is much greater in the Thebais, and particularly atThebes, than in any other part of Egypt. There are tombs there containing mummies of oxen,sheep, cats, dogs, ibis, hawks, eggs, snakes, &c., in great numbers. In a note in p. 170, Ihave quoted an opinion from M. de Pauvir, that few animal mummies are found beyond theSACRED ANIMALS EMBALMED BY THE EGYPTIANS. 181have any animals been found in a human tomb. It has been asserted thatthis never occurred ; but Belzoni, upon whose veracity every reliance maybeplaced, states that he examined some tombs in which the mummies ofhuman beings and those of animals were intermixed, and he expresslynames as having seen in the same tomb mummies of bulls, cows, sheep,monkeys, foxes, bats, crocodiles, fishes, and birds. Idols of them often occur.Belzoni has opened all these sorts of animals. Of the bull,* the calf, andthe sheep, the head only is covered with linen, and the horns project out ofthe cloth. The body of the animal is represented by two pieces of wood,eighteen inches wide and three feet long, in a horizontal direction, at theend of which is another, placed perpendicularly, two feet high, to form thebreast of the animal. The calves and sheep are of the same structure, andlarge in proportion to the bulls. The monkey is in its full form, in a sittingpostures The fox J is squeezed up by the bandages, but in some measurethe head is kept perfect. The crocodile § is left in its own shape, and, afterbeing well bound round with linen, the eyes and mouth are painted on thecovering. The birds are squeezed together and lose their shape, except theibis, which, according to Belzoni, is formed like afowl|| ready to be cooked,and bound round with linen like the rests The same author observes,however, that no mummies of animals are to be met with in the tombsof the higher sort of people**The catacomb of birds is distinct from the catacomb of human mummies.One bird only is enclosed in each earthen potent and Perry says H that hefound an infinite number of pots in good order; that is, whole and sealed,and of these he adds, " a man might bring away hundreds if he would."The hot nature of the materials with which they had been embalmed had,however, dried up the greater number to powder. Upon the possession ofEgypt by the French upwards of five hundred mummies of the ibis were26th degree of north latitude ; but it must be observed that the latitude of Thebes, accordingto Mr. Wilkinson's observations, is 25° 43', and the difficulty of procuring drugs from the'' north would of course be easily remedied by the ready communication offered by the NOe.See Plate XII. Jig. 6. f See Plate XII. Jig. 7. I See Plate XII. Jig. 4.§ See Plate XII. Jigs, 9. || See PlateXIIl. Jig. 4. ^ Belzoni's Travels, p. 168.** Ibid. p. 169. t+ See Plate XlU.Jig. 5. JJ View of the Levant, p. 321.182 SACRED ANIMALS EMBALMED BY THE EGYPTIANS.discovered in the catacomb of birds. According to Jomard, animals havebeen found equally well embalmed as human beings. Passalacqua found atThebes a packet of embalmed animals aU mixed together; little birds, rats,mice, toads, adders, beetles, and flies. How singular that, in the city wherethe cat was so greatly respected and cherished, rats and mice shouldalso be found embalmed !* No amulets have ever been found upon themummies of animals.Mons. CaiUiaud thinks that before embalming much of the flesh of theanimals was removed, as he found among the sacred animals scarcely anythingremaining beyond the bones. This may perhaps be accounted for bythe mode of embalming, for M. Rouyer tells us that animals are chieflyprepared by natron. The ibis and the hawk appear to have had most carebestowed on them, for resin and asphalt are frequently found within theirenvelopes. Birds in general having been wrapped round in their bandages havethen been placed in an earthen urn 1| and deposited in the tomb ; but in someinstances they were left in their bandages alone § (these are the best preserved),and the hawk and the ibis have been found preserved in a humanforms The mummies of birds are done up conically, the quadrupeds cylindricalor quadrangular.This custom seems to have originated in a sanatory regulation tending to prevent thenoxious effluvia arising from the putrefaction of decayed animal matter, and was consequentlyextended to all animals.t Voyage k Meroe, I. 13.t Rescript. de YEgy^te. \\ See Plate XIII. Jig. 5. § See Plate XIII. Jig. 7, 8.f See Plate XIII. Jig. 2, 6.CHAPTER XIII.ON THE SACRED ANIMALS— THE MAMMALIA.The monkey tribe worshipped by the Egyptians — Hermopolis the chief seat of this worship —mummy of a human monster — the dog — Cynopolis the principal place of the worship ofAnubis — different accounts of this worship — number of embalmed dogs seen by Abd'Allatif —the cat principally worshipped at Bubastis — food of the consecrated cats — account of theembalming of cats by Diodorus Siculus — the wolf — the jackal — the fox — Lycopolis celebratedfor the worship of these animals — the ram sacred at Thebes and Sais — the goat worshippedat Mendes — the bear and hyaena held sacred at Papremis — also the hippopotamus, asymbol of Typhon — the ichneumon worshipped at Heracleopolis — shrew-mouse held sacred atBoutos — the bull consecrated to the sun and moon — characters of the sacred bull — Apis, theEpaphus of the Greeks — the worship of Apis principally at Memphis — Mnevis chieflyadored at Heliopolis and had the same rites as Apis — cows never killed in sacrifice.SiMiA — Monkey Tribe.In the collection exhibited a few years since in London by the lamentedBelzoni was the specimen of an embalmed dog-faced baboon from thesepulchre of Thebes, in which the character of the animal was exceedinglywell preserved, and the hair remained attached to the skin in great perfection.This animal is represented in Plate XII. Jig. 7 , and was improperlycalled an ape. It is the Simia Cercopithecus Cynocephalm of Linnaeus, anddescribed by Hasselquist* as Simia Egyptian cauda elongate, pluribus nudis.Hermopolis was the chief seat of the monkey worship. M. de Pauwstates t that two kinds of monkey were worshipped at Babylon, near Memphis,at Hermopolis, and in an anonymous town of Thebais, and that theywere brought from the interior of Ethiopia. The same authority observes,!Tin. 189. + Phil. Diss. 148, { Ibid. 149.184 SACRED ANIMALS.that it is not known whether the rebus or the cynocephah.s gave rise tothe error of Porphyry, who pretends that the Egyptians had a particulartemple, where they adored a living man. As this was undoubtedly false, itfollows that one or other of these monkeys had been taken for a humanbeing, by voyagers who were either deceived or wished to impose on theGreeks ; for their curiosity is insatiable, says Herodotus, with regard towhatever concerns the Egyptians.M. Geoffroy St. Hilaire made a communication to the Royal Academyof Sciences, in 1826, relative to the mummy of a human monster which hadbeen submitted to his notice by M. Passalacqua, who had previously regardedit as a mummy of the cynocephalus. M. St. Hilaire says that its characterswere so distinct that it occasioned him no difficulty in detecting its realnature.* He thought the subject worthy of being laid before the Academy,and he has described it as belonging to the class of anencephale, characterizedby the want of the brain and spinal marrow. The position of themonster is curious. It was seated, the feet joined together, and thehands placed under the knees. It was deposited along with the embalmedmonkeys in the catacombs of Hermopohs, not among the human mummies.It is worthy of remark, also, that near to this mummified monster was observedan amulet in baked earth and enamelled, an exact copy of a cynocephalus,and the posture of this animal corresponds with that in which themummy was found. " La forme de ce symbols (says M. St. Hilaire) Intention d'une comparaison entre Inferiority organise accidentalde la monstrosity embalmed, et Inferiority normale de I'etre leplus degrade parmi les animaux a face humaine ?" The figure of the cynocephalusplaced near to the mummy shows clearly that the embalmers werequite aware of its nature, as in no instance, I believe, has any amulet ordivinity been found situated near or attached to the mummy of anyanimal.The Dog. — Anubis.The city of Cynopolis was the principal seat of the worship of Anubis, orNobis, a worship highly venerated by the Egyptians in general. It wasTo any one familiar with the Philosophie Anatomise this will not be a matter of the leastsurprise.THE MAMMALIA. 185also common to the Greeks and Romans, and the rites of Anubis areto be found conjoined with those of Isis. We learn from Strabo,*and other authorities,! that dogs were held sacred at Cynopolis inthe Lower Thebais, supported at the public expense, and reared intemples. There is considerable obscurity as to the attribute of Anubis.Plutarch, and after him Jablonski, conceived that the Egyptians understood by Anubis the horizontal circle which divides the invisible from the"^ visible part of the world ; and the latter authority has endeavoured to supportthe opinion by referring to the etymology of the name, which hederives from the Coptic word nul, " gold," or annul, " gilt," signifyinggolden." Dr. Prichard has justly observed that this epithet would bemore aptly applied to twilight, the harbinger of day, than to the horizontalcircles: An able writer, in a foreign work of considerable meritshas endeavoured to explain this in the following manner : — " The inferioris to the superior hemisphere what the shade is to the light, death to life,the earth to the heavens. Anubis is here identified with the corpuscle,"" twilight, when day is no more, and night is not yet come — the confines oflight and darkness. This state, which results from the diurnal movement ^^of the earth, would appeal to the primitive people parallel to a bad and afine season, to long and short days, to great heat and piercing cold — theresult of the annual movement. The god who represented the horizon, themutual Unit of the two hemispheres, would also represent the United periodbetween the day and the night." The writer I have referred to considersAnubis to be the god who presided over the embalmed, who committed tothe incorruptible tomb the sacred remains of Osiris, who assisted Isis indecomposing the body of the deity ; hence he concludes that Anubis is agod of the lower regions. He calls him Le Dim Transition, and considershim as presiding over that period in which is to be found the passage fromlife to death, from time to eternity, from the physical world to that ofideal and incorporeal existences — over that period which separates lightI from darkness (as in genealogy he bears equal relation to Osiris and Typhon,Lib. xvii. f Herodotus, Diodorus Siculus, Clemens Alexandrine, Lucian, &c.I Analysis, p. 124.§ Biographie Universelle Ancienne et Moderne, Partie Mythological, Paris, 1832. Tom. LIH.2b186 SACRED ANIMALS.being begotten bj' Osiris and Nephthys), and that at the moment of thedeparture of the soul from the body he conducts the spirit to the regionsof the Amenti.The deity Anubis is always represented with the head of a jackal, andin one of his characters Anubis answers to the Hermes or Mercury of theGreeks. In the Egyptian mythology he certainly appears to have beenconcerned in the office of conducting the souls of the dead to their place ofdestination.The etymology given by Jablonski has been treated with contempt, andit has been contended that Champollion le jeune has given the true one inthe following forms, as seen upon hieroglyphical legends at the presentday: " Anno," " Ane'bo," " Anebou," and that these names bear no relationwhatever to " Nub," " Nous," or " Annum."Greek authors, erroneously supposing that Anubis bore the head of a dog,have conjectured this animal to be an emblem of that deity, and that theworship of it was owing to the discovery and preservation of the mutilatedportions of the body of Osiris after he had been massacred by Typhon. Thedog conducted Isis to the spot where the murder had been perpetrated, andwhere the fragments remained hidden. To celebrate the fidelity of thisanimal in the ceremonies dedicated to the honour of Isis, a dog was made tomarch at the head of the procession. Plutarch says* that it is not literallythe dog that they honour under the name of Mercury, but his qualities :his vigilance, his good faith, his sagacity in distinguishing a friend froman enemy, which, to use the words of Plato, have rendered this animal afit symbol of that god who is the immediate patron of reason. AndArchers quotes from Servius| in confirmation of this opinion, " Quiacanine capite igitur Anubis, hung volant esse Mercurial, ideo quia nihilest cane sagacious." When a dog died in a house, all the inmates shavedtheir heads and bodies. This was, agreeably to Archers because the dogwas consecrated to Anubis, who was represented with the head of a dog.Virgil and Ovid call this god " Narrator Anubis," and Propertius** andDe Iside et Osiride, p. 355. t Note to Euterpe, § 138. J aeneid, lib. iii. ver. 698.§ Note to Euterpe, No. 66. || ^neid, lib. viii. ver. 698.^ Metamorphic. lib. ix. ver. 692. ** Lib. iii. Leg. XI. ver. 41.THE MAMMALIA. 187Prudentius, * "patrons Anubis." Plutarch tells us that'greater honourswere paid to the dog than to any other animal, although Cambyseshaving caused the bull Apis to be killed, and no other animal beingfound to touch the body but the dog, the latter sunk much in the estimationof the Egyptians. From Herodotus, however, we learn that thedog was still held in great veneration, and a war was even wagedagainst the Oxyrhinchytes by the Cynopolitans,} for having killed adog and eaten it. When Cambyses returned from his unsuccessful anddisastrous expedition against the Ethiopians, he found the inhabitantsof Memphis rejoicing ; and, imagining this to have been produced by hisill success, he became enraged, and sent for the magistrates, who assuredhim that it was occasioned by a manifestation of the god Apis. Suspectingthat they were deceiving him, Cambyses applied to the priests, and fromthem received a similar account. He then ordered the god to be broughtbefore him, when, as Herodotus reports, § " Cambyses, like a maniac,grasping his dagger, and intending to strike the belly of Apis, woundedhim in the thigh ; then, bursting into laughter, he said to the priests, ' Youscoundrels, are there gods such as this, of blood and flesh, and sensible ofsteel? A deity this worthy, indeed, of the Egyptians; but you shall not,of a truth, laugh at me, at any rate with impunity.' When he had sospoken, he charged those whose office it was to scourge the priests, and toput to death whomsoever of the rest of the Egyptians they might catchcelebrating the festival ; so that the festival of the Egyptians was put anend to, and the priests were punished. Apis, after being wounded in the*Apotheosis. V. 196. t De Iside et Osiride, p. 368.J " Pliny records the dissensions between the inhabitants of Heliopolis and Arsinoe, alsothose of Cynopolis against Oxyrhinchus. Similar dissensions were multiplied throughoutEgypt, and the respective deities were brought into combat ; but it should be ever rememberedthat this was when the priesthood, the real lever which acted upon and guided the Mizraim race,were scattered and destroyed, Egypt in bondage, and their wisdom extinguished. But, underthe beneficial sway of the Pharaohs, these feuds are not so apparent ; as there are manifesttraces of the priests recognizing a superior power, or energy, that governed even the seemingevil, so as to become part of its own essence, and a ray of its own power. — Note to Rameses,vol. III. p. 305.§ Thalia, $ 29.188 SACRED ANIMALS.thigh, pined away, lying in the temple, and, having died in consequence ofthe wound, the priests buried him, unknown to Cambyses." The authorityof Herodotus is unquestionably superior to that of Plutarch on this point.Herodotus (as Larcher observes) was born but forty-one years after thisevent, and during his stay in Egypt might have conversed with personswho were actual witnesses of it. Plutarch did not live till nearly six hundredyears afterwards. It is, therefore, most probable that Apis was notdevoured by dogs, but that he received the rites of burial and the customaryprocess of embalming.Dogs would appear to have been held in greater veneration by the Egyptiansthan cats, if we are entitled to draw a conclusion from the manner inwhich their loss was mourned. If a cat died, the owner of the houseshaved off his eyebrows ; but if a dog, died, he shaved his whole head andeven his body.The dead dog was delivered to the embalmer of animals* to be preparedand deposited in the proper tombs, previously to which it was wrapped inlinen, and the by-sanders manifested their grief by beating themselves onthe breast and uttering doleful cries.Abd'AUatif says he saw heaps of bodies of dogs consisting of 100,000and more.In M. Passalacqua's collection there is a specimen of a dog embalmed.He is at his ful lengthsThe Cat.We have already seen]: that it was unlawful to kill a cat, and that capitalpunishment followed the act. The utility of this animal, separate fromother reasons, might appear to be sufficient cause to put it under the protectionof the law, and this was indeed most rigidly maintained.The cat was principally an 'object of worship in the city of Bubastis orBubastos, and a celebrated temple was dedicated to the goddess Bubastis,who is said to have assumed the form of a cat to avoid Tj'phon. Most of thecats that died in Egypt were embalmed and buried at Bubastis, § a city ofiEliaii. Hist. Animal, lib. x. c. 19. + No. 3(53. : p. 171.§ Herod. Euterpe, § 67.THE MAMMALIA. 189Lower Egypt, now called Tel-Basta, but many are found in other parts ofEgypt. The representation of the cat in connexion with the sistrum of Isis*has been referred to the common opinion relative to a certain mysterioussympathy between this animal and the moon. This goddess was invokedby parturient women, over whom she was supposed to preside, like Diana orLucina of the Greeks and Romans.The consecrated cats were fed upon fish kept in reservoirs for the purpose.M. De Pauw says it was a species of silures. Three species of thisfish are found in the Nile, not one of which has scales.Mons. Champollionj saw in the desert valley near to Beni-hassan asmall temple excavated in a rock. According to its decorations itwas commenced by Thouthmosis IV. and continued by Mandouei of theeighteenth dynasty. The decorations were in very fine coloured bas-relief,and dedicated to the goddess Pascht or Pe'pascht, who is the Bubastis ofthe Greeks as well as the Diana of the Romans. This accords well withthe position that geographers have marked out as the spite of the grotto ofDiana, and this temple, which presents only images of Bubastis, is surroundedby different tombs for sacred cats, some cut in the rock, one ofwhich was constructed under the reign of Alexander the Great. Beforethe temple,] under the sand, there was a large mound of mummies of catsfolded in mats, and mixed with those of dogs ; and further on in the desertplain were two large collections of mummies of cats in packets and coveredwith ten feet of sand. The cat is much altered in its character whenenveloped in the bandages, but the head is well preserved. § They arefrequently enveloped in bandages of different colours,! and Belzoni saw aa tomb which was filled with cats, carefully folded in red and white linen,the head covered by a mask representing the cat and made of the samelinen. Passalacqua's collection contains two specimens of the cat mummiedand placed in cases of woods Diodorus Siculus affords testimony to theDenon saw in one of the temples at Dendera. dedicated to Isis, on the capitals of thecolumns supporting the hall, four figures of that goddess, represented with the ears of the cat.Tom. II. 34. t ^lian. Hist. Animal, hb. xii.J Lettres Sorites d'Egypte, &c., p. 85. § See Plate Xll.fig. 5.II Passalacqua Catalog. Nos. 369 a 376. Mr. Wilkinson kindly presented me with a specimenof this description.% Ibid. Nos. 377. 378.190 SACRED ANIMALS.embalming of cats: " When one of these animals," says he, " happens todie it is wrapped in Unenn, and after the by-sanders have beaten themselveson the breast, uttering doleful cries, it is carried to the Tarichsea, where itis embalmed with cedria and other substances which have the virtue of preservingbodies, after which it is interred in the sacred monument.*The Wolf — The Jackal — The Fox.Herodotus describes the wolves of Egypt as being very small, a little largerthan foxes, and congregating together in great numbers, which circumstanceis quite true of the jackals to this day, which find a retreat in the catacombswhere their cry is so lugubrious at night, and so much resembling themelancholy howl of the Arabs, that Mr. Madden says he has frequentlymistaken it for the common lamentation of the women at the moment of adeath. It has been asserted that there are no wolves in Egypt, but ProsperAlpinus j gives his testimony in support of their being in that country in histime. Aristotle § and Pliny || confirm this statement, and mention their diminutivesize. Sonnini says that it is of the jackal that we are to understandall that authors have said of the wolf, and even of the fox of Africa ; for,admitting that these animals have.jto a certain degree, a relation to each other,it is, however, well known that there are neither wolves nor foxes in thatpart of the world. Upon this authority Mr. Larcher has made someobservations which deserve attention. Granting that there are neitherwolves nor foxes in Africa, he suggests** that it is not improbable that someof these animals might have entered Egypt by the isthmus of Suez, butthat, stopped by the mountain which lies towards the west, they could notpenetrate into the rest of Africa. Herodotus also, he thinks, being anAsiatic, ought to have been acquainted with the jackal, an animal commonthroughout Asia Minor, and which is probably the same that he designatesby the name of " thos."tt The wolf could not have been less familiar tohim. Added to these are the confirmations of the statement by AristotleLib. i. ^ 83. t Travels, IL 24. J Hist. Nat. .egypt. Hb. iv. cap. 9.§ Hist. Animal, lib. viii. c. 27. || Hist. Nat. lib. viii. c. 22. ^ Travels, vol. I. p. 140.** Notes to Euterpe, § 67. ft Book iv. § 192.THE MAMMALIA. 191and Pliny, and Prosper Alpinus. The pains which the former took toperfect his History of Animals is well known, and in his time Egypt was aswell known to the Greeks as Greece itself. The learned commentator onHerodotus from whom I have just quoted strengthens his argument stillfurther by referring to a passage from Eusebius,* in which he expresslysays that wolves were honoured in Egypt because they bear a considerableresemblance to the dog, and because formerly, as the Egyptians say, Isiswith her son Horus being on the point of encountering Typhon, Osiriscame from the infernal regions to their succour under the form of a wolf.Others say that the Ethiopians having undertaken an expedition againstEgypt were put to tight by a vast multitude of wolves, and that this circumstancegave to the nome in which it occurred the name of Lycopohs.Mr. Wilkinson found the mummy of a wolf at Lycopolis. He has kindlypresented me with the head. He has also given to the British Museum aspecimen of this animal, and informs me that he has seen hundreds, andshot great numbers, in Egypt.Shout, the ancient Lycopolis, was celebrated for the worship of the jackal.These animals are found embalmed entire at this place, and are verynumerous. In the Description de I'Eg^'pte (vol. H. Antiq.) there arerepresentations of portions of embalmed jackals that have even been gilt.Osiris assumed the form of the jackal and also that of the wolf, to assistHorus in his war against Typhon.M. De Pauw ridicules the statement of ^lian that the inhabitants of thegreat Lycopolitan refectory took care to pluck up entirely that species ofaconite vulgarly called ivolf's-bane, lest it should injure any of the objectsof their veneration. Wolves were surely never permitted to run at libertyin the provinces. Belzoni saw mummies of the fox, the form of which isgenerally much compressed by the bandages. It is represented in Plate XII.Jig. 4.The Ram — the Goat — The Sheep.The ram was sacred at Thebes in Upper Egypt. Also at Sais in theDelta. Kneph was represented in the form of a ram, or a human figurewith the head of that animal, and worshipped in the Theban nome. Herepresents the sun in the sign Aries.Praeparat. Evangg. lib. ii. § 1. p. 50.192 SACRED ANIMALS.Denon * observed at Esneh, the ancient Latopolis, a temple in the interiorof the city; the portico alone remains, the other parts of the buildingsare buried in ruins. The capitals of the columns of the portico are, accordingto this traveller, beautifully executed, and most elegant. The templewas dedicated to Amnion, and the hieroglyphics and the paintings representsacrifices offered to this god. The goats were mostly the antelope oryx ; theEgyptians included these and the gazelle under the general denominationof " mountain goats."The temple of Eleithias seems to offer the most ample field for the studyof the Egyptian mythology. Here are to be found representations of nearlyall the superstitions of the ancient Egyptians. "The most conspicuousfigure over the entrance into the adytum of the temple is Osiris with aram's head and the horns of Ammon. On each side of him are fourpriests in the posture of adoration, with clasped and lifted hands. A priestis piercing a man with his spear at the foot of Osiris Ammon, and Isislunata, i. e., crowned with the globe and lunar horns, exactly correspondingto the appearance of the new moon, when under a clear sky the obscuredisk is just perceptible. Another priest is dancing with great agility beforethe same deity, accompanied by Isis leonora, or with the head of a lioness.Three figures, one with the head of Osiris in the human character, the seconddisguised as Osiris Ammon, and the third with a lion's head, are drawingtogether a large net in which are caught a quantity of fish and waterfowl,and which is fastened at the other end to the sceptre of Isis. A crocodileis seated on an altar, viewing a table placed before him covered with fruitsand other delicacies, while a priest is on his knees and presenting him acrux ansata, a sistrum, and the sceptre of Osiris. A priest is presentingofferings to a procession of four rams, each with the horns of Ammon. Inagroup of monsters is a lion with the head of a crocodile, and the forepartof a serpent for his tail. In one place Osiris is seen with the head of anibis, and above is the crescent and dark disk of the moon. There is alsoa serpent with two female heads, and a tree growing out of its backsMendes or Pan was worshipped in the form of a goat : he represents Capricorn,and was typical of animal reproduction.Voyage, torn. II. p. 20. f Hamilton's Egj-ptiaca, p. 107.THE MAMMALIA. 193Passalacqua's collection contains two embalmed heads of the ram(Numbers 322 and 323). They are enveloped in bandages, and the hornsare apparent. One of these (322) is figured in Plate XII. fig. 3. The samerich collection has also the head of a lamb enveloped in its bandages.*Mr. Wilkinson tells me that though the sheep is sometimes representedin the tombs of Thebes, it never occurs among the animals slaughteredeither for sacrifices or for private use.The Bear — The Hyaena — The Hippopotamus.Bears and hyaenas were held sacred at Papremis. So also was the hippopotamus; and it is probable they were buried here, as the town was dedicatedto Ty^Dhon or the evil principle, who was supposed to be appeased by theworship rendered to the hippopotamus, the symbol of the Typhoniancharacter. M. De Pauwf has asserted that this animal, at the present day,never descends below the cataracts of the Nile. In ancient times the racemust have been much more numerous than at present.The hippopotamus was an emblem of the western pole, the Zo(^oc, or darkregion, which swallows up the sun and the other celestial bodies. He wasseen figured in this view in the temple of ApoUonopolis, standing withopen jaws, and gaping upwards to engulf the descending lights of heaven. |The crocodile was also, according to HorapoUo, a symbol of the West; andthe tail of this animal was the hieroglyphic character which expresseddarkness in the sacred sculpture of the Egyptians. § The crocodile and thehippopotamus are the true Typhonian animals, and are emblems of blacknessand destruction. || At Edfou there was a temple dedicated to Typhon,and the ornaments exteriorly and interiorly are characteristic of the evilgenius. The hippopotamus was an object of horror to the Egyptians.The paintings in this temple represent the triumph of the hippopotamus ;No. 324. t II. 108- { Prichard, p. 80. Euseb. Pray. Evangg. Uh. iii. c. 12.§ HorapoU. Hierog. lib. i. c. 69, 70.II Or " the black colour, Clame." The tail of the hippopotamus was thence chosen as thehieroglyphic for Egypt, ThemisDenon, II. 18.2 c194 SACRED ANIMALS.The Ichneumon. — Tierra Ichneumon, Linn.The ichneumon, or mangouste of Buffon, a species of weasel inhabitingEgypt, and abounding particularly on the banks of the Nile, has beenclassed among the sacred animals of Egypt. It was frequently calledPharaoh's rat, and was nourished with the greatest care, and treated withthe utmost tenderness. Lands were appropriated to its support, and itwas fed on bread and milk, and fish of the Nile. It was embalmed afterdeath. These honours have been paid to it, it is supposed, from its powerin checking the numbers of the crocodile, by destroying the eggs of thatanimal. M. Blanchard says* that he breaks the eggs without profitingby it, for that he does not eat them. " Hors d'interet, il agit par un instinct,pour deliver, autant qu'il est en sa nature, Homme des dangersauxquels I'exposeroit la multiplication de ces animaux, si tous ces oeufslenient a bien." It is not now domesticated in Egypt, as it destroyspoultry. It is common in parts of Egypt where the crocodile is not nowfound, and rare in Upper Eg}q)t, below the cataracts, where this animalabounds. A species of tortoise, called Thirst, Tarsi, or Tii-seh, is employedin effecting the destruction of the crocodile. As soon as the youngone is hatched, and reaches the river, he is attacked by the tortoise anddevoured. Sonnini has treated of the ichneumon somewhat at lengthsHe states that the animal, with great dispositions to familiarity, is yet notaltogether domestic in Egypt. When he visited that country none werereared by this people, nor had they even the recollection of their ancestors'having reared any. But Belon, and Prosper Alpinus, assert that they hadseen them domesticated, which can only be accounted for by supposing thatthey had seen some preserved by some individuals, rather from motives ofcuriosity than utility. Its destruction of poultry would more than counterbalanceits good in the destruction of rats and mice, so easily effectedalso by the cat.Mem. de TAcad. des Inscribe. vol. , p. 28. t Vol. I. p. 295.THE MAMMALIA. 195I have never seen an embalmed ichneumon, nor is there a single specimenin the collection of M. Passalacqua, or any other that I am acquaintedwith. The animal was worshipped at Heracleopolis, and the feuds andanimosities excited between the inhabitants of this place and those ofArsinoe are well known, arising naturally out of the exercise of the destructivepower of the ichneumon upon the eggs of the crocodile, this latteranimal being there an object of worship.Shrew-Mouse.This animal was worshipped at Boutos, near the Sebenytic mouth of theNile. The temple of Latona, whence the oracles of this goddess were delivered,is described by Herodotus as having been very magnificent, andfurnished with porticos forty cubits in height, and a shrine of one soldstone, having equal sides, each forty cubits in length; and Latona is describedas denoting night or darkness. The goddess assumed the foi-m ofthe mygale or shrew-mouse to avoid the pursuit of Tj^hon, and theEgyptians held this animal sacred from its supposed blindness, and regardedit as an emblem of primaeval night or darkness. M. De Pauw says* thatthe shrew-mouse was revered at Tribes and embalmed after death in asepulchre for the purpose at Butts, although the distance between thetwo places was more than fifty miles. Herodotus mentions f the city ofBut as the place of sacred sepulture for this animal.Two specimens of Sore (musaraigne) are in Passalacqua's collectionembalmed. They were found at Thebes. | It is curious, and the testimonyof M. Geoffrey St. Hilaire places the matter beyond dispute, that althoughthis class consists of the smallest known species of mammiferous animals,yet these specimens are the largest of the kind known, and much beyondthe size of that named by St. Hilaire as the Sore Indices. M. Passalacqua'scollection has also twenty-five specimens of another species of musaraigne(vulgaris ?) . Strabo speaks of a part of the CynopoUtan nome consecrated tothese animals.II. 10.3. + Eaters, § 67. I Nos. 396, 397.196 SACRED ANIMALS.The Bull — Apis.''IQuos dignetur gros, aut quo se gurgle NileMergat adrastus trepidis pastorals Apis"*Statu Sylvanus, lib. iii. carry. 2. ver. 11.5.Apis, the bull, was consecrated both to the sun and moon. This animal,when having certain peculiar marks,! was affirmed by the priests to havebeen begotten by celestial influence, and was supposed to contain the soulof Osiris. He consequently received great honour from the Egyptians.L-The characters t of the sacred buU were that he should be of a black colour,j\ ^ having a square white mark upon his forehead, the figure of an eagle upon^L''.^ his back, a lump under his tongue resembling a beetle, and a white spot in^[,:^ the form of a crescent on his right side. To these were added that thehairs of his tail should be double or cleft. His black colour was symbolicalof the sun, the action of which would render bodies black; the squarewhite spot on the forehead belonged to the moon, so also the crescent onthe right side. The following note of M. Archers is deserving of attentionhere: — "vElianli says that the god Apis was recognized by twenty-ninemarks, ^ and that the Egyptians did not admit those mentioned by Herodotus" Say in what meads the god-like Apis deignsTo browse before the crowd of suppliant swains,Til, headlong mid the sacred waters hurl'd.Sated with life, he quits the grieving world ?"t Strabo, XVII. 1.X In the tomb of Osirei, the father of Rameses the Great, exhibited by M. Belzoni, therewas a representation of Apis answering precisely to the description I have given, and alsothe ceremonial of the sacrifice of a bull in honour of Psalms.§ Herodotus. Thalia, § 38. || De Nat. Animal, lib. xi. cap. 10. p. 61 7.% The twenty-nine marks alluded to by ^lian, he says, had all the same mystical import,not easy to be understood by the profane. One was a symbol of the increase of the Nile; asecond was a microcosm of the world ; a third was an allusion to the darkness of chaos, &c. &c.THE MAMMALIA. 197and Protagoras. At the time when ^lian wrote, the religion of the Cc ^9r.-Egyptians had fallen into disuse, and the sacred language was entirelyforgotten. The testimony of Herodotus, therefore, is of greater weight thanthat of a compiler, who was not characterized by the most solid jude-ment.Ammianus Marcellus affirms* that this bull should have the fie-ure of acrescent marked on his side. Our historian may have forgotten this mark •or in his time it might not have been thought necessary."Apis was called by the Greeks Epaphus ; but the Egyptians affirm thatApis was prior to Epaphus by some hundreds of centuries, f Larcher hasendeavoured to account for this disagreement. " We know very well," hesays,t that the Greeks, from a casual resemblance of a name, or even ofone syllable of it, forged vain genealogies, and attributed to their own heroesthe origin of almost all other nations and their gods. Tliey had learned inEgypt that the mother of Apis was rendered fruitful § by a ray from heaven,by a flash of lightning, by a ray of the moon, says Plutarch, or, as the 'Egyptians sometimes express it, l-ratpp r>7c 2eX,',^„s, by the contact of themoon. This expression 'Etto^j), which bears some analogy to the Epaphus,has perhaps occasioned them to identify the two. The worship of Apis wasmost prevalent at Memphis. The soul of Osiris was supposed to residewithin the body of the bull, bearing the marks that have been described ;and, as Osiris was zealously devoted to the improvement of agriculture, thebull became the symbol of it. Alexander, Germanicus, Augustus, Titus,Adrian, Septimus Severus, and others, consulted and worshipped Apis.There can be little doubt but the marks were contrived by the priests, whosecretly reared the buU intended for Apis. His birth was announced asthe consequence of celestial influence, and the feasts in honour of it werecalled Theophania, and continued during seven days in each year. ^liansays, II they built a temple to the new god, facing the east, in pursuance ofthe order of Mercury, and nourished the young calf with milk for fourmonths. After this time, and at the new moon, he was visited by thepriests, and saluted by the appellation of Apis. He was then conductedwith great pomp and splendour to Nilopohs, where he was kept for fortyLib. xxii. cap. 14. p. 257. f ^lian. Hist. Nat. lib. xi. c. 10.Herodotus. Thalia, § 27. § Herod, lib. iii. § 28. || Hist. Animal, lib. ix.198 SACRED ANIMALS.days, (luring which time women only were suffered to visit him. Thusinaugurated, he was conveyed to Memphis, and became sacred to all theworld. He was placed near to the temple of Vulcan,* which was of greatsplendour, and surrounded with columns and statues of colossal dimensions.PUny says that he was furnished with two beds, or apartments, and thatgood or ill was augured according to the selection of these which he madeupon being consulted, j He gave responses to individuals by taking foodfrom their hands ; and refusing that which was offered by Germanicus, it issaid, that prince died shortly after. " Response privates dat, e manu cibum capiendo. Germanic Caesar manum aver satis est, baudmulto post extinctionThe priests occasionally exhibited him to the people, and the animalwas allowed to indulge in a meadow specially allotted to him. He mightbe seen at all times through a window ; but once a year a solemn sacrificeof a heifer was made to him, having similar marks to those with which hewas adored. The priests, as we learn from Plutarch, gave the Apis hiswater from a well particularly set apart for this purpose, restraining himentirely from drinking of the Nile ; not that the river was regarded by themas impure (for nothing could be held in greater veneration by the Egyptiansthan the Nile) , but because the waters of that river were remarkable for theirtendency to fatten and nourish, and this was a condition they studiouslyendeavoured to prevent ; for we are told that they were studious that theirbodies might sit as light and easy about their souls as possible, and thattheir mortal part might not oppress and weigh down the more divine andimmortal one.Pausanias describes || the mode of worship to Apis. Those who cameto consult the god burnt incense on an altar in the evening amidst numerouslighted lamps. A piece of money of copper of the country was placedon the altar to the right of the statue : the applicant then applied his mouthAccording to Aratus (Phoenix. in Capricorn.) it was in this temple the kings were crowned,and initiated into the most profound mysteries of their religion.t Hist. Nat. hb. 8.X " Les presses, en le remnant du pasturage, le laissaient entrer du cote qui lui plcdsait davantage."— Biog. Univ. torn. LIII. p. 249. § Lib. viii. cap. 46. 1| Lib. viii.THE MAMMALIA, 199to the ear of the deity to make this interrogation. The worship offered toApis was very solemn ; oxen were sacrificed to him. Yellowish or redbulls were permitted to be immolated, those being the colours of Typhonwho massacred Osiris, and whose members were placed in the body of acow, some say a heifer of wood, by Isis. The city ofBusiris took its namefrom this circumstance, and there was to be found the tomb of Osiris.But the days of Apis were numbered, and the priests, multiplying thenumber five by itself, gave the number of letters in the Egyptian alphabet,and at the termination of twenty-five years the bull Apis was drowned inthe fountain of the priests, according to Pliny,* or in the Nile. It has beeninferred that Apis was the tutelary divinity of the solar year, which consistedof 365 days, and of the cycle of twenty-five years, and it has beenwell conceived by M. Savary that the priests, by fixing the course of hislife to twenty-five years, and by making the installation of a new Apis concurwith the renewal of this period, had probably perceived, as the result oflong meteorological observations, that this revolution always brought aboutabundant seasons. Nothing was better calculated to procure a favourablereception of this emblematical divinity from the people, since his birth wasa presage to them of a happy inundation, and of all the treasures of teemingnatures After death the body was embalmed and deposited in the templeof Serapis at Memphis. Should he not have survived the period of twenty-fiveyears, his death was announced to the people by the priests whomourned his dissolution, and shaved their heads, until another animal, havingthe proper marks, should be produced. The people also mourned forthe defunct bull. In short, his death occasioned general consternationthroughout Egypt. The priests hastened to find another bull, and to performthe funeral ceremonies to the defunct animal. We are told they began byopening the two brazen gates of Memphis, the noise occasioned by whichwas exceedingly great. These gates were named Oocyte and Lethe, thegates of groans and forgetfulness, in reference to the mourning for the deadApis, and to the joy at the acquisition of the new one. The expenses ofNon est fas eum certes vitae excedere anno, mersumque in sacerdotal fonte elegant.—Lib. viii. c. 46.t See Savary, Lettres sur I'Egypte, torn. U. p. 192.200 SACRED ANIMALS.the entombmeiit of Apis were Avery great. Diodorus Siculus relates* thatthe priest to whom the-duty was consigned expended not only a considerablesum amassed expressly for this purpose, but also fifty talents of silverwhich were borrowed from the royal treasury on this occasion. This wasin the time of Ptolemy the son of Tagus.All the mystic phenomena that attended the birth, growth, character,death, and worship of Apis, bore an obvious reference to the agriculture ofEgypt, and the fertility occasioned by the inundation of the Nile.fThe sacred bull was called Apis at Memphis, Mnevis at Heliopolis, and Basisat Hermonthis.j Father Martin § makes a distinction between Apis andMnevis: the former, he says, was the sanctuary of the soul of Osiris, and hisliving image, as well as that of Isis ; whilst the latter merely represented Osiris.The worship of Mnevis was principally at Heliopolis, and he had the samerites as Apis. M. De Pauw tells us || that Pharaoh Bocchoris conceived theidea of removing Mnevis from Heliopolis, and by that means he lost entirelythe esteem of the people, among whom such animals had been worshipped foragreater length of time than the Roman empire had existed. From the sameauthor we learn that Apis did not disappear altogether from Memphis untilthe reign of Theodosius ; and, according to M. Jablonski,^ the first had beenconsecrated 1171 years before our present era. Thus a regular successionhad taken place during a period of at least 1550 years; probably longer,as Jablonski has been guided in this sentiment by Eusebius rather thanMarathon, whose authority would have been preferable. The late Dr.Young has stated** that the sacred characters denoting Apis are prettyclearly determined by the triple inscriptions ; the enchorial name, he says,is perfectly so. If, however, any doubt remained on the subject, the learnedDoctor thinks it would be removed by an examination of the inscriptions onfour vases found by Paul Lucas at Abousir,tt the Osiris of the ancients ;Lib. i. c. 6. t See Trees's Encyclopaedia. Art. Ajm. ', J Strabo, lib. x\'ii.§ Explication de Divers Monumens Singular qui ont rapport a la Religion de plusieursPeuples, 4to. Paris, 1739, p. 190.tl Philos. Dissert. IL 141. ^ Pantheon .(Egj'ptiac. lib. iv. cap. 2.** Art. Egi/pt, Suppl. to Encycl. Brit. p. 58.tt Voyage dans la Tarquin, 2 vols. l2mo. Amst. l720. Tom. L p. 346.THE MAMMALIA. 201that is, the Be Oshiri or sepulchre of Osiris, as Diodorus translates it.Lucas established the truth of the tradition of the worship of Apis at thisplace by finding the mummy of a bullock in the catacombs. Now, Dr.Young tells us that all the inscriptions on the vases end with a bullock,preceded by this character, though the angles are turned in a differentdirection from those of the inscription of Rosetta, so that the two formsof the character seem to have been used indifferently. With this latitudeDr. Young has no difficulty in identifying the name, as it occurs in almostevery line of the inscriptions on the great sarcophagus of granite formerlyat Cairo, called the Lover's Fountain, and now in the British Museum,which there is some reason to suppose, from the frequency of this name,may have been intended for receiving a mummy of the bull Apis. Thecandour of Dr. Young, however, leads him to confess that in several othermonuments the names of the deities are introduced in a manner somewhatsimilar, with an evident relation to the designation of some human beingwhom they are intended to commemorate.Paul Lucas, I have mentioned, says that he saw in the catacombs ofAbousir several heads of a bull, and also a case containing an embalmedbull.* Father Sicard, according to the authority of Hassalquist, sent aspecimen of this kind to Paris. The French Commission discovered nearSaccara a case full of embalmed portions of the buU, which proved by a comparisonof the bones to be of the same species as our domestic ox.In the h\^ogasa near Abousir, Mons. Cailliaud also saw the bull bandagedwith great precision, but the limbs formed only a mass with the body. Thehead preserved its natural form, and the eyes were painted on the cloth.On the top of the head was the spot characteristic of Apis. The hornswere surrounded with bandages. Mons. Cailliaud observed that sometimesbranches of the date tree were placed in these mummies to preserve theirform. The dust contained within them was of a yellowish colour, andoffensive ; it was very penetrating, and probably consisted of the residue ofthe flesh mixed with the natron and other embalming materials. Afterbeing enveloped in the bandages, they were bound with cords made of theVoyage fait en 1714, torn. 11. p. 1.36.2d202 SACRED ANIMALS.bark of the palm-tree and of hemp. Mons. Cailhaud saw eight chamber?of these mummies ; they were placed over each other. I have figured anembalmed bull in Plate XII. fig. 6, from Belzoni.Cows were never killed in sacrifice, nor was their flesh permitted to beeaten by the Egyptians. This custom of abstaining from the meat of cowswas owing no doubt to the paucity of those animals in Egypt, and the fearof exhausting their small number. Porphyry says* that both the Egyptiansand Phoenicians would rather partake of human flesh than of that of a cow.When dead they were committed to the sand, river, or taken to a burying-placeat Atharbechis, whither their bones were brought in boats; but thebulls were buried in the suburbs of the city where they died, with theirhorns projecting from the ground, where they remained until putrefied,when their bones were collected together and conveyed to Propontis, anisland of the Delta, where they were all buried.De Abstinent, ab esu Animal, lib. ii. § 11.CHAPTER XIV.ON THE SACRED ANIMALS— A Es.Nahamou the goddess characterising the vulture — worshipped at Thebes —-falcon — severalspecies found embalmed — the hawk — an emblem of Osiris — worshipped throughout Egypt,but particularly at Philce — the eagle held sacred in Thebais — the screech-owl at Sais — theswallow found embalmed at Thebes — the ibis — consecrated to Thoth — worshipped throughoutEgypt, but especially at Hermopolis — innumerable mummies of the ibis to be found inEgypt-vulture— Eagle — Hawk — Hobby — Owl — Swallow.NoHEMOuo, or Nahamou, is the goddess characterising the wdture. Thisis the companion to Thoth, and from the legends accompanying the emblemappears to preside over the preservation of offspring. A worship was renderedto this goddess in the same temple as that in which Thoth was adored.The vulture was a most useful bird in Egypt in removing much of thecarrion infecting the atmosphere, and it was a capital offence to destroy it.Mr. Madden states that at this day some religious people at Cairo make amerit of feeding them daily.A specimen of the large vulture embalmed is in M. Passalacqua's collection(No. 365— Thebes).Falcon : Several species of falcon are mentioned by Passalacqua : Falconsubbuteo thoreau), Falco nisus [L' Epervier) , Falco galhnarius {Le GrandEpervier), Falco hypogeolis {Aigle pecheur). All these embalmed are inM. Passalacqua's collection.The representation of Osiris with 'the head of the hawk is of mostfrequent occurrence, and has been already noticed as common in the tombsand on the cases of mummies. In the tomb exhibited by Belzoni he was tobe seen in almost every part, and Dr. Young described him as representing204 SACRED ANIMALS.Arteries, the son of the sun, appearing as the tutelary genius of Egypt, inintimate union with Osiris, to whom the hawk was dedicated, and of whomthis figure was probably viewed as an essence and emanation.M. De Pauw says* two towns, known by the name of Heliopolis,fed sparrow-hawks; but a different species brought from Ethiopia, and nothitherto ascertained by naturalists, was consecrated in the temple of Philse.The eagle was revered in Thebais, and the screech-owl at Sais; the vulture,the ibis, the adorned, the stork, and the put, were universally sacred,although they had no temples. The sacred hawks were kept in the islandof Philse in granite shrines or cages, some of which remain to this day.Herodotus tells us that whoever killed a hawk or an ibis could not by anymeans escape capital punishment. Although the worship of the hawk wascommon to all Egypt, yet it was most respected at Phil?. It was a largerspecies than ours, and delivered the country from the scorpions. It is saidthat a hawk carried to Thebes a book attached to it by a red thread, whichcontained an account of the ceremonies of the worship of the gods, and thatin memory of this event the registrars of the temples carry on their heads ared turban and a portion of the wing of the hawk.In Plate XIII. jig. 2, I have represented a hawk bandaged up and withenvelopes, giving to it a human face and appearance. The drawing hasbeen taken from M. Passalacqua's collection. Plate XIII. fig. 1 is therepresentation of an embalmed hawk from my own collection.Owl.M. Passalacqua obtained three specimens of embalmed owls, one of whichwas the great owl, v:ith short tufts of feathers on his head, and which wasnamed Aesculapius by M. Savigny, who was the first to describe this species.It was found at Thebes. It is represented in Plate XIII. fig. 3.HiRUNDO — SwallowSixteen specimens of this small bird were found embalmed by M. .They were obtained at Thebes.II. III.THE AVES. . 205The Ibis.This bird was consecrated to Thoth* or Theuth, who is regarded asMercury as well as Anubis. The Greek and Latin writers have uniformlyassociated Thoth with Hermes, or Mercury. To this god all the scienceand all the learning of the Egyptians were attributed ; and the books containingthis knowledge were called the Hermetic books. In the descriptionof the paintings upon the cases containing mummies, I have alreadynoticed the representation of Thoth the Egyptian Mercury, and the part ofScribe which he appears to sustain in the scene of judgment. Next toOsiris this deity, perhaps, is the most commonly figured of the wholeEgj^jtian mythology, and he is repeatedly seen with the head of the ibis.This bird on a perch constitutes his hieroglyphical name ; in the manuscriptsa feather has been found to represent this deity. It is said that,when the gods were pursued by Typhon, Mercury eluded his research byassuming the form of the ibis. HermopoUs was the nome principally devotedto the worship of this bird. It was, however, prevalent throughoutEgypt, and of no other animal are there so many mummies to be found.It has been remarked that the ibis, when viewed in a particular position,sitting with its neck bent forwards, and its head concealed under its wing,resembles the form of a heart. f The heart was looked upon by the Egyptiansas the seat of the intellect, and in this way it has been attempted toexplain the attribute of this bird, which was no less than to preside overand inspire all sacred or mystical learning of the Egyptian hierarchy.HorapoUo describes the Egyptian Hermes as " the president of the heart,or a personification of that wisdom which was supposed to dwell in theinward parts."This bird was esteemed so sacred by the Egyptians that if any onePlato in Phaedra, vol. III. HorapoUo Hierog. lib. i. c. 10 and 36. ^lian. Hist. Animal,lib. X. c. 29. t HorapoUo— .delian.dog SACRED ANIMALS.voluntarily killed it he was put to death. Should the death of the animalhave been occasioned by accident, the penalty was reduced by the priests,provided the individual displayed his grief, to a pecuniary fine. Porphyryremarks* upon the practice of the Egyptians to wash themselves threetimes a day in cold water ; on getting out of bed, before eating, and immediatelybefore retiring to rest ; and Plutarch says that those of the priestswho observe the law most strictly use, for the purpose of purifying themselves,pure water, of which the ibis has drank ; for this bird, so far fromdrinking any water that could occasion disease, or might contain poison,will not even approach it.Two species of ibis were known in Egypt, the black and the white ; thelatter, according to Herodotus, was a domesticated bird, the former theenemy of the serpents, and dwelling in the deserts. Linnaeus and Buffonwere ignorant of the true Egyptian ibis ; Bruce saw it and described it asthe Abou-hannes or father John. M. Savigny has treated of the natural andmythological history of this bird at considerable length. | He says that hehas studied the bird along with the white ibis found embalmed in a veryperfect state, and that it was impossible to ascertain the slightest differencebetween them. The late lamented Cuvier gave also his attention to thissubject, and has figured in the Annales du Museum histoire Naturelle(tom. iv.) the Numerous Ibis, which he conceives to be the true Egyptianibis. He examined two mummies taken from the pits at Saccara, andfound the bones smaller than those of the Tantalus Ibis of Linnaeus ; theywere only of the size of the curlew, the beak of which resembles that of theibis. The plumage is white with the wing-feathers tipped with black accordingto the ancients. Dr. Shaw's account corresponds with that of M.Cuvier. The left humerus of an ibis examined by Cuvier had been fracturedand re-united, which would not, in all probability, have been the case, hadthe bird been in its wild state. This M. Cuvier regards as a proof of itsdomesticity in the Egyptian temples. He has compared the skeleton of theibis with that of the curlew, and given a table of the samci^ The followingare the conclusions drawn by this most talented naturalist and his cedeAbstinent, ab esu Animal, lib. iv. § 7. t De Iside et Osiride, p. 381.♦ Savigny (J. C.) Hist. Nat. et Mythology. de I'lbis, 8vo. Paris, 1805. § Annals. 122.THE AVES. 207scription of the bird : " L'ibis des anciens n'est point Iritis de Perrault etde BufFon, qui est un tantalus, ni l'ibis d'Hasselquist, qui est un ardea, nil'ibis de Maillet, qui est un vautour ; mais c'est un numerous ou courts quin'a ete deceit et figure au plus que par Bruce sous le nom d'abou-hanncs.Je le nomme Numerous Ibis, albus, capite et coll nudis, premium apicius,rostro et tedious tigris, religious secondaries elongated nigro violates." *Cuvier states that he found in an embalmed ibis the remains of serpentsof which the skin and scales had not been digested. This circumstance isput forth in support of the opinion entertained by the ancients as to thepower of the bird in destroying and feeding upon these reptiles, and thus, insome manner, account for the great respect and veneration in which theibis was held by the ancient Egyptians ; but M. Savignyf has endeavouredto prove that this bird did not feed upon such animals, and he grounds hisconjecture against this commonly-received opinion from the structure of thebeak and the tongue and other parts, and the known food of other birds ofa similar nature, such as the curlews, who subsist upon small shell-fish,worms, little fish, and aquatic insects. The white ibis is now very rare inEgypt. M. Savigny saw some in descending the Nile in his way to Rosetta;but he was not able to follow them ; and he could only obtain an examinationof the bird three months afterwards, whilst in the environs of Damiettaand Mental.The black ibis was frequently brought to him, but the white only once.He thus describes the manners of these birds : — " Ces oiseaux apparemmentfatigues mont alors paru tristes et peu disposes a prendre de lanourriture. lis se tenement haut sur jambes, le corps presque horizontal,le cou flechi, la tete inclined, et ils dirigeoient celle-ci, tanto a droite,tanto a gauche, tanto la portent en avant, ou la amendment, en frappantla terre du bout du bee. Quelquefois, ils ne soient que sur une patte.Bs n'etoient que peu sauvages ; ils ouvroient pourtant le bee, des qu'on enapprochoit le doit, comme pour se defence ; mais, ainsi que je I'ai dit, cebee est beaucoup trop foible pour pincer, et il Test sur-tout dans l'ibis noir."|M. Savigny then goes on to state that the black ibis is ordinarily seen inAnnal. p. 134. , f § 4, p. 28. { p. 50.208 SACRED ANIMALS.troops, but the white solitary, or in groups of not more than eight or tenindividuals.These birds are now not resident in Egypt. They appear as soon as theNile begins to rise, and as it advances their numbers also increase, and as itsinks they also diminish ; their migration is complete when the inundationhas passed. Connecting the appearance of the ibis with the rise of theNile and the consequent fecundity of the earth, M. Savigny conceives thefirst motives to the veneration of this bird by the Egyptians to have arisen,and not to any power exercised by it in the destruction cf the serpents.The ibis is never found in the neighbourhood of salt water. M. Savignysought for it in vain even at the Lake Mental, which, receiving the water■ of the Nile, is rendered scarcely saline.At Medinet-Abou there is a temple especially dedicated to Thoth, theProtector of the Sciences, the inventor of writing and of all the useful arts,and, in short, the organizer of human society. In this temple he is representedwith the face of an ibis, and ornamented with varied head-dresses.The Ibeum or city of the ibis, wherein those sacred birds were generallyburied, is a little north of Minyeh and Oshmiinein, and is now called Taha-el-amudein (Tala of the Two columns). At Memphis there are thousandsof the embalmed ibis,* but they are generally very badly preserved. Theyappear to have been made with great heat, for, of one hundred drawn from thepits at Saccara, Jomard says hardly one was found perfect or entire. Theywere either prepared with bitumen or natron ; the latter were in a very badcondition. I have a specimen in which the plumage is very fairly preserved.As to the position of these birds in their embalmed state, thewings are placed in their natural situation along the sides of the body ; thehead and neck beneath the left wing, and the beak extends the whole lengthM. Denon says, " On trouve, dans le desert de Saccara, un grand nombre de grottessouterraines, novi talent deposes des momies hommes, et particulierement un grand nombrede momies d'ibis. Ces souterrains consistent en une longue galerie devisee en plusieurs ,des deux cotes desquels sont des recruits de huit pieds de haut sur dix de large.C'est la que sont les pots qui renferment les momies d'ibis : leur disposition est celle de bouteillesdans les caves. II est probable que Memphis etait la sepulture de tous les ibis mortsdans les temples, ou trouves dans les differences parties de I'Egypte." — Voyage, II. 40.THE MAMMALIA. 209of the body; the leg is drawn upon the thigh, and the thigh Has upon thebody. In this manner the bird assumes a somewhat conical shape. M.Savigny reports that M. Olivier found in the murray pits of birds at theplain of Saccara an embalmed ibis not done up in the usual form, and inthe interior of this mummy there were shells of the eggs of the bird, smallquadrupeds of different kinds, some entire, but of others only portions.This shows that the respect entertained by the Egyptians for the bodies ofanimals was so great as to extend itself to the preservation of even thefragments of their bodies. The eggs of the ibis have been found preservedin the tombs dedicated to this bird.* It has been said to be the onlyanimal enclosed in a case when embalmed. This, however, is not the fact,but it is excessively rare for any other animal to be so arranged. AtMemphis the bird is deposited in a vase ; at Hermopolis in small oblongcases of wood or stone ; and at Thebes only in its envelopes. f M. met with a specimen of this bird with the human form. I am happyin acknowledging my obligation to this distinguished traveller for a drawingof this specimen. See Plate XIII. fig. 6.In Plate LXI. fig. 3, of " Monumens Egyptians," published in folio atRome in 1791, there is a representation of the mummy of an ibis in thehuman form ; and Count De Caylus has figured in the sixth volume of hisRecueil d'Antiquites (Plate XI. fig. 1) another specimen of mummied ibisin human form. The bandages are very neatly applied, and folded withgreat precision. This specimen was in the possession of the Due de Sully ; itwas not opened. It measured one foot seven inches and four lines, and nowherewas the circumference greater than five inches and a half.The mummy pots are either of common stone or blue ware, or a hardpolished stone, and are of a lengthened conical figure. \Anas Nilotica — Turkey Goose.Belzoni has figured § for an ibis that which appears to me to have been agoose. This bird we know constantly occurs as an hieroglyphical emblem,and I have a small but exceedingly perfect specimen which had been ,347. I have a well preserved specimen of this kind.t See Plate XIII. Jig, 7, 8, J See Plate XIII. /^. 5, and vol. V. d'Antiq. Describe I'Egypte.§ See Plate XIII. fg. 9.2 E210 SACRED ANIMALS.served by embalming. It is represented in Plate Xlll. ficj. 10. Brownementions* the Anas Nilotica of Linnaeus (the turkey goose) as a large fowl,the flesh of which is palatable and salubrious food.Travels, p. 65.CHAPTER XV.ON THE SACRED ANIMALS— AMPHIBIA— PISCES— INSECTA.The crocodile typical of Typhon — principally worshipped at Arsinoe — mode of feeding theconsecrated crocodile — used as food at Elephantis, Tentyris, Ileracleopolis, and Apollo's— crocodiles embalmed and placed in catacombs expressly excavated for them — serpentsthe god Cneph worshipped in Thebais — the worship of serpents common throughoutEgypt — the adder — the atreus — the asp — the colder — the ophiophagi — lizard — toad —fishes : lepidotus a species of carp — oxyrhynchus — mantis forbidden at Elephantis — Variousprobably the perch held in veneration at Latopolis — the eel — doubtful whether to beconsidered as a sacred animal — sir— found embalmed according to Abd'Allatif — Insects.The Scarabaeus —synopsis of the genera and species — Buprestis — probably the (Estrus —Cantharis — squill or sea-onion.The Crocodile.It was at Crocodilopolis, or the City of Crocodiles, a town of Egypt, S. E.of the Lake Moeris, afterwards called Arsinoe, in honour of the wife andsister of Ptolemy Philadelphus, that the worship of this animal was particularlypractised. The crocodile was held sacred at Thebes, Ombos, in theenvirons of Lake Moeris, and in other parts of Egypt.At Arsinoe the priests nourished one to which the name of Lucius wasgiven ; it was fed upon bread, flesh, and wine offered to it by strangers ; it waspreserved in a particular lake, and, whilst reposing, the priests approachedthe animal, opened his mouth, and put the food within its jaws; after itsrepast it usually descended into the water and swam away, but it wouldsuffer itself to be handled, and pendants of gold and precious stones wereplaced about it.* Strabo relates that his host, a man of consideration,Mem. de r.A.cad. des Rescript., torn. IX. p. 25.212 SACRED ANIMALS.conducted him and his companions to the lake, and that he there saw thecrocodile at the border of it ; that one of the priests to whom was entrustedthe care of the animal opened his mouth and placed within it a cake,another a portion of flesh, and a third poured in some wine. The repastthus made, the animal passed over to the other side, to receive from otherhands similar marks of attention.Diodorus Siculus* says that the Egyptians reverenced the crocodile onaccount of their king Menes, whose life was said to have been preservedwhen in danger of drowning, by being floated to land upon the back of oneof these animals.Between Essouan and Thebes is the spite of the Bite nome. Thetemple of Ombos, which from its Greek inscription f first gave rise to theconjecture that, perhaps, many of the Egyptian temples may be attributedto the Polemics, was dedicated to the worship of the crocodile. In Elephants,the crocodile was called camps, which signifies an ark or receptacle,and the people of this city are said to have eaten its flesh.Herodotus tells us that in visiting the Labyrinth he was not permittedto descend into the subterranean apartments, because they were strictlyguarded, and were the places of interment for the sacred crocodiles, and thesepulchres of the kings under whose care they had been constructed. Mr.Hamilton observed two long narrow subterraneous galleries immediatelyunder the temple of Isis, near the level of the water at Ombos, and he saysthat they are constructed of very strong masonry, in the rustic manner,and have every appearance of being continued as far as the great temple,serving perhaps as secret passages for the priests in their mysterious ceremonies,or more probably for the convenience of conducting the sacredcrocodiles into the adytum of the temple. | M. de Pauw states § that inthe year 1770, having been particularly engaged in studying the topographyof Egypt, it first occurred to him that Copts, Arsinoe, and Crocodilopolisthe second, the towns most remarkable for the adoration of crocodiles, wereall situated on canals at some distance from the Nile. Thus, by the leastnegligence in allowing the ditches to be filled up, those animals, from beingI,ib. i. t Hamilton's Eg3T)tiaca, p. 75. J Egyptian, p. 80.4 Philos. Dissert. II. 100.THE AMPHIBIA. 213incapable of going far on dry land, could never have arrived at those threeplaces, where they were considered as the symbols of water fit for drinkingand watering the fields, as we learn from ^lian, and more particularly in apassage of Eusebius.* As long as this worship was in vogue, the governmentmight remain assured that the superstitious would not neglect to repairthe canals with the greatest exactness.At Ombos, the remains only of two temples are now to be found.Denon and Hamilton have remarked upon the peculiarity of the largertemple in having two entrances. The greatest part of the paintings withinrelate to the adoration of the crocodile, and every where, according toDenon, t offerings are addressed to the figure of a deity (Saba) in humanform, but with the head of this animal. In the second temple, especiallydedicated to Tj^hon, the figure of the evil genius is also represented withthe head of a crocodile, but with the body of a bear. And atTaud Denon Jsaw another temple dedicated to the crocodile, where the animal was frequentlyrepresented with the head of a hawk ; and to the south of thistemple he found the ruins of a large pond which he presumes served eitherfor the keeping of the crocodiles or the sacred fishes ; however, it appearsthat they were not peculiar to temples where the crocodile was adored, butwere merely tanks for religious use.^- Although the flesh of this animal has a musky flavour, it was used asfood at Elephantis, Tenths, Heracleopolis, and ApoUonopolis, which lattercity, according to Strabo, was remarkable for making war against the crocodiles,and Mr. Hamilton observed in the large temple at Edfou the representationof a priest, over whose head a hawk is flying with the crux abstainhis claws, piercing the head of a crocodile with a spear. At ApoUono-polis, all except the priests, who considered it as fish, were obliged to tasteof the flesh of this animal. Strabo speaks § largely of the aversion of theTentyrites for the crocodile. The inhabitants of Tentyris, he says, abhorthe crocodile, and make continual war against it as an animal of the mostdangerous character. Others, regarding it as pernicious, avoid it; theTentyrites, on the contrary, seek it out, and destroy it, if possible. ThePraeparat. Evangel, lib. iii. c. 1 1. f Voyage, torn. II. p. 16. J Ibid. torn. II. p. 21.§ Lib. xvii.214 SACRED ANIMALS.Psvlla of Cyrene have been supposed to be endowed with supernaturalpowers over the serpents ; the Tentyrites, in like manner, have been said tohave no less dominion over the crocodile ; in short, they boldly plunge into themidst of the Nile, and are not known to receive any injury from the attempt.In the spectacles at Rome, several crocodiles were placed in a basin ofwater, which, having an opening in one of the sides, admitted of theircoming out. The Tentyrites threw themselves into the water amidst theseanimals, bound them with fillets, and dragged them out. Having exposed themto the gaze of the spectators, they, in the most intrepid manner, returnedthem into the basin. It is also said that they were so bold and dexterousin hunting these animals that they would leap on their backs, and placing astick across their mouths as they opened them to bite, managed them aswith a bridle, and brought them to land.*The crocodiles were embalmed and deposited in catacombs purposely excavatedfor them. Mr. Hamilton visited one of these situated about a milefrom Ombos ; it was on the side of a light sandy bank, and the entrancewas very low. The natives who showed it said it went to a great distanceunder ground, and they brought out many skulls, jaws-bones, spines, tails,&c., of these animals, on which were still to be seen the bitumen whichpreserved them, and the cotton cloth in which they were wrapped. fBelzoni speaks of having only seen the head of this animal embalmed,which was probably the case when they had attained any considerable size.The collection of M. Passalacqua contains eleven specimens of small crocodile,six of which have been unrolled. I owe to my learned friend Mr.Douce, in company with my friend Dr. Richardson, the opportunity ofexamining one of this kind of mummies, and to his kindness I am indebtedfor the specimen figured in Plate XII. jig. 8, 9, now* in my collection.The bandage, or rather envelope in immediate contact with thebody of the animal, was of a very coarse texture. Jomard says that henever met with an entire crocodile embalmed; it was only the head, theremainder of the animal being represented by stalks of palm-trees, bandages,&c. At Eleithia the crocodile was mostly found. He saw also false*• Univ. Hist. I. 500. Pliny, lib. viii. c. 45. t Egyptian, p. 79.THE AMPHIBIA. 215mummies of the crocodile.* Two of the mummies in M. Passalacqua'scollection (Nos. 351 and 354) are enveloped in bandages of different colours.Mr. Wilkinson acquaints me that mummied crocodiles are foundin the caves of Maabdeh, opposite Manfaloot, perfectly preserved, and ofthe largest size.Serpents.The Egyptians (according to Porphyry) acknowledged one intellectualAuthor or Creator of the world, under the name of Cneph ; and that theyworshipped him in a statue of human form, and dark-blue complexion,holding in his hand a girdle and a sceptre, wearing upon his head a royalplume, and thrusting forth an egg out of his mouth. By the egg thrust outof the mouth of this god was meant the world, and from this Cneph wassaid to be generated, or produced, another god, whom the Egyptians callPhtha, and the Greeks Vulcan."According to Plutarch Cneph was worshipped by the inhabitants ofThebaid, who refused to contribute any part towards the maintenance ofthe sacred animals, because they acknowledged no mortal god, and adorednone but him whom they called Cneph, an uncreated and immortal being.Strabo says the temple of Cnuphis, or Cneph, was in the island ofElephantine, at the confines of Egj^pt and Ethiopia. Cneph is often alludedto as the Phoenician Agathodsemon, or the good genius, fThe worship of serpents is said to have been common in all the templesof Egypt. I An innocent adder represented Cneph as the divine goodness.Strength and power were personified by an asp. The priests of Ethiopiaand Egypt wore the latter coiled up in their bonnets of ceremony, § and thediadem of the Pharaohs was ornamented with this emblem. It is the sameas the uroeus, which, bending its bosom forward, is represented on thefront of the door of the Monolithe temple at Memphis. The serpent withhis tail in his mouth has been supposed to be an Egyptian emblem, andto denote time and eternity, but it is not to be found in any sculpturedmythological representation of an early epoch.p. 46. t See Marathon. lib. i. ; also, Euseb. Prsep. Evangg.t ^lian, Ub. X. c. 31. § Did. Sic. lib. iv.216 SACRED ANIMALS.Under various appellations and characters the serpent is to be found anobject of adoration and worship.* In Egypt there was a serpent namedThermuthis, regarded as sacred, and statues of Isis have been found inwhich the tiara of the goddess has been made up of the representationsof this reptile. This serpent Thermuthis is no other than the basilisk orroyal serpent, figures of which are so common in the tombs, and may beseen by referring to the plates which accompany the travels of Belzoni.What the priests of Egypt have related," says de Pauw,t " concerningthe basilisk, the aspic, and the thermuthis, is merely allegorical. This deceivedthe greater part of ancient authors, and particularly ./Ehan. Theserpent pelham-nasser , easily known among the hieroglyphics, by the veilunder its neck, which it puffs out at will, was the reptile generally takenfor the aspic of Egypt, as we find from the words of Pliny and Lucian.Yet nothing is more certain than that the pelham-nasser has no venomousqualities, any more than the ceraste,X concerning which so many fableshave been published. The Egyptian viper was the aspic employed byCleopatra ; and the same reptile occasioned the death of the learned Deme-triesPhalareus, whose catastrophe is attributed by Cicero to the infamousdynasty of the Polemics."The ceases is very common in Egypt, but is never used as food as somehave erroneously supposed.Shaw says that more than 40,000 persons in Cairo and the neighbouringvillages lived upon no other food than lizards and serpents. These peoplewere called Ophiophagi (Eaters of serpents), |1 and among other religiousM. Larcher quotes from .delian (lib. xvii. cap. 5), that Phylarchus relates that greathonours are rendered in Egypt to the asp, and that by these honours, and the food that isgiven to them, they become tame, and live amongst the children without doing them any harm.They come from their holes when called, by a noise made with the fingers. The Egyptians,after their dinner, place on the table meal moistened with wine and honey, and call to theass, which come and take their food. This kind of asp is called " Thermouthis."t Note, vol. I. p. 1 14.X On the contrary the ceases and the asp are decidedly, the most venomous of the serpentsof Egypt. The asp is not the viper, but a species of cobra.II It is scarcely necessary to observe that this is not true. The sect who perform the ceremonyof tearing the snakes with their teeth in the religious processions of the pilgrimage, andTHE AMPHIBIA. 217privileges they were entitled to the honour of attending more immediatelyupon the embroidered hangings of black silk, which are made every yearfor the Kaaba of Mecca, and conducted with great pomp and ceremony fromthe castle through the streets of Cairo. Upon these occasions numbers ofthis order sing and dance before it, and throw their bodies into a variety ofenthusiastic gestures. These acts of devotion, however ludicrous they mayappear to us, have been always looked upon with reverence by the Easternnations.*The sacred ceases were embalmed and buried in the temple of Jupiter.They are frequent about Thebes. It is, therefore, not a little surprisingthat the French Commission in Egj^pt should not have obtained a betterspecimen than that which is figured in the Description de I'Egj^pte, andwhich is the only fragment of the kind seen by the naturalists and antiquariansengaged in this expedition. I have examined several and found themin various states of preparation. There were generally five or six or moreenclosed in one envelope. In some instances the bandaging was very carefullyarranged, and the cloth was of a red colour, in addition to the usuallyyellow stained linen. Mr. Davidson has also opened some mummies ofsnakes and his observations coincide with mine. In Plate XII., /^. 1 , I haveshown the case containing an embalmed serpent. From the figure of theanimal which is carved upon the case, we may presume that it is the asp.The case is, Mr. Wilkinson thinks, made of tamarisk, extremely hard anddense; the whole has been plastered over and the serpent gilt. Theembalmed contents are exceedingly hard, consisting of cloth that has beendipped into heated bitumen. I have not yet attempted to unroll it. I knowof no other specimen of the kind, nor have I yet met with any traveller whohas seen a similar one.M. Passalacqua's collection contains two specimens only of embalmedserpent, and M. Geoffroy St. Hilaire was unable to determine their particularspecies.the prophet's birthday, are the Sadder ; but they do not eat them as food. The snake theyuse is generally the asp.Shaw's Travels, p. 430. See also Psal. xlix. 3. Psal. cl. 4. Exod. xv. 20. 2 Sam.-^-i. 14.2 F218 SACRED ANIMALS.Lizard.Abd'Allatif speaks of a lizard of the species called sohliyya enclosed inbandages and embalmed with care. He heard of its being found uponopening a sarcophagus of stone in which also another was embalmed.Toad.M. Passalacqua obtained four specimens of toad embalmed at Thebes.*M. Geoffrey St. Hilaire describes them thus: — " Saracens, d'esp^ce voisinedu crapaud."PISCES.LePIDOTUS — OXYRHYNCHUS Mentis VaRIOLE Spars AnGUILLASir.Various species of fish have been held sacred in different parts of Egypt.The carp at Lepidotum, a town of Thebais ; the mizdeh at Oxyrhynchus ;the Mantis at Elephantis ; the various at Latopolis ; the spares at Syene.According to Larcher the word Lepidus signifies scaled, but he is at aloss to conjecture the particular kind of fish. Linnaeus thought it the redcarp of the Nile (Cyprinus rubescens Niloticus) . The Abbe Sicard, in hisMemoirs of the Levantine Missions, asserts that it is the fish known at Cairoby the name of " bunni," which weighs from twenty to thirty pounds; andMaillet says that at Cairo there is a species of fish called "boulti," whichgreatly resembles the carp. Larcher remarks that if this be the " bunni" ofSicard it cannot be the same that Herodotus calls lepidotus, because, accordingto Maris, it was not always known in Egypt. Passalacqua states it to betheCyprinus lepidotus, the hinny, a small carp, and the fish that has givenrise to the proverb, " If you can find a better eat me not." De Pauw statesthat at Lepidotum, a town situated on the right bank of the Nile, in theCatal. 422 to 425.THE PISCES. 219district of Thebais, a fish was prohibited as food. This he conceives, froma passage in Theseus must have been a carp, yet its history is extremelydoubtful. It has been taken for the dorado, consecrated among the Greeksto Cytherea Venus, the same with the Nephthys of Egypt, or the wife ofTyphon ; but the latter fish, he thinks, was too remarkable to be mistakenby the Greeks in changing the term crysophrys, used among them, tolepidotos, which expression was already employed in the Orpheus.*M. Passalacqua collected several specimens of embalmed fish enclosedwithin cases representing the form of the animal. Some of them wereenveloped in bandages, others without. M. Geoffroy St. Hilaire examinedthem, and declared them to be of the species named by him in the Descriptionde I'Egypte as the Cyprinus lepidotus.The Egyptians were obliged by law to eat a fried fish on one day only inthe whole year. This was the 9th of the month Thoth.The OxYRHYNCHUs, doubtless, received as much honour at Oxyrhynchusas the lepidotus did at Lepidotum, and it is probable that this was confinedto their cities, for Plutarch tells us that the Egyptians held in abominationthe fishes lepidotus, phaedrus, and oxyrhynchus, from their having devouredone of the fourteen portions of the body of Osiris, separated and scatteredabroad by Typhon. Father Sicard calls the oxyrhynchus " quechoue," anddescribes it as of the size of the shad, and as having a pointed snout. f Thedisputes and wars between the Oxyrhynchites and Cynopolitans havealready been adverted to.The character of the Moths is unknown; it was forbidden at Elephantis.The Various, de Pauw says, was the perch, and held in great venerationat Latopolis.Anguilla. De Pauw denies to the eel the character of sacred ; but theGreeks have ridiculed the Egyptians for their worship of this fish. I havealready quoted the comic poet of Rhodes on this subject : —You fancy in the little eel some powerOf demon huge and terrible ; withinWe stew it for our daintiest appetite."I. 129.t A representation of the fish oxyrhynchus is given in Plate XLV. Jig. 5, of the MonumentEgyptians, Roma 1791, folio. The oxjThynchus has been conjectured to be the pike,220 SACRED ANIMALS.And Antitheses,* in his Lyon, also says that "the Egyptians, so wise inother things, are still more so in regarding the eel as the equal of the gods.It is of more consequence than they are. Our prayers suffice to obtainfrom the gods what we require of them ; but we must spend a dozendrachmas to get a smell only at the eels, so perfectly holy is that animal."Larcher defends the Egyptians from the ridicule of the Greeks. " The fleshof this and of some other fish," says he, " having a tendency to thickenthe blood and diminish perspiration, brings on those diseases that resembleelephantiasis. The priests forbade the people to eat them, and, in order tosecure obedience, caused them to be held sacred."Sir. Abd'AUatif relates that an emir, a man worthy of confidence,reported to him that, whilst at Rous, some persons came to him and announcedthat they had made an entry into an excavation where much treasurewas supposed to be deposited. He accompanied them with a troop ofsoldiers, and there found a large vessel, of which the orifice was firmlyclosely with plaster. It was with much difficulty opened, and its contentswere found to consist of a great number of packets about the size of afinger surrounded with bandages. Upon being unrolled, they were foundto be embalmed fishes of the species named sir. They were reduced todust ; the vessel containing them was removed to Rous, and deposited inthe hands of the prefect. The whole of the packets were unrolled in thepresence of more than one hundred persons, but nothing else was discovered.This little fish is the ^laivk of Dioscorides. De Sacy has given the followingtranslation of the Arabic text of this author: " Ruinous, autrementmanidous : c'est un petit poisson que les habitans de la Syria nomment sir;sa tete, brulee, pulverised, et saupoudree sur les gestures qui surviennentau siege, les guerit : la saumure faite de ce poisson, prise en barbarism,guerit les mauvais ulcers, corrompus et betides, qui viennent dans laboucher According to M. Geoffroy St. Hilaire, the sir is the joel fatherthat fish was never known in Egjipt. Mr. Wilkinson believes it to have been the mizzenor mizdeh, a species of mormyras.Athena Deipnosoph. lib. vii. cap. 13.t Manuscrit Arab, de Discords, a la Bill. Imp. trad, par De Sacy.THE INSECTS. 221ring hepsetus). At certain seasons this fish is exceedingly abundant in theNile, and a source of considerable traffic*INSECTS.Scarabaeus. — Beetle.The high veneration in which this insect was held by the Egyptians ismatter of notoriety, and the representation of it is one of the most commonlymet with among antiquities. The regard which has been paid to this insecthas been attributed to its power of sustaining life for an extraordinary lengthof time without food. It has arisen more probably from the fact of thebeetle being the first living animal observed upon the subsidence of thewaters of the Nile, and hence has been regarded as the emblem of regenerationor reproduction. ''The antiquity of the worship of the scarabseus is very great. From theaccount of De Pauw.f it would appear to have been common to the Ethiopians,and other inhabitants of Africa, even before Egypt was inhabited.Traces of the same worship are found, according to this author, in theholy cricket of Madagascar, and even among the Hottentots, who look withveneration on the persons over whom the scarabseus with golden rays, orthe horn beetle of the Cape, chances to pass.The scarabseus has been regarded as emblematical of the sun. It isgenerally represented with its ball, and according to Plutarch these insects,casting the seed of generation into round balls of dung, as a genial nidus,and rolling them backward with their feet, while they themselves lookdirectly forward, are considered solar emblems. As the sun appears toproceed through the heavens in a course contrary to the signs, thus thosescarab<3ei turn their balls toward the west, while they themselves continuecreeping toward the east ; by the first of those motions exhibiting thediurnal, by the second the annual motion of the earth and the planets. Itis also a type of spring, of fecundity, and of the Egyptian month anterior tothe rising of the Nile, as it appears in that season of the year which immediatelyprecedes the inundation. |The reader is referred to a very copious note on this subject by De Sacy, in his Translationof Abd'AUatif, pp. 278—288. Also, pp. 321—324. f H- 104. J See Psalms, p. 9.222 SACRED ANIMALS.Mr. Hamilton describes * the ruins of a magnificent temple marking thesite of the ancient Bite nome. Some of the hieroglyphics of this interestingmonument serve to explain the deities which were worshippedwithin its walls — the crocodile and the sun ; or, more properly speaking,the sun under the mysterious emblems of the crocodile and the beetle. Thislatter animal, with the ball or circle within its claws, is frequently representedon the most conspicuous part of the building, and the former is generallyseen couchant on an altar or table, receiving the adorations and offerings ofhis votaries. The same author tells us also that in the most conspicuouspart of the great temple, priests are paying divine honours to the scarabseusor beetle, which is placed upon an altar; and, that it might have a characterof more mysterious sanctity, it is generally represented with two mitredheads : that of the common hawk, and that of the ram with the horn ofAmmon. This insect is said to have been typical of the sun, because itchanges its appearance and place of abode every six months, or because itis wonderfully productive, t Montauban and Count Caylus have describedmonuments in which Egyptian women are seen feeding the scarabsei onaltars.As the scarabseus has always been considered a symbol of the EgyptianMinerva, it is constantly found upon military rings. The Egyptian militia(the Clashes and Hermotybes) were established principally in Sais, wherea temple was erected to Minerva, who was considered by the soldiers astheir guardian. The scarabseus was their amulet. Arnobius states | thatsome chapels were entirely dedicated to the scarabseus.The beetles in the zodiac of Dendera have, according to Dr. Young, § muchmore of a mythological than of an astronomical nature. The beetle nearthe beginning of the zodiac is the Avell-known symbol of generation, and heis in the act of depositing his globe : on the opposite side, at the end of thezodiac, is the head of Isis, with her name as newly born ; both the longfemale figures are appropriate representations of the mother ; and the zodiacbetween them expresses the "revolving year" which elapsed between thetwo periods. This explanation Dr. Young conceives to be completely con-egyptian.chap. V. On the Antiquities between Es-soudan and Thebes.tp. 88. t Adversus Gent. lib. i. ^ Suppl. to Envy. Brit. Art. Eg-j/y)/, p. 51.THE INSECTS.fined by a similar representation of two female figures on the ceiling of thefirst tomb of the kings at Biban-el-Molouk ; one with the beetle, the otherwith the name of the personage just born : between them, instead of thezodiac, are two tablets, divided into 270 squares, or rectangles, correspondingto the number of days in nine Egyptian months, with ten circles placedat equal distances, probably intended to represent full moons, and relating tothe ten incomplete nations to which those days must belong. The number270 is too remarkable to be supposed to have been introduced by mei'eaccident ; and, when the argument is considered as a confirmation of otherevidence in itself sufficiently convincing, the whole must be allowed to befully conclusive. Dr. Young has remarked that all the inscriptions on thescarabsei run from right to left, so that if they were used as seals the impressionmust have assumed the form which is somewhat less usual in othercases.M. Passalacqua found an embalmed scarabaeus at Thebes. * M. Latreillestates this to be the copris sabaus of Fabricius.fCatal. No. 441. -t The Rev. F. W. Hope has obligingly favoured me with a short tabular synopsis of thegenera and species said by the best writers on entomology to belong to the scarabaeus sacer.Sacred Genera.Species of Ateuchus. (a)Species of Copris."Heliocantharus of the1. A. Egyptiorum, Lat.1. Copris (6) Isidis, Savigny.Egyptians.2. A. Sacer, Fab.2. Priscus, Fab.].<Cantharus of the Greeks.3. A. Sanctus, Fab.3. Sabffius, (c) Fab.Scarabaeus of the Latins.4. A. PiUularius, Fab.4. Lunar, Fab.Ateuchus of Weber and5. A. PuncticoUis, Lat.5. Mimas, Million.Patricius.6. A. Flagellation.2. Copris, Fab.3. Onitis.§§ From the temple at Kama, probably a Maris or Calcareous.(a) According to Mr. Mac Lay, good representations of the following'species of Ateuchusmay be traced in the sculpture and drawings from Egypt : viz. 1. A. semipunctatus. Fab.2. A. laticolhs, Linn. 3. A. morbillosus. Fab. 4. A. puncticollis, Lat.(6) Mons. LatreiUe states that a Copris, somewhat allied to Midas and Hamadryas (bothIndian species) was worshipped at Heliopolis. Patricius describes two species from tropicalAfrica (Giganteus and Anterior), and from the same country the following seven described224 SACRED ANIMALS.BUPRESTIS.This genus of insects is remarkable for its rich metallic colours, frequentlyhaving the appearance of the most highly polished gold or copper. Latreillesupposes their fine green colour have given to these insects their consecrationto religious ceremonies. It may also have arisen from some transformationof the animal. The buprestis gibbon has been found embalmed by and is common in Senna, Nubia, and the Cape of Good Hope.Although the above species of buprestis has been found embalmed, thereare great doubts whether the insect so named is the buprestis of the Greeks.The derivation of the word implies insects, which produce inflammation inoxen, &c. These insects, if swallowed by cattle when grazing, are said toproduce a disease called Tympanites, and this induces Mr. Hope to believebuprestis a lytta, mylabris, or melos, all which are dedicatory insects, and,if swallowed, would probably have the effect described. MoufFet, however,thinks buprestis was a carabus ; the former opinion is mere likely to beaccurate, as the carabidse are chiefly ground beetles, while the former arefound on grass and other herbage. Mr. Hope thinks it not unlikely thatbuprestis was the same as oestrus of the Greeks. The oestrus bevis depositsits eggs on the back of cattle ; when hatched the grubs work their way intothe skin, forming at length tumors and abscess, they live on the juices ofinsects, allied to Copris Isidis in form, are in Mr. Hope's collection, viz. C. Osiris, C. Apis,C. Memnon, C. Sesostris, C. Moeris, C. Shishaek.(c) An insect closely allied to this species was found embalmed by Passalacqua. Mr. Hopedoubts whether C. sabres. Fab., is ever found in Egypt. The C. pithecius closely resemblesit, and has probably been mistaken for it. Latreille's remark, " Variety et femelle du busiersabeen," seems also to express a doubt. Other insects, and even Crustacea, are found inscribedor engraved on the temples and monumental needles of Egypt. Among the former we discoveran Apis, Sphex, and Pompous. Among the Arachnoid, Galeodes, and Scorpio, andunder the sign of Cancer, there are good representations of Leucosia, Pinnotheres, Fortunes,and Attacks.THE INSECTS. 225the animal till fully grown, then work their way out, and drop to the earth,in which they change into the pupa state. MoufFet gives us the following-signsof an animal having swallowed a buprestis : — " Si quis Buprestis intushaubert, eadem fere patter quae a Cantharides : Corpus in tumors attoliturac si tympanic laboraret, fatuus copia inter autem et carne valde multiplicity."This passage agreeing altogether with the Natural History of theOestrus would incline one to think buprestis the same insect. As the godApis was worshipped under the form of an ox, it is not likely the Egyptianscould have failed to observe the oestrus, particularly as they discovered asmall mark on the tongue resembling a cantharis. The effect produced onthe sacred oxen being found not ultimately injurious to their health (as theCastri always attack the healthiest beasts), they became objects of veneration.As the Greeks derived their notions of heliocantharus, cantharus, or sacredbeetle from the Egyptians, so also it is highly probable they did the samerespecting buprestis.«Cantharis.An embalmed specimen of one of the species of this rapacious genus ofinsects, a genus which preys not only on other insects, but also on its owntribe, is mentioned as being in the collection of M. Passalacqua (No. 442) ;he obtained it at Thebes.From the above description the cantharis seems to belong to the carabidaefamily. Mr. Hope is not aware, however, that any true carabus hashitherto been recorded as Egyptian. It may, therefore, belong to Scares,Anglia, or Diagonal. It is rather singular that Monsieur Passalacqua hasnot given us Latreille's opinion on cantharis, as he has on the rest of theembalmed insects.SciLLA — Squill, Sea Onion.DiODORUs Sinuous tells us that different kinds of leguminous and bulbousplants were permitted as food in particular provinces and prohibited inothers. M. De Pauw says* that "on the eastern bank of the PersianI. 130.2 G226 SACRED ANIMALS.mouth, in a canton never formed into a prefecture, but dependent apparentlyon the Sethroite nome, stood a temple where the sea-leek was worshipped,and probably the kind with red roots." The sea-leek or squill* is an articleof medicine much esteemed in the present day, and the reason of the strangeworship of it may, perhaps, be found in the virtues it possesses of relievingdisorders of obstruction and consequent effusion with which it appears theinhabitants of Pelusium were particularly affected. The tympany of Pelusiumis represented in several small Egyptian figures said to have been made atPelusium, and represent daemons rather than human beings, with theirbodies immoderately distended. The disorder appears to have been producedby a marshy soil in which Pelusium was situated, and it was alsoexposed to the wind blowing from the east and carrying thither the vapoursof the Lake Sirbon, impregnated with bitumen and sulphur.The Egyptian onions, Browne tells us,t are remarkably mild, more sothan the Spanish, but not so large. They are of the purest white, and thelamina are of a softer and looser contexture than those of any other species.They deteriorate by transplantation, so that much must depend on the soiland climate. They remain a favourite article of food with all classes, andit is usual to put a layer or two of them, and of meat, on a spit or skewer,and thus roast them over a charcoal fire. The desire of the Israelites forthe onions of Egjrpt, Mr. Browne says, is not to be wondered at.Mr. Wilkinson found the squill in the desert of Egypt on both sides of the Nile ; it is anindigenous plant of the country,t Travels, p. 127.CHAPTER XVI.ON DECEPTIVE SPECIMENS OF MUMMIES.Deceptive specimens of frequent occurrence — Mr. Maddens description of the frauds practisedby the Arabs at Gournah — Blumenbach's examination of several fictitious mummies.Frequent deceptions have been practised in the manufacture of mummies,as we have seen in a previous chapter. I purchased three mummies at thesale of the museum of the late Mr. Heaviside, to whom they had been presentedas Egyptian. I have opened two of them, one apparently that of aninfant of very tender age, the other that of a child about six or seven years.The former consisted literally of saw-dust, bundles of rags of variousdescriptions, and a portion of stick to serve the place of the spine. Therewere some of the vertebrae of a cat mixed up with the dust. The bandagesenclosing this rubbish were of the true Egyptian character, and had, doubtless,been taken off from other and real mummies in the country. The facewas formed of linen covered with plaster of Paris, and carefully made out.The second specimen was of a similar manufacture, the face of the samedescription, but the contents of the head consisted of the bones of a humanskull about the age of eight years, which led me in the first instance tothink that it had been a genuine mummy; but, upon examination, I foundthree temporal bones, which was conclusive on the matter. Around thebody of this figure were the proper kind of bandages, and some linen withhieroglyphics painted upon it. The contents consisted of bones of variouskinds, some belonging to a human foetus, others of a more advanced age,and some bones of the monkey, and the entire hand of a small species ofthis animal. M. Jomard mentions the making up of mummies similar tothese.*Descr. des Hj-pogees, p. 41.228 DECEPTIVE SPECIMENS OF MUMMIES.M. de Maillet says that in some of the chambers of the tombs heaps ofbones and pieces of linen, such as I have described, may be seen ; andthat the outer bandages of genuine mummies lead been removed to coverfictitious ones. Among other travellers Mr. Madden bears his testimonyto the frauds practised by the Arabs of Gournah. Having cured one ofthese old inhabitants of the tombs of a fever, he was permitted to penetratefurther into the habitation of the troglodyte than customary, and he givesthe following as the description of his visit : " His dwelling was in the mostspacious chamber of a superb sepulchre, the walls where covered with paintings,the roof was supported by four magnificent pillars, his divan wasformed of an inverted coffin, and the lamp, which feebly illumined thisgloomy chamber, was made of the cover of an alabaster vase. Variousantique utensils furnished his cupboard, and the screen which separatedthe women's alcove from the common chamber was formed principally ofthe cloth torn from the mummies. It was with great difficulty I couldprevail on him to let me visit the interior of the tomb ; I did so, however,on the condition of not telling any thing of what I saw to the Franks atGournah, and, to my utter surprise, the first thing I observed, at the extremityof the gallery, was a manufacture of mummies. Three beautifulmummy-cases were laid open, an ordinary mummy was placed in the last,the original one having been previously pillaged ; and what convinced meof the fraud was several new wooden pegs lying on the cover of the largecase, undoubtedly intended as substitutes to the old ones, which had beenbroken in bursting open the external case. There are generally threecases, and the nails which join them are made of hard wood. I asked noquestions : I knew it would be useless ; but my eye was inquisitive for thefew moments I remained, and some red paint in a coffee-cup beside thecoffins left me no doubt of the justice of my first suspicion. I proceededthrough a narrow passage into another cave, which was literally crammedwith mummies, placed in horizontal layers, as they had been, in all probability,deposited some thousands of years ago. Not one was upright, asHerodotus describes them to have been. I never found a mummy in astanding posture"*Travels, II. 79.DECEPTIVE SPECIMENS OF MUMMIES. 229In 1792 Professor Blumenbacli was in this country, and opened severalmummies belonging to private individuals, and in the collection of theBritish Museum. Some of these were fictitious, and he has given an accountof them in the Philosophical Transactions for 1794. A mummynot above one foot in length, of the usual form of a swathed puppet,wrapped up in cotton bandages, painted and gilt on its front part, andplaced in a small sarcophagus of sycamore wood, into which it fittedexactly, was permitted by its owner. Dr. Hartshorn, to be opened by theProfessor. The mask of the face was of a gypseous plaster, similar to theinfant one I have mentioned, but which here and there showed some signsof having been once gilt. Some fragments of a semicircular breast-platewere found. The lower part of the covering was divided into regular compartmentslike to the larger mummies, and on it were painted two standingfigures, Anubis with the jackal's head on the right, and Osiris with thehawk's head on the left. Twenty circumvolutions of bandages envelopedthe body, which, when displayed, was found to consist of a portion of theinteguments of a larger mummy, eight inches long and two inches in circumference.This mass was strongly impregnated with a resinous substance,and appeared to have been purposely shaped into its present form.Another specimen which belonged to my late friend Dr. Lettsom ratherlarger than the preceding, but resembling it in many particulars, was alsoopened, and was found to consist of a great number of detached bones ofthe skeleton of an ibis, here and there impregnated with resin. ProfessorBlumenbacli was permitted by the trustees of the British Museum to examineamong other mummies a specimen from the Albanian collection. This wasalso small in size, and the mass was found to have for its centre a humanOS humeri, being part of the mummy of a young person, perhaps abouteight years old, who had been embalmed with resin, and some of the integumentsimpregnated with this matter were found in it. The head of thebone formed the caput of the mummy, and the condyles the feet. Disappointedin the three preceding instances, the Professor was permitted toexamine another specimen in the Museum. It appeared by its stature tobe that of a person about fourteen years of age. This proved to be a realmummy ; but not in a good state of preservation, for little remained beyond230 DECEPTIVE SPECIMENS OF MUMMIES.the naked bones. One circumstance in the examination of this mummy isremarkable, and has not been noticed by any other author: there were twoartificial external ears made of cotton cloth and resin, and applied on eachside of the head. The right one was prominent ; the left had been displacedfrom its proper situation, and was much compressed and disfigured. Thecavity of the trunk was filled with bundled rags and dark brown vegetablemould intermixed with portions of resin. In the examination of anotherand a larger mummy measuring five feet five inches, deposited in the BritishMuseum, the Professor was not more fortunate than in the previous instance,for no trace of the soft parts was to be found — the naked bones aloneremained.Professor Blumenbach has described the mask of a mummy which belongedto Mr. Summons, which he says interested him much. The innerpart of this mask was of sycamore wood, and the outer surface was shapedby means of a thick coat of plaster in bas-relief into the form of a face, thesurface of which seemed to have been stained with natural colours, butwhich time had now considerably blended and obscured. Upon steepingthis mask in warm water he was enabled to separate all the parts of it, andhe thus discovered the fraudulent artifices that had been practised in theconstruction of it. The wooden part was evidently a piece of the front ofthe sarcophagus of the mummy of a young person, and, in order to convertits alto-relievo into the basso relievo of the usual linen mask of a mummy,plaster had been applied on each side of the nose, after which paper hadbeen ingeniously pasted over the whole face, and the paper then stainedwith the colours generally observed on mummies.The sculpture and paintings of the cases and sarcophagi in which mummieshave been transported into this country one might expect would enable usto form something like a judgment of the period at which the mummy wasmade; but it is well known, and it is well supported by the evidence oftravellers whose veracity may be depended on, that the Arabs hare beenin the practice of breaking in pieces the mummies contained in the tombsand enclosed within the most ornamented sarcophagi, to abstract from themidols, jewels, &c., which are known to have been frequently placed withinthem. Fictitious mummies have then been substituted for the originals.CHAPTER XVII.ON THE GUANCHES— THE MUMMIES OF PERU— THE DesiccatedBODIES AT PALERMO— THE BURMAN Embalming.Modes of preserving the dead adopted by viany nations — the bodies at Toulouse — in St.Michael vaults — the Giianches — mode of embalming — specimens of this description —Bltimenbach's account of the skull of a Guanche — the peculiarity of the teeth — mummies ofthe ancient Peruvians — their position and appearance — specimens of this kind cf desiccatedbodies — Captain Basil Hall's account of a Peruvian mummy — desiccated bodies at Palermodescription of the Cadavery by Captain Smyth, Captain Sutherland, and Sonnini —embalmed Burma priests — Captain Cokeys account of the mode of embalming a Burmapriest — the ceremony of its destruction.Having treated of the methods of embalming 'adopted by the Egyptians, itis proper to notice the practices which have been resorted to by othernations for the preservation of their dead. The principal of these deservingof notice are —I. The mummies of the Canary Islands, commonly called the Guanches.II. The mummies of the ancient Peruvians.III. The desiccated bodies at Palermo.IV. The embalmed Burma priests.In dry, and particularly in calcareous vaults, bodies may be preserved foragreat length of time. In Toulouse bodies are to be seen quite perfectalthough buried two centuries ago. In the vaults of St. Michael's church,Dublin, the same effect is produced, and Mr. Madden says he there saw thebody of Henry Shears, who was hanged in 1798, in a state of preservationequal to that of any Egyptian mummy. The dryness of the air of UpperEgypt principally tended to prevent decomposition. In Lower Egypt themummies go to pieces on exposure to the external air, and in Alexandria,232 THE GUANCHES.'where the atmosphere is exceedingly moist, Mr. Madden saw severalmummies melt away in a damp storehouse where he kept them, and decompositiontake place after an exposure of forty hours to the humid air,though the same bodies had resisted corruption in a dry air for perhapsforty centuries.*I. The Guanches.In the Atlantic Ocean about four degrees south of the Madeiras, on thecoast of Africa, there is a cluster of thirteen islands known by the appellationof the Canary Islands. Of these, TenerifFe is the principal. In 1344,these islands were bestowed by the court of Rome on Luis de la Corda, theInfanta of Spain ; but the inhabitants repulsed, for nearly half a century,the expeditions which were sent to enforce the claims of the Infanta. Norwere these islands subdued until the latter part of the fifteenth century,when nearly all the original inhabitants of the country were destroyed.These people, now believed to be quite extinct, were called the Guanches, fand from the accounts of early historians it would appear that they werenot only a valiant people, but also considerably advanced in civilization. Itwould be out of place here to do more than allude to one of their mostremarkable customs, which approaches, in some manner, to that of the1^ ancient Egyptians, and relates to their embalming of the dead.In Glass's History of the Canary islands, | there is a translation from anancient Spanish MS. found in the island of Palma, one of the thirteen Ihave above alluded to, and from this curious document we learn that whenany person died they preserved the body in this manner: "First, theycarried it to a case, and stretched it on a flat stone, where they opened it,and took out the bowels ; then twice a day they washed the porous parts ofthe body, viz. the arm-pits, behind the ears, the groin, between the fingers,and the neck with cold water : after washing it sufficiently, they anointedTravels, II. 76.t Jos. de Mere (y Clavijo) Notices de las Isles de Canada. This author says the wordburn, from-which Guanche is derived, signifies Man. The Guanches have been said to betheremains of the primitive people of the Atlantis, alluded to by Plato in his Theseus.■ 1 4to. Lond. 1764.THE GUANCHES. 233those parts with sheep's butter, and sprinkled them with a powder made ofthe dust of decayed pine-trees, and a sort of brush-wood, which the Spaniardscall Dresses, together with the powder of pumice-stone ; then they let thebody remain till it was perfectly dry, when the relations of the deceasedcame and swaddled it in sheep or goats-skins* dressed, girding all tightwith long leather thongs ; they put it in the cave which had been set apartby the deceased for his burying-place, without any covering. The kingcould be buried only in the cave of his ancestors, in which the bodies wereso disposed as to be known again, f There were particular persons setapart for this office of embalming, each sex performing it for those of theirown. During the process, they watched the bodies very strictly, to prevent theravens from devouring them, the wife or husband of the deceased bringingthem victuals, and waiting on them during the time of their watching. "fM. Body de St. Vincent, in his Essay on the Fortunate Islands, a title bywhich they were sometimes called and well known, also treats of the modeof the preservation of their dead, and from him we learn that it was done byremoving the intestines, washing the body with salt water, filling the largecavities with aromatic plants, and then drying the body either in the sun orby means of a stove. In some cases it is stated that corrosive hqmds weremerely poured down the throat prior to the process of desiccation. Thisprocess is said to require fifteen or sixteen days, at the expiration of whichtime the body was folded in goats-skins, and then put in a kind of coffin,made out of one solid piece of wood, and this was deposited in a grottoexcavated in the solid rock. In caverns of this description, which are metwith on the eastern slope of the peak between Arica and Guitar, thesemummies or naxos, as they are called, are found in an upright position. Afew of these specimens have been brought to this country, and I have seenThe inhabitants of the Island of TenerifFe wore garments composed of dressed goats-skins.t " Not many years ago two of those embalmed bodies were taken out of a cave : they wereentire, and as light as cork; but quite fresh, and without any disagreeable smell. Their hair,teeth, and garments, were all found fresh. About two years ago I employed some of thenatives of TeneriiFe to go into one of these caves (which are almost inaccessible) to try if theycould find any of those bodies ; they brought me some bones, pieces of goat-skin garments, &c.,and a skull with some hair upon it, which was black and lank ; the garments were quite fresh,and had the hair upon them." J p. 151.2 H234 THE GUANCHES.five. One of these is in my own possession : it formerly belonged to Dr.Lettsom, who obtained it, and another from TenerifFe, which he gave to theBritish Museum, but which has since been transferred to the Museum of theRoyal College of Surgeons. Neither of these is furnished with hair. Theupper part of the head of my specimen has, from long exposure, sufferedinjury even to the bones ; the lower part of the face with the remainder ofthe body is quite perfect. The skin has the appearance of having beentanned and is quite elastic ; it preserves its follicular structure, and all thenails are perfect. It is a female, and the teeth and other parts denote itan a°-ed subject. There are the remains of a slight beard on the chin distinctlyto be felt at this day. The specimen at the Museum of the Collegeis that of a male ; the figure is diminutive ; it is very much distorted, and ofa very disagreeable appearance. Two very good specimens were shown privatelyin London a few years since, and were intended to be disposed of. Ido not know what has become of them ; but they were well worthy of attention.One of these, a male, had been deprived of its covering of goatsin the expectation of finding some treasure concealed within it ; butthe other, a female, was perfect and in good condition. In Trinity College,Cambridge, there is also a specimen, the hair of which is abundant and ino-ood preservation. Its aspect is disagreeable ; but an examination of itshows somewhat the manner in which it had been prepared. Each fingerand toe is separately bound by strips of leather.In Dudley's Annual Register,* I find the following notice :—Cadi, August 10, 1764.A few days ago a dead body was landed here, enclosed in a long skinnearly resembling that of a bear. It was found, with several others of thesame kind, in some caverns in the Canary Islands, where they are supposedto have been buried before the conquest of those islands by John deBetancourt, a Norman, in 1417, or by Peter de Vera, a Spaniard, in 1483.The flesh of this body is perfectly preserved, but is dry, inflexible, andhard as wood, so that to the touch it seems petrified, though it is not.The features of the face are very perfect, and appear to be those of a veryyoung man ; nor is that or any other part of the body decayed ; the bodyVII. 95.THE GUANCHES. 235is no more shrunk than if the person had not been dead above two or threedays, only the skin appears a little shrivelled. This body is sent to Madridto be deposited in the Royal Academy of Surgery. The case in which itwas placed had another small case within it, containing two or three vases,and a hand-mill, which were found in the same cavern."In the same work* is another notice of a specimen of Guanche : —Captain Young having touched at TenerLfFe, in his return from the coastof Guinea, had the curiosity to ascend the Peak with a guide ; whereon inacave (the burying-place of the ancient pagan inhabitants) he discoveredseveral dead bodies, sewed up in goats-skins, one of which he opened, anddiscovered a body perfect, fresh, and the features not in the least mutilated: some were seven feet long, and others five feet three inches. Heexpressed a great desire to obtain one of these bodies ; but the Romishpriest made many objections. These, however, a little gold removed, and heprocured him a female mummy. The body is perfect in every particular, thebowels are extracted, and the skin appears of a deep tanned copper colour.The hair is long and black, and retains the curl, and the teeth and nails ofthe toes and fingers are fresh. According to the tradition of the priest,and the extinction of the ancient inhabitants, it cannot be less than 500 yearssince the decease of this body. Indeed it may be as probably 1000,for, according to its appearance, it may as well continue ad infinitum asremain one year in its present condition. It looks like a tanned hide, andconsists of bone and skin ; the nerves, tendons, veins, and arteries, appeardistinctly like strings."Baron Humboldt has noticed the subject of the Guanches. " TheGuanches," says hest " famed for their tall stature, were the Patagoniansof the Old World; and historians exaggerated the muscular force of theGuanches, as, previously to the voyage of Bougainville and Corrode, acolossal force was conferred on the tribe that inhabited the southernextremity of America. I never saw Guanche mummies but in the cabinetsof Europe ; at the period of my journey they were very scarce. A considerablenumber, however, might be found, if miners were employed to openthe sepulchral caverns which are cut in the rock on the eastern slope of thePeak between Arica and Guitar. Those mummies are in a state of desic-Dudley's Annual Register, XVI. 66. An. 1773. f Personal Narrative, I. 278.236 THE GUANCHES.cation so singular, that whole bodies with their integuments frequently donot weigh above six or seven pounds, or a third less than the skeleton of anindividual of the same size recently stripped of the muscular flesh. Theconformation of the skull has some slight resemblance to that of the whiterace of the ancient Egyptians, and the incisive teeth of the Guanches areblunted like those in the mummies found on the banks of the Nile. Butthis form of the teeth is owing to art alone ; * and, on examining morecarefully the physiognomy of the ancient Canadians, able anatomists haverecognized in the cheek-bones and the lower jaw perceptible differencesfrom the Egyptian mummies. On opening those of the Guanches remains,of aromatic plants are discovered, among which the chenopodium ambroseis constantly perceived. The corpses are often decorated with smalllaces, to which are hung little disks of baked earth that appear to haveserved as numerical signs, and resemble the quippoes of the Peruvians, theMexicans, and the Chinese." In the fifth Decade of Professor Blumenbach'sCollection of Skulls he has figured (Tab. XLII.) the head of a Guanche,(Which he thinks to be that of a female. It was brought from TenerifFe toLondon, sewed up in goats-skins, and was so perfectly desiccated that theentire body weighed only seven pounds and a half, although, according tothe Professor, the skeleton belonging to a female of the same size would befound in its ordinary state of dryness to weigh not less than ten pounds-theskull is described as belonging to the Caucasian variety, and thereforein the same class as the Egyptian mummies, which it resembles in manyrespects. The facial part is, however, broader, the cheek-bones standingout. The top of the head is depressed ; the occiput projects out. Theforehead is spacious. The brim of the superciliary arch greatly projectsout to the external orbital or malar process ; the lower part of the face,from the nostrils to the chin short, the curvature of the lower jaw morebowed than elliptic and the chin rounded. But what is most singular, thecrowns of the lower incisor teeth (the top ones had fallen out) were notlancet shaped, but obtuse, almost cylindrical, the outer superficies rubbedaway ; in a word, such as are noted in various Egyptian mummies, fThis is not possible : the foundation of the teeth is peculiar, but quite natural, as will beseen by reference to Blumenbach's Decades Cranmer. Dec. V. p. 7. Tab. 42.t Corpse vero gentium primum inferior neutiquam scalpriformes ad memorandumPERUVIAN MUMMIES. 237That the inhabitants of the Canary Islands should have adopted a practicelos embalming in some measure similar to that of the Egyptians is rathersingular, seeing that they were separated from each other by the entirebreadth of Northern Africa ; and it is not a little surprising that Mr. Marstonshould have traced an affinity between the language of the Berbers orNumidia, where the remains of the Guanche tongue are to be found, andthe language of the Turks, near Egypt, as shown in a vocabulary collectedby M. Horseman.Blumenbach states that the viscera of the body of his Guanche hadbeen preserved within it. This does not appear to have been the case withmine, for through two large openings, one above the clavicle on the rightside, the other below the clavicle on the left, the several organs I shouldconceive had been extracted.My female Guanche measures four feet eleven inches, and that in theMuseum of the Royal College of Surgeons five feet.II. The Mummies of the ancient Peruvians.Mr. Fryer * has given an account of some articles taken from thegraves of the ancient Peruvians in the neighbourhood of Arica, on thewest coast of South America. In a grave which he caused to be openedin a place that appeared to have been a fishing village, and not to have beenused as a burial-place since the conquest of Peru by the Spaniards, he foundseveral articles of much interest. The graves extend for a mile along thecoast. Mr. Fryer found a tumulus, consisting entirely of graves in threecourses, one above the other. The space occupied by these graves did notexceed a cube of two feet square, being formed either of pieces of wood,apparently the masts and paddles of their boats, or of thin pieces of sandstone.The bottom he found invariably covered with a considerable quantityaptae, veni obtuse, fere cylindrical, extima superficie plana detritus, vero tales quale prideab alias et a me ipso in varies mumiis .egyptians annotated sunt." The incisor teeth of myspecimen, and also of that in the Museum of the Royal College of Surgeons, are wanting.Archaeological .delian, or Miscellaneous Tracts relating to Antiquity, published by theSociety of Antiquaries of Newcastle-upon-Tyne. Vc] 11. p. 248.238 PERUVIAN Mummies.of shell-fish, placed there, as he supposes, from religious motives, either forthe food for the person interred, or to serve for bait to his fishing-hook,which occur in every grave. A straw mat was placed upon this bed ofshells, on which the body was found. The body (he says) was in a sittingposture, the knees bent up close to the sides, the hands crossed over thebreast ; in this position it was enveloped in a woollen cloth, which, in itsmanufacture, resembled an extremely coarse crape, over which the ponchowas put, wrapped round the whole and tightly secured, and covered by aneat net-work of well-made cordage, with large meshes. The head wasenveloped in the same crape-like cloth, with a closely-woven cap, or surroundedby a wreath of feathers. The bodies were in a perfect state ofpreservation, dry, hard, and brown (like an Egj'ptian mummy, says Mr.Fryer), but soon smouldered away upon exposure to the air. Theirstate of preservation he attributes not to any mode of embalming thathad been adopted ; but solely to the perfect dryness of the atmosphere,and the sand and salt in which the bodies are deposited. On the breast,underneath the poncho, was a small bag, which contained coco, the leaf ofa plant very much used by the Peruvians for chewing, being mixed withwood, ashes, and lime, in the same manner as the betel nut is used in theEast Indies. In the joint of the elbow, on each side, where found somevessels of pottery, which, together with other earthen vessels found uponthe floor of the grave, a model of a boat, baskets, &c., is figured in thework from which this account is collected. In the graves of the females abag of cotton and a spindle were found in addition to those articles alreadymentioned.In the British Museum there is a small specimen of Peruvian mummysent to this country by Lord Colchester. It is wrapped up in a crimson-colouredcloth, which I am assured by Mr Brookes, who dug up thisspecimen, is always the colour of the envelope in which the bodies arefound, and was in a pit between two and three feet in depth. The pitsare very numerous, and found chiefly at Arica; the bodies are alwayswrapped up and tied, and the pits are never of any considerable depth. Thesaline nature of the earth, and the dryness of it, appear to be quite sufficientfor the purpose of embalming ; for animals of all kinds, thrown loosely intoPERUVIAN MUMMIES. 239the earth, are, with great certainty, preserved. By the permission of theBoard of Curators of the Museum of the Royal College of Surgeons, I amenabled to present to the reader the representation of an adult Peruvianmummy presented to the College by King George IV.*The following account is extracted from the Catalogue of the Museum, Part VI. No. 742.;' The body of a Peruvian, which was found in one of the native sepulchres, or guacas, insome calcareous hills in the district of Caxamarca, in Peru. Tradition, preserved among theinhabitants of the country, stated the spot in which the body was found buried to have beenthe site of a voluntary sacrifice of the life of a Curacy, one of an order of nobles, immediatelyfollowing in dignity the members of the blood royal. Colonel Thomas Heres, at that time(1821) Governor of the province of Caxamarca, hearing of this tradition, and knowing it tohave been the custom of the ancient Peruvians to bury with their dead whatever householdgoods or implements they had, during life, been possessed of, ordered these guacas to beopened. As he expected, he found therein various objects of interest, which he remitted tothe Museum of Lima. He also found, at about ten or twelve feet below the surface, threehuman bodies, viz. the above specimen, which is a male, another of a female, which crumbledto dust when exposed to the air, and a third of a young child about a year old, which latterwas presented by Colonel Heres to General Don Juan Gregory las Hers, and is preserved inthe Museum of Buenos Ayres. Tradition also places the period of interment a very shorttime previous to the arrival of Pizarro at Rima, or Lima, somewhere between 1530 and 1540.The only weapon found with the bodies was an axe, or bludgeon, of green jade-stone, verysimilar in shape to those brought from New Holland. Under the arm of the child was a ball,of two or three inches diameter, of very fine thread or worsted, of Vicugna wool. The bodieswere merely placed in an excavation in the earth of about ten feet deep. The soil is calcareous; and perhaps to this circumstance, as well as the dryness of the air, is to be attributedthe preservation of the bodies in an decomposed state. Indeed, throughout the highlandsof Peru, the dedicating process goes on so fast as to arrest the putrefactive process very much :animal substances wOl be completely dried up by mere exposure to the air. The bodies arenot found wrapped up in linen, as amongst the Egyptians, but they are sometimes coveredwith the skin of the Vicugna or Peruvian camel, bound closely to the body ^vith ligatures.The poorer classes were generally buried on the eastern aspect of mountains, while the richerwere entombed in their own dwellings ; the bodies being clothed in their accustomed garments,and the weapons, utensils, &c., they had used during life were buried with them ; the housewas then forsaken by the rest of the family, and the interior of its walls filled up with earth, soas to become quite solid. The bodies are generally found extended and lying on the back.The above specimen was brought to England by the late General Permission, deputy from thegovernment of Peru, as a present from General San Martin to his late majesty King Georgethe Fourth, by whom it was presented to the Museum in 1823."240 Peruvian MUMMIES.This figure* represents very accurately the position in which those dried(for it is really not proper to call them embalmed) bodies are met with.There is no hair upon this specimen ; but, three or four years ago, a veryfine example of the kind, with the hair very abundant, finely preserved,and ingeniously plaited, and lying over the shoulders, was exhibited inLondon. With the body was also found a kind of float, formerly used bythe natives in ferrying across rivers ; it consisted of three pieces of woodfirmly lashed together. The paddle to propel it, a peculiarly-shaped earthenvessel containing a fishing-line, a comb, and some decayed grains of Indiancorn, was also discovered in the pit. The position of the body correspondedperfectly with that in the College of Surgeons.In the Museum of the London University are two heads of Peruvians,taken also from the mummy-pits, and presented to the University byCaptain Landgrave, Ren. ; one of these has also the hair plaited, and acomb is attached to it. The hair of this is black, and appears coarser thanthat generally found on these heads. In the other specimen the hair is ofa lighter colour, fine and lank, as in most of the instances I have seen.A small portion of the skin only remains upon these specimens. CaptainBasil Hall has favoured the public with an account of a Peruvian mummy.The following is taken from his " Extracts from a Journal written on thecoasts of Chili, Peru, and Mexico." 12mo. Edinb. 1824.13th of Dec. — I went this morning to the palace to breakfast with theProtector, and to see a curious mummy, or preserved figure, which hadbeen brought the day before from a Peruvian village to the northward ofLima. The figure was that of a man seated on the ground, with the kneesalmost touching his chin, the elbows pressed to the sides, and the handsclasping his cheek bones. The mouth was half open, exposing a doublerow of fine teeth. The body, though shrivelled up in a remarkable manner,had all the appearance of a man, the skin being entire, except on oneshoulder. In the countenance there was an expression of agony very distinctlymarked. The tradition with respect to this and other similar bodiesis, that, at the time of the conquest, many of the Incas and their familiesPlate VI. fg. 5.DESICCATED BODIES AT PALERMO. twerepersecuted to such a degree that they actually allowed themselves tobe buried alive rather than submit to the fate with which the Spaniardsthreatened them.They have generally been found in the posture above described, in pitsdug more than twelve feet deep in the sand ; whereas the bodies of personsknown to have died a natural death are invariably discovered in the regularburying-places of the Indians, stretched out at full length. There wasseated near the same spot a female figure with a child in her arms. Thefemale had crumbled into dust, on exposure to the air ; but the childwhich was shown to us, was entire. It was wrapped in a cotton clothwoven very neatly, and composed of a variety of brilliant colours and quitefresh. Parts of the clothes also which the female figure had worn wereequally perfect, and the fibres quite strong. These bodies were dug up inapart of the country where rain never falls, and where the sand, consequently,is so perfectly dry as to cause an absorption of moisture so rapidthat putrefaction does not take place. The male figure was sent to Englandin the Conway, and is now in the British Museum"*Garcillasso de la Vega, who wrote a History of Peru and the Incas, issaid to have been allowed, before he left his country in 1579, to see thebodies of his royal ancestors who were placed in a sitting posture with theirhands crossed upon their breasts. fIII. The Desiccated Bodies at Palermo.About a mile from the city of Palermo is the famous burial place belongingto the convent of the Capuchins. It is a subterraneous apartment, dividedinto four galleries, in the walls of which there are niches containing deadbodies of all the Capuchins who have died in the convent since its foundation,as well as the bodies of several persons from the city, all standingpp. 72, 73. I believe this is the mummy preserved at the Museum of the Royal Collegeof Surgeons.t Art. Mummy, Envy. Metrop.2 I242 DESICCATED BODIESin an upright posture and habited in the clothes they usually wore. Theskin and flesh have, by a process of preparation, been rendered quite hardand resist putrefaction. It is said that some of them have been preservedin their recesses 250 years, and no decay has taken place. This burial-placealso contains the bodies of some of the nobility and more opulentpeople ; but they are confined in chests locked up, and of which the nearestrelations hold the keys.Captain Smyth visited this cemetery, and he says* that, upon descendingit, it is difficult to express the disgust arising from seeing the humanform so degradingly caricatured, in the ridiculous assemblage of distortedmummies that are here hung by the neck in hundreds, with aspects, features,and proportions, so strangely altered by the operation of drying, ashardly to bear a resemblance to human beings. From their curious attitudes(he observes), they are rather calculated to excite derision than the awfulemotions arising from the sight of 2000 decayed mortals. There are fourlong galleries with their niches filled, besides many coffins containing noblemenin their court-dresses ; and among the principal personages is a kingof Tunis, who died in 1620. At the end of the great corridor there is analtar, the front of which is formed of human teeth, skulls, &c., and inlaidlike mosaic work. There is also an apartment at the end of one of thegalleries in which the bodies in various states of putrescence were undergoingthe operation of drying, which is effected by means of an oven. It has beensaid that they were thus prepared by being gradually dried before a slowfire. Captain Smyth has given a representation of this cadavery in hisMemoir on Sicily.In a tour to Constantinople by Captain Sutherland, a description of thePalermo cadavery is given. After the funeral service is performed, he says,the bodies are dried in a stove, heated by a composition of lime, whichmakes the skin adhere to the bones. The following is the account givenby this gentleman of his visit to this celebrated repository. " It was nearlydusk when we arrived at the convent. We passed the chapel, where one ofMemoir of Sicily and its Islands, 4to. Lend. 1824, p. 88.AT PALERMO. 243the order had just finished saying vespers, by the gloomy glimmering of adying lamp. We were then conducted through a garden, where the yew,the cypress, and the barren orange, obscured the remaining light ; andwhere melancholy silence is disturbed only by the hollow murmuring of afeeble water-fall. All these circumstances prepared our minds for the dismalscene which we were going to behold ; but we had still to descend aflight of steps impervious to the sun ; and these, at last, conveyed us tothe dreary mansion of the dead. But notwithstanding the chilling scenethrough which we had passed, notwithstanding our being in the midst of morethan a thousand lifeless bodies, neither our respect for the dead, nor for theholy fathers who conducted us, could prevent our smiling. The physiognomiesof the deceased are so ludicrously mutilated, and their muscles are socontracted and distorted in the drying, that no French mimic could equaltheir grimaces. Most of the corpses have lost the lower part of the nose ;their necks are generally a little twisted ; their mouths drawn awry in onedirection, their noses in another ; their eyes sunk and pointed differentways ; one was perhaps turned up, the other drawn down. The friars soonobserved the mirth which these unexpected visages occasioned ; and one ofthem, as a kind of memento, pointed out to me a captain of cavalry, who hadjust been cut off in the pride of his youth : but three months ago he was theminion of a king — the favourite of a princess — alas ! how changed ! even onearth there is no distinction between him and the meanest beggar. This ideain a moment restored my reflection ; and I felt with ful force the folly ofhuman vanity." S he^l'<r. Jerk. lix~!^^- / ■ 3.0 / — 'i ':i cSonnini also describes this lugubrious mansion, and remarks that "apreservation like this is horrid." The skin discoloured, dry, and as if ithad been tanned, nay, torn in some places, is glued close to the bone. Itis easy to imagine, from the different grimaces of this numerous assemblageof fleshless figures, rendered still more frightful by a long beard on the chin,what a hideous spectacle this must exhibit ; and whoever has seen a Capuchinalive may form an idea of this singular repository of dead friars.*The relations of the deceased are said to be obliged to send two wax tapers244 EMBALMED BURMAN PRIESTS.every year for the use of the convent, in default of which the body is takendown and thrown into a charnel-house. But for the vacancies occasionedby non-payment of this condition, niches could not be found sufficient forthe dead.In the cathedral of Palermo there are several magnificent sarcophagi offine red porphyry, the workmanship of which, according to Captain Smyth,*attests great age, it being much too good for the date of the Sicilian sovereignswhose remains are enclosed within them. In 1781, the sarcophaguscontaining the body of Frederic was opened, and it was found that althougha period of 444 years had elapsed since his entombment the corpse wasperfect and entire. It was clothed in a triple imperial dress, the alba, dalmatia,and pluviale, all highly ornamented with embroidery, gold, andpearls.IV. Embalmed Burma Priests.I AM much indebted to my friend Captain Coke for an account of the modesof embalming practised in the Burma empire. This gentleman wasattached to the 45th regiment, engaged in the late war, and was an eyewitnessof the curious and interesting circumstance he relates respecting the> disposal of the remains of a Burma phongyee, or priest. During his stayin this country Captain Coke had frequent opportunities of witnessing thisextraordinary funeral ceremony, and the following is the account given tomeby this intelligent officer : —The first body of a phongyee I saw prepared for the above public exhibitionwas a few months after our regiment had left Rangoon, and retiredto the eastern bank of the Saladin River, which divides the Burma territoriesfrom those districts ceded to the British on the Tenasserim coast.We were at that time busily employed in housing ourselves against thefury of the approaching monsoon, from whose first blast our canvasdwellings would be a poor protection. Every day was an object of importanceto us, and every workman was easily grasped at, though demandingthree times the usual wages of an Indian labourer : judge, then,Memoir, p. 76.EMBALMED BURMAN PRIESTS. 245of my dismay and astonishment at finding myself one morning deserted,without any previous warning, by my whole host of bamboo splinters, rattanpeelers, cadjan carriers, and bungalow builders. I had invariably made a pointof treating them kindly ; so thinking that the urgency of the case must begreat, which compelled them to leave me in such a helpless state, I for thatday was content to put up with the uninteresting spectacle of my housein statu quo. The next day coming, and bringing with it no change, mystock of patience was exhausted, and I sallied forth fully resolved uponsolving the mystery in person. Walking down to my architect's or buildingfactotum's house, in the village of Bo, I found him with several of hisfellow-labourers set hand and heart at work in the construction of a hugeelephant of wood, some eighteen or twenty feet in height, at whose feet laya rude warlike-looking gun, resembling a long twenty-four pounder in sizeand shape ; round about which a covey of naked young brats were assembled,at one time attempting in high glee to creep within the bore ofthe cannon, at another viewing the fast increasing monster with mingledfeelings of awe and delight. After much significant shaking of heads, andflourishing of hands, with very few words of speech, I was made to understandthat, the time being near at hand when a phongyee's body was to beburnt with unusual pomp, the natives were engaged in the necessary preparations,and that if I had any wish to see this dignitary of their churchlying in state my master builder would be happy to accompany me to thekioum, or convent, in which the deceased had resided. Upon our arrivalthere we found the body lying exposed to public view upon a stage constructedof bamboos, gaudily but rather tastefully decorated, with tinseland coloured paper. The entrails of the deceased (who had been dead upwardsof a month) had been taken out a few hours after death by means ofan incision in the stomach, and the vacuum being filled with honey andspices the opening was sewed up. The whole body was then covered overwith a slight coating of resinous substance called dhamma, and wax, topreserve it from the air, after which it was richly overlaid with gold leaf,thus giving the body the appearance of one of the finely moulded imagesso common in the temples of the worshippers of Booth.Another method which I have known to be practised, but not as common246 EMBALMED BURMAN PRIESTS.as the one above detailed, of embalming bodies in the Murrain country, isby forcing two hollow bamboos through the soles of the feet, up the legs,and into the body of the deceased ; then by dint of pressing and squeezingthe fluid (if 1 may so call it) is carried off through the bamboos into theground, the other end of them being fixed into it for that purpose. Thenecessary ingredients for the preservation of the body are then passed upinto it by the same tubes. The body of the deceased afterwards Les instatefor several weeks, the exact period, if there be a limited one, I do notknow; but the impression upon my mind is that the time varies fromseven or eight weeks to three months ; in some very rare instances bodieshave not been destroyed until a year after death, which circumstance ratherstrengthens my opinion that there is no limited period for the preservationof a body.A few days after we had visited the kioum there was a grand processionof all the monstrous representations of animals that Burma ingenuity haddevised, through the principal streets of the town, and along the lines ofthe cantonment. These animals were elevated on a low stage with wheels,and were drawn by the retainers of the petty chieftains, who had eachconstructed a huge rocket of timber, well secured by belts of iron, andthen strongly lashed with green rattan between the legs of the beast whicheach had chosen to construct. Bodies of the natives, too, who lived independently,and owned no chief's supremacy, had associated themselves togetherfor the purpose of sending delegates to this strange assembly.The procession was headed by a long single file of women bearing flagsin their hands, and highly blackened vessels filled with flowers and fruitsupon their heads ; these were followed by a band of music, consisting ofshrill chariots, cymbals, drums, gongs, and fiddles, playing a favouriteselection of Burma melodies. Numerous dancing-women, and chorus-singersfollowed ; the latter, as they approached the English lines, strikingup the complimentary air of " Ta young ta gar," beating time with theirhands at intervals of the tune, or with a kind of castanet formed of twopieces of split bamboo ; while here and there moved on a steady old fellowwhom one might have supposed to have been born both deaf and dumb,so sedately did they view the noise and confusion around them. ThenEMBALMED BURMAN PRIESTS. 247came the monsters ! the aforementioned elephant and formidable rocket inthe van ; next approached an unwieldy rhinoceros, then boars with bristlybacks, camels whose heads overtopped the loftiest of our mansions, bisonswho were aU neck and eyes, tigers with tails borne aloft, bufFalos withcrimson eyes and vermilion nostrils, bears with shaggy skins, horsesequalling the famed one of Ulysses in dimension, and one par eminencesurmounted by a figure in due proportion of an English sergeant brandishinga albert of the size of a weaver's beam. The rear of the lengthenedarray was brought up by representatives of most of the natives of the field,the forest, and the flood, and finally closed by a vast concourse of chorus-singersand standard-bearers. In the evening some of the principal chiefskept open house, and gave a ' pwa,' not as the term would signify ' a feast'for the body, but rather a musical soiree, where the ears were regaled witha second edition of singing, dancing, and the acting of some pathetic taleof love ; the performers at times being singing boys and girl ; at others,as if in keeping with the principal personages of the morning's parade, theywere relieved by large puppets excellently manoeuvred by some simplemachinery. To these parties we were invited by a card, in the shape of apaun ,leaf filled with pickled tea, — not the most savoury dish in the world, beingleft at our houses. They where usually kept up to a late hour, and often,when I have returned home at midnight, the throng appeared as great asever.Wrestling and boxing formed also one of the amusements by day, whenhard cuffs and heavy falls were dealt about with no unsparing hand, thecombatants being invariably separated when either began to lose his temper,and the prize being awarded to him who first drew blood.About the middle of April, the" beginning of the new year, and twomonths after the phongyee's decease, the body was brought out of the kioum,and placed upon a lofty stage on wheels, from twenty to twenty-five feet inheight, formed of open fretted bamboo work, with a profusion of smallflags and pinnacles highly decorated with paint, tinsel, and gold leaf. Thebody was about twenty feet from the ground, with an open canopy above,about which much ingenuity had been called into action, and no expensespared to render it imposing in the eyes of the multitude. Several huge248 EMBALMED BURMAN PRIESTS.creepers which entwine and strangle the forest trees of the east, and of thethickness of a ship's cable, were spliced together and attached to oppositeextremities of the car, which was drawn out to an open plain in the vicinityof the kioum. Here from ten to twelve thousand people were assembled,as many of whom as could possibly find room for their hands linked themselvesto the wooden cables, and each party raising a tumultuous shoutstrove to drag the car in contrary directions.* At the first heave of thevast multitude, I expected to see the car rent into a thousand pieces ; but itstood firm against the efforts of both parties. For a length of time neitherparty gained the ascendancy ; sometimes one would be dragged bodily a fewfeet to the rear ; but rallying again, and by a desperate effort, they wouldsoon recover the lost ground, and by the exertion gain somewhat of theiradversary, holding it in turn but for a moment. At last a cable snapped,and away whirled the car at the full speed of 1500 devotees, now workedup to an enthusiastic phrensy by the joyous exclamations of the assembledhost of idle but not uninterested spectators. Their triumph was, however,of short duration, part of their opponents clinging to the car and clamberingon the stage impeded its progress, while the remainder pursued withthe broken cable borne aloft on their shoulders ; in a few minutes the disjointedpart was again lashed to the car, and a check and again a struggletook place. This laborious contest continued for two or three days, when"the time had arrived that the body was ultimately to be destroyed. By earlymorn the town was emptied of its inhabitants, who had assembled at thekioum, and every street was deserted except by a few half-starved Pariahdogs which rushed yelping under the elevated floors of the houses, as soon asthe paroles of English, to prevent plundering, came in sight. Peopleflocked in from the surrounding villages and across the Burma frontierin such quantities that it was deemed probable they might embrace theopportunity of coming prepared for other enterprises than the destructionof an old phongyee. Paroles of our troops were accordingly ordered throughthe streets, and several officers' guards upon the ground where the lastCaptain C. tells me that these parties represent the worshippers of water and of fire, andthat according to the success of the one or the other the body of the priest is to be consumed.EMBALMED BURMAN PRIESTS. 249solemnity was performed. It was well known that the Burials had notyet forgiven the Peers for their three months' blockade of the town ofRangoon after our departure from it ; and that they were still burning withan anxiety to wipe off the disgrace which had stained their arms upon thatoccasion. The Peers had ultimately (for want of ammunition) raised thesiege, and, with their king, throwing themselves under the British protection,had been received as subjects, and allotted lands on the Tenasserim coast.At mid-day the car, with its numerous attaches of miniature pagodas, woodenmonsters, and their rockets, was drawn out along a road cut expressly forthe purpose through the dense jungle which enclosed the village on theland side, into a small plain about a mile distant. The scene now becameof the greatest interest, and one of the finest that could be imagined ; thegracefully shaped car was placed in the centre of the plain, which was girton three sides by an amphitheatrical range of low hills, which run in a parallelline to the Saladin River. The fanciful figures of the beasts were drawn upin a kind of battle array, at some short distance upon every side of thej stage upon which lay the Phongyee's body. Round about them not fewerthan 30,000 people were assembled, who, unshackled by castes, were dressedin brilliant, and many-coloured costumes, that were well relieved by thedark mass of the forage which enriched the plain, and connected the ruggedsides of the hills, whose loftier eminences were crowned wth the light taperingspires of pagodas, and temples of Guadma.The unfortunate ex-king of Pegu, with his golden chattel,* and surroundedby his mimic court, took a prominent part in the proceedings of theday. The ascent of a few rockets was the signal for the commencement ofa general attack upon the Phongyee's car by the surrounding monsters.The rocket between the legs of each being lighted, the animals were propelledby the force of the powder in the direction towards which they werepointed : so from every side they were seen bearing down upon the car,vomiting forth a long train of fire and smoke, and (to make a simile) like somany line-of-battle ships firing their bow-guns in full chase. Some indeed■ deviated a little from the line intended, and, charging the crowd on theNone but the king and royal family are allowed to bear umbrellas covered with gold leaf.2k250 EMBALMED BURMAN PRIESTS..opposite side of the circle, trampled down all before them. Two or threepeople were crushed to death by this ' untoward event,' and the shaft of asky-rocket descending through an unfortunate boy's head, killed him onthe spot. One poor representative of a pig (the cunning construction ofsome Shans who had possessed sufficient interest to procure English powderfor the loading of their rocket), true to its nature, would not advance aI single step. It retrograded, oblique to the right and left, made a dead halt,and blazed away; but no efforts could induce it to come to the charge.The Shans smote their breasts in dismay, and, dancing about like so manymaniacs, poured in volleys of oaths and abuse, while the shrill ' alma tama-koung-boo' of their wives could be distinguished amidst the uproariouspeals of laughter which rose from the assembled multitude, and seemed toshake the very ground on which we stood. The vis a tergo in vain wastried; a chosen few of the tribe, with their brawny shoulders, gave animpulse a posteriori, to no avail ; the rocket expired, and the pig had notadvanced ten paces from the starting place. His assistance, however (hadnot the honour of the Shans been touched) , to complete the work of destruction,might have well been dispensed with : the combustible materials ofthe car were soon ignited, and, when the dense cloud of smoke had sweptaway to leeward, all that was mortal of the Phongyee had disappeared, andnot a vestige of the car remained."CHAPTER XVIII.ON MODERN Embalming.The practice of embalming royal personages of an early date — Edward IV. — Henry VIII.Charles I. — Sir Henry Halford's account of the examination — remarkable mummy atAuvergne — modern methods of embalming very similar to each other — methods of DeBits — Clauderus — Pure — Guillemots — Gilbert — Char as — Penicher — Sue — Hunter —Cniikshank — Sheldon — Baillie — Brookes — Madden.The practice of embalming kings, princes, and nobles, is of very earlydate, and probably was introduced from the East even while the Egyptianembalmings were employed. Its introduction may perhaps be dated as farback as the fourth century ; but the embalming of the middle ages doesnot from any of the specimens that have been discovered appear to havebeen attended with any great degree of preservation. The coffin of EdwardIV., who died in 1483, was opened in 1789, and little more than theskeleton was discovered. There was a little brown hair, and a smallquantity of fluid arising from decomposition. The body of Henry VIII.scarcely presented any thing beyond this ; but the body of Charles I.appears to have been more perfectly preserved.Sir Henry Halford has published an exceedingly interesting account of'what appeared on opening the coffin of King Charles I., in the vaultof King Henry VIII. in St. George's Chapel, Windsor, on the 1st of April,1813. It is inserted in a volume of Essays and Orations, read and deliveredat the Royal College of Physicians : * —On removing the pall (of black velvet) a plain leaden coffin, with noappearance of ever having been enclosed in wood, and bearing an inscription.London, 1831.252 ON MODERN Embalming.tion, ' King Charles, 1648,' in large, legible characters, on a scroll of leadencircling it, immediately presented itself to the view. A square openingwas then made in the upper part of the lid, of such dimensions as to admita clear insight into its contents. These were an internal wooden coffin,very much decayed, and the body carefully wrapped up in cere-cloth, intothe folds of which a quantity of unctuous or greasy matter, mixed withresin, as it seemed, had been melted, so as to exclude as effectually aspossible the external air. The coffin was completely full ; and, from thetenacity of the cere-cloth, great difficulty was experienced in detaching itsuccessfully from the parts which it enveloped. Wherever the unctuousmatter had insinuated itself, the separation of the cere-cloth was easy ;and when it came off "a correct impression of the features to which it hadbeen applied was observed in the unctuous substance. At length the wholeface was disengaged from its covering. The complexion of the skin of itwas dark and discoloured. The forehead and temples had lost little ornothing of their muscular substance ; the cartilage of the nose was gone ;but the left eye, in the first moment of exposure, was open and full, thoughit vanished almost immediately : and the pointed beard, so characteristicof the period of the reign of King Charles, was perfect. The shape of theface was a long oval ; many of the teeth remained ; and the left ear, in consequenceof the interposition of the unctuous matter between it and thecere-cloth, was found entire."When the head had been entirely disengaged from the attachmentswhich confined it, it was found to be loose, and without any difficulty wastaken up and held to view. It was quite wet, and gave a greenish-redtinge to paper and to linen which touched it.* The back part of the scalpwas entirely perfect, and had a remarkably fresh appearance ; the pores ofthe skin being more distinct, as they usually are when soaked in moisture ;and the tendons and ligaments of the neck were of considerable substanceand firmness. The hair was thick at the back part of the head, and inappearance nearly black. A portion of it, which has since been cleanedand dried, is of a beautiful dark-brown colour. That of the beard was aSir Henry conjectures this fluid to have been blood discharged from the large blood-vesselsafter decapitation.ON MODERN EMBALMINGS. 253redder brown. On the back part of the head it was not more than an inchin length, and had probably been cut so short for the convenience of theexecutioner, or perhaps by the piety of friends soon after death, in order tofurnish memorials of the unhappy king. On holding up the head, to examinethe place of separation from the body, the muscles of the neck hadevidently retracted themselves considerably ; and the fourth cervical vertebrawas found to be cut through its substance transversely, leaving thesurfaces of the divided portions perfectly smooth and even, an appearancewhich could have been produced only by a heavy blow, inflicted with a verysharp instrument, and which furnished the last proof wanting to identifyKing Charles I."After this examination of the head it was restored to its situation, thecoffin soldered up, and the vault closed.This account is deposited in the British Museum, and its accuracy authenticatedby the signature of his Royal Highness the Prince Regent,who was present at the examination.In the Memoirs of the Royal Academy of Sciences at Paris, for the year1756, there is an account of a remarkable mummy.Some peasants being at work in a field belonging to the village of mattress'Artier, near Room in Auvergne, found a kind of trough, seven feetlong and five feet high, cut out of a stone which seemed to be a granite,and covered with another stone of the same kind. In this trough was aleaden coffin, which contained the body of a lad about ten or twelve, so wellembalmed, that the flesh was still flexible and supple. The arms werecovered with bands twisted round them from the wrist to the top of theshoulders, and the legs in the same manner from the ancles to the top of thethighs : a kind of shirt covered the breast and belly, and over all was awinding sheet. All these Linens were imbibed with a balm of such a strongsmell that the stone trough retained it, and communicated it to those whocame near it, long after the coffin was taken out of it. This mummy wascarried first to the curate's of the parish : it had at that time on its head awooden cap, lined with an aromatic paste, which had the same smell as thebalm in which the linen had been dipped. It had also in its hands balls ofthe same paste, which were kept on by little bags, which covered the hands,254 ON MODERN EMBALMINGS.and were tied to the wrists ; and the arms, thighs, and legs were coveredwith the same paste. But, being removed soon after to Room, by order ofthe intendant of that place all the coverings were taken away; and the colourof the skin, which was at first very clear, changed to a dark brown. Thedrug employed in embalming had very much diminished the bulk of thefleshy parts ; but had preserved their suppleness so well that a surgeonmaking an incision in the stomach, one of the by-sanders put in his finger,and could feel the diaphragm, the great lobe of the liver, and the spleen ;but these last two had lost much of their bulk. A part of the epiploon,about three inches in length, being extracted at this opening, was found tobe quite sound, and as flexible as in its natural state. About twelve inchesof the jejunum being likewise extracted, and tied at one end, it was inflatedbv blowing in it, as readily as if it had been that of an animal just killed.In short, the body seemed to be embalmed in a quite different manner fromthat of the Egyptians, whose mummies are dry and brittle"*No inscription on the coffin or linen, no medal, nor any symbol whatever,was found, that might discover the time when it was deposited in thisplace ; and the peasants affirmed, with oaths, that they had not removed orembezzled any thing."The modes of embalming practised by the moderns vary very littlefrom each other. Some few have proposed to preserve the body withoutremoving the viscera ; but the greater number have recommended evis-This opinion we have seen is not correct ; the best specimens of Egyptian embalming areperfectly soft and flexible. The account of the mummy of Auvergne must be regarded withsuspicion after reading such a passage as the following : — " On ne lui avait enleve, comme onle faisait en Egypt, ni la cervelle, ni les intestins : son corps etait entier, sans mutilation aucune,et par consequent avec tous ses principes de corruption ; et cependant il avait un air devie qui paraissait tenir du prodige. Ni les oreilles. ni les dents, ni la langue, non plus queles differences parties du visage, n'avaient sibi la moindre alteration. Les livres talentbranches et vermeUles ; les mains blanches et potelees ; les yeux enfin, chose plus etonnante encore! les yeux, qu'on aurait cru devoir etre events et obliteres, constraint, dit-on, le brillantet la vivacity qu'ils ont dans Homme vivant. Enfin, toutes les articulations talent flexible,et eyes obeissaient au mouvement qu'on voulait leur improper ; les doigts avaient meme,lorsque les pliant, assez de ressort pour se restituer dans leur position." — Roquefort des sepultureNationales.'p. 116.ON MODERN EMBALMINGS. 255Deration . In the removal of the organs contained within the cavities of theskull and body, in the injection of saline and spirituous fluids, and in theinsertion of aromatic powders into the body, and into the ties of the limbs,consist the principal points of modern embalming. To these the applicationof cloths dipped in oil and wax to exclude the external air, have beenadded, prior to depositing the body in its cases or coffins. Little else hasbeen done.M. Rouelle* gives an account of the methods employed by two writerson the Art of Embalming, Lewis de Bils, a Flamand, a very learned anatomistwho lived in the middle of the seventeenth century, and GabrielClauderus, an eminent physician, whopubUshed a work entitled "MethodusBalsamandi Corpora Human, aliqua majora sine evisceratione et sectionquousque solita " at Oldenburg in 1769. The works of both these authorsare now before me, and from them it would appear that De Bils had devotedmuch time to arrive at a good method of preserving anatomical preparations ;that he was largely engaged in disputes with the anatomists of his time inconsequenceof his assertion that he had found out a means of drying bodiesdissected, at the same time preserving the muscles, vessels, viscera, andother parts all in their natural situation, having deprived them of theirmoisture and fat. De Bils denies having used any balsamic matter in hispreparations. Clauderus is elaborate on this subject; his work extends to216 pages in quarto. He reviews the statements made by De Bils, andcontends that he did not employ any balsamic materials in his mode ofpreparation. He admits that aromatics were diffused in the cabinet ofpreparations, which might give rise to the opinion generally entertained oftheir having been employed in his process. Clauderus states that he hadseen the preparations and had wetted his finger and tasted them ; thatthey were not balsamic but saline, and hence he was induced to employsaline substances in his own method, and ultimately came to use the alkalinesalts, without however appearing to be aware of their true nature and adaptationin the process of embalming. The method of Clauderus was tomacerate or saturate in a liquor made of the ashes of tartar, dissolved inMem. de I'Acad. des Sciences pour Iran. 1750.256 ON MODERN EMBALMINGS.water in the proportion of one pound of the former to six pounds of thelatter. To this solution he added half a pound of sal ammoniac. Theliquor was then filtered ; he denominated it his Balsamic Spirit. Thisliquor he injected into the different cavities of the chest and abdomen, andthen placed the body in the fluid. It was allowed to remain six or eightweeks ; but, in order to shorten the process, at the expiration of a fortnightthe Hquor was either renewed or renovated by the addition of some volatilealkali. The body when taken out was dried either in the sun or in a stove.The cabinet of Ruysch, the celebrated Dutch anatomist, which was sold tothe Czar Peter, has always been much extolled for the manner in whichpreparations of the human body had been rendered capable of resistingputrefaction. The method adopted by this anatomist is unknown. Thedead bodies prepared by him were said to have rather resembled personsasleep than devoid of life.The methods recommended by Pare, by Guillemots, Gilbert, Charas,Penicher, Sue, and others, differ little from each other, and are scarcelydeserving of notice ; and the manner in which a body was mutilated, by thevarious openings and incisions made into it, is a subject calculated rather toexcite disgust than admiration.Louis Penicher, a celebrated apothecary at Paris, published in 1699 asmall work entitled, " Traite des Embaumemens selon les Anciens et lesModernes." This work contains the description of a variety of balsamiccompositions intended for the preservation of bodies, and gives a very circumstantialaccount of the mode adopted in the embalming of Madame laDauphine. The balm used on this occasion consisted of upwards of sixtyarticles, which are enumerated by M. Penicher. In the journal book of theRoyal Society for December 1, 1686, I find the following notice : — "Dr.Sloane said that formerly he with some others made a muscular dissectionof a human body at Montpellier, and that, to preserve the body from putrefaction,the bowels being taken out, they infused a tincture of myrrh andaloes drawn with spirit of wine ; and kept it covered with fir shavings inacoffin, whereby it was preserved three months in the middle of summer.The same said that cedar dust is affirmed the best preservative in this case,but that was not procurable at Montpellier."ON MODERN EMBALMINGS. 257M. Sue in his " Anthropotomie, ou I'Art de Dissenter," 12mo. Paris, 1750,devotes a considerable portion of the second volume of his work to a descriptionof the manner of preparing and preserving the different parts of the humanbody, and treats also of embalming in general, in which he considers thosesubstances which are best adapted to resist putrefaction, and the mode ofemploying them. He gives an immensely lengthy list of aromatics of all kinds,consisting of different kinds of flowers, fruits, leaves, barks, woods, roots,gums, resins, and other juices of plants, essences, spirits, tinctures, &c., toonumerous to be noticed here. He is equally elaborate in his enumeration ofthe instruments, bandages, &c., with which an embalmer ought to be furnished,and he concludes by directing the manner in which the variousincisions into the body are to be made, the mode of extracting several ofthe viscera, removing all humidity, &c., and the immediate application ofthe numerous medicaments he recommends should be employed.Dr. William Hunter was in the habit of delivering, at the close of hiscourse of anatomical lectures, an account of the manner of making anatomicalpreparations, and on this occasion he advanced a method of embalming,as being in some measure connected with the subject of his lectures.The method he proposed was to throw into the blood-vessels, in the mostminute manner he was able, an injection composed of essential oil of turpentine,in which a small proportion of Venice turpentine had been dissolved.To this he added different proportions of oil of camomile and oil of lavender,and coloured the whole with vermilion. This fluid having been forcedinto the large arteries with such power and continuance that even the skinexhibited a red appearance, the body was allowed to remain some hoursundisturbed, to admit of the mixture thoroughly impregnating it. The nextstep was to open the cavities of the chest and belly, to remove the visceraand squeeze out the fluid contained in them. The Vessels of these partswere to be again injected, ligatures put upon them, and well bathed in camphoratedspirits of wine. The vessels of the body were then again to beinjected from the large artery (the aorta) rising from the heart, and thecavities of the chest and belly well washed with the camphorated spirit. Allthe spaces between the viscera were now to be filled ap with a powdercomposed of camphor, resin, and nitre. This powder was also to be put2l258 ON MODERN EMBALMINGS.into the eyes, nostrils, ears, and other cavities, the whole body to berubbed over with the essential oils of rosemary and lavender, and thebody then placed upon a bed of plaster of Paris, by which all moisturewould be absorbed. The coffin was to be closed up, and at the expirationof four years opened, and, should the desiccation of the body be imperfect,another bed of gypsum was to be added to complete the process. A bodyprepared according to this manner by Dr. Hunter is preserved in themuseum of the Royal College of Surgeons. It is the body of the wife ofa well-known eccentric character, the late Martin Van Butcher* It reiam happy to be able to lay before the reader the following verbatim copy of a paper inVan Butcher's own writing, preserved at the Royal College of Surgeons : —14 Jan. 1775. At i past 3 this morning my wife died. At 8 this morning the statuarytook off her face in plaster.At 5 past 2 this afternoon Mr. Cruikslianks injected at the crural arteries 5 pints of oilturpentine mixed with — of Venice turpentine, and — of vermilion.15. At 9 this morning Dr. Hunter and Mr. C. began to open and embalm the body ofmy wife : her diseases were a large empyema in the left lung (which would not receive anyair), accompanied with pleuro-pneumony, and much adhesion; the right lung was also beginningto decay, and had some pus in it. The spleen hard and much contracted; the liverdiseased, called rata malign. The stomach very sound. The kidneys, uterus, bladder, andintestines in good order. Injected at the large arteries oil of turpentine mixed with camphorspirits, i. e. 10 oz. camphor to a quart sp", so as to make the whole vascular system turgid:put into the belly part 6 lb. rosin powder, 3 lb. camphor powder, and 3 lb. nitre powder mixedwith rec. sp'^"17. I opened the abdomen to put in the remainder of powders, and added 4 lb. rosin, 3 lb.nitre, and 1 lb. camphor. In aU there were 10 lb. rosin, C lb. nitre, and 41b. camphor, i. e.20 lb. of powders mixed with spirits of wine. .18. Dr. Hunter and Mr. Cruikshanks came at 9 this morning and put my wife into thebox on and in 130 lb. w' of Paris plaster at 18rf. a bag : I put between the thighs 3 arquebusadebottles, one full of camphor spirits very rich of the gum, one containing 8 oz. oil ofrosemary, and in the other 2 oz. of lavender.19. I closed up the joints of the box lid and glasses with Paris plaster mixed with gumwater and spirits of wine.25. Dr. Hunter came with Sir Tho'. Wynn and his lady.Feb. 5. Dr. Hunter came with two ladies at 10 this evening.7. Dr. Hunter came with Sir John Prince, Dr. Heberden, Dr. Watson, and about 1 2 moreFellows of the Royal Society."11. Dr. Hunter came with Dr. Solander, Dr. , Mr. Banks, and another gentleman.ON MODERN EMBALMINGS. 259semble a Guanche or Peruvian, rather than an Egj'ptian mummy, andis, properly speaking, a desiccated, rather than an embalmed body.In the same museum is also an embalmed body of a female, aged twenty-four,of the name of Johnson, who died of phthisis in the Lock Hospitalabout the year 1775, and who left her body for dissection to Mr. Sheldon.No account of the method employed has been preserved, but it is presumedto have been similar to that adopted by Dr. Hunter in the precedinginstance, as a letter which accompanied the specimen when it was sent tothe College of Surgeons stated that " much camphor was used, that all thearteries and veins were filled with injection, and that spirit of wine wasused as well as camphor; that the heart and intestines were taken out andinjected, and replaced, as was also the brain."The late Dr. Baillie published a Paper on the Embalming of DeadBodies,* the object of which was to describe a method to preserve themfrom decay, and to be more easy of execution than any previously employedby modern anatomists. He made an experiment of embalmingupon the bodies of three children, and in these his process answered perfectly.His method varies little from that of Dr. Hunter. Instead of removingthe viscera, he injects into the stomach and bowels, and into thewind-pipe and lungs, the same fluid as that proposed by Dr. Hunter, andthus simplifies the process by not having recourse to the removal of thecontents of the several cavities of the body, and in having only one injectionof the blood-vessels.The late Mr. Joshua Brookes prepared the body of a boy after thismanner. It was disposed of at the sale of his museum by public auction.Mr. Madden employed common tar as an embalming ingredient. In1823 he accompanied an invalid from Naples, by sea, to London ; theI unlocked the glasses to clean the face and legs nth spirits of wine and oil of lavender.12. Dr. Hunter came to look at the neck and shoulders."13. I put 4 oz. of camphor spirits into the box, on sides of neck, and 6 lb. of plaster.16. I put 4 oz. oil of lavender, 4 oz. oil of rosemary, and J oz. of oil of camomile flowers (thelast cost 4 sh.) on sides of the face, and 3 oz. of very dry powder of camomile flowers on thebreast, neck, and shoulders."Transactions of a Society for the Improvement of Medical and Chirurgical Knowledge,III. 7.260 ON MODERN EMBALMINGS.-voyage was long and perilous, the provisions were expended, and the privationswere such that his companion died thirty days previously to thearrival of the vessel at Plymouth. Believing that the friends of the deceasedwould be glad to have his remains brought home, Mr. Maddenturned his attention to the preservation of the body ; but on board therewere neither spirits nor spices. He determined on employing commontar, and having removed the intestines he applied the tar both within andwithout, and then enveloped the body in a well-tarred sheet ; by this meanshe completely excluded the air, and was enabled to bring home the bodyafter a voyage of no less than seventy-two days.EXPLANATION OF THE PLATES.Plate I. Frontispiece. Wholes length view of the Greco-Egyptian mummy,showing the colour of the same and the appearance of the gildingon different parts of the body. From the Author's collection.II. Profile of the same mummy, natural size.III. The Sacred Barge for conveying the mummies to the tombs. Drawnfrom a model in the collection of Mons. Passalacqua at Berlin (seepage33). Fig. 1 , 2, 3, 4. Representations of the Four Deities of theAmenti, Netsonof or Kebhnsnof, Smof, Hapee, and Amset (seepage58). Fig. 5. represents a bos in which twenty-four figures ofmummies carved in wood, were found deposited. These are regardedas donatives to the deceased by those who assisted at the funeral.On the box, which measured 1 84 inches in length and 1 7 inches inheight, are representations of the Four Genii of the Amenti, andalso of the Sacred Eye of Osiris (see page lib.)IV. Fig. 1 . Case to contain Foetal mummy. Fig. 2. Foetal mummyin the bandages (see page 73). Fig. 3. The substance of theheart found in the Greco-Egyptian mummy (seepage 60). Fig. 4.The leathern Amulet found in Dr. Lee's mummy (see page 96).Fig. 5. Representation of Fingers found in a mummy. Takenfrom M. Passalacqua's collection (seepage 96). Fig. 6,7, 8. Knivesof Silex found in a box near to a mummy by M. Passalacqua(see pages 57 and 112). Fig. 9, 10. Bronze Crotchets for theextraction of the brain. From the collection at Bern (seepage53).V. Insects found in the heads of mummies (see page 53, et seq.) Fig.1, 2. Necrosis mumiarum, natural size. Fig. 3. magnified, a, b,c, d, anatomical sections of the same. Fig. 4, 5. Dermestes pol-sanctus,natural size. Fig. 6, 7, magnified. Fig 8. Larva of thesame magnified. Fig. 9. Larva, natural size, e, f, g, h, i, j, k,anatomical sections of the Dermestes poUinctus. /. ova of thesame.VI. Fig. I . Gold plate found upon the tongue of a mummy (see page 63).Fig. 2. The outer bandages as they appeared in Dr. Lee's mxmnmy,showing also the position of the leathern Amulet over the heart(see page 95). Fig. 3. The second layer of bandages (see page 95).2G2 OF THE PLATES.Fife. 4. Sycamore Sarcophagus which contained Dr. Perry's mummy(see page 122). Fig. 5. Peruvian mummy at the Museum of theRoyal College of Surgeons (see page 239).Plate VII. Copy of the portrait upon an Egyptian mummy in the BritishMuseum (see page 101).VIII. Fiij. I, 2. Representations of a Funereal Tablet in the possessionof Samuel Rogers, Esq. Fire. 3. Another Tablet from the samecollection (see page 108). Fig. 4. Representation of the breastplateof a King (see page 109). Fig. 5. The Sacred Eye of Osirisfrom Dr. Lee's collection (see page 109). Fig. 6. Representationof Osiris in b'-onze, from Kdrnak, in the Author's collection (seepage110). Fig. 7. Island the Infant Horus, from the collectionof Samuel Rogers, Esq. Many fabulous accounts have beentransmitted to us by the Greeks concerning the son of Isis andOsiris, but we are still ignorant of the real meaning of this mythologicalsubject, which, though generally supposed to be the most intelligiblepart of the Egyptian Pantheon, is in reality the most difficultand obscure ; nor can we expect to unravel the great mystery concerningOsiris, Isis, and Horus, tiU our acquaintance with theEgyptian language and religion becomes more extensive.It will probably be found that Osiris, in one of his characters atleast, was the greatest of the EgJiitian deities, that neither he norIsis was ever supposed by the Egyptians to have been mortalsdeified, and that Horus, the avenger of his father, will prove to beof much more consequence in their Pantheon than any thing theGreeks have told us could lead any one to suppose ; though at thesame time it is highly probable that many other allegories may betraced, in the story of these personages, which have a physical aswell as a moral signification.IX. Inner case of Dr. Lee's mummy. Fig. \. Representing the mythologicalemblems painted upon it. The ornamental details on theupper side of the figure are arranged in compartments with a lineof hieroglyphics down the centre. On the breast immediatelybelow the necklace are the winged globe and ass, the eml:)lems ofthe god Hat or Agathodeemon. The upper compartments contain,on the right, two of the genii of Amenti, Hai, and Smof, standingbefore an asp, cro'mied with the cap of the upper country, andon the opposite side the other two, Amset and the hawk-headedEXPLANATION 263Kebhnsnof. In the next are represented two winged ass ; and inthe lowest is on one side a jackal headed, and in the other ahawk-headed figure with the ostrich feather of Truth. The line ofhieroglyphics contains the usual formula of funereal inscriptions,and, as far as the sense can be ascertained, it signifies, "This is a(royal ?) chosen gift to Re Atnioo, Lord of the two regions ofPhut (or the Lilian side of the Nile), Pthah Sokari Osiris, Lordof the sacred place, the manifester of good, king of the gods, thegreat Re, Lord of heaven. Give chosen offerings of incense forOsiris, the lady of the house, priestess of the (sacred abode ?)Tan Noire, deceased." Fig. 2. Showing the manner in which theparsonage is secured (see page 116).Pl.\te X. Outer case of Dr. Lee's mummy. F/^. 1. Front view, representinga Une of hieroglyphics down the centre, which contains the usualfunereal ritual, thus : " This is a (royal ?) chosen gift to Osiris,dominator or president of the west, the good God, lord of theland of (Abydos). Give chosen offerings of oxen and geeseincense and libation for Osiris, the lady of the house, priestess ofthe (sacred abode?) Tan^nofre Fig. 2. Innerpart of the case, representing a figure of the goddess Netph^, thewife of Seb and mother of Osiris, who held one of the principaloffices in the regions of the dead, and is frequently represented inthis form and position in Egyptian sarcophagi (see page 123).XI. Fig. 1, 2. Brass coin of one of the Polemics, the reverse of whichis almost entirely obscured by a portion of the bandage of a mummyadhering to it. In the possession of Mr. Kirkmann (see page 111).Fig. 3. The leaden seals attached to the bandages of a Greekmummy. From the two impressions the name of KOnPHC maybedistinctly made out. From Mr. Burgon's collection (see pagesHI and 113). Fig. 4. Line of hieroglyphics from the RosettaStone, with a translation of the same. Fig. 5. The same Writtenin the Hieratic character, to show the similarity of form. Fig. 6 isthe same in the Enchorial character, taken from the Rosetta Stone.Fig. 7, 8, 9, illustrate the manner in which dates are expressed inthe Hieroglyphic, Hieratic, and Enchorial characters.XII. Sacred animals. Fig. 1. Embalmed Asp in a case, upon which arepresentation of the animal is carved. From the author's collection(see page 217). Fig 2. Unrolled snake. From the author'scollection (see page 217). Fig. 3. Head of an embalmed Ram in the264 EXPLANATION OF THE PLATES.bandages. From the collection at Berlin (see page 193). Fig. 4.Embalmed Fox. From Belzoni (see page 191). Fig. 5. EmbalmedCat. From ditto (see page 189). Fig. G. EmbalmedBull. From ditto (see page 202). Fig. 7. Embalmed Cynocephalus.From the same (see page 183). Fig. 8, 9. The Crocodilein the bandages and unrolled. From the Author's collection(see page 214).XIII. Sacred Animals. Fig. 1. Embalmed Hawk. From the Author'scollection (see page 204). Fig. 2. Embalmed Hawk in humanform. From the collection at Berlin (see page 204). Fig. 3. EmbalmedOwl. From the same (see page 204). Fig. 4. UnrolledIbis. From the Author's collection (see page 209). Fig. 5. IbisPot. Fig. 6. Embalmed Ibis in human form. From the collectionat Berlin (see page 209). Fig. 7, 8. Embalmed Ibis in bandages(see page 209). Fig. 9. Embalmed Goose. From Belzoni (seepage209). Fig. 10. Embalmed Goose. From the Author's collection(see page 210).■i;hoins, Printer sud Stereotyped, li, Warwick Squat*.14. Line 6for 'iitTT€poy16. Note *for 2k(!9t)s17. tfor Chap, i.18. *for TheseusERRATA ET CORRIGENDA.Page 14. Line 6 for 'Simpov read vGnQov.read 2ku97)S.read Chap. I.read Adrastus.77; read 7}/.fKacrov read exoffTor. Mr. Long tells methat these last lines of Euripides are an imitation of a beautiful passage by Empedocles.25. Line 20 for Memnonuim read Memnonium.28. 11 for Dames read Dames.35. Note t for Otj/ios read Stjkos.45. Line 2 for eT\o read eTAOf.25 for dfioreKvov read i/xiJTexi'oi'51. 22 dele the KaTcoToi. The original passage does not say that they werespecially appointed for the purpose ; it merely means that there were individualswho made it a profession.69. Line 15 trvp/ialri. This is not the name of a liquor; it means a purge generally,and nothing more. It is, however, spoken of as Plus ex Aqua el Sale, purgationserviens,74. Line 15 for three read four.84, 12 for Necropol'm read Metropolis.95. 6 for atttun read linen,7 for linen read cotton.124. 6 I believe the great temple of Diana at Ephesus was of stone.125. 18 for pielru read pietro.146. Note * for lenity read unity.151. Line 1 for AUTOGRAPH read Autograph.157. 10 ^e\dxpo€s Kat ov\6rpix^s. Black in complexion and woolly headedwill perhaps be more correctly rendered by curly headed.162. Line 6 for Stammering read Stammering.169. S ioT futurum read naturam.193. Note II for hippopotamus read crocodile.Line 18 for ApoUonopolis read Apollinopolis.196. 7 for under read on. See Herod. III. 29.197. 8 Epaphus. See ^Eschyli Prometheus, where the name Epaphus firstoccurs :iTrwvvfiov Se riiiv Airs Otyr)fxtt.Twv {yevvqfj.d'rwv')Tellers K(\aivhv"S.ira.ipov. See ^Esch. Prom. 875.1 98. Line 10 for aetatis read aversatus.200. 9 Basis at Hermonthis. According to Ammianus, Porphyry, and delian,Apis was sacred to the moon, Mnevis to the sun. Jablonski mentions Basis orBasis as the bull of Hermonthis. At this place Cleopatra is seen worshipping abull, but it is not certain that the hieroglyphics over it present the name of Basis.Mr. Wilkinson tells me that it seems to be the emblem of the god Mandoo, whowas particularly adored in this town.214. Line 1 for Psylla read Psylli.215. 28 for Mnnnlithe read Monolith.219. 7 for Orpheus read Orpheus.222. 21 for Calasires!^- Hermotybes read Calamities and Hermotybies.