CHEMISTRY METEOROLOGYAND THE FUNCTION OF DIGESTIONCONSIDERED WITH REFERENCE TONATURAL THEOLOGYBYWILLIAM PROUT Med. F.R.S.FELLOW OI THF. ROYAL COLLF.GF. OF PHYSICIANSLONDONWILLIAM PICKERING*3LlisinU3HI OCT 6 1972C. WI11TTINGI1AM, Took COURT, CHANCERY LANE.TODAVIES GILBERT ESQ.LATE PRESIDENT OF THE ROYAL SOCIETYTo VolumeISRESPECTFULLY INSCRIBEDNOTICE.The series of Treatises, of which the present is one, ispublished under the following circumstances :The Right Honourable and Reverend FrancisHenry, Earl of Bridgewater, died in the month ofFebruary, 1829 ; and by his last Will and Testament, bearingdate the 25th of February, 1825, he directed certainTrustees therein named to invest in the public funds thesum of Eio-ht thousand pounds sterling; this sum, withthe accruing dividends thereon, to be held at the disposalof the President, for the time being, of the Royal Societyof London, to be paid to the person or persons nominatedby him. The Testator further directed, that the person orpersons selected by the said President should be appointedto write, print, and publish one thousand copies of a workOn the Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of God, as manifestedin the Creation; illustrating such work by all reasonablearguments, as for instance the variety andjormatwn ojGod's creatures in the animal, vegetable, and mineral kingdoms;the effect of digestion, and thereby oj conversion;the construction of the hand of man, and an inflate varietyof other arguments; as also by discoveries ancient andmodern, in arts, sciences, and the whole extent of literature.He desired, moreover, that the profits arising from the saleof the works so published should be paid to the authors ofthe works.VlllThe late President of the Royal Society, Davies Gilbert,Esq. requested the assistance of his Grace the Archbishopof Canterbury and of the Bishop of London, in determiningupon the best mode of carrying into effect the intentions ofthe Testator. Acting with their advice, and with the concurrenceof a nobleman immediately connected with thedeceased, Mr. Davies Gilbert appointed the following eightgentlemen to write separate Treatises on the differentbranches of the subject as here stated :THE REV. THOMAS CHALMERS, Dad.Professor OF DIVINITY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH.ON THE POWER, WISDOM, AND GOODNESS OF GODAS MANIFESTED IN THE ADAPTATIONOF EXTERNAL NATURE TO THE MORAL ANDINTELLECTUAL CONSTITUTION OF MAN.JOHN KIDD, M. D. F. R. S.Rectus PROFESSOR OF MEDICINE IN THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD.ON THE ADAPTATION OF EXTERNAL NATURE TO THEPHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN.THE REV. WILLIAM Wheel, M. A. F. Res.FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.ASTRONOMY AND GENERAL PHYSICS CONSIDERED WITHREFERENCE TO NATURAL THEOLOGY.SIR CHARLES BELL, K. G. H. F. R. S. L. & E.THE HAND: ITS MECHANISM AND VITAL ENDOWMENTSAS EVINCING DESIGN.PETER MARK ROGET, M. D.FELLOW OK AND Sl.i KLIAHY TO THE ROYAL Society.ON ANIMAL AND VEGETABLE PHYSIOLOGYIXTHE REV. WILLIAM Auckland, D. D. F. R. S.CANON OF CHRIST CHURCH, AND PROFESSOR OF CEOLOCV IN TUBUNIVERSITY OF OXFORD.ON GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY.THE REV. WILLIAM KIRBY, M. A. F. R. S.ON THE HISTORY, HABITS, AND INSTINCTS OF ANIMALS.WILLIAM PROUT, Med. F.R.S.CHEMISTRY, METEOROLOGY, AND THE FUNCTION OFDIGESTION, CONSIDERED WITH REFERENCE TONATURAL THEOLOGY.His Royal Highness the Duke of Sussex, Presidentof the Royal Society, having desired that no unnecessarydelay should take place in the publication of theabove mentioned treatises, they will appear at short intervals,as they are ready for publication.TO THE READER.Chemistry has not hitherto been consideredin detail with reference to Natural Theology :the difficulties, therefore, incidental to a firstattempt, added to those arising from thenature of Chemistry itself as a science, mustbe the apology of the author for numerousimperfections in this treatise.The peculiar chemical opinions advanced,would never have appeared in their presentform ; had not the author been strongly impressedwith the belief that they are calculated,sooner or later, to bring chemicalaction under the dominion of the laws ofquantity ; and had he not despaired, underhis professional engagements, of being himselfable to submit them to experimentalMlproof. These opinions, however, have beenalways introduced as mere illustrations.The argument of design is necessarily cumulative; that is to say, is made up of manysimilar arguments. To avoid repetitionstherefore, the illustration of principles ratherthan of details, has been studied ; and theapplication of particular facts to the argument,has been often left to the Reader.London,February 3, 1834.CONTENTS.INTRODUCTION.Of the Leading Argument of Natural Theology;that Design, or the Adaptation of Means toan End exists in Nature.BOOK I.CHEMISTRY.PalePreliminary Observations on the Rank of Chemistryas a Science; and on the Applicationof Chemistry to the Argument of Design 1Chapter I. — Of the Mutual Operation of PhysicalAgents and of Matter, and of the Laws whichthey obey 15Chapter II. — Of the Inertia and Activity of Matter17Chapter III. — Of Molecular or Polarizing Forces,etc 21Section I. Of the Divisibility of Matter 22Section II. Of the Forms of Aggregation of the ultimateMolecules of Matter 26XIV CONTENTS.PageSection III. Of the solid Form of Bodies. Crystallization28Of Electricity 35Of Magnetism 39Of Polarity 43Section IV. Of the Liquid Form of Bodies. Of Heat 48Of the Latency of Heat 52Section V. Of the Gaseous Form of Bodies 56Of the Diffusion of Gaseous Bodies 60Of the Equal Expansion of Gaseous Bodies ;and of their similar Capacity for Heat 62Section VI. Of the other Properties of Heat. OfHeat in Motion. Of the Radiation, Conduction,and Convection of Heat 64Section VII. Of Light 69Of the Radiation of Light 69Of the Reflection and Refraction of Light 71Of the Polarization of Light 73Of the Decomposition of Light 76Section VIII. Of the Sources of Heat and Light 80Section IX. Recapitulation and General Observationson the Subjects treated of in the preceding Chapters 82Arguments in Proof of Design, deducible fromthe Divisibility and Molecular Constitution ofMatter 85Chapter IV. — Of Chemical Elementary Principles,AND OF THE LvW's OF THEIR COMBINATION 92Section I. Of Chemical Elementary Principles 93Of the Five Elementary Supporters of Combustion;Oxygen, Chlorine, Bromine, Iodine, andFluorine 96Of Elements, vjhich instead of Supporting Combustion,are for the most part themselves Combustible101CONTEXTS. XVPageOf the Eight Elements not Metallic, generallytermed Vitrifiable Bases, most of which are Combustible; Hydrogen, Carbon, Azote, Boron, Silicon,Phosphorus, Sulfur, Selenium 101Of the Ten Metallic, Arsenic, Antimony, Tellurium,Chromium, Uranium, Vanadium, Molyb- 'dcenum, Tungsten, Titanium, Columbium 109Of the Twelve Metallic Bases of the Alkaliesand Earths ; Potassium, Sodium, Lithium, Calcium,Magnesium, Strontium, Barium, Aluminum, Glucinum,Yttrium, Zirconium, and Thorinum 110Of the Nineteen Metals Proper ; Iron, Manganese,Nickel, Cobalt, Cerium, Zinc, Cadmium,Lead, Tin, Bismuth, Copper, Mercury, Silver,Gold, Platinum, Palladium, Rhodium, Iridium,Osmium , 115Section II. Of the Laws of Chemical Combination. . . 121Of the Atomic Theory 134Of the Representation of the Combining Moleculesof Bodies by Numerical Series 139Section III. General Remarks upon Chemical Compounds1 40Of Primary Compounds 141Of Acids 141Of Alkalies and Bases 144Of Neutral Compounds 145Of Secondary Compounds ; Salts 146Section IV. Recapitulation. General Reflections onthe Subjects treated of in the preceding Chapters. . 148Statement of the Facts on which the AtomicTheory is Founded 148Of the Adaptation of Subordinate to PrimordialAgents and Elements, and of the Means by whichthese Adaptations have been effected 150Of Adaptations produced by Adjustments ofQuality and Quantity 156cox i i:> is.POf the Tendency in Nature to a State of Reposeor Equilibrium 161Of the Creation of the Elements with the Propertiesessential to produce perfect Compounds . . . 167Of the Wonderful Nature of the most SimpleChemical Processes 170Brief Examination of certain Objections to theArgument of Design 173BOOK II.Of Meteorology ; comprehending a GeneralSketch of the Constitution of the Globe; andof the Distribution and Mutual Influence ofthe Agents and Elements of Chemistry in theEconomy of Nature.Preliminary Observations 178Chapter I. — Of the General Structure of theEarth ; particularly with reference to theDistribution of its Surface into Land andWater; and with respect to its Atmosphere 181Section I. Of the General Relations of the Sea andLand to each other 181Section II. Of the Ocean 183Section III. Of the Atmosphere 1 87Chapter II. — Of Heat and Light : the Modes of Estimatingtheir Degree, and the Ways inwhich they are Propagated. Of the GeneralTemperature of the Celestial Regions,and of the Earth independently of theSun 195Section I. Of Heat and Light, and the Modes of estimatingtheir Degree 195CONTENTS XVIIPageSection II. Of the Propagation of Heat and Light. . . 197Section III. Of the Temperature of the Celestial Regions198Section IV. Of the Temperature of the Interior of theEarth 200Chapter III. — Of the Temperature of the Earthat its Surface, as dependent on the Sun 205Section I. Of Mean Temperature 207Section II. Of the actual Distribution of Temperatureover the Globe. Of Isothermal Lines, fyc. Climate209Of the Temperature of the Poles and of thePolar Regions 209Of the mean annual Temperature of the Equator 211Of the Temperature of the intermediate Regionsof the Globe. Of Isothermal Lines, fyc 212Climate 219Chapter IV. — Of the Primary Constituents of Climate:or of the Temperature of the Earth,as dependent on its globular form ; and onits Annual and Diurnal Motions 220Chapter V. — Of the secondary or subsidiary Constituentsof Climate; comprehending aSketch of those Circumstances capable ofInfluencing Climate, which are more immediatelyconnected with the Surface of theEarth, as consisting of Land or Water; orwhich are connected with the atmosphere. . . 224Section I. Of the secondary Constituents of Climate,immediately connected tuith the Surface of theEarth ; and depending on the Nature of that Surfaceas composed of Land or Water 2261 . Of the Proportion of Solar Heat and Lightthat actually arrives at the Surface of the Earth., 226p. bXvi CONTENTS.Page2. Of the Distribution of Heat and Light overthe Earth's Surface in the latent and decomposedForms 228Of the General Distribution of Electricityand Magnetism over the Earth 230Of the Distribution of Light in the decomposedForm over the Earth 2343. Of the Laws of Absorption, Radiation, andReflection of Heat and Light 2364. Of the Conduction of Heat below the Earth'sSurface on Land 2435. Of the Propagation of Heat and Light behovethe Earth's Surface in Water 246Of the Temperature of the Waters of theOcean at great Depths 252Of the under Currents of the Ocean existingbetween the Equatorial and the Polar Regions 254Temperature on Land and at Sea 255Temperature of Natural Springs 257Section II. Of the secondary Constituents of Climateimmediately connected with the Atmosphere 2591. Of the Distribution of Heat and of Lightthrough the Atmosphere, and of the Consequences 259Of the Limits of Perpetual Snow 263Of the Distribution of Heat and Lightthrough the Atmosphere in their Latent andDecomposed Forms 265Of the Propagation of Sensible Heatthrough the Atmosphere 266Of Atmospheric Currents. The Trade Winds 2682. Of the Presence of Water in the Atmosphere. 274Of the Relations of the Water in the Atmosphereto Temperature 275Of the general Relations of Evaporationand Condensation 290• Of the actual Quantity of Water that isevaporated and condensed over the Earth 307Of Dew and Hoar Frost 312CONTENTS. XixP«gcOf Mists and Fogs 316Of Clouds 319Of Snow and Sleet 326Of Rain 328Of Hail 335Of the Distribution of Heat and Light intheir latent and decomposed Forms throughthe Vapour of the Atmosphere ; and of theEffects of that Distribution 337Of the Relations of Electricity to the Vapourof the Atmosphere 337Of the Aurora Borealis 341Of the Phenomena depending upon the Decomposition,Refraction, and Reflection ofLight by the Vapour of the Atmosphere. TheMirage. The Fata Morgana. Halos. TheRainbow 3423. Of the Occasional Presence of ForeignBodies in the Atmosphere ; and of their Effects . . 345Of Matter suspended in the A atmosphere inastate of Mixture. Coloured Rain and Snow.Aerolites. Dry Fogs 345Of Flatters which pervade the Atmospherein a state of Solution. Malaria 351Recapitulation. The Arrangements of Climatedemonstrative of Design 354Chapter VI. — Of the Adaptation of OrganizedBeings to Climate ; comprehending a GeneralSketch of the Distribution of Plants andAnimals over the Earth, and of the PresentPosition and Future Prospects of Man 363Of the Formation and Ingredients of the Soil 364Section I. Of the Distribution of Plants over theEarth.1 . Of the Differences of Vegetation, as liable tobe influenced by Soil, and by other minor LocalCircumstances, in the same Climate 366XX CONTEXTS.Page2. Of the Influence of Climate on Vegetation.Distribution of Plants 370Profusion of Vegetable Productions 377Section II. Of the Distribution of Animals over theEarth 3811. Of the Differences existing among Animalsin similar Climates 3842. Of the Effects of Diversity of Climate on theDistribution of Animals 389Migration and Hybernation 398Coverings of A animals 399Section III. Of the Present Position and futureProspects of Man 1 404BOOK III.Of the Chemistry of Organization : particularlyof the Chemical Process of Digestion : and ofthe subsequent Processes, by which variousAlimentary Substances are assimilated to, andbecome Component Parts of, a Living Body 413Chapter I. — Of the Nature and Composition of OrganizedBodies in general, as compared withInorganic Matter 4141. Of Organic Bodies considered as ChemicalCompounds 415Of the Chemical Composition of Sugar,Vinegar, Starch, and Wood 4222. Of the Cause of the Differences in the SensibleProperties of Substances nearly allied in theirChemical Composition 423Of the Peculiarity of the Composition ofOrganic Substances 424CONTEXTS. XXIPageOf the Nature of the Agents by which OrganicSubstances are Produced 4293. Of the Modes of Operation of OrganicAgents 431Refections on the Mutual Adaptation of theElements and the Agents of Organic Nature 439Chapter TI. — Of the Modes of Nutrition; comprehendinga Sketch of the Alimentary Apparatus; and of Alimentary Substances in Plantsand in Animals 443Section I. Of the Modes of the Nutrition of Plants ;and of the Nature of those Matters by which theirNutrition is effected 444Section II. Of the Modes of Nutrition in Animals ;and of the Alimentary Substances by which theyare nourished 4501. Of the Organs of Digestion in Animals 451Of the Mouth and its Appendages 452Of the Oesophagus, the Stomach, and theIntestinal Canal 457Of the Liver, the Pancreas, and the Spleen. 465Of the Circulation of the Blood, and of theDistribution of the Nerves in the Organsof Digestion 4672. Of Alimentary Substances composed of theSaccharine, the Oily, and the Albuminous Principles470Chapter III. — Of the Digestive Process; and ofthe General Action of the Stomach and theDuodenum 480Of the Influence of Water as an Essential, and asan Accidental Ingredient of Alimentary Substances. . 480Of the Powers exerted by the Stomach in the Digestionof the Food 4881 . Of the Reducing Powers of the Stomach 4892. Of the Powers of Conversion possessed by theStomach 498XXII CONTENTS.Page3. Of the Organizing and Vitalizing Powers ofthe Stomach 501Of the Changes the Food undergoes in theDuodenum 5024. Of the Functions of the Alimentary Canal,beyond the Duodenum 506Observations on the Choice and the Preparationof Aliment 507Observations on the General Character ofthe Assimilating Agency 510Chapter IV. — Of the Processes of Assimilation-subsequentTO THOSE IN THE STOMACH AND AlimentaryCanal ; particularly of the Conversionof the Chyle into Blood. Of Respirationand its Uses. Of Secretion. Of theFinal Decomposition of Organized Bodies.General Reflections and Conclusion 5141. Of the Passage of the Chyle from the AlimentaryCanal into the Sanguineous System ; andof the Function of Absorption generally 514Process similar to Digestion carried on in allParts of the Body 5172. Of the Blood 517Of the Constituents of the Blood 518Of the Organization of the Blood 5193. Of Respiration 521Of the different Colours of Arterial and ofVenous Blood 523Of the Source of the Carbonic Acid in VenousBlood, and of the Gaseous Vapour thatis expelled from the Lungs 524Of the Uses of the continual Extrication ofCarbonic Acid from Living Animals 5254. Of Secretion 5275. Of the Spontaneous Decay of OrganizedBodies 528Recapitulation of the Mechanical Arrange-contents.XX11IPagements of the Digestive Organs, and of theChemical Changes by which the Food isadapted for Assimilation 531Reflections on the Mutual Dependence ofPlants and Animals. On the Subserviency oftheir Mechanism to the Chemical Propertiesof Matter ; and on the beneficial Effectsof their Renovation and Decay 537Conclusion. Of the Future Progress ofChemistry ; of the Application of Chemistryto Physiological Research ; and of the Tendencyof Physical Knowledge to elevate theMind by Displaying the Attributes of theDeity and the Immensity of His Works 543Appendix. — Containing Additional Notes and Emendations553DIRECTION TO THE BINDER.The Binder is desired to place the Map opposite to page 561,in the Appendix.INTRODUCTION.OF THE LEADING ARGUMENT OF NATURAL Theology; THAT DESIGN, OR THE ADAPTATION OFMEANS TO AN END, EXISTS IN NATURE.With the view of illustrating the argument ofdesign, we shall commence with a statement ofthat argument in its simplest form.Animals in cold climates have been providedwith a covering of fur. Men in such climatescover themselves with that fur. In both cases,whatever may have been the end or object, noone can deny that the effect, at least, is preciselythe same : the animal and the man are alikeprotected from the cold. Now, since the animaldid not clothe itself, but must have been clothedby another ; it follows, that whoever clothed theanimal, must have known what the man knows,and must have reasoned like the man ; that isto say, the clothier of the animal must haveknown that the climate in which the animaliMKom c riot,is placed, is a cold climate ; and that a coveringof fur, is one of the best means of warding oft*the cold : he therefore clothed his creature inthis very appropriate material.The man who clothes himself in fur to keepoff the cold, performs an act directed to acertain end ; in short, an act of design. So,whoever, directly or indirectly, caused the animalto be clothed with fur to keep off the cold,must likewise have performed an act of design.But, under the circumstances, the clothier ofthe animal, must be admitted to have been alsothe Creator of the animal : and by extendingthe argument ; the Creator of man himself — ofthe universe. Moreover, the reasoning the Creatorhas displayed in clothing the animal, He hasdeigned to impart to man, who is thus enabledto recognise his Creator's design.Such is an instance of those varied adaptationsof means to ends around him, whichman by his reasoning, appreciates; and whichdemonstrate to him, the existence of an intelligentCreator. Compared, however, with theextent of creation, the instances, numerous asthey appear, in which man is thus able totrace the designs of his Creator, are reallyfew. Man not only sees means directed tocertain ends ; but ends accomplished by means,which he is totally unable to understand. Healso sees, every where, things, the nature, andINTRODUCTION.the end of which are utterly beyond his comprehension; and respecting which, he is obligedto content himself with simply inferring theexistence of design.The argument of design, therefore, in itsgeneral sense, embraces at least three classesof objects : —1. Those objects, regarding which, the reasoningof man coincides with the reasoningevinced by his Creator ; as in the simple adaptationof clothing above mentioned: or those objects,in which, man is able to trace, to a certainextent, his Creator's designs ; as in various phenomenaamenable to the laws of quantity ; viz.mechanics, &c.2. Those objects, in which, man sees no morethan the preliminaries and the results, or theend and design accomplished ; without being-ableto trace through their details, the meansof that accomplishment ; as in all the phenomenaand operations of chemistry.3. Those objects, in which, design is inferred,but in which the design, as well as the means bywhich it is accomplished, are alike concealed ;as in the existence of fixed stars, of comets,of organized life ; and indeed in all the greatand more recondite phenomena of nature.The intention of these Treatises, is to pointout the various evidences of design, among theobjects of creation ; and to deduce from them,INTRODUCTION.the existence, and the attributes, of the Creator.The following pages are occupied more particularly,with the illustration of the evidences ofdesign, in objects belonging to the second ofthe three classes above mentioned ; with those,namely, in which design is obvious, though wecannot trace the means by which that design isaccomplished.BOOK I.OF CHEMISTRY.PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS ON THE RANK OF ChemistryAS A SCIENCE ; AND ON ITS APPLICATIONTO THE ARGUMENT OF DESIGN.Chemistry does not afford the same species ofargument (in favour of design) that mechanismaffords, and yet may afford an argument in ahigh degree satisfactory"* This remark of theexcellent Paley has been made by him withreference only to a particular subject, but thefollowing sketch, pointing out the grounds uponwhich chemistry as a science is founded, andthe rank which it holds among the departmentsof human knowledge, will at the sametime show the general truth of the remark.An elaborate enquiry into the origin andnature of human knowledge would be quite• Natural Theology, chap. vii.P BINTRODUCTION.misplaced here. We shall content ourselveswith simply considering it as of two kinds, viz :a knowledge of what must be ; that is to sayof what we cannot conceive either not to exist,or to exist otherwise than as it is, andY which is therefore founded upon reason ; and aknowledge of what simply is, but how or whyAve know not, and for the existence of which,therefore, we can assign no reason but ourexperience alone.Of these, the only instance of the first kindwhich particularly concerns us at present, is theknowledge of quantity and its relations in general; of the second, that of certain natural phenomena,the consideration of which constitutesthe principal object of the present volume.The fundamental differences between these twogreat branches of human knowledge, as well astheir consequences, cannot perhaps be more strikinglyillustrated than in the following familiarexposition by a celebrated writer. " A cleverman," says Sir J. Herschel, " shut up aloneand allowed unlimited time, might reason outfor himself all the truths of mathematics, by proceedingfrom those simple notions of space andnumber of which he cannot divest himself withoutceasing to think ; but he would never tell byany effort of reasoning what would becomeof a lump of sugar, if immersed in water, orwhat impression would be produced on his eyeINTRODUCTION, 3by mixing the colours yellow and blue'* resultswhich can be learnt only from experience.Thus then the extremes of human knowledgemay be considered as founded on the onehand purely upon reason, and on the otherpurely upon sense. Now, a very large portionof our knowledge, and what in fact may beconsidered as the most important part of it, liesbetween these two extremes, and results from aunion or mixture of them, that is to say, consistsof the application of rational principles to thephenomena presented by the objects of nature.With respect to knowledge founded upon reason,we are so constituted, that whether we contemplatethose primary notions of space, time,force, &c. above alluded to in the abstract, orwhether we view them in connexion with theobjects of sense around us, we cannot divestthem of quantity, which seems to be involved intheir very essence. Quantity and its relations,therefore, in some shape or other, enter as anecessary element into by far the greater portionof human knowledge. Now the primary relationsof quantity are exceedingly simple ; onequantity may be equal to another, or it may begreater or less, but we can conceive no other relation.Hence all the operations of the mathematics— the science of quantity and its relationsDiscourse on the Study of Natural Philosophy, p. 76.4 INTRODUCTION.however abstruse and complicated they appear,can be ultimately resolved into additionand subtraction.It is principally then through the mediumof the relations of quantity that we are enabledto reason in a satisfactory manner upon theobjects of sense. For as every thing in nature, orwhat is the same thing to us, every sensationproduced by one natural object, as comparedwith that produced by another, must be eitherequal or similar, or unequal or dissimilar; thewhole are capable of being subjected, more orless perfectly, to the laws of quantity. This iseffected in various ways and by various artifices,but chiefly through the intervention of certainnatural or assumed units, or standards of resemblance,as a second in time, a foot in space, &c.and in proportion to the definite character ofthese units, or standards, and as they can bemore or less satisfactorily applied, so will theresulting branch of knowledge be more or lessof a mathematical character, or be more or lessrational and perfect.By contemplating, in the abstract, the boundlessrelations of time and of space, where no endcan be conceived to addition and subtraction, wearrive at the only notions of infinity of whichour nature seems capable. These once obtained,the obvious and necessary existence of causewithin the narrow sphere of our observationINTRODUCTION. 5naturally leads us to inquire, can this cause beinfinite ? And thus we are led by degrees, butirresistibly, to the sublimest of all conclusions,that a Cause or Agent in every way commensuratewith infinity — omniscient and omnipresent,eternal and omnipotent must exist — inother words, a God.Compared with infinity, however, and evenwith the objects of nature as they visibly existaround us, our actual knowledge of time and ofspace is exceedingly limited. Like travellerson an extended plain, we see what is going onaround us at the present moment, but the distantand the very near, the past and the future, arealike unknown to us. A few millions of miles,for example, or a few thousand years, comprisethe utmost that we know of space and of time.On the other hand, beyond the fraction of aninch, or of a second, every thing belonging tospace and to time is inappreciable by our senses.Yet beyond these limits we know that myriadsof portions of space and of time must exist, toovast or too minute to be referred to our imperfectstandards. Let us, for instance, take the distanceof the nearest fixed star. This we areassured by astronomers is so great that theutmost measure we can apply to it — the dia Xmeter of the earth's orbit — a space of no lessthan 192,000,000 of miles is absolutely toolittle to measure it by — is in fact contained1NTK01U (thonwithin it so many times that the number cannotat present be counted ! On the other hand, weshall presently find, that the molecules of matterof which the objects we see around us are composedare so minute, that a measure scarcelyappreciable by the unassisted sight, the thousandthpart of an inch for example, is vastly toolarge to compare them with, and may in factcomprise millions of them !Experience, the great and ultimate source ofall the knowledge we possess of those portions ofnature to which our faculties are limited may beacquired in two ways ; by simple observation,and by experiment; that is to say, either "bynoticing facts as they occur without any attemptto influence the frequency of their occurrence, orto vary the circumstances under which theyoccur ;" or "by putting in action causes andagents over which we have control, 'and purposelyvarying these combinations, and noticingwhat effects take place'* Now in all thehigher departments of knowledge the objects ofwhich are principally matter, and its motions inthe aggregate, the information we can acquireby one or both these means is so complete, andat the same time so favourable to the applicationof the relations of quantity, that the resultingsciences have all the certainty of abstract truthsHerschel's Discourse on the Study of Natural Philosophy,p. 76.INTRODUCTION.themselves. But when the knowledge we possessof objects is wholly sensible, and in no waycommensurate, or only very imperfectly so withtheir quantity, here it is that uncertainty begins ;for though we may be able to trace the apparentcause and effect of a particular phenomenon, themost minute and careful observation and experiment,often give us but little insight into theconnexion between the two, and generally failus altogether. The reason of this is to be soughtfor in the limited nature of our faculties,and particularly in our complete ignorance ofthe nature of that mysterious communicationwhich we maintain with the external worldthrough the medium of sensation. In two ofthe senses indeed, seeing and hearing, we areable to trace the intermediate train of phenomenabetween the external object producingthe sensation and the sensation itself, and evento form some idea of the remote cause of thesensation ; but in the other two senses, tastingand smelling, the whole is involved in mysteryfrom beginning to end.Thus when a bell is struck, philosophers havesatisfactorily demonstrated that a vibratory motion,excited in the bell, and depending upon itselasticity, is communicated to the air in contactwith it, and through this medium is propagated tothe ear, in which organ, we know not why, thesensation of sound is excited . Circumstances very8 INTRODUCTION.similar have been supposed to take place withrespect to light, and indulge (or something obeyingthe laws of indulge) have been demonstratedto exist and to be propagated from the luminousbody to the eye, and thus the remote cause ofsound, and probably of light, is proved to bemotion. But in the cases of tasting and smellingthe circumstances are altogether dissimilar ;here the sapid and odoriferous matters arebrought at once into actual contact with thesentient organs, and the sensations are the consequencewithout any intermediate train of phenomena,at least any that we can appreciate. Whatit is therefore in an acid or a rose for example,analogous to motion in the bell, and which producesthe sensations we call sour and sheet weknow not, and probably never shall know, andsimply because the laws and relations of quantityare here either totally inapplicable, or can beonly indirectly and most imperfectly applied.These observations are principally introducedwith reference to the department of knowledgewe have at present to consider. Almost all ofwhat are denominated the chemical properties ofbodies, are objects of taste and of smell, ratherthan of sight and of hearing. Hence they admitonly of the indirect application of the laws ofquantity, and are the result, not of reason butsolely of experience. Indeed, so much is chemistrythe creature of actual experimental reintroduction.9search, that its simplest truths have seldom beenanticipated a priori. Thousands of years ofobservation and experience for example had nottaught mankind that water is composed of twoelementary gaseous principles, much less theproportions in which those principles combineto form water. Nay, even now the fact has beenestablished upon the clearest evidence, we are unableto explain why it is so, or even to comprehendthe nature of the union or its result. Hence,to use the language of Paley, in all chemicaloperations — " our situation is precisely like thatof an unmechanical looker-on, who stands by amachine, the fabric of which is hidden from hissight by the outside case, or if seen, would betoo complicated for his uninformed understandingto comprehend. And what," continuesthis energetic writer, " is that situation ? Ignorantas he is, he does not fail to see thatcertain materials, in passing through the machine,undergo remarkable changes; and whatis more, changes manifestly adapted for futureuse. Is it necessary that this man, in order tobe convinced that design, that intention, thatcontrivance, have been employed about the machine,should be allowed to pull it to pieces tostudy its construction ? He may indeed wish todothis for many reasons, but for all the purposesof ascertaining the existence of counsel and designin the formation of the machine, he wants10 INTRODUCTION.no such intromission or privity. What he seesis sufficient. The effect upon the material, thechange produced in it, the utility of that changefor further applications abundantly testify, betheconcealed part of the machine, or of its constructionwhat it will, the hand and agency ofa contriver. "*We have thus attempted to point out the rankwhich chemistry holds among human knowledge,and the kind of evidence which it furnishes infavour of design ; and the whole argument maybebriefly recapitulated as follows : chemistry isa branch of knowledge founded solely on experience,for the phenomena of which we canassign no reason. But although the intimatenature of its changes be unknown to us, we seethem manifestly directed to certain ends ; henceas objects directed to certain ends, where thewhole of the intermediate phenomena can betraced and understood, always imply design,we naturally infer design in others obviouslyso directed, even although we may not be ableto understand their intimate nature.Such is the state in which Paley has leftthe argument, and while we admit that evenin its most perfect form, it is less satisfactorythan that founded upon mechanism, we havealways thought that our excellent author has notNatural Theology, chap. vii. condensed slightly, but the argumentstrictly adhered to.INTRODUCTION. 11made quite so much of his subject as he mighthave done, and that the very imperfections anddifficulties of chemistry and of the allied branchesof knowledge give them some advantages overmechanism itself. When a series of wheels or oflevers are arranged in a certain order, they mustmove in a certain way, and produce a certaineffect which can be foretold exactly. In such acase, we may admire the skill and ingenuity ofthe Contriver, or perhaps feel astonished at hispower, but we scarcely do more, and much of theeffect is lost in the apparent necessity of theresult, and the consciousness that under thecircumstances nothing else could have happened.When the Deity, therefore, operates through themedium of mechanism, he appears almost tooobviously to limit his powers within the trammelsof necessity ; but when he operates throughthe medium of chemistry, the laws of which areless obvious, and indeed for the most part unknownto us, his operations have much more thecharacter of those of a free agent, and, in manyinstances also, appear of a higher order and aremore striking and wonderful . Do not, for instance,those extraordinary and mysterious changes constantlygoing on around us, beneath us, withinus, derive no small additional interest from thevery circumstance of their not being understood ?Just such an interest, to revert to the argumentof Paley, as the unmechanical looker-on feels12 INTRODUCTION".in the operations of a corn mill, a carding machine,or a threshing machine, and to whichhe who is well acquainted with the mechanismis a stranger. Certainly this is the case. Obviousmechanism, though well suited to display theintelligence and design of the Contriver, is notalways so well adapted for arresting the attentionof the observer; its very obviousness in somemeasure depriving it of its interest. But when wesee the same Contriver, besides the most beautifuland complicated mechanism, employ othermeans utterly above our comprehension, thoughevidently most familiar to him, the circumstanceis not only calculated to arrest our attentionmore forcibly, but at the same time to impressus with more exalted notions of his wisdom andpower.There yet remain one or two other points tobe briefly considered before we proceed to oursubject. In the first place it may be asked, dothose extraordinary changes which appear to beconstantly going on in bodies around us, indicatereal and substantial changes in the bodies themselves,or are they mere phantasms and creationsof the organs of sense, through which webecome acquainted with them ? The discussionof this question will probably be considered bymost as superfluous, but for the sake of those (ifthere be any) who entertain doubts upon thepoint, it may be remarked, that the sensations,INTRODUCTION. 13though admitted to be mere signals or indications,bearing little or no analogy with the causesproducing them, and therefore throwing littlelight upon their nature, do nevertheless representreal and substantial operations of some sortin the bodies themselves. This might be provedwere it necessary by a variety of arguments, butone or two only will be sufficient for our presentpurpose. In the first place it may be stated,that changes in the chemical constitution ofbodies are usually accompanied by correspondingchanges in weight. Now weight is a modificationof force, one of those self-evident existenceswhich we cannot doubt without doubting ourown. Another, and perhaps indeed the moststriking argument in favour of the reality ofchemical changes, may be deduced from thesubserviency to them of those mechanical contrivancesand operations everywhere existing inorganized beings. At least, half the mechanismin a living animal is subservient to the chemicalchanges constantly going on in it, and necessaryto its existence. Take, for instance, the circulartion of the blood : what a complicated apparatusis here employed for the simple purpose of exposingthe blood to the action of the air in the jylungs, in order that it may there undergo somechemical change. Now, surely no one canreasonably doubt that this chemical change is asmuch a reality as the mechanism by which it14 INTRODUCTION.has been accomplished ; and if one chemicalchange be admitted to be a reality, why may notall others ?Lastly, if there be any one who denies theexistence of design, and sees nothing in allthe more obvious arrangements and orderaround him but the necessary results of what hechooses to denominate " the laws of nature," lethim calmly and deliberately consider the factsbrought forward in the following pages ; and ifhe can witness unconvinced all the numerousinstances of prospective arrangement obviouslymade with reference to things not yet inexistence; all the beautiful adjustments andadaptations of noxious and conflicting elementsmost wonderfully conspiring together for good ;and, lastly, the subversion of even his favouritelaws of nature" themselves, when a particularpurpose requires it ; if, we say, he can witnessall these and still remain incredulous of theevidences of design, w% can only observe, thathis mind must be most singularly constituted,and apparently beyond the reach of conviction.CHAPTER I.OF THE MUTUAL OPERATION OF PHYSICAL AGENTSAND OF MATTER, AND OF THE LAWS WHICH THEYOBEY.God has been pleased to prescribe limits tohis own power, and to work his ends within thoselimits. The general laws of matter have perhapsthe nature of these limits ; its inertia, itsreaction, the laws which govern the communicationof motion, of light, of heat, of magnetismand electricity, and probably of othersyet undiscovered. These are general laws, andwhen a particular purpose is to be effected,it is not by making them wind and bend andyield to the occasion, (for nature with greatsteadiness adheres to and supports them,) butit is, as we have seen in the eye, by theinterposition of an apparatus corresponding withthese laws, and suited to the exigency whichresults from them, that the purpose is at lengthattained. As we have said, therefore, God prescribeslimits to his power, that he may letin the exercise, and thereby exhibit demonsCHEMISTRY.stations of his wisdom. For then, i. e. suchlaws and limitations being laid down, it is asthough one Being should have fixed certainrules ; and, if we may so speak, provided certainmaterials; and afterwards have committedto another Being, out of these materials, andin subordination to these rules, the task ofdrawing forth a creation : a supposition whichevidently leaves room, and induces indeed anecessity for contrivance. Nay, there may bemany such agents, and many ranks of these"*This admirable passage from Paley is so muchin point, and so exactly expresses our viewsupon the subject, that we have chosen it as atext, as in a former instance, for illustration.We shall proceed, therefore, to take a summaryview of " the limits within which the Deity hasconfined his operations ;" that is to say, of thelaws by which matter, and those subordinateagents by which it is capable of being influenced,have been made to mutually act andreact upon each other.The principles of activity which operate assubordinate agencies in nature may be consideredas of two kinds ; those which operateuniversally upon every individual atom of matterwithout reference to its sensible properties, asthe forces producing the phenomena of gravitateTheology, chap. iii.INERTIA AND ACTIVITY OF MATTER. 17Hon, &c. ; and those which operate among thedifferent constituent molecules of which all bodiesare composed, and which are denominatedmolecular or polarizing forces, &c. Of each ofthese we shall in the first place endeavour toconvey some idea to the general reader.CHAPTER II.ON THE INERTIA AND ACTIVITY OF MATTER.To form a notion of what is termed the inertiaor inactivity of matter, let us imagine a portionof it, as, for example, a ball of lead a detachedfrom all other matter, and existing absolutelyuninfluenced in space. Such a mass ofmatter, if supposed to be at rest, must obviouslyremain so, for it cannot move itself ; on the otherhand, if it be supposed to be in motion, it mustcontinue in motion, for it cannot be conceivedto be able to stop itself any more than it couldbe conceived to be able to set itself in motion ;in short, a mass of matter under such circumstancesof isolation must be considered as perfectlypassive and unable to change its state,whatever that may happen to be, whether ofmotion or of rest. Now let us suppose anotherportion of matter, as, for example, another ballp. c18 CHEMISTRY.of lead b exactly of the same size as a, placed infree space at any moderate distance from a, andaway from all other influences, what will happen?We know from general experience that underthese circumstances, the two balls will mutuallyapproach each other with an accelerated motion,till they meet at a point exactly intermediatefrom those at which they first started ; and theinference from this experience is, that the twoballs exert a mutual and equal attractive force,which causes them to move towards each other.If the ball b be twice the size of the ball a, thetwo balls will mutually approach each other asbefore, but, in this instance, instead of movingwith equal velocity, while the ball a movestwo feet, the ball b will only move one foot ;or taking an extreme case, and supposing theball b to be indefinitely larger, say a milliontimes larger, than the ball a, they will mutuallyinfluence and mutually move towards each otheras before, but the motion of the ball b will be sominute as to be insensible, while that of theball a will be the greatest possible. Here we haveinstances of the inertia (inactivity, opposingforce, &c.) and of the activity (force of attraction,force of gravitation, &c.) which all matter exertsreciprocally and mutually towards all othermatter, and the laws of which, as deducible fromthe circumstances stated, and from others, whichit would be foreign to our present purpose toINERTIA AND ACTIVITY OF MATTER. 19enter upon, may, in general terms, be given asfollows : " The mutual attraction of two bodiesincreases in the same proportion as their massesare increased, and as the square of their distanceis decreased, and it decreases in proportion astheir masses are decreased and as the square oftheir distance is increased." These laws, and[those of the motions connected with them, are[absolutely general, and not only extend to the[utmost limits of the universe hitherto exploredby man, but to every form and condition of matter,i without exception and without reference to itsother properties. They, therefore, constitute,probably, the most comprehensive " limits whichthe Deity has been pleased to prescribe to HisJ power," and within which He operates withjjthe most unceasing and undeviating regularityand certainty; they have also the remarkable(property of being so amenable to the laws ofquantity and mathematics, as to be in most instancesas firmly established upon reason as abstracttruths themselves. The mind of a Newtonwas chosen to reveal these laws to man, and man'sacquaintance with them may be justly consideredas one of his noblest privileges. To pointout their wonders in detail, and the sublimeconclusions to which they lead, is the businessof a colleague ; at present we have to considerthem in their more general form only, and, exceptin a single point of view, as objects of compare)CHEMISTRY.risen merely with those more immediately connectedwith our own subject.The point of view to which we allude is thatpeculiar case, or instance of gravitating force,termed weight. In oar illustration of the attractiveforces of matter above given we supposeda case in which one ball was very much largerthan the other : now this precisely correspondswith the case of the globe of the Earth, and ofall common bodies near its surface. The Earthis more than 1,000,000,000,000,000 times themass of any body which is observed to fall onits surface, and therefore if even the largest bodywhich can come under observation were to fallthrough a height of 500 feet, the correspondingmotion of the Earth would be through a spacelessthan the 1,000,000,000,000,000th part of 500feet, which is less than the 100,000,000,000th partof an inch, and therefore quite inappreciable.*Now the attractive force exerted between theEarth and detached bodies is denominated weight.Hence the weight of a body, at the earth's surface,is proportionate to its mass, or to the quantityof matter it may contain, whatever its formor qualities may be — a most important fact forthe chemist, who, by employing the chemicalproperties of bodies as indications of identity orof change, is by these means enabled to applyLardner's Cabinet Cyclopaedia. Art. Mechanics, p. 79.POLARIZING FORCES. 21to them the more certain measure of weight, andthus in some degree to bring them under thedominion of the laws of quantity.CHAPTER III.OF MOLECULAR OR POLARIZING FORCES, ETC.In all chemical operations, as already observed,we only witness the beginning and the end, thecause and the effect, while the whole of theintermediate changes elude our senses. Nevertheless,by a careful observation of the phenomenawe are enabled to form some notion uponthe subject, and that amply sufficient to convinceus of their wonderful nature. With a viewtherefore of arresting the attention of those whomay be unconscious of these wonders, or too aptto overlook them, we have thought it proper topremise a sketch of what may be supposedto take place among the ultimate particles ofwhich all bodies are constituted, during thoseremarkable changes which they are constantlyundergoing. And here it may be remarked,once for all, that many of the views commonlyentertained on these points have always appearedto us to be so imperfect and unsatisfactory,that so far from elucidating the subject, they22 CHEMISTRY.have only served to render it the more obscure.In the following sketch, therefore, as betteradapted for our purpose, we have endeavouredto give that view of the subject, which, aftertwenty years of close attention and no ordinarylabour, we have been induced to consider asthe most simple and consistent with the phenomena.The general reader, who feels nointerest in these enquiries, and who at the sametime wishes to be apprized of the nature ofthe arguments deducible from the divisibilityand molecular constitution of matter, is referredto the end of the present and of the followingchapters for a summary of these arguments.Section I.Of the Divisibility of Matter.The first point which naturally claims our attentionin the consideration of molecular operations,is the size of these molecules ; a subject usuallydiscussed under the head of the divisibility ofmatter. Matter, or rather space, may be conceivedto be divisible ad infinitum; at least nolimits can be assigned beyond which its subdivisioncannot necessarily proceed. As, however,it exists in the world around us, there cannotbe the least doubt that it is composed ofDIVISIBILITY OF MATTER. 23ultimate particles or molecules incapable ofJ further division or change, at least by ordinaryI agents : the reasons for these assertions will| appear hereafter, at present it is our object toconvey to the general reader some idea of themagnitude of these particles, with the view, printfinally, of showing how infinitely they surpassthe limited powers not only of our senses, butalmost of our conception. The subject, however,has so much attracted the attention of philosophers,that most of our readers must be alreadyfamiliar with it ; we shall therefore content ourselveswith merely selecting a single instancefrom each of the kingdoms of nature. As aninstance from the mineral kingdom, we mayquote from Dr. Thomson, who has shown thatan ultimate molecule of lead cannot weigh morethan the ^.^.^.^ th, nor an ultimate molecule ofsulphur more than 2 . 015 . 00 o-ooo-ooo th of a grain, andprobably a great deal less ; and that the size ofthe molecule of lead cannot surpass, and is probablymuch less than the ^.^.^.^.^ th of a cubicinch!* The vegetable kingdom presents us withinnumerable instances, not only of the extraordinarydivisibility of matter, but of its activity,in the almost incredibly rapid development ofcellular structure in certain plants. Thus theVista giganteum (a species of fungus), hasbeen known to acquire the size of a gourd in oneSystem of Inorganic Chemistry, I. 7.24 CHEMISTRY.night. Now supposing, with Professor Lindsey,that the cellules of this plant are not less than theissth of an inch in diameter, a plant of the abovesize will contain no less than 47-000-000-000cellules ; so that, supposing it to have grown inthe course of twelve hours, its cellules must havebeen developed at the rate of nearly 4 , 000 - 000'000per hour, or of more than sixty six millions inaminute ! * and when we consider that everyoneof these cellules must be composed of innumerablemolecules, each one of which isagain composed of others, we are perfectly overwhelmedwith the minuteness and number of theparts employed in this single production ofnature. But the animal kingdom perhaps presentsus with still more striking instances thanthese. Thus animalcules have been discoveredwhose magnitude is such that a million ofthem does not exceed a grain of sand ; and yeteach of these creatures is composed of membersas curiously organized as those of the largestspecies ; they have life and spontaneous motion,and are endowed with feeling and instinct. Inthe liquids in which they live they are observedto move with astonishing speed and activity, norare their motions blind and fortuitous, but evidentlygoverned by choice and directed to anend. They use food and drink, from which theyderive nutrition, and are therefore provided withIntroduction to Botany, page 7.DIVISIBILITY OF MATTER. 25a digestive apparatus. They have great muscularpower, and are provided with limbs andmuscles of strength and flexibility. They aresusceptible of the same appetites and obnoxiousto the same passions. Must we not concludethat these creatures have hearts, arteries, veins,muscles, sinews, tendons, nerves, circulatingfluids, and all the concomitant apparatus of aliving organized body? and if so, how inconceivablyminute must these parts be ? If a globuleof their blood bears the same proportionto their whole bulk, as a globule of our bloodbears to our magnitude, what power of calculationcan give an adequate notion of its minuteness?*We have thus endeavoured to convey someidea of the magnitude of the ultimate moleculesof which bodies are composed ; but though wehave succeeded in showing that they cannot exceeda certain magnitude, we are by no meanscertain that they are not in reality much less —indeed a great deal less than the least magnitudeof which we have endeavoured above to conveya conception : yet notwithstanding this unapproachableminuteness, they retain all the charactersof matter in the highest degree, andmoreover possess certain remarkable propertiesin common, upon the nature of which, in thenext place, we have to make a few remarks.Lardner's Cyclopaedia, Art. Mechanics, p. 13.2i) CHEMISTRY.Section II.Of the Forms of Aggregation of the ultimateMolecules of Matter.Matter in the aggregate, and as it appears toexist in the world around us, is known to usprincipally in three forms or conditions : — theSolid, the Liquid, and the Gaseous (the latterincluding the state of vapour and the thereforecondition of matter) ; these in their well markedstates are sufficiently distinct, though the wholegradually run into each other ; the solid into theliquid, and the liquid into the gaseous, by suchimperceptible grades, that in many instances itis not easy to say where one ends and the otherbegins.* The notions, which the mechanician ornatural philosopher employs in reasoning onthese forms of bodies are — of a solid, that all itsparts are indissolubly and unalterably connected,and impenetrable, so that the relative situationof the parts among one another, cannot bechanged, or one part be set in motion without allthe rest ; of a liquid, that all its parts are freelyIt may be proper here to observe that some bodies, as water,for instance, are capable of existing in that imperfectly gaseousform denominated vapour, under all ordinary circumstances ; thuseven ice gives off vapour rapidly, as we shall find hereafter.DIFFERENT FORMS OF AGGREGATION. 27movable among one another, but that it is notdilatable or compressible by mechanical means ;of a gas or aeriform body, that all its parts arenot only freely movable among one another, butthat it is compressible and dilatable withoutlimits. Strictly speaking, however, there are noobjects in nature actually existing which completelyconform to these definitions : no solid,for instance, absolutely hard and impenetrable,no fluid not compressible and dilatable, no gascompressible or dilatable without limits : andthese circumstances are evidently the naturalresult of their being composed of aggregations ofthe minute molecules we have been considering.Thus solids composed of such molecules mustnecessarily have innumerable interstices or pores;hence, when submitted to pressure, they areliable to undergo more or less of condensation,and apparently occupy less space than before :the same remarks may be made with respectto liquids ; while gaseous bodies, supposed to becomposed of such molecules, of course cannot beinfinitely compressible.28 CHEMISTRY.Section III.Of the solid Form of Bodies. Crystallization.Natural solids present us with a variety of propertiesusually termed secondary, many of whichare of the utmost importance : such are hardnessand softness, elasticity, toughness, malleability,tenacity, ductility, &C, all too well understood torequire definition here. These properties evidentlydepend in a great degree upon original differencesin the properties of the component moleculesthemselves ; but there is no doubt thatmany of them are also intimately connectedwith the modes in which the molecules are arranged.Of these modes we can form no preciseidea in a great many instances : there is, however,one form of solid aggregation, the regularcrystalline form, which has occupied much moreattention than the rest, and upon this we shallproceed to offer a few remarks.As an object of illustration we shall select thefamiliar one of water, which from its well knownproperties of existing either as a solid, a liquidavapour, or a gas, by a slight variation of circumstances,is well adapted for our purpose, aswe are thus enabled to employ the same objectof illustration throughout. At present we haveto consider it in its solid form of ice.SOLID FORM OF MATTER. 29Every one must have remarked that water inthe act of freezing assumes various symmetricalforms, shooting into spiculae, &c, as may bebeautifully seen on our windows on a frostymorning. Now this affords a familiar instance ofwhat is termed crystallization, a property apparentlypossessed by all ponderable matter,and readily exhibited by it when under favourablecircumstances : and it has beenremarked that the form assumed by the samematter is usually similar, or easily deduciblefrom some common form according to well-ascertainedand obvious laws. Let us now brieflyinquire into the properties which the ultimatemolecules of water must be supposed to possessto enable them to form these symmetrical aggregations.In the first place it is evident that thesimple supposition of mutually attractive forcesbetween these molecules, analogous or identicalwith the forces of gravitation, is inadequateto explain the phenomena. Possessed of suchproperties alone the ultimate molecules of bodiesmight indeed be imagined to adhere together,and their aggregations might even exhibit somethinglike regularity, but this regularity wouldin a great measure be accidental, and probablynever twice alike ; hence the utmost latitudeof assumption would never enable us toexplain upon such principles alone that samenessof figure above alluded to as always assumedby the same matter. It is obvious, therefore,30 CHEMISTRY.that the ultimate molecules of bodies are influencedby other powers than those of simpleinertia and attraction : what is the nature ofthese powers ? On this point there have beenvarious opinions. Some have supposed the ultimateparticles of bodies to possess shapesidentical with those of the aggregates whichthey form ; that a crystal, for example, whoseshape is a cube, is formed by the aggregation ofa number of infinitely little cubes, &c. But toothers this supposition has appeared so improbable,and so unlike the usual simplicity ofnature's operations, that they have rejected it, jmdhave formed the more feasible hypothesis, that theultimate molecules of bodies are either spheresor spheroidal, that is to say, more or less, virtuallyglobular.* Let us take it for granted then thatthe ultimate molecules of bodies are spheres, withwhat powers is it necessary to suppose these littlespheres to be invested in order to enable them toStrictly speaking, perhaps this observation is applicable tothe forms supposed to be assumed by the influences surroundingthe molecules, and by which all their operations are directed,rather than to the absolute forms of the molecules themselves,which, though in all instances virtually exerting spheroidal influences,must, in different instances, have very different forms.Those who wish to study the principles upon which spheroidalmolecules may be supposed to aggregate into crystalline forms,are referred to Dr. Wollaston's interesting paper on the subjectin the Philos. Trans. 1813, p. 51. It may be noticed, however,that the principles here advanced differ materially in other respectsfrom those referred to.CRYSTALLIZATION.cohere and form the symmetrical figures weobserve among natural bodies ? The existence ofsimple, mutual and general attractive powersamong such a set of molecules, has been alreadyobserved to be inadequate to explain the phenomena; there must be some specific powers determiningsimilar particles, to combine in similarways, otherwise the same resulting forms couldnot be supposed to take place. In the three smallHg. L spheres,* (Fig. 1«) let usee e suppose the points Ee, E e,()()() E e, on their superficies toee e he endowed with the followingproperties, viz. that the similar points,E, E, E, and e, e, e, have the property of mutuallyrepelling each other, while the dissimilarFig Ee, E e, E e, have the property ofmutual attraction. In such a case thethree molecules will readily combineE to e, as in Fig. 2, but in no otherway. Now let us suppose the samethree spheres to be endowed with propertiesat the points M m, M m, M m,F 3 as in Fig. 3, very similarE E to those at E e. Spheres-^ot so endowed will aggregatereadily, as in Fig.Or rather sections of spheres, and the same is to be understoodof all the subsequent figures.3'2CHEMISTRY4, E to e and 31 to »i, but inno other way ; and thus insteadof a single line we obtaina plate of molecules onein thickness.* To form thethird dimension, or to constitutea solid, it is necessary toassume the molecules asin Fig. 5, to be possessednot only of the attractivepoints Ee, Ee, Ee, 31m,31 m, M m, but also of 31' m, 31' m, M' m, (thepoint m', being supposed to be opposite to thepoint 31' , and out of sight.)Molecules so endowedwill readily combine as inFig. 6, and form a cubeor some figure obviouslydeducible from it, but inno other manner; and inthis way by assuming certain attractive and repulsivepoints upon our spheres at appropriateHere it is to be observed that the similar poles E E, e e, ofeach pair of molecules being supposed to be repellent withincertain limits, as will hereafter be explained, their absolute contactis prevented, and the two molecules are balanced, as it were,between the two opposing 1 and the two attracting forces. Theconsideration of forces operating in these and in the other modes,subsequently mentioned, present some highly interesting andnovel objects of research for the mathematician.CRYSTALLIZATION. o3parts of their superficies, it is not difficult toconceive them capable, in different instances,of forming aggregates of any shape whatever.The next point to be considered is, how far arewe authorized in making such apparently complicatedand gratuitous assumptions respectingthe properties of the ultimate molecules ofmatter ; are there any phenomena in nature justifyingsuch conclusions, and what are they ?And this leads us to enquire further, but asbriefly as possible, into the phenomena of aggregation,as we see them constantly going onaround us.Aggregation is usually considered as of twodistinct kinds, viz. that depending upon thesimple cohesion of similar molecules of matter, asof water, and which for the present may besupposed to undergo no change by the combination; and that depending upon the union ofdissimilar molecules of matter, capable of exertinga mutual chemical change upon eachother, in which case the aggregate is a tertiumquid, or third something differing altogether fromeither of the original molecules composing it.Now both these kinds of aggregation obviouslyexist in the same substance, at least when inthe solid form. In the first place the chemicalaggregation is exerted between the heterogeneousmolecules, (hydrogen and oxygen in thepresent case of water) which uniting, form comp.D34 CHEMISTRY.pound homogeneous molecules, (of water) ; while,in the next place, the molecules of water unitingchemically in one direction and cohesively in theother, form the solid crystal (of ice). Hencechemical aggregation and cohesive aggregationare as distinct as the polarities themselvesupon which they depend ; and if the one existedalone without the other, no such thing asaregular crystalline solid would probably beformed in nature.From the above views, of molecular forces,it follows as a consequence that every molecule,and crystalline aggregate of molecules,must possess one axis (as that, for instance, joiningthe polarities E e in the preceding figures,)having totally different powers and properties fromthe other two axes and polarities. This axis, bywayof distinction, may be called the chemicalaxis and polarities. The other two axes (andindeed every other axis that can be supposed tobe drawn, through the centre, from opposite pointsof the superficies of the molecule) probably possesscommon properties, and may be called thecohesive axes and polarities. Here then the existenceof two forces is indicated, — the one axial,the other equatorial, if we may be allowed theexpressions. The next question is, do suchforces actually exist in nature on the largescale, and what are these forces ? Now late observationshave proved, beyond a doubt, that theELECTRICITY. 35electric and magnetic are such forces. We proceed,therefore, to take a short view of electricityand magnetism.*Electricity. — It would be foreign to our presentpurpose to enter into details respecting thisor any other department of science we may haveoccasion to allude to : hence we shall contentourselves with a short summary of its generalprinciples. It seems to be satisfactorily provedthat the phenomena of electricity depend upontwo energies, usually existing throughout naturein a state of equilibrium, in which state theirpeculiar powers are not perceptible ; that thisequilibrium is capable of being destroyed by avariety of causes, as friction, &c. ; and that owingto the different capacities possessed by differentbodies, for conducting and retaining them, theseenergies can be partially separated and keptasunder, in which state they are capable of exhibitingtheir peculiar powers. These powers aresuch, that if two bodies charged in excess withIt may be remarked, that as all parts of the superficies ofour molecules, except the chemical poles, are supposed to bemore or less capable of cohesion, their aggregation in the form ofcommon crystallized solids may be readily conceived. With respectto the cohesion (if we may be allowed the expression) of thedifferent chemical poles E e, of similar molecules with each other,such cohesion seems to be proved by several circumstances, whichit would be foreign to our purpose at present to inquire into ; butof which, perhaps, the optical properties of crystals will hereafterform one of the most striking illustrations.3B CHEMISTRY.the same energy be brought into the vicinity ofeach other, they mutually repel each other ;while two 1 bodies charged with the two differentenergies mutually attract each other. In thisdisturbance of the equilibrium of the two energies,it is to be remarked, that in no instancedo we suppose that the two energies are, or canbe, entirely separated, so as to reside each, per Be,in different bodies ; but that a portion of theenergy of the one body goes to the other body,which at the same time returns a correspondingportion of its antagonist energy ; hence, otherthings being equal, each body contains the sametotal quantity of the two electricities as beforethe equilibrium was destroyed. For the sake ofthe general reader, the matter, in short, may berepresented numerically as follows : — Let us supposethat 2000 balls, all exactly of the same size,&c, but one half black and the other half white,are divided into two equal groups, a and b, of1000 balls each, but in such a way that thegroup a shall contain 200 black and 800 whiteballs, and the group b 800 black and 200 whiteballs. In this case the two groups will correspondexactly with two bodies in differentstates of electricity ; and (supposing them to bepossessed of similar powers), if a third group, c,containing 200 black and 800 white balls bebrought into the neighbourhood of the group a,which is similarly constituted, the two will beELECTRICITY. 37found mutually to repel each other, till they approachwithin a certain distance, that is to say,till the 200 black balls of each group come intoaction, and unite each with 200 white balls. Atthis distance they will no longer repel but attracteach other ; although, instead of forming a stateof equilibrium, the white balls (or one of theelectric energies,) will predominate. The samething precisely may be supposed to happen if afourth group, d, composed of 800 black and 200white balls, be brought into the neighbourhood ofthe group b. But if the group a, containing 200black and 800 white, be brought into the neighbourhoodof the group b, containing 800 blackand 200 white, the two will attract each other,and combine to form the original group of 2000balls, consisting of 1000 of each kind, as at firstsupposed.Such are, we believe, the fundamental laws ofaction and equilibrium of the two electric energies.There is one circumstance immediatelyarising out of them, which, as it is the mostfrequent and important of all the causes disturbingthe natural equilibrium of the twoenergies in different bodies, we shall briefly explain: we allude to what are usually called thephenomena of induction. Suppose an electrifiedbody a, (that is to say, a body having the equilibriumof its electric energies destroyed, asabove mentioned,) be brought into the weighsCHEMISTRY.boyhood of another body, n, in its naturalstate, what takes place? The electricity e, ofthe body a, acting upon the correspondingelectricity e, in the body b, repels it to thefurthest extremity of the body b ; and at thesame time attracts to that end of the body bwhich is nearest to the body a, the other andopposite electricity e. The body b, therefore,while under the influence of the body a, willexhibit all the phenomena of electricity, and issaid to be electrified by induction ; but remove thisbody b from the neighbourhood of the body a,and immediately the natural equilibrium of theenergies of the body b will be restored, and allsigns of electricity will vanish. In this experimentneither of the bodies gains or loses anything.As these phenomena are constantly occurringin nature, and as we shall have frequentoccasion to use the term induction, we haveendeavoured to convey an idea of the nature ofthe subject to the general reader.Of Galvanism. — While we are upon the subjectof electricity, we may briefly notice thatimportant modification of it termed galvanism.This form of electricity, instead of being evolvedby friction, is usually obtained by the mutualaction of various metals and chemical agents uponeach other. Late experiments, however, haveshown that the energies thus developed, differin no respect from those of common electricity,JMAGNETISM. 3f)but that they are obtained in this way in muchgreater quantity only, though in a lower state ofintensity than by the common machine ; and thatmany of the supposed peculiar effects of galvanismare the consequence of the motion ofsuch large quantities of these energies, throughbodies of various conducting powers. Galvanismhas recently attracted much more attention thanordinary electricity, from the facility with whichit may be applied to the purposes of the chemist,and from the extraordinary light it has thrownupon many chemical phenomena. Indeed, thechemist has been more indebted to the energiesof galvanism than to any other; and he will probablybe still further indebted to them than heyet has been. With respect to the phenomenaof galvanism, these in most respects, so closelyresemble the phenomena of electricity, that theydo not require further illustration here.Of Magnetism. — The general phenomena andlaws of magnetism are very analogous to thoseof electricity. There are evidently two antagonistenergies, which, while in a state ofequilibrium, are not cognizable ; but when separated,each one is mutually repellant of itssimilar, and mutually attractive of its opposite orantagonist. Thus the two north or two southpoles of two magnetic needles mutually repeleach other (with the same exceptions as the twoelectric poles), but the north pole of one needle40 CHEMISTRY.and the south pole of another, mutually attracteach other. Bodies are also rendered magneticby induction when in the vicinity of anothermagnet, precisely as happens with respect toelectricity. Magnetism principally differs fromelectricity in being apparently limited to a fewbodies, as iron and two or three others ; but lateobservations have thrown an entirely new light onthis part of the subject, which we have next toconsider. Before we proceed, however, we maymake a few remarks upon the obvious questions :What becomes of the two electric and two magneticenergies when in a state of equilibrium?Do the electric and magnetic energies combineto yield the same, or a different result, and whatis the nature of this result or results, and in whatform do they exist around us? On these pointsdifferent opinions have been held : some supposingthat by their union, both the electric andthe magnetic energies alike constitute heat;others something else. That both are most intimatelyconnected with heat and light, is evident ;but at present we decline to give a decidedopinion on the subject.We come now to consider the relations ofelectricity and of magnetism to one another — adiscovery which we owe to Oersted, and one ofthe most important that has been made in thepresent age. The following is a summary ofthese relations. Let us suppose, in the annexedMerELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM. 41Kg.7 figure, E e to represent the wire coni^pg, l netting the zinc and the copper terminatingplates of a galvanic battery~ m in action. From what has beensaid, it may be conceived that underCopper i these circumstances there will betwo currents moving through this wire in oppositedirections ; (from the copper to the zinc,usually called positive electricity, which maybesupposed to be represented by our blackballsin the previous illustration ; and from thezinc to the copper, usually termed negativeelectricity, which may be represented by ourwhite balls). Now in this state of things it hasbeen satisfactorily established by experiment,that besides these two currents, there are twoothers having totally different properties, indeedall the properties of the magnetic energies,moving, not in the direction of the wire, butincircles, or rather spirals, round it. The energycorresponding to the north pole of the magneticneedle moves from right to left, round the wire asabove posited, while the energy corresponding tothe south pole of the magnet moves in the oppositedirection, or from left to right. Hence when adelicate magnetic needle, Mm, is placed abovethe wire E e, its north pole M, will be attractedby the current moving from left to right, withwhich it comes first in contact ; and its southpole, for similar reasons, will be attracted byChemistry.the opposite current. A needle so placed willconsequently assume the direction represented inthe figure, with its north pole M to the left ; andif it be carried round the wire by its point ofsuspension, it will be always found to keep thesame relative position with respect to the wire.Thus when below the wire, the needle will apparentlypoint in the opposite direction ; whenon the same level, on the left hand, verticallydownwards ; when on the right, upwards.Bearing in mind these relative positions of thecurrents and needles, in what follows we mayneglect the currents and judge from the positionof the needles alone. Let us consider the caseof two connecting wires placed by the side ofeach other, as in the figures annexed, and whichEg*Zinc 1 I ZincMeem Merr Cojip,F.I CopperKg 9-1 Zinc I \ CopperMerECopper->MZincwires may be supposed to represent the chemicalaxes of our molecules. Now these wires,in consequence of the magnetic energies circulatinground them, will mutually attract or repeleach other, according to their position. If, asin Fig. 8, they are both in the same relativeposition, they will mutually attract each other,ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM. 43as may be inferred from the position of theneedles, M m M m, the north pole of one ofwhich corresponds with the south pole of theother ; but if one of the wires be reversed, as inFig. 9, they will mutually repel each other, thetwo similar poles of the needles in this case beingcontiguous. These relations hold universally, andwhat is most important, recent observations haveshown them to be reciprocal ; that is to say, if themagnetic energies be made to move in straightlines, the galvanic energies are found to circulateround them precisely in the way, and accordingto the laws above described as happeningto magnetism round electricity. Henceelectric sparks, and indeed all the phenomenaof electricity can now be obtained from a commonmagnet.Whether electricity and magnetism be differentforms of the same energies resulting fromthe different direction of their motions — whetherthey be distinct energies — whether they be thecause or the effect of Polarity, we shall not stayto inquire ; it is sufficient for our present purposeto know that they are inseparably associatedwith one another in the manner stated, and arealways present at least in, if they be not theimmediate cause of, all molecular actions amongponderable bodies. And this brings us back tothe point, where we digressed to consider thesubjects of electricity and magnetism.41 CHEMISTRY.We attempted to show that the ultimate moleculesof matter must possess two kinds of Polarity; one which we have denominated ChemicalPolarity, of a binary character, and existingbetween molecule and molecule, chiefly whenof different kinds ; and another denominated cohesivepolarity, determining, under certain circumstances,molecules of the same matter to cohere.We further attempted to explain howthese polarities (each supposed to be connectedby its own proper axis) must exist or be distributedin our molecules so as to fulfil the officesassigned to them, and which they evidentlyfulfil in nature. Lastly, we have shown that theelectric and magnetic polarities or energies areactually related to one another, precisely in thesame way that we supposed the chemical andcohesive polarities to be. The question then atonce arises, — are these forces identical? Dothe electric polarities correspond with the supposedchemical polarities, and the magneticwith the cohesive polarities of our molecule ?To us, we have no hesitation in saying, thisconclusion seems very probable, nay, almostinevitable, not only for the reasons stated, butfor others equally striking, that we shall haveoccasion to refer to hereafter. In the mean timewe may briefly consider the subject with a littlemore attention, and principally with reference tosome apparent objections that may be raisedPOLARIZATION, ELECTRICITY, ETC. 45against it. In the first place it may be objectedthat it is difficult, from what we know of thevarying and capricious character of the electricenergies, to suppose that they can ever existin that definite and permanent form in whichthey must exist if they be really identical withthe cause of chemical affinity. To this objection,it may be replied, that magnetism can and doesexist permanently in bodies for ages, and aselectricity is an inseparable attendant upon magnetism,this energy must also have equal permanence.Again, a portion of zinc and a portion ofcopper placed in contact produce electrical effectsas constant and enduring as the metals themselves.The argument, therefore, founded uponthe want of permanence, and uniformity of theelectric and magnetic energies, cannot, if dulyconsidered, be supposed to have any weight;for the molecule may be conceived to be composedof two parts analogous to the copperand zinc in contact, and the electricity andaccompanying magnetism evolved may be supposedto be as permanent in their character asthe parts of the molecule evolving them. To theargument that electricity and magnetism, as weareacquainted with these energies, are inadequateto produce the effects and explain the phenomenaof chemical affinity and cohesion, it maybereplied, that they may be so : but that theseenergies, as we are acquainted with them, are4<> CHEMISTRY.probably merely accidental and peculiar modificationsof the real energies, which in theirelementary form, may be something altogetherdifferent, and quite unknown to us. In proofof this notion, it may be observed, that theelectricities of the common machine and ofthe galvanic machine apparently differ materially; while that existing in certain animalsappears to differ from both. The magnetismevolved by electricity differs also slightly fromcommon magnetism, yet no one now doubts thatthese differences arise from varieties in thequantity and intensity of the same energies,which in their elementary form, therefore, may,and probably do, differ from all these varieties.At any rate, we are unable to say that one ofthese varieties is more elementary than another,and consequently we have no right to assume thateither of them is elementary, much less to foundany argument upon the assumption.Before we quit this subject of polarities andpolarizing forces, it may not be amiss, in thelast place, to make a few general remarks onthe points in which they resemble or differ fromthose of gravitation.The forces of gravitation, inertia and attraction,appear to be associated, and to reside inevery individual atom of matter in the universe ;hence every atom mutually attracts and is attractedby every other atom. The polarizingPOLARIZATION AND GRAVITATION. 47forces, on the other hand, are evidently disassociated,and reside in different parts of the samemass; hence this mass can in no instance be amathematical point, (or atom ?), but must consistof at least two parts ; hence, also, as all matterappears to possess polarity, matter must exist inthe state of mass or molecule, each of which moleculesmust occupy actual space. Thus theforces of gravitation and those of polarization arequite distinct. The forces of gravitation are primordial,and probably co-existent with matter ;while the forces of polarization have more of aderivative or resultant character, and are evidentlysubordinate to those of gravitation. Thequestion here naturally arises, — Are these differentforces related to one another? Do theforces of polarization consist of the forces ofgravitation in a state of separation, (if we may beallowed the expression,) or do they result fromthe motion of the molecules upon their axes?These are questions quite beyond our powers, —indeed we have nothing to do with them,— ourpresent object being merely to point out the apparentlimits within which the Deity has chosento confine his operations.48 CHEMISTRYSection IV.Of the Liquid Form of Bodies. Of Heat.Hitherto we have spoken of the aggregationof molecules in the solid form only ; we havenext to consider their arrangement in thatstate in which they constitute a liquid. Ournotion of a fluid, generally speaking, is, that allits parts or molecules, instead of being fixed, areperfectly moveable among one another ; our notionof a liquid (the least perfect form of fluidity) is,that its molecules are incompressible. Now, stillretaining water as our example of a liquid, letus consider what must happen to its moleculessituated, as we suppose them to be, in the formof ice, before they can be so arranged as toconstitute the liquid water. A moment's reflectionteaches us that they must be loosened orseparated from each other ; and, as they cannotseparate themselves, that some new agency isrequisite for this purpose. It need scarcely bementioned that this agent is heat ; on the generalphenomena and laws of which most importantprinciple we now proceed to make a few remarks.The sensations termed heat and cold are toowell known to require explanation. TheseHEAT. 49sensations, however, like all others, are merelythe effects of some external cause or causes,operating on and through our organs, in a mannertotally unknown to us. Various opinions havebeen entertained on the subject ; some consideringthe cause of heat (caloric) to be an existentand material fluid, though of such extremetenuity and impenetrability as to escape our observation,and to become manifest to us only byits effects upon our sensations, and upon all theponderable forms of matter ; others consideringit not as material, but as a property or principleof motion, which by exciting a certain speciesof vibration among the particles of bodies causesthe sensations and effects of heat. Such are themost usual opinions, and the probability is, thatthey are neither of them literally correct, but thatheat, and we may T add light, are substances, themolecules of which are influenced by polarizingforces precisely similar in all respects to thosewhich influence common matter ; that is to say,that the molecules of heat and of light obey laws,similar in all respects to those which govern themolecules of ponderable bodies.* We haveWe are aware that this opinion is opposed to that of most mathematicians,who favour the undulatory theory of light, and withgood reason, so far as they have occasion to consider it ; but we aredecidedly of opinion that the chemical action of light can be explainedonly upon chemical principles, whatever these may be.Whether these chemical principles will hereafter explain what isnow so happily illustrated by indulge, time must determine.P. E50 CHEMISTRY.already alluded to the opinion maintained bysome, that heat is a compound principle (likewater for instance), consisting of a union of thetwo forms of electricity. We now draw theattention of the reader to this hypothesis, inorder to state, that whatever heat may consistof besides, it is almost impossible to explain itseffects upon the polarizing forces, without supposingthat it at least involves, if it do not passinto the electric forces, upon which the polarizingforces appear to us to depend. We have saidappear, for as has been already stated, though itis convenient to consider the polarizing forcesunder the forms of electricity and magnetism, inwhich they are most usually and palpably manifestedto us among ponderable bodies; yet, intheir elementary form these forces may in realitybe something very different, not only from thoseof electricity and magnetism, but from all otherswith which we are acquainted ; while electricityand magnetism themselves, may be nothing morethan the effects of these elementary forces uponthe subtle matters of which the electric andmagnetic molecules are composed.One of the most general effects of heat isthe increase of volume which it produces in allbodies in which it is accumulated. There areafew exceptions to this law, and one of socurious and important a character as to requireespecial notice hereafter. In the mean time,EFFECTS OF HEAT. ■ *> 1however, the generality of the law may be takenfor granted, and an attentive comparison ofwhat has preceded and follows, will perhapsthrow some light upon the nature of this pie Jnomen .Let us suppose Fig. 10, to represent,as in our former illustrations,two molecules of ice,with the chemical axes E e, E e,parallel and similar. In this state their cohesivepolarities will be dissimilar, and themolecules, of course, will cohere as represented.Let us now suppose, from some external source,a certain quantity of heat to be communicatedto these molecules. The natural tendency ofheat is usually considered to be to arrangeFilii. itself in the form of an atmos-JL JL there, around the molecules asMl-w/m-\m in Fig. 11 ; the consequence^ *f*' of which is, that their apparenttemperature is raised a certain quantity,and they will be separated from each other insome slight degree ; they will thus occupy morespace than in Fig. 10, before the addition ofheat ; the cohesion between the parts M m willalso at the same time be diminished. Andhere it may be proper to notice an importantfact, that the same quantity of heat when introducedinto different bodies produces very differentapparent temperatures and effects, and that52 CHEMISTRY.this constitutes what is called by chemists theircapacity for heat, or their specific heat. Thus ifthe same quantity of heat, which we supposed tohave been introduced into two molecules of ice,had been introduced into two molecules of silver,their apparent temperature would have beenraised more than ten times as much as that of themolecules of ice ; hence in the case of the icesome of the heat must have disappeared, or become,in the language of chemists, latent, a mostimportant property of heat which we have nextbriefly to inquire into. Previously, however, itmay not be amiss to observe, that the moleculesof heat are supposed to be vastly less than thoseof any ponderable substance ; and that they maythus, without any incongruity, be supposedcapable of forming an atmosphere around theponderable molecules, which they could nototherwise of course be imagined to do.The latency of heat appears to depend upontwo totally different phenomena, or rather,properly speaking, is of two distinct kinds,as may be thus illustrated. Let us take thetwo bodies above alluded to — ice and silver;these under the same volume contain very unequalportions of matter, the silver being tentimes as heavy as the ice. The vacuities in theice, therefore, must be very much greater thanthose in the silver ; hence, when the same quantityof any principle, capable of occupying suchCAPACITY FOR HEAT, ETC. 53vacuities, as heat may be supposed to be, isintroduced equally into both, very dissimilarapparent effects must be produced. The moreporous body will absorb and condense within itsvacuities the added principle, and leave but littleexternal and sensible ; while the less porousbody, having less room among its pores, willexhibit a larger quantity external and sensible.The more porous body, therefore, may be said tohave a greater capacity for heat than the lessporous body, from its greater power of absorbingheat, and rendering it latent.* This, we believe,is the usual explanation of the phenomenon underthe assumed circumstances, and it is probablycorrect to a certain extent : but there is obviouslyanother form of latent heat, totally different fromthe above, and which evidently cannot be explainedon the same principles, and this we havenow to consider. Let us suppose that into a massof ice, cooled considerably below the freezingpoint, a uniform and regular flow of heat be determinedfrom some external source ; the temperatureof the ice, of course, will gradually go onincreasing till it rise up to the freezing point ;This union of heat with ponderable bodies may, perhaps, beconsidered as analogous to the condensation of gaseous bodies byporous substances — a very remarkable set of phenomena, whichdeserve to be much more carefully studied than they have been.The absorption of light is probably of a similar nature ; and thewhole apparently depend upon chemical principles, and probably,if studied in connexion, would mutually illustrate each other.54 CHEMISTRY.it will then suddenly stop, and remain stationarytill a quantity of heat, equal to 140 degreesof the thermometer, have flowed into theice. The ice has now become water ; but uptothat point the water still retains the originaltemperature of the ice; after that point, however,if the heat continue to be applied, thewater acquires apparent temperature as before.Now in this experiment a quantity of heat equalto 140 degrees of the thermometer has actuallydisappeared ; but this disappearance cannot beexplained in the same manner as that abovementioned; for the water, instead of being greaterin volume, and consequently having greater vacuitiesthan the ice from which it was formed, isactually less, and must therefore contain fewervacuities. How then are the phenomena to be explained? We commenced our observations uponheat, by alluding to the hypothesis that thisprinciple is capable of being decomposed into twoenergies, if not identical with, at least operating inthe same way as those of electricity. In the aboveexperiment, therefore, we consider that the 140degrees of heat which have disappeared, are decomposedand converted into the two polarizingenergies ; and that these energies thus producedare superadded to the energies already existingattached to the molecules of water, and in thisway increase their total quantity or intensity.The changes induced in the relative position ofLIQUID FORM OF BODIES. ISthe molecules of water, by this increase of intensityin their energies, may be illustrated asfollows : — Let Fig. 12, as beforeE lg E represent the position of twomolecules in the state of ice.Here the similar poles E E ande e y are of course mutually repellent,while cohesion takes place betweenthe dissimilar polarities, as shewn in the figure.Now suppose the polarities, E E, e e, to be suddenlymuch increased in intensity, so as to extendbeyond the semi-diameter of the spheres ; theywill of course repel each other, and in such a waythat the two spheres will revolve on the commonaxis of adhesion M m, and the axes E e, E e,instead of remaining parallel, will become atright angles to each other, as in Fig. 13 ; orrather as in Fig. 14.In Fig. 14, a view is supposedin the directionof the common axes,M m M m, of Fig. 13 ; in which view, of course,E e E e, are supposed to represent the chemicalaxes of the two spheres at right angles to eachother. Hence in the liquid state of bodies theposition of the axes of adjoining molecules maybesupposed to be at right angles, or in some positionless than right angles and approaching parallelism.At exact right angles the cohesive polaritiesare balanced and neutralized, so that50 CHEMISTRY.the points M m have neither a tendency tounite nor to separate, but remain simply in contact.Hence the molecules of such a body willbe all disassociated and free to move amongone another; and if we suppose each moleculeat the same time to be surrounded by its atmosphereof caloric, so thin as not altogether toremove mechanically the molecules beyond oneanother's influence, we have probably as clearan idea of the nature of a liquid as we arecapable of forming.Section V.Of the Third or Gaseous Form of Bodies.We have next to consider the most perfect formof fluidity, that of gas, or (adhering to our formerexample), steam ; and we shall, in the first place,take a short view of the molecular arrangement,of bodies existing in the gaseous form, whichwill enable us still further to elucidate the subjectof latent heat.Let us suppose as before, the same constantstream of heat to be flowing into a portion ofwater that we supposed to be flowing into theice : the water continues to increase in temperatureand capacity for heat till it arrives at theboiling point ; at this moment the temperatureGASEOUS FORM OF BODIES. ~)7ceases to be augmented, however much we mayurge the application of heat, and the water isconverted into a transparent gas, well known bythe name of steam ; to effect this latter purpose,however, under the ordinary circumstances ofatmospheric pressure, it has been found thatnearly 1000 degrees of heat are necessary, whichlarge quantity of heat actually becomes latentor disappears, since the temperature of the steamformed never exceeds 212°, that of the waterat the boiling point. What becomes of these1000 degrees of heat? We may suppose oneportion of it to become latent in the first of thetwo ways described above ; that is to say thewater in the act of being converted into vapour,is much augmented in volume, and into this augmentedvolume, as into a sort of vacuum, aportion of the heat may be supposed to rush andbecome insensible ; but another portion of heatis obviously decomposed, and goes to augmentthe molecular polarities of the water, which, inthe case of steam (and in all gases), may beimagined to be arranged in some such way asthe following : —Fig.15. In Fig. 1 5, we have represented/^■v/**^ as before, though in a different^LTVv^v manner, the chemical axes ateright angles to each other; atwhich angle the cohesive polarities are balancedand neutralized. This angle, therefore, may be68 CHEMISTRY.considered as the point at which liquidity terminatesand perfect fluidity begins. The nextaugmentation of heat increases the chemicalpolar intensities still further, so as to inducethem to repel (or rather to attract) each other'sKg 16 axes into the parallel position,m *> jAy Fig. 16; where the chemicalM V A J P ^ ar i^ es are °t u ite reversed , ande E of course, the contiguous cohesivepolarities m and m are brought into themaximum state of repulsion. Now such position,or some angle greater than a right angle, maybesupposed to be that assumed by the chemicalaxes of the molecules of all bodies when in thegaseous state. Hence, as there are two kinds ofattraction, so there must likewise be two kindsof repulsion, viz. heterogeneous or chemical repulsion; and homogeneous, or self repulsion,opposed to cohesion, upon which the gaseousform of bodies principally depends.But here a question arises : in what stateare the molecules of bodies in the condition ofvapour, as those of water at all temperaturesbelow 212° ; for instance at 32°? According toan hypothesis to be presently mentioned, agiven volume of steam, at 212°, contains the samenumber of self-repulsive molecules as a similarvolume of air under the same temperature andpressure, and therefore has the same elasticity.But the elasticity of the vapour of water at 32° isPROPERTIES OF GASES. oleonly equal to about l-5th of an inch of mercury ;*hence the same given volume of that vapour at32° will only weigh about 1- 150th of what steamought to weigh, supposing it could exist as apermanent gas at 32°, and under a pressure ofthirty inches of mercury. The molecules of thevapour, consequently, will be five or six timesfarther apart than in perfectly gaseous bodiesunder a similar temperature and pressure.!Let us now, in the last place, enquire how theabove suppositions respecting gaseous bodiesaccord with their common leading properties,viz., with their self-repulsive or diffusive properties; their equable expansion by heat ; their in-theelastic force of vapours increases with their temperatures; that is to say, according to our hypothesis, increases withthe angle formed by the chemical axes of their molecules. Atexact right angles the elastic force is ; at 180° it is equal tothat of air under similar pressure and temperature. Hence allintermediate elasticity lie between these two points.t Supposing it were possible for steam to exist at 32°, of courseat this temperature its weight would bear to that of air, the sameproportion it bears at 212°, that is to say, as 5 to 8. Hence100 cubic inches of steam at 32°, ought to weigh 2049375grains; or 5-8ths of 32*79 grains, which is the weight of 100cubic inches of air at 32°. But the weight of 100 cubic inchesof steam at 32° is only •] 366 grain, or 1- 150th that of air. Thenumber of molecules in steam at 32° is consequently only 1-1 50thof those in air at 32°. Hence this diminution of the number ofmolecules, if we suppose them to be diffused equally throughoutthe same space of 100 cubic inches, must of course, as stated inthe text, cause them to be between five and six times furtherapart.00 CHEMISTRY.crease in volume in the inverse proportion of theforce with which they are compressed ; and withtheir similar capacities for heat.Of the diffusion of Gaseous Bodies. — For thefacts connected with this most important subjectwe are principally indebted to Dr. Dalton andto Mr. Graham ; the latter of whom has shownthat when any gas or air is confined in a vesselfurnished with a very narrow aperture or with aporous plug, an interchange between the confinedand the external airs immediately begins totake place through the communicating aperture ;and that this interchange continues to go on toa certain point, which, with respect to the samegas, appears to be uniform, but differs in differentgases according to a certain law. Two gasesalso, whatever may be their specific gravities,and however they may be introduced into thesame vessel, speedily become mixed uniformlythroughout. These facts evidently indicate aspecies of self-repulsive influence among themolecules of the same gas, which appears to besatisfactorily accounted for by our hypothesis.The argument is very simple and obvious : Twomolecules of the same matter have a tendency tocohere and to form a solid, when the chemicalpolarities of these molecules are similarly arranged,and do not extend beyond the semi-diametersof the molecules ; but two molecules ofdifferent matter, under circumstances preciselyalike, remain passive, and have no tendency toPROPERTIES OF OASES. 01cohere. Hence, while two molecules of the samematter, having the intensity of their polaritiesmuch increased, and their chemical poles, consequently,reversed, repel each other, or becomeself repulsive ; two molecules of different matter,still retaining their mutual passiveness, do notrepel each other.There is reason to believe that these phenomenaare not confined to bodies perfectly gaseous, butexist also in that less perfect gaseous conditiontermed vapour, of which the vapour of water maybeconsidered as the most familiar example.On this supposition, and particularly that theabove law of diffusion holds among vapours,(which is probably the case, though in a modifiedform) the lower the specific gravity of the vapour,that is to say the lower the temperature, thegreater the diffusive power ; and consequentlythe more rapid the evaporation : a most importantinference that will enable us to explain manymeteorological phenomena at present quite inexplicable.Something very similar, if not identicalwith the above phenomena, also exists in liquidsand perhaps in solids. Thus the molecules ofcertain matters diffused through a liquid, aswater, may be supposed to exert in some casesa self-repulsive influence on each other, bywhich supposition only do their equal diffusionthrough a large mass of liquid seem explicable.Even in the solid state, as above observed, somethingof the kind appears to exist, especially(}-) CHEMISTRY.among organized bodies, which apparently owesome of their most remarkable properties tothe diffusion of active self repulsive moleculesthroughout their substance.Of the equal Expansion of Gaseous Bodies byHeat. — With respect to the second importantproperty of gaseous bodies, that under the sametemperature and pressure they all undergo equalexpansion by an equal increase of heat; thisseems to be explicable only on the suppositionthat all gaseous bodies, under the same pressure andtemperature, contain equal numbers of self-repulsivemolecules: a most important conclusion, as weshall see hereafter, and one, which at present weareanxious a little further to illustrate. Supposingthe fact to be, as it is, undeniable, thatwithin the ordinary limits of experiment, all perfectlygaseous bodies expand equally by similarincrements of heat, if different gases containunequal numbers of self-repulsive molecules, thosegases which contain the least number of molecules,must exert the greatest power, and consequentlyhave the greatest disposition to expand ;in other words, the expansive power of the moleculesof a gas, must increase as their numberdiminishes ; and not only so, but in order to producethe effect stated, the expansive power mustincrease, neither more nor less, but exactly as thenumber diminishes — a law which when applied toextreme cases becomes obviously absurd. Furtherit may be observed, in corroboration of the hypo-propertiesOF GASES. (}3thesis advanced, that in the gaseous state themolecules of bodies may be considered as havingundergone the utmost effects, that any increaseof heat can produce upon them. All theirinterstitial vacuities may be supposed to bealready saturated with it ; while an atmospheremay be supposed to surround each molecule,keeping them individually at a considerable distancefrom each other : their polarities also maybesupposed to have undergone their ultimatechange, so that no more heat can be renderedlatent by inducing further changes, except indegree, which degree may be supposed to becommon to all gases. Hence every molecule ofmatter, when in the gaseous state, and subjectedto similar pressure and temperature, may, withoutreference to its other properties, be supposedto be in circumstances exactly similar, and consequentlyliable to be affected in an exactlysimilar manner by all further increments of heat.Of the inverse Relation of the Volume to theCompressive Force. — Nearly the same remarksapply to this law as to the preceding ; for werethe numbers of molecules in each gas supposedto be unequal, the diminution of volume undersimilar pressure ought to vary also, which is notthe case, at least in the more perfect gaseousbodies, and neither this observation, nor those inthe former paragraph apply to vapours.Of the similar capacity of Gaseous Bodies forHeat. — The best experiments seem to show thatfj-l CHEMISTRY.under the same pressure the same volumes of allgases have the same capacity for heat — a circumstancequite according with the other phenomena.Hence, for the above and other reasonswhich might be mentioned, we have been inducedto adopt the hypothesis already stated,that, under the same pressure and temperature, allbodies in a perfectly gaseous state contain equalnumbers of self-repulsive molecules*Section VI.Other Properties of Heat. Of Heat in Motion.Heat appears to be in a constant state of motionand of interchange between different bodies,among which it finally settles into a state of equiii-It is proper to observe that these views were adopted by theauthor long before he was aware of the existence of the essays onthe subject by Messrs. Avogadro, Ampere, and Dumas. Indeedhe was unacquainted with those of Dumas, which most nearlyresemble his own, till he saw them alluded to in Mr. Johnston'srecent report on chemistry in the Transactions of the British Association.Mr. Donovan seems to consider the above hypothesisas untenable; but we think his arguments entirely inconclusive.See Giornale di Fisica, sec. n. torn. viii. p. 1 ; Annales deChimie, torn. xc. p. 43; a Treatise on Chemistry, by Mr. Donovan,in Lardner's Cabinet Cyclopaedia, p. 379 ; and the Introductionto Dumas's Traite de Chimie appliquee aux Arts, whichexcellent work the author had been prevented from perusing bythe nature of the title.HEAT IN MOTION. 65brim. If accumulated in anybody, this accumulationcannot be preserved ; but the excesswill fly off in spite of all we can do to the contrary,and sooner or later the equilibrium will berestored. This motion of heat takes place inthree ways, which a common fire-place verywell illustrates. If, for instance, we place athermometer directly before a fire, it soon beginsto rise, indicating an increase of temperature.In this case the heat has made its way throughthe space between the fire and the thermometer,by the process termed radiation. If we place asecond thermometer in contact with any part ofthe grate, and away from the direct influence ofthe fire, we shall find that this thermometer alsodenotes an increase of temperature ; but here theheat must have travelled through the metal ofthe grate, by what is termed conduction. Lastly,a third thermometer placed in the chimney, awayfrom the direct influence of the fire, will also indicatea considerable increase of temperature ;in this case a portion of the air, passing throughand near the fire, has become heated, and hascarried up the chimney the temperature acquiredfrom the fire. There is at present no singleterm in our language employed to denote thisthird mode of the propagation of heat ; but weventure to propose for that purpose, the termconvection* which not only expresses the leadingConvectio, a carrying or conveying.P. F66 CHEMISTRY.fact, but also accords very well with the twoother terms. Each of these modes of the propagationof heat possesses certain peculiarities, onwhich we proceed to make a few remarks.Radiation of Heat. — Heat radiates in vacuoin all directions equally, and with immeasurablevelocity. Heat radiates also through all gaseousbodies, and more or less through transparentmedia. Radiation goes on at all temperatures ;but the quantity of heat radiated in a given timebears some proportion to the excess of the temperatureof the radiating body above that of thesurrounding medium. Radiant heat is capableof being reflected like light, (to be presentlynoticed,) and, indeed, obeys altogether somewhatsimilar laws. Those surfaces, however,that reflect light most perfectly, are not equallyadapted to the reflection of heat. Metals ingeneral, and particularly when highly polished,are the best reflectors of heat, while glass, whichreflects light most perfectly, reflects comparativelylittle heat ; thus tin-plate reflects abouteight times as much heat as a glass mirror. Theradiation of heat is much influenced by thenature and state of the surfaces of bodies. Thusa surface coated with lamp-black radiates eight ornine times as much heat as a polished surface oftin or silver; and in general polished surfaces,particularly of metal, radiate much less than othersurfaces. As might be expected, this differenceRADIATION OF HEAT. b*7of radiating power exerts great influence in thecooling of bodies ; thus warm water retains itsheat much longer in a bright tin vessel, than inthe same vessel coated with linen, paint, orparticularly lamp-black. Radiant heat is absorbedwith different facilities by different surfaces.The absorbing power of surfaces seems,indeed, to vary directly as their radiating power,and inversely as their reflecting power. Thatis to say, surfaces receive heat by radiationnearly with the same degree of facility as theygive it off; while those that reflect most, ofcourse, must absorb least ; a surface coveredwith lamp-black, for example, receives in a giventime eight or nine times as much heat by radiationas a polished tin surface receives. Fromthese remarks, it will be readily inferred, thatthe colours of bodies may have considerable influencein the radiation and absorption of heat ;now this is found to be the case, and the darkerthe colour of a body, the more readily it givesoff, and absorbs radiant heat. Radiant heathas the power of passing through transparentbodies, as glass. This power, however, variesaccording to the thickness of the glass, its relativeposition to the radiating body, and a varietyof other circumstances not well understood ; butgenerally speaking heat seems to obey laws,more or less, analogous to those of light undersimilar circumstances.68 CHEMISTRY.Conduction of Heat — The conduction of heatis chiefly confined to solid bodies ; and as solidsexist of every degree of consistency and density,from perfect fluidity up to perfect hardness,the conducting power varies in like manner.Hence the laws of conduction and thoseof radiation have a mutual dependance ; and, infact, the laws of conduction may be considered asonly extreme cases of the laws of radiation. Theconduction of heat through bodies seems totake place equally in all directions. In generalthe densest bodies, as metals, stones, hardwoods, &c, have the greatest conducting power,though these differ exceedingly among one another.Porous bodies in general are bad conductors; and of such bodies charcoal may beconsidered as one of the worst conductors.Among substances employed as articles of dress,hare's fur and eider down are the worst conductors,and flax the best. The relative conductingpowers of substances of this class seemto depend much upon the quantity of air enclosedwithin their interstices, and the power ofattraction by which this air is retained or confined.The conducting power of liquids andof gases is very limited, though under certaincircumstances they appear to possess this powerin a high degree. But this power is onlyapparent, and heat is chiefly communicatedthrough liquids, and also through gases by theLIGHT. 69third process above alluded to, viz. convection.By convection however, heat is only propagatedin one direction, namely, upwards ; hence almostany degree of heat may be applied to the uppersurface of a liquid or gas without affecting thelower.Such are the principal phenomena connectedwith the motion of heat ; but before we proceedto speak of the sources of this wonderful agent,we have yet to consider another imponderableprinciple of the utmost importance, and intimatelyconnected with heat ; viz., Light.Section VII.Of Light.The laws of the motion of light, of its reflection,refraction, polarization, &c, properly belong toanother department; we shall, therefore, onlybriefly describe them here, and endeavour topoint out the general connexion and analogythey bear to the phenomena of chemistry, andmore especially to the phenomena of heat andelectricity.Radiation or Motion of Light. — Light radiatesor moves in strait lines with such inconceivablevelocity, that it occupies only about70 CHEMISTRY.eight minutes in travelling from the sun to ourearth, so that it must move at the rate of nearly200,000 miles in a second ! At the same rate itwould occupy about four hours to travel to usfrom the planet Uranus, the present ultima Thuleof our system ; hence if this planet were at anygiven instant suddenly annihilated, we shouldnot miss it for four hours afterwards ; and whenwe look at it, we do not see it where it actually isat this instant, but where it was four hours previously.A cannon ball, when first shot fromthe cannon, moves with a velocity of between2000 and 3000 feet per second ; supposing, therefore,it could retain its initial velocity, it wouldscarcely move in a year as much as light movesin a single second ! The utmost velocities ofthe earth and other planets, in their orbits or ontheir axes, scarcely exceed 30 or 40 miles in asecond. Hence the utmost velocity that we areacquainted with as possessed by ordinary matter,and therefore the utmost perhaps of which suchmatter is capable, only amounts to the 1-couthor 1-couth of that of light ! These striking factsare mentioned with the view of conveying somenotion of the immensity of space, and of thewonderful velocity with which it is in everydirection penetrated by light. They seem alsoto shew, that if light be matter, it must exist inastate of tenuity, totally different from the pon-reflectionOF LIGHT.durable matter we are acquainted with, whichactually seems incapable of such velocity.*If we consider heat and light to consist ofpolarized molecules in the self-repulsive state,and to obey the same laws that ponderablematters in the gaseous state obey, which is exceedinglyprobable ; the radiation of these imponderablebodies will be analogous to the diffusionof gaseous bodies, and by knowing theirvelocity and applying the same law, we maydeduce their comparative gravities.Reflection and Refraction of Light. — In freespace, as before observed, light moves in straitlines ; but when a ray, R, Fig. 17, falls upon apolished surface, as ofglass, a portion of it isreflected in the directione E, and the angle,R e P, calledthe angle of incidence,is always equal to theangle, P e E, calledthe angle of reflection.Another portion, e m, passes through theglass, but instead of continuing to move in thesame strait line, is bent considerably out of thatdirection towards the perpendicular P Q ; it thenPouillet, Elemens de Physique et de Meteorologie, torn. in.p. 216.Egl772 CHEMISTRY.makes its exit at m, and goes on in the directionm 31, parallel to its original direction, R e. Thisportion of the ray is said to have undergone refraction; a term indicating that its natural course-hasbeen broken. Such are the general facts;and the study of their laws, varieties, and peculiarities,as modified by different media, constitutesthe science of optics, a branch of knowledgenot falling within our present design. Inconnection with this part of our subject, it onlyremains to observe, that in passing through themost transparent bodies much light is lost, byabsorption and in other ways. So also whenlight falls upon metallic bodies, such as polishedsilver, about one-half only is reflected, while theother half is absorbed and lost. Different substances,however, differ materially in these respects,and from the experiments of M. Rougherand M. Lambert, it appears that in fluids,transparent solids and metals, the quantity oflight reflected, increases with the angle of incidencereckoned from the perpendicular ;whereas in white opaque bodies the quantityof light reflected, decreases with the angle ofincidence.* We shall hereafter have occasionto revert to these curious facts.See article Optics, p. 67, and 68, in the Library of UsefulKnowledge. Where the original observations are to be found,which are there referred to, we do not at present know.POLARIZATION OF LIGHT.Polarization of Light. — The next propertywe have to notice is what is called the polarizationof light. Let us suppose Fig. 18,Fig.i8. e to represent abundle of platesof thin window-glass,bound togetherin the mannerindicated.Let R e be a rayg of light falling onthe upper plate,at an angle of incidence of about 56° ; a portionof the ray will be reflected, and will move in thedirection e E, while another portion of the rayem, will pass through the bundle of glass platesonwards to M, according to the laws of reflectionand refraction already stated. Now these tworays e E and m M, possess remarkable properties,similar to one another in most respects, butdirectly opposed in another. Of these propertieswe shall endeavour to give a general idea.If the ray of light R A, after falling upon thevertical glass A, Fig. 19, at an angle of incidenceof 56°, be received on a plate of glass, C, placedat the same angle of incidence, and be thenreflected from C to E ; in the position intendedto be shown in the figure, when the ray R isfirst reflected in a horizontal plane, R A C, and74 CHEMISTRY.then in a vertical plane, ACE, the ray C Ebecomes so weak as to be scarcely visible, thewhole of it having passed through the glass C.But if the glass C be turned round 90°, (the rayA C being supposed to be the axis of motion) sothat the ray C E be reflected horizontally ; insteadof passing through the glass C, as before,the whole of the ray C E will be reflected. Ifwe continue to turn the plate C upon the axisA C, round the entire circle, these alternations oftransmission and reflection will be found to takeplace in the same manner at the two other quadrants180° and 270°. Hence the ray R A, byreflection, has acquired properties altogethernew ; it is said in short, to have acquiredpolarity, or to have become polarized. Nowrecurring to Fig. 18, the ray R e, in that figurewill of course follow the same laws as the rayR A in Fig. \9, that is to say, the ray e E willPOLARIZATION OF LIGHT. 75have acquired polarity by reflection. Let usnow consider what has happened to the refractedray m Mm the same Fig. 18. This raym M will also be found to be polarized ; but ifwe receive it on a glass plate, F G, at thepolarizing angle of 56°, we shall find that it willrefuse to be reflected ; whereas the reflectedray e E does not refuse to be again reflected,-unless the plate F G be turned round 90°, orinto a plane at right angles to that plane inwhich the refracted ray m M had refused to bereflected. Hence we conclude that when a ray oflight is incident at the polarizing angle upon atransparent body, the whole of the reflected lightis polarized ; while the whole of the transmittedlight is also polarized, but in a plane at rightangles to that in which the reflected ray is polarized.Such is the general law, and it may not beamiss to allude briefly to another familiar illustrationof it. Every one is acquainted with themineral called Iceland spar, and with the singularproperty which this mineral possesses of forminga double image of objects seen through it, orits property of double refraction ; that is to saywhen a ray of light falls on a crystal of suchspar in a particular direction, the ray is separatedinto two. Now it is a remarkable factthat if these two rays be examined in the way7(3CHEMISTRY.before directed, when speaking of reflected andtransmitted light, it will be found that both arepolarized, but that the two rays are polarized inplanes at right angles to each other ; that is to say,the ordinary transmitted ray is polarized likethe ordinary ray transmitted, through the bundleof glass plates ; while the extraordinary transmittedray is polarized like the ray reflectedfrom these plates. Many bodies are similarlyconstituted ; while others have two or more planesor axes of double refraction, giving origin to avariety of curious and beautiful properties, whichit would be quite foreign to our present purposeto detail further.Decomposition of Light. — When a ray of light,R, Fig. 20, traverses a prism, CDF, insteadY6>"of passing onward in the direction Y, it is refractedinto the spectrum E e ; which spectrumwhen received upon the screen, A B, will befound to consist of seven different colours, in theDECOMPOSITION OF LIGHT. 77order and of the kind described, each having,of course, different refractive powers ; the redbeing the least, and the violet the most refractedfrom the original direction R Y, of the solarbeam. This oblong image is called the solar,or sometimes, the prismatic spectrum, and SirIsaac Newton found that each colour consistsof light no longer separable, like white light,into others, but having uniform refractive properties: hence he called all the seven colourssimple or homogeneous, in opposition to whitelight, which he called compound or heterogeneous.*This important fact presents a clueto, and exhibits the general law which regulatesthe endless variety and change of colours ; asbodies appear to have this or that colour, accordingas they have the power of reflecting ortransmitting this or that colour, and of absorbingor reflecting the rest ; while white bodies reflectall, and black absorb all. Besides colour, it hasbeen likewise noticed that different portions of theprismatic spectrum possess different heating andchemical or electrical properties. These vary insome respects, according to the nature of theSir David Brewster has lately shown that there are, in fact,but three simple colours, the red, the yellow and the blue, andthat each of these colours exists throughout the spectrum. Hence,probably, like the different electric and magnetic energies, theseelementary colours, or, at least, the red and the blue (the yellowbeing probably merely resultant), can never be entirely separatedfrom each other.78 CHEMISTRY.prism employed. In general the heating powerincreases towards the red ray ; while the chemicalpower seems to be regulated in somedegree by the nature of the colour, but is greater(though of opposite character) at the two extremitiesthan in the centre of the spectrum,where it appears to be nearly null. The chemicalproperties of light, however, are by no meanswell understood, and have not received the attentionwhich they merit.Upon an attentive consideration of the phenomenaof heat and of light, and a careful comparisonof them with the general phenomena ofpolarizing forces, it is impossible not to be struckwith the close analogy that prevails throughoutthe whole. The phenomena of heat have hithertobeen very imperfectly studied, and in consequencewe are much less able to trace theanalogy ; but the phenomena of light from theirobvious and striking characters have attractedmore attention, and are much better understood.To enter further upon the enquiry here would bequite foreign to the object of this treatise ; wecannot however, in concluding these remarks,refrain from repeating an opinion already expressed,that the molecules both of heat and oflight possess polarities precisely similar to thoseof ponderable bodies ; and that not only thechemical agencies of these principles, but thosephenomena of light also at present so beautifullyANALOGIES OF LIGHT AND HEAT, ETC. 79illustrated by the hypothesis of indulge, will behereafter found to admit of explanation on themore probable supposition of molecular polarity.*In the Newtonian hypothesis of Fits of easy transmission andof easy reflection, the molecules of light may be regarded as littlemagnets revolving rapidly round their centres while they advancein their course, and thus presenting alternately their attractiveand repulsive poles. (See Discourse on the Study of NaturalPhilosophy, by Sir J. Herschel, p. 253.) In our hypothesis, thechemical poles of all self-repulsive molecules are supposed to bearranged positive and negative alternately; (see Fig. 16, page 58)by which arrangement the contiguous cohesive polarities are renderedof the same kind, and consequently repulsive. Hence whena series of self-repulsive molecules move onwards in virtue of theirself-repulsive powers, (as in the radiation of light, &c.) the cohesiveaxes of the molecules will always be in the line of motion,and each successive molecule will present alternately an oppositepolarity ; while the chemical axes of course will be all in thesame plane, and transverse to the line of motion. Such will betheorder in a single series of molecules in motion ; but when anumber of series move onward together, as in homogeneous light,there is reason to conclude that the molecules of contiguous serieshave a tendency to arrange themselves thus •.•.•.•.• with thechemical axes at right angles to each other. Those who areinterested in these subjects will perhaps readily conceive howsuch arrangements may be applied to explain the various phenomenawe have been considering.Section VIII.Of the Sources of Heat and Light.The principal and obvious sources of heat andlight are the sun, electricity, mechanical action ;change of physical condition, change of chemicalcondition ; and organic action.The sun is the most obvious and unvaryingsource from which both heat and light are communicatedto our earth. The nature of the sun,however, and the mode in which that wonderfulsupply of heat and light is maintained arequite unknown to us, and will probably alwaysremain so. Electricity is another source of heatand light which are developed at the moment ofthe equilibrium of the two energies ; and some ofthe most intense degrees of heat and light thathave been produced have sprung from a galvanicapparatus. The sudden condensation of air islikewise a source from which heat and light areoften both extricated, on principles that it willnot perhaps be difficult to understand from whathas been stated. The extrication of heat by percussionand condensation appear to be limited,but its extrication by friction seems to be boundless; that is to say, so long as friction is kept up,will heat continue to be extricated, but whenceSOURCES OF HEAT AND LIGHT. iithe heat is derived does not appear to be capableof satisfactory explanation, unless we suppose aperpetual decomposition and recomposition totake place, which is not improbable. Anotherfertile source from which heat is derived, is thephysical change of condition which bodies areconstantly undergoing in nature, as for example,the conversion of gases into liquids, of liquidsinto solids, &c. by taking advantage of whichconversions we can accumulate heat at will, asfor instance by the condensation of steam.When these physical changes however are associatedwith chemical changes, as is very oftenthe case, the most striking effects are produced.Of this kind are all the phenomena of combustion,the most common source of artificialheat ; and which consists of nothing more thanthe rapid chemical union of certain bodies withothers, and generally with the principle termedoxygen. Nearly allied to chemical action, andperhaps identical with it, is the extrication ofheat by organic changes, or what is termedanimal heat ; a subject we shall have to considerin a future part of this volume.We have thus endeavoured to give a summaryview of the phenomena, and laws of motion ofheat, and of light. In conclusion it only remainsto observe that these phenomena and laws arep. G82 CHEMISTRY.all of the utmost importance in the economy ofnature, as constituting limitations and principlesof action, to which the Great Author of naturemost rigidly adheres in his operations. Hence,whether we view the distribution of heat and oflight on the large scale, as regulating climate ;or whether we view them with reference to themost trifling particular, as the clothing of a budor of an insect ; we find the same beautiful adaptationand contrivance, every where exemplified,to ensure or to evade the agency of these all-importantprinciples. The wonderful arrangementsconnected with heat and light will however fallmore naturally to be considered hereafter ; weshall therefore defer what we have to say on thesesubjects till we come to speak of meteorology.Section IX.Recapitulation and General Observations on theSubjects treated of in the preceding Chapters.In the preceding observations we have endeavouredto give a connected sketch of thenature and operation of molecular forces ; andperhaps it will still further facilitate the understandingof the subject, if we recapitulate brieflythe leading facts, so as to point out to thosewho may not be inclined to peruse the foregoingRECAPITULATION. 83details, the analogy that prevails throughout thewhole.1. In the first place we attempted to showthat the forces which determine molecular unioncan scarcely be those of mere gravitation, intheir ordinary forms at least ; but that someother modification of force is necessary to accountfor the phenomena.2. By assuming the molecules of bodies tobe virtually spheroidal, and endowed with twokinds of polarizing forces, the one operatingamiably, and the other equatorial, we attemptedto show how the phenomena of simple crystallizationmight be explained ; and we corroboratedour argument by demonstrating that the electricand magnetic forces are actually related to eachother, precisely as we assumed the energies ofour molecules to be. Hence we ventured todraw the conclusion, that electricity and magnetism,if not identical with, at least represent,or are analogous to those forces, the existence ofwhich among ponderable bodies we assumed asnecessary to account for the phenomena of crystallization.Further we attempted to render itprobable, that the molecules of the imponderableprinciples, heat and light, possess polarities preciselyanalogous to those of ponderable bodies,and that many of their peculiar phenomenadepend upon these polarities.3. In attempting to account for the different84 CHEMISTRY.forms assumed by bodies, we supposed that in thesolid form, the molecules are so arranged as toattract each other according to certain laws ; thatin the liquid form, they are so arranged as neitherto attract nor repel each other ; and that in thegaseous form, the arrangement of the energies ofthe molecules is such as to render them mutuallyrepulsive. Further, by assuming that those moleculeswhich possess the property of attractingeach other in the solid form in preference toothers, retain a similar relation in the gaseousform, and repel each other in preference to others,we attempted to account for many of the wellknown phenomena of gaseous bodies.4. Lastly, we attempted to show that thephenomena of radiation among the moleculesof imponderable bodies, are precisely analogousto the phenomena of diffusion and mixtureamong the molecules of ponderable bodies whenin the liquid and gaseous states ; and that consequentlythe same laws are strictly applicableto both.With respect to the reasons which have inducedus thus to enter into the dry details ofmolecular action, and which may seem to requiresome apology to our readers, they are chiefly twofold: In the first place, as connected with theparticular business of the present treatise, it hasbeen our object to convey to the general readersome idea of the wonderful operations which areGENERAL ARGUMENTS. 85constantly taking place in every particle ofmatter which he sees around him, or to use thelanguage of Paley, some notion of the " concealedand internal operations of the machine."These operations may not be as we have representedthem, they may in fact be altogetherdifferent ; but be this as it will, a perusal howevercursory, of what has been stated, canhardly fail to accomplish one purpose we hadin view, viz. to show to the most incurious andsuperficial reader that in the minutest fragmentof matter, and in the commonest and simplestoperations which take place in nature, andwhich he is altogether too apt to overlook, themost wonderful and extraordinary arrangements,must take place ; arrangements which, if dulyconsidered, are calculated fully as much, if notmore, than those connected with the more strikingand obvious phenomena, to excite his wonder,and at the same time to display the wisdom andpower of the great Creator. The second objectwe aimed at, was, as just stated, to give a connectedand popular sketch of molecular forcesand operations ; and by placing them in a pointof view in which we believe they have nothitherto been considered, to display the beautifulsimplicity and analogy that prevail throughoutthe whole.Finally, it remains, before we close, to statebriefly the arguments deducible from the divi-fit)CHEMISTRY.nobility and molecular constitution of matter,with reference to our present subject. Thesearguments may be considered under the threefollowing heads ; first, that matter has not alwaysexisted in its present form ; secondly, that itcould not have existed in its present form bychance ; and thirdly, and consequently, that itmust have been the work of a voluntary andintelligent Being. Other deductions mightdoubtless be made from what has been stated,but these we purposely avoid, and confine ourarguments as much as possible to grounds admittingof no controversy.In the first place, the divisibility and molecularconstitution of matter seem to prove beyond adoubt that it cannot have eternally existed in itspresent state.Although we can form no idea of what matterwould be without its molecular properties, thereis yet nothing in these properties which caninduce us to believe that they are necessary tothe mere existence of matter. On the contrary, wehave seen that matter possesses qualities (thoseof gravitation) of a more primordial kind, towhich its molecular properties are apparentlysecondary or subordinate. But if these subordinateproperties be not necessary to the existenceof matter, matter might possibly at sometimehave existed without them. Now this verypossibility is incompatible with eternal existence;GENERAL ARGUMENTS. 87for eternal (passive) existence necessarily involvesincapability of change. Hence the molecularconstitution of matter, even in this point ofview, must be supposed to have had a beginning ;and when we consider the leading and characteristicproperty of matter in the molecular state,viz. the endless repetition of exactly similar parts,the difficulty of arriving at any other conclusionis exceedingly increased. It is to be observedalso that the above remarks apply to the suppositionof only one form of matter ; but we shallsee hereafter that chemists recognise upwards offifty forms of matter, all of an elementary character; at least we cannot at present say thatone of these forms is more elementary thananother. Again, the number of molecules ineach of these elementary principles, great as itis, is limited; the properties of the moleculesalso are fixed and definite, all which circumstancesthrow further insurmountable difficultiesin the way of the supposition, that the wholehave existed, as they now exist, from eternity.For how has it happened, it may be asked, thatthe number and properties of the elements, andthe molecules of which they consist, are justwhat the economy of nature requires, and neithergreater, nor less, nor different ? How has it happened,that what is supposed to be infinite insome respects, should be finite and limited inthose respects in which we are actually able to88 CHEMISTRY.trace them ; and what is more, most luckily finiteand limited just where they appear to be requiredto be so ? He who can satisfactorily answer thesequestions may contend with some prospect ofsuccess for the eternity of matter and its propertiesin their present form. In the mean timewe assert without fear of contradiction, that themolecular constitution of matter is decidedlyartificial ; or to use the words of a celebratedwriter, that the molecules of matter have allthe essential characters of a manufacturedarticle"* and consequently are not eternal.Secondly, if the present molecular constitutionof matter has not always existed, it musthave been produced at some time, by some causesuperior to itself. Now this cause must haveoperated either accidentally and by chance; orvoluntarily and under the influence of a will.With respect to the first of these alternatives,viz. chance ; the endless repetition of similar partspresented by the molecular constitution of matterseems absolutely to preclude this supposition.Do we not consider it a subject of wonder tosee even two or three things by chance alike, asfor example two or three human faces ? Shouldwe not consider the man absolutely mad, whowould attribute the uniform and manoeuvres ofa regiment of soldiers to chance? and can wethen resist the argument in the infinitely strongerSir J. Herschel on the Study of Natural Philosophy, p. 38.GENERAL ARGUMENTS. 89shape iii which it is here presented to us ? Thus,as the idea of chance seems too monstrous to beentertained for a moment by any rational being,we are driven irresistibly to the other conclusion,viz. that the cause or agent who formed themolecular constitution of matter was a voluntaryagent or Being ; and moreover that this Beingpossessed a power commensurate with his will.Thirdly ; the agent or Being who constructedthe wonderful system we have been consideringmust have been as intelligent as he waspowerful.We infer intelligence in an agent from thefitness and adaptation to certain ends exemplifiedin his works. Thus, when we see a machineadmirably fitted for the office it performs, weinfer that the maker of that machine must havepossessed intelligence. Now if we judge of themolecular constitution of matter by this rule, weshall find that there is not only the most extraordinaryfitness and adaptation to circumstancesdisplayed in its arrangements, as far as we canunderstand them, but evidently much further ;that is to say, the maker of this system must notonly have possessed intelligence, but intelligenceinfinitely surpassing our own. Thus at the verybeginning, the selection of the molecular form ofmatter out of the many possible forms whichmight be supposed to exist, may be consideredas an instance of intelligence of the highestDO CHEMISTRY.kind ; for this alone, of all the forms that can beconceived, seems best adapted to the purposes ofcreation. Indeed, on what other supposition,than that of the subdivision of matter into minutesimilar parts, could all those endless operationswhich we see constantly going on in the world,be imagined to take place ? Moreover, the natureof the powers with which the molecules of matterare endowed is truly astonishing, and calculatedin the highest degree to impress us with exaltednotions of the intelligence and power of theircontriver. Thus, what can be more wonderful,than that the self same chemical forces differentlydirected should produce, not only all thatendless change of property, of form, and of conditionwhich we see around us, and which are sobeneficial and even necessary to our existence ;but likewise some of the most terrible displaysof power in nature ; as for instance, the utmostintensities of heat, of cold, and of light; theterrors of the thunderbolt, and the irresistibleenergies of the earthquake ! Nor on the otherhand, are the cohesive affinities existing amongthe molecules of matter much less wonderful orimportant ; for if similar molecules had not beenconstituted with self-attractive and self-repulsivepowers, there would have been no aggregationof the same matter into symmetrical groups, noorder or regularity, no separation or purity ; inshort there would have been no common bond ofGENERAL ARGUMENTS. 91union, and the whole would have been dispersedthroughout nature, as accident or other circumstancesmight determine. Hence the presentorder of things could not have existed unless themolecules of matter had been endowed with boththese properties ; one of which the chemical, asit were, goes before and imperiously determineswhat molecules shall be combined or separated ;while the other, the cohesive, silent and unobtrusive,follows in its train, and industriouslyassorting and arranging its predecessors' labours,here perhaps forms a diamond, or there superintendsthe integrity of the atmosphere !Such are molecular forces as they obviouslyappear to us, and such the arguments deduciblefrom them. But when we attempt to go further,and inquire into the intimate nature of theseforces, we not only find much that is unknownto us, but much that apparently surpasses ourutmost conception ! And what a still more sublimeidea is this calculated to convey to us ofthe wisdom and power of that Being who contrivedand made the whole ! When and where,do we naturally exclaim, did this Being exist?whence his wisdom, and whence his power?There is, there can be, but one answer to theseenquiries. The Being who contrived and madeall these things must have pre-existed frometernity — must have been omniscient — musthave been omnipotent — must have been God !CHAPTER IV.OF CHEMICAL ELEMENTARY PRINCIPLES, AND OFTHE LAWS OF THEIR COMBINATION.In the preceding chapter we have endeavoured toshow that the minutest fragment of homogeneousmatter cognizable by our senses is composed ofinnumerable molecules, all of which are exactlyalike in size, in shape, in properties, in short, ofevery kind ; and we argued that these facts incontestablyprove that these molecules could notalways have existed in their present form, norhave been formed by chance, but that they musthave had a beginning, and have been the work ofa Creator. Now when we consider the prodigiousquantity of matter composing our globe (to go nofurther) or even composing a portion of it, as forexample, the mass of water existing in the ocean,and reflect that every individual molecule of thiswater possesses properties exactly like those ofthe drop we formerly contemplated, our argument,already sufficiently convincing, actuallyoverwhelms us with its force. Still however itadmits of further corroboration ; and we proceednow to show that all this vast assemblage ofELEMENTARY PRINCIPLES. 93molecules, so numerous, so diversified, so extraordinaryas they are, may be reduced to a veryfew elementary groups, upon the endless combinationsand separations of which all the phenomenaof chemistry depend.Section I.Of Chemical Elementary Principles.The substances at present considered as elementaryamount to about fifty-four. Of these severalpossess certain properties in common, thoughthey all differ from one another in subordinateparticulars, or in other words, are specificallydifferent. Of the whole number not above twoor three exist in any great quantity in an uncombinedstate, at least in those parts of ourglobe to which we have access, but the wholeare wrapped up as it were and have their propertiesconcealed in compounds. Under ordinarycircumstances most elementary principles existas solids, but some of the more importantoccur in a gaseous form, and one or two asfluids. A few of them are apparently of so littleconsequence in the world, that if they wereannihilated they would scarcely be missed ;while others of them, on the other hand, are soobviously necessary to the existence of the94 CHEMISTRY.present order of things, that the least derangementor alteration in their proportion or quantitywould be fatal to the whole. Some of theseelementary substances exist in such enormousquantities as to constitute a large proportion ofthe whole visible bulk of our globe, while othersagain, occur in such minute proportion, at leastwithin our reach, as to be obtained with difficultyand not without elaborate research. Withrespect to the facility with which they enter intocombination, and the obstinacy with which theyunite, they differ also very remarkably ; a few ofthem combining readily in a variety of proportionswith almost all the rest, while some of theothers can be scarcely made to combine underany circumstances. Lastly, with respect to theinfluences which different elementary substancesare capable of exerting upon organic life, theseare equally striking. A large majority of themindeed may in their simple state, be consideredof a deleterious nature ; while three or four ofthem, on the other hand, make organized beingswhat they are, and are necessary to their veryexistence.Such are a few of the leading properties of theelementary principles as we are at present acquaintedwith them ; in the following table fromDr. Thomson they are arranged, as far perhapsas is practicable, according to their chemicalcharacters.ELEMENTARY PRINCIPLES.1 Oxygen.2 Chlorine.3 Bromine.4 Iodine.5 Fluorine.6 Hydrogen.7 Carbon.8 Azote.9 Boron.10 Silicon.1 1 Phosphorus.12 Sulfur.13 Selenium.14 Arsenic.15 Antimony.16 Tellurium.17 Chromium.18 Uranium.TABLE.19 Vanadium.20 Molybdaenum.21 Tungsten.22 Titanium.23 Columbium.24 Potassium.25 Sodium26 Lithium.27 Calcium.28 Magnesium.29 Strontium.30 Barium.31 Aluminum32 Glucinum.33 Yttrium.34 Zirconium.35 Thorinum.36 Iron.37 Manganese.38 Nickel.39 Cobalt.40 Cerium.41 Zinc.42 Cadmium.43 Lead.44 Tin.45 Bismuth.46 Copper.47 Mercury.48 Silver.49 Gold.50 Platinum.51 Palladium52 Rhodium.53 Iridium.54 Osmium.It is foreign to the object of this work to enterinto a minute description of these bodies ; weshall therefore content ourselves with such aview of them as may enable the general reader1 . Oxygen, from o£,vg, acid, and yevvaia, to generate ; from itsproperty of forming acids. 2. Chlorine, from ^Xwpoc, green ; socalled from its colour. 3. Bromine, from fiptipoe, fetid ; so calledfrom its strong odour. 4. Iodine, from 'loei^rjs, violet ; from thecolour it assumes in the gaseous state. 6. Hydrogen, from vciwp,water, and yewdw, to generate. 8. Azote, from a privative and£wr/,life; from its being incapable of supporting life. 13. Selenium,from SeXZ/vrj, the moon. 17. Chromium, from ^pQfia, colour; socalled from the beautiful colours of some of its salts. 18. Uranium,from ovpavoc, the heavens. 19. Vanadium, from amadis,a Scandinavian deity. 20. Molybdaenum, from MoXvfltiaira, lead.96 CHEMISTRY.to form some idea of their properties, and tofollow us without much difficulty in our subsequentremarks.The five first bodies, Oxygen, Chlorine, Bromine,Iodine, and Fluorine, are usually termedsupporters of combustion. They have some propertiesin common, though in other respects, andparticularly in their apparent relative importancein the economy of nature they differ exceedingly.They are remarkable for the tendency they have,not only to combine with one another, but withalmost all the bodies below them in the table;and their union, particularly that of oxygen, isusually accompanied with the extrication of moreor less of heat and light, and constitutes the well-knownphenomena termed combustion.(1) Oxygen is one of the very few elementarysubstances that occur naturally in the gaseousform, in which form it constitutes about one fifthpart of common air. As the world at presentexists, oxygen, perhaps, may be fairly consideredas one of the most important, if not the22. Titanium, from Tiravoq, calx. 23. Columbium, from Columbia,in America, where it was first found. 26. Lithium, fromAidog, a stone. 29. Strontium, from S^rontian, the name of aplace in Scotland, where first found. 30. Barium, from Bapvg,heavy. 31. Aluminum, from Albumen, alum. 32. Ghicinum, fromTXvkvq, sweet ; from the taste of some of its salts. 52. Rhodium,from "PoSov, a rose ; from the colour of some of its compounds.53. Iridium, from T Ipse, the rainbow; from the variety of coloursassumed by some of its salts. 54. Osmium, from '0<t/x»), odour;from the strong smell emitted by some of its compounds.OXYGEN. 97most important substance in it. From its pronenessto enter into composition it is constantlyoperating upon, and modifying every thing.By far the greater proportion of mineral bodiesforming the crust of the earth, contain more orless of it ; and in all plants and animals itactually exists as a constituent elementary principle.In short the properties of oxygen stampit as an element and subordinate agent of themost important kind ; while the numberless contrivanceswhich are observable in nature, tosecure, or evade, or modify its operations, aremost extraordinary, and exhibit some of themost marked and unequivocal evidences ofdesign on the part of their great Contriver, thatwe meet with among his works. Several of themost important of these contrivances we shallhave occasion to allude to hereafter ; but thereis one of so curious and interesting a characterthat it may be mentioned here as an illustrationof the above remarks. The nature and mechanismof the function of respiration will be explainedelsewhere, and it is sufficient for ourpresent purpose to state that, by means of a complicatedapparatus, the blood is made to circulatethrough the lungs, in order that it may be thereexposed to the oxygen of the atmosphere. Forpurposes beyond our comprehension, but probablyin part at least with a view to the future creationof organized beings, the great Architect of thep. H98 CHEMISTRY.universe had willed that this principle shouldexist upon the surface of our globe in a gaseousstate ; when he created animals he chose also torender them dependent upon oxygen for theirexistence ; and he effects his object, not bybending this principle to his purpose, by alteringits physical or other properties ; not by obtainingit from water, or any of the innumerable compoundsinto which it enters, which according toour imperfect notions he might have more easilydone ; but, as if on purpose to display his powerand design, he rigidly adheres to the properties,both mechanical and chemical, imparted tooxygen, and to these properties accommodateshis future labours ! The whole therefore of thecomplicated and beautiful apparatus, connectedwith the respiration of animals, is most obviouslydesigned and constructed with reference to theproperties of the oxygen of the atmosphere, andaltogether they afford one of the most strikingevidences of adaptation and design presented tousin nature.(2) Chlorine in its elementary state is a gas,having all the mechanical properties of commonair, but in this form it never occurs naturally.It exists however in great abundance in a stateof combination, from which it may be readilyobtained by easy chemical processes. One ofthe most abundant sources of chlorine is commonsalt, into which it enters in the proportion ofCHLORINE. BROMINE. IODINE. 99about 60 per cent. As compared with oxygenchlorine is much less abundant and perhaps important; yet it is doubtful if without chlorine thepresent order of things could proceed. Take forexample the familiar instance of common saltabove referred to. Let us consider the universaldiffusion of this substance throughout nature—what the sea would be, or how animals couldexist, without it — let us consider these and thenumberless other operations which this valuablecompound more or less enters into, or influences,and we shall be able to form some notion of thepart chlorine bears in the economy of nature.On the other hand, when we reflect that werechlorine to be extricated from its state of combination,and made to exist, like oxygen, in agaseous form, that it would instantly prove fatalto organized beings ; can we fail to be struckwith the very obvious design thus displayed inrendering its quantity and combining powers suchas to keep it in a state of union, and by thesemeans to secure all its useful without its deleteriousproperties ?(3) (4) Bromine and Iodine, the next twosubstances, are found principally in sea waterand in marine productions. They appear toexist in very minute proportion, and always inastate of combination. Bromine exists underordinary circumstances as a deep coloured redfluid, having a very strong and offensive odour ;100 CHEMISTRY.Iodine is a crystallized solid, volatile by a slightincrease of temperature, and forming a beautifulviolet vapour. Bromine and Iodine more nearlyresemble chlorine than oxygen in their properties,though they differ materially from both,and their use in the economy of nature is absolutelyunknown. It may however be observedthat Iodine has lately been much celebrated forits medicinal properties.*(5) Fluorine has been rather inferred thandemonstrated to exist. It occurs principally inthe mineral called Fluor spar, in a state of combinationwith lime, and in this state it wouldseem to be harmless ; but in a state of purity itis exceedingly deleterious. One of its most remarkableproperties is that of corroding glass.It may not be amiss to observe here that the author of thepresent volume first employed the hydriodate of potash, as aremedy for goitre, in the year 1816, after having previouslyascertained, by experiments upon himself, that it was not poisonousin small doses as had been represented. Some time before theperiod stated, this substance had been found in certain marineproductions ; and it struck the author that burnt sponge (a well-knownremedy for goitre) might owe its properties to the presenceof Iodine, and this was his motive for making the trial. He lostsight of the case in which the remedy was employed, before anyvisible alteration was made in the state of disease ; but not beforesome of the most striking effects of the remedy were observed.The above employment of the compounds of Iodine in medicinewas at the time made no secret; and so early as 1819, theremedy was adopted in St. Thomas's Hospital, by Dr. Ellison,at the author's suggestion.HYDROGEN. 101We pass on now to a very different class ofsubstances, and which instead of having thepower of supporting combustion in other substances,are for the most part themselves combustible.Of these, the first and perhaps themost important we have to notice is(6) Hydrogen. This principle in its elementarystate exists as a gas, having all the mechanicalproperties of common air. In this state itis exceedingly inflammable ; and if mixed withoxygen, and if the mixture be exposed to heat,the two gases unite suddenly and violently witha loud explosion ; while the result of the combustionis water. Hydrogen is the lightest bodyknown, and under the same bulk therefore containsless matter than any other body. It doesnot exist naturally in a separate state, but alwaysin combination ; and by far most generally andabundantly in combination with oxygen in theform of water. Hydrogen ranks perhaps nextto oxygen in importance ; at least as far asorganized beings are concerned ; since likeoxygen it constitutes one of the elementaryprinciples of which they are formed. It differshowever remarkably from oxygen, in not beingin its elementary state necessary to the existenceof organized beings ; indeed hydrogen is actuallyincompatible with the existence of animals, if notof vegetables ; and its properties as an elementhave evidently been sacrificed to its properties102 CHEMISTRY.as a compound, that is to say, to its properties aswater. Hence we have to admire the happyadjustment of the quantities of the two elementsto each other, so that the oxygen shall predominate;an adjustment that can scarcely be explainedon any other supposition than that ofdesign ; for any other cause, as chance, wouldhave been quite as likely to have produced anexcess of hydrogen as of oxygen, or at least anythingbut the exact proportions required. Lastly,it may be remarked, that to the relative proportionsof oxygen and hydrogen existing on ourglobe, more than perhaps to any other subordinatecause, the present order of things owes itsstability. For the proportions of these principlesare so happily adjusted and balanced, and allthe numerous operations dependent upon themare, in consequence, so firmly established, thatno material change can possibly happen to anypart from an internal cause, but if changed atall, the whole must be changed from without.(7) Carbon, or charcoal, is a substance toowell known in its ordinary state to require description; in its crystallized and pure state it isfound to constitute the diamond, the hardest andmost brilliant body in nature ; a circumstancethat certainly could not have been anticipated,but which affords a most striking instance of theeffects produced by the different modes in whichmolecules of the same matter may be aggre-Carlton. 103gated. Carbon perhaps more than any otherprinciple may be considered as constituting thestaminal or fundamental element entering intothe composition of organized beings. This isparticularly the case in principles from thevegetable kingdom, which owe their peculiarcharacter essentially to carbon, and their endlessvarieties to differences in its quantity, and to themodifying influence of the hydrogen and oxygenwith which it is associated. In animal substancescarbon exerts a similar influence, but its effectsare materially modified by the presence of anotherstaminal principle to be presently considered.Carbon, in some state or other, exists in considerablequantities upon the surface of ourglobe, but apparently by no means in so large aproportion as oxygen and hydrogen. Exclusivelyof that actually involved in the composition oforganized beings, carbon is met with nearly purein large quantities in particular districts in thewell-known form of fossil coals ; but it occurs infar greater proportion in combination with oxygenin the form of carbonic acid ; which carbonicacid in union with lime, constitutes common chalkand lime stone, two of the most abundant mineralsin nature.* Carbon in its elementary state, is avery inert substance, and is scarcely liable to beIn order to give some idea of the proportion in which carbonexists in different common substances, it may be observed thata pound of charcoal is equal to, and is contained in rather more104 CHEMISTRY.affected by, or to affect organized beings ; butwith hydrogen and oxygen it forms gaseous compoundsof great activity, and capable of provinginstantly fatal to animals respiring them. Sucheffects, however, appear to be obviated by abeautiful expedient which we shall have occasionmore particularly to notice hereafter. In themean time it may be observed, that though thecompound of carbon and oxygen (carbonic acid)is by innumerable processes constantly formingaround us in enormous quantities ; by some compensatingmeans, it disappears as fast as it isformed ; so that the atmosphere, which withoutthis provision would probably before now have becomecontaminated by carbonic acid to an extentfatal to animal life, barely contains traces of it.(8) Azote or nitrogen is one of the very fewelementary principles which exist naturally inan uncombined state. It constitutes about4-5ths or 80 per cent of common air, the restbeing principally oxygen. The great bulk ofthis principle in existence is confined to theatmosphere, and to animal substances, of which itforms a constituent element ; and it enters verylittle into natural mineral productions. In itspure state, azote is remarkable for its negativethan, two pounds of sugar or flour, and eight of potatoes or limestone; so that a mountain of limestone contains the essentialelement of at least an equal bulk of potatoes, and of a forest thatWould amply cover many such mountains.AZOTE. 105properties, that is to say, for the difficulty withwhich it enters into combination with other matters.Thus it is neither combustible nor a supporterof combustion ; is neither acid nor alkaline; possesses neither taste nor smell ; nor doesit directly combine with any known substance.Yet when made by peculiar management to unitewith oxygen, hydrogen, or carbon, azote formssome of the most energetic compounds we possess: thus, mixed with oxygen it forms atmosphericair, as before observed ; united with oxygenit forms aquafortis, the most corrosive ofliquids ; united with hydrogen it forms the volatilealkali or ammonia, likewise an energetic compound,but of an opposite nature ; while unitedwith carbon and hydrogen, it forms prussic acid,the most virulent poison in existence ! Azotemay be considered as constituting the characteristicelement of animal substances, and as impartingto them their peculiar properties ; inthis point of view therefore it is a principle ofvery great importance. Moreover, the abovementionednegative properties of azote areevidently of a primordial kind, and seem to havebeen formed with reference to future creations,which have all been most carefully and rigidlyadapted to them. Thus had the properties ofazote not been negative, those of its most importantcompound, atmospheric air could nothave been negative ; and atmospheric air might106 Chemistry.have been acid or alkaline, or have possessedodour or colour ; either of which circumstanceswould have been incompatible with the presentorder of things.(9) (10) Boron and Silicon. The next twosubstances obtain their names from borax andsilex, the natural productions in which theyexist in a state of combination. Borax is asaline production chiefly found in certain lakesin Tibet and China. Boron, the elementarysubstance obtainable from it, is a deep brownpowder possessing neither taste nor smell, buthighly inflammable at a temperature below ared heat. Silicon is the elementary basis ofsilex or common flint, one of the most abundantminerals in nature. Silicon is a brown powdervery similar to boron in appearance, and like itinflammable under certain circumstances. Thesetwo elementary principles do not exist naturally,but have been formed by elaborate chemicalprocesses in small quantities only. They seemto be more nearly allied to carbon, in their properties,than to any other elementary product.Borax exists in very small quantities, and itsuse in the economy of nature is not apparent.Silex on the other hand is a most importantproduction, and in its hardness, insolubility,and other refractory properties, we recognisea substance admirably adapted for the purposeto which it has evidently been designed,PHOSPHORUS. 107viz. that of constituting the stamina or groundwork,as it were, of our globe, and which couldnot be withdrawn without subverting the whole.Silex is found in small quantities both in plantsand in animals, but does not, like hydrogen,oxygen, carbon, and azote, form a constituentelement of organized beings.(11) Phosphorus, under ordinary circumstances,is a pale amber-coloured substance,very like wax in appearance, but so exceedinglycombustible that it cannot be heated, much lessmelted in the open air, without immediatelytaking fire. Under these circumstances, as maybesupposed, it does not exist naturally, but isobtained by an elaborate process from variouscompounds into which it enters ; as for example,from bone earth, or the earthy basis of the bonesof animals ; and also from certain salts. It existsalso in the mineral kingdom in certain districtsin considerable quantities, but upon the whole,it is not an abundant principle. Phosphorusaffords another beautiful instance in which thedesign has been directed to the properties of thecompound, rather than to the element itself.The phosphate of lime or bone earth was apparentlythe thing wanted to constitute thebony skeleton of animals, and accordingly, tothis compound the properties of the elementitself seem to have been sacrificed. Neitherlime itself in mass, nor any of its mineral coinsCHEMISTRY*pounds, appear to be adapted for forming a constituentprinciple of a living organized being.It was necessary therefore to have a connectingmedium, or link, that should unite organizationwith the mineral constituent, and phosphorusadmirably accomplishes this object. Accordingly,we see that organization goes on in conjunctionwith lime in the bones of animals, throughthe medium of this element, quite as readily asin other parts of their system ; whereas whenphosphorus is absent, as in shells, and in otherdeposits of carbonate of lime, the carbonate oflime is extra vascular, and seems to form no partof the living system. There are also other importantoffices which this principle evidentlyperforms in the animal economy, some of whichwe shall have occasion to refer to hereafter.(12) Sulfur. This well known substance isone of the very few that exist naturally in anelementary state. It is a very abundant andprobably important principle in the economy ofnature, as it not only exists in large quantitiesin the mineral kingdom, but in a greater or lessproportion in almost all animal, and in manyvegetable products. Its uses, however, at present,are very imperfectly understood. Sulfur combineswith hydrogen, and forms a very deleteriousgaseous compound. Its combinations withoxygen are generally acid, and very active intheir concentrated form, but not poisonous.SELENIUM. ARSENIC. ANTIMONY, ETC. 109(13) Selenium, the next substance, is foundin very minute quantities generally associatedwith sulfur, which in its properties it somewhatresembles ; or rather, perhaps, it appears to constitutethe connecting link between sulfur andthe metals. The uses of selenium in the economyof nature are unknown ; but we shall have occasionhereafter to refer to its compound withhydrogen, which is even more deleterious thanthe compound of sulfur with this element.(14) Arsenic in its pure state is a metallic,or imperfectly metallic substance, having muchthe appearance of polished steel. In the formin which it is popularly known, as white arsenic,it is combined with oxygen, and constitutes oneof the most virulent of poisons. Arsenic existsin certain minerals in considerable quantities,and seems, in every form, to be incompatiblewith organic life.(15) Antimony is usually found in nature associatedwith sulfur, the compound it forms withwhich, was for a long time considered as the metalitself. In its pure state, antimony has a bluish-greycolour, and possesses considerable metallicsplendour, but in this form it seldom occurs innature. The compounds of antimony are activemedicinal agents, and some of them are muchemployed for that uprose.(16) (17) (IB) (19) (20) (21) (22) (23) Tellurium,Chromium, Cranium, Vanadium, Molyb-110 CHEMISTRY.dcenum, Tungsten, Titanium and Columbian, thenext eight substances, are metals, for the mostpart obtained by elaborate processes from raremineral productions. The most important, aswell perhaps as the most abundant of these substances,is chromium, the compounds of which,from the splendour of their colours, have beenlately much employed in the arts. It may beremarked of all these substances, that at presenttheir use in the economy of nature is quite unknownto us.(24) (25) Potassium and Sodium are the metallicbases of the two well-known alkaline substances,potash and soda, which are compoundsof these metals with oxygen. Such, however,are the powerful affinities of the metallic basesfor oxygen, that they no where exist naturallyupon the surface of our globe. The same maybealso remarked of potash and soda, the powerfulalkaline properties of which prevent themfrom existing separately. In this respect, thecompounds these metals form with oxygen,present a striking contrast with the compoundsthey form with the analogous principle, chlorine ;the compounds of potassium and sodium withchlorine (the latter of which constitutes commonsalt,) are remarkable for their fixed and permanentcharacter, and for the little tendency ingeneral which they have, to enter into a furtherstate of combination. Besides their remarkablePOTASSIUM. SODIUM. LITHIUM. 1 1 1avidity for oxygen, potassium and sodium possesssome other unusual properties. Potassium,for example, is so light, that were it compatiblewith water, it would swim on the surface of thatfluid ; a circumstance we can hardly imagineto happen with a metal. Potash and soda inall their forms are most important principles,and evidently are necessary to the existence ofthe present order of things, both mineral and organized; for there are few organized beings thatdo not contain more or less of them, especially ofsoda. Potash is found more particularly inplants, but exists also in animals ; while theuniversal presence of soda in animals, in theform of common salt, has been already referredto, and is generally known. These alkalies presentus with a beautiful instance of adaptation,for the purposes which they seem destined tofulfil in the operations of nature. Had they beensolids, or had they formed solid compounds, likemany of the preceding principles, they wouldhave been totally unfitted for their peculiar office,that is to say, for forming a constituent elementof the fluids of organized beings.(26) Lithium is the metallic basis of lithia, asubstance recently discovered, and intermediatein its properties between the alkalies and theearths to be next considered. It has hithertobeen met with, in some rare minerals, in smallquantities only.11 *J CHEMISTRY.(27) Calcium, the metallic basis of lime, canbe obtained only by a troublesome and difficultprocess, and of course does not exist naturally.It is a white metal like silver, and by union withoxygen is readily convertible into lime. Thiswell known principle exists in the greatestabundance in nature, not as quick-lime, butunited with carbon and oxygen, in the form ofcommon lime-stone, marble, &,c. The great importanceof lime in the economy of nature is tooobvious to require notice, and it is only necessaryto revert to the fact that this earth is one of thevery few mineral productions capable of forminga part of a living organized being ; at least inany quantity. This earth, as formerly noticed,constitutes with phosphorus and oxygen, thebasis of the bones of animals ; and with carbonand oxygen, all the endless variety of shells andsimilar products. Thus the properties of limefurnish another striking instance of adaptationto a particular purpose. The compounds ofpotash and soda are all very soluble in water,and hence are chiefly confined to the fluids ofanimals, in which their presence is indispensable.But a solid frame work or skeleton wasnecessary to the existence of the more perfectanimals, and as this could not be formed fromthe soluble potash or soda, the introduction ofanother mineral substance possessed of therequisite properties was necessary. Now lime,MAGNESIUM. U3some of the compounds of which are solid andsome fluid, is admirably adapted for the purpose ;and lime accordingly has been chosen : the limeis carried, in a state of solution, to the spot whereit is required, and is there converted into a solid;while by the same agency, when necessary, thissolid is again converted into a fluid and removed !It seems impossible to conceive arrangements topresent more striking evidences of adaptationthan these ; and the more we consider the subjectin all its bearings, the more wonderful doesit appear.(28) Magnesium is the metallic basis of thewell-known earth called magnesia. It is said toresemble calcium in its properties, and like thatprinciple does not exist naturally, at least uponthe surface of our globe. Magnesia, though occurringmost abundantly in nature, and enteringvery largely into the composition of rocks, doesnot, like lime, constitute masses of great extentin the same simple state of combination ; that isto say, there are no mountains of magnesia, asthere are of chalk and of limestone. Magnesia,even more decidedly than the three precedingmineral substances, seems to be necessary to theexistence of organized beings ; as there does notappear to be one, in which traces of this earthare not met with, generally associated with phosphorus.Its uses, however, are less obvious thanthose of the three other substances, and indeedp. i114 CHEMISTRY.may be said to be unknown ; though there isreason to believe that it is most intimately connectedwith the vital operations of organizedbeings.(29) (30) Strontium, and Barium, the metallicbases of the two earthy bodies strontia andbaryta, are allied to calcium and magnesium insome of their properties, but differ exceedinglyfrom them in others. Their combinations withoxygen exhibit still more decidedly alkalinepowers than those of either calcium or magnesium,and in consequence, like them, theyonly exist in various states of combination;and most usually with carbon and oxygen, orwith sulfur and oxygen. Compared with limeand magnesia, strontia and baryta exist butsparingly, and neither of them has any thingto do with organization ; indeed many of thecombinations of barium are virulent poisons.(31) Aluminum is the metallic basis of theearth alumina, the characteristic ingredient ofthe well known salt called alum. The metallicbasis, like the preceding, no where exists ; butalumina, the compound of aluminum and oxygen,is one of the most abundant productions ofnature, and constitutes an ingredient in by farthe greater number of rocks and soils upon thesurface of the globe. The different kinds ofclay, also, of which bricks, earthenware, fee.,are formed, consist chiefly of this earth in cliffYTTRIUM, ETC. IRON. 115fervent states of purity ; so that it is a substanceof great utility and importance. Alumina appearsto have nothing to do with organization ; at leastit is not known to form a necessary constituentof any organized being, either vegetable oranimal ; though it is in constant communicationwith organized beings, and appears to be almostnecessary, in some indirect way, to their existence.This fact is very remarkable ; for asthe earth does not appear to be poisonous, itcould scarcely have been so completely excludedfrom living bodies, except by some design beyondour comprehension.(32) (33) (34) (35) Glucinum, Yttrium, Zirconium,and Thorinum, the four next elementaryprinciples are the metallic bases of substances,usually considered as possessing the characters ofearthy bodies, and denominated Lucina, Yttria,Zirconia, and Thorn. They all appear to existvery sparingly in nature, and are only met withinsome rare minerals. Lucina has been hithertomet with only in the precious stones denominatedthe emerald, the beryl, and the enclose ;yttria and thorn in some rare Swedish andNorwegian minerals ; and zirconia in the jargonor zircon from Ceylon, and in the hyacinth.These earths more nearly resemble alumina thanany other substance.(36) Iron, one of the most important, is alsoone of the most abundant principles in nature.1 10 CHEMISTRY.It is met with occasionally in the metallic state,but most generally it is found mineralized invarious ways, and can only be obtained pure byan elaborate process. Iron exists in minutequantities in almost all vegetable and animalproducts, particularly in the blood ; though itsmode of combination, as well as its precise use,are quite unknown. Iron may justly be consideredas the most useful of all the metals, andthe one that has perhaps contributed more towardsthe civilization of mankind than any other.To form some idea of its use, we have only toreflect what would happen if it were annihilated.What substitute could be found for it in all thenumerous instances in which it contributes to thewants or to the comforts of mankind ; particularlythrough the medium of tools, of almost everyoneof which it constitutes the essential material.In short, when we contemplate all thecircumstances connected with this metal, itsabundance, the manner in which it is mineralized,and the occasion which it thus gives to humaningenuity to extract it from its ores ; its wholesomeness(for many of the metals are poisonous) ;its properties, particularly its extraordinary tenacity; its strength, its property of welding, of beingconverted into steel, and in this form of beingtempered to any degree of hardness we choose ;its magnetic properties, &c, — when we contemplateall these circumstances, it is impossibleMANGANESE, NICKEL, ETC. 117not to be struck with such varied usefulness, andto consider iron, not only as an article evidentlydesigned for the benefit of man, but as the instrumentby which he should conquer andgovern the world ; and thus be enabled to placehimself, where it was evidently intended heshould be, at the head of the creation.(37) Manganese somewhat resembles iron in afew of its properties. It may be obtained fromits ores by an elaborate process, but in this formit is little known or used. Manganese exists inminute quantities in certain mineral waters, andin a few animal products ; and its combinationswith oxygen, are not only employed in the arts,but by the chemist, who frequently procuresoxygen for his experiments from the ores ofmanganese. Though much diffused, manganeseis not a very abundant metal, at least comparedwith iron, and its uses in the economy of natureare apparently much less important.(38) (39) Nickel and Cobalt, are two metalssomewhat resembling each other in a few oftheir properties, and their ores are often associatedin nature. It is remarkable also thatthey are both generally found combined withiron in those bodies, which occasionally fall fromthe atmosphere, and which are considered as ofmeteoric origin. Like iron also both these metalsare capable of becoming magnetic. Cobalt isused in the arts, and is the basis of the blue118 CHEMISTRY.colour upon our earthenware ; but neither thismetal nor nickel are to be compared with iron inpoint of utility, nor are they very abundant productions.(40) Cerium is a metal very little known, andhas hitherto been obtained, in minute quantitiesonly, from some rare minerals occurring inSweden and in Greenland.(41) (42) Zinc, Cadmium. These two metalsare generally associated in nature, and somewhatresemble each other in their properties ; but thelast is comparatively much less abundant, andhas been only recently discovered. Zinc is ametal easily fusible, of a bluish white colour, andof a lamellated brittle texture ; though by peculiarmanagement it may be rendered malleable. Itis an ingredient in the well-known compoundmetal, brass, and in this form is much used andis of considerable importance.(43) Lead. This well-known metal is notfound in its metallic state, but its ores are veryabundant, and most of the lead of commerce isextracted from the mineral called galena, whichis a compound of lead and sulfur. The generalproperties of lead and of its compounds render itof considerable importance ; but its poisonousproperties are a considerable draw-back to itsusefulness. Why lead, and other mineral matters,should have been constituted poisonous is aquestion beyond our reach ; and all we can atTIN. BISMUTH. COPPER. 119present venture to state on this and on similarpoints is, that it is not actually necessary thatman should employ lead or other poisons, andthat he may, if he chooses, avoid their deleteriousproperties.(44) Tin. This useful metal has been employedby man from the most remote antiquity,though it no where exists naturally in its metallicstate, but usually in conjunction with oxygen. Tinis not a very abundant metal, being apparentlyconfined to a few localities only, one of the mostnoted of which is Cornwall. It is much used inthe arts, and hence is of considerable importance.(45) Bismuth occurs in nature both in themetallic state and in various states of combination.It has a reddish white colour and a lamellatedbrittle texture, and is easily fusible. Bismuthis not a very abundant metal, and is notmuch employed.(46) Copper occurs in nature in the metallicstate, but much more frequently mineralized, especiallywith sulfur. The valuable properties ofcopper, both in its pure and mixed state, renderit of considerable importance ; and it is in consequencemuch employed in the arts. With zinc itconstitutes brass ; with tin bell-metal ; both well-knowncompounds. Copper has been lately saidto exist in very minute quantities in organicnature, but whether as an accidental, or as anessential ingredient is not known. The CHEMISTRY.pounds of copper are poisonous, but these poisonousproperties, like those of lead, can be easilyobviated and guarded against.(47) Mercury. This well-known fluid metaloccurs in the metallic state, but more frequentlymineralized, especially with sulfur. Its importancein the arts, and as a medicinal agent, aretoo well known to require mention here. Thefluidity of mercury presents a beautiful instanceof the endless diversity of nature, and adds muchto its importance and usefulness. Mercury existsin considerable abundance, though much less sothan many of the preceding elementary principles.(48) (49) Silver and Gold, and their uses,are too familiar to require enumeration. Theyare both met with in the metallic state, butsilver also occurs mineralized. So unimportanta part do they seem to perform in the economyof nature, that if they were annihilated, it isprobable that the world would go on just as wellwithout them. How different in these respectsfrom iron, and how much less therefore intrinsicallyvaluable ! Independently of their beauty,the only really valuable properties of silver andgold are the difficulty with which they are actedon by heat and other extraneous agents, properties,which if they were more abundant, wouldrender them well adapted for a great many usefulpurposes.LAWS OF CHEMICAL COMBINATION. 121(50) (51) (52) (53) (54) Platinum, Palladium,Rhodium, Iridium, and Osmium, are metallicsubstances usually found associated in smallquantities, chiefly in certain districts of SouthAmerica, but recently also in the old world.Platinum, the most abundant and important ofthem, is the heaviest body in nature. It isscarcely acted on by any ordinary agents, but itmay be welded by heat ; properties which renderit exceedingly valuable for many purposes, andmake us regret that it is not more abundant.Palladium somewhat resembles platinum in itsproperties, but occurs in less quantity. The otherthree metals exist in very minute quantities, andtheir properties are very little known.We have thus taken a summary view of thedifferent elementary principles met with uponthe surface of our globe, and of their leadingcompounds ; and we are now to consider thelaws which regulate the union of these principleswith one another.Section II.Of the Lais of Chemical Combination.As the following remarks upon the laws of chemicalcombination can scarcely be so given as toprove a source of interest to the general reader,122 CHEMISTRY.he is desired to pass them over and to turn to thelast section of the present chapter, where hewill find a brief recapitulation of the leadingacts, and of the arguments which they furnishin favour of design, and of the wisdom andpower of the Creator.In the preceding chapter we advanced a fewof the leading arguments which induce us toadopt the hypothesis that all gaseous bodies underthe same pressure and temperature, contain anequal number of self repulsive molecules ; and wehave now to consider, very briefly, some of theimportant consequences to which this hypothesisnaturally leads.It seems to be satisfactorily established thatbodies, in their gaseous state, combine both chemicallyand cohesively with reference to theirvolumes : that is to say, that the same volume ofa gas always combines with either precisely asimilar volume of the same or of another gas, orwith some multiple or sub multiple of that gas (inother words with twice, or thrice, or half, or aquarter as much, &c.) but not with any intermediateproportion ; and further, that the resultingcompound always has reference by volume tothe original volumes of its constituent elements.Let us take water for example. Water has beenshown to consist of one volume of oxygen gas,and two volumes of hydrogen gas ; and so invariably,that we cannot suppose w y ater to beLAWS OF CHEMICAL COMBINATION. 123formed of any other proportions of these elements.It has been also shown that the resultingwater, if in the state of steam, occupies exactlythe space of two volumes, so that one volumehas disappeared. Now let us consider attentivelywhat must have happened during thesechanges. One volume of oxygen gas has contributedto form two volumes of water, which twovolumes of water, according to our hypothesis,must consist of twice the number of self repulsivemolecules contained in the one volume of oxygen; yet every one of these molecules mustcontain oxygen, because oxygen is an essentialelement of water : it follows, therefore, irresistibly,that every self-repulsive molecule of oxygenhas been divided into tito, and consequentlymust have originally consisted of at least twoelementary molecules, somehow or other associated,so as to have formed only one self-repulsivemolecule. This conclusion, which seems toflow naturally from our premises, is most important,as we shall see immediately, and enablesus to throw no small light upon many pointsdeemed obscure. In the mean time let us considerbriefly the nature of the compound self-repulsivemolecule of oxygen.We endeavoured to show in the previous chapter,that every ultimate molecule of matter mustpossess two kinds of polarity, which, for wantof better terms, we denominated the chemical and1-24 CHEMISTRY.the cohesive; and that these polarities bear thesame relations to each other as electricity andmagnetism ; in other words that, like these forces,the polarities exist at right angles to each other.Hence if a and b be supposed to be two moleculesof oxygen, of which ec Ee represent thechemical poles and axis, and mm, mm the cohesive,it is evident that these two moleculesmay be supposed to combine in two ways,either e to e chemically, or m to m cohesively ;but the latter form of course is most probablefrom the similar nature of the molecules * Everyself-repulsive molecule of oxygen, therefore, as itexists in a state of gas, must consist of at leasttwo molecules, united to each other cohesively,and acting as a single one ; and the same may beThe general and strong analogy, if not identity, in allrespects except direction, between the axial and the equatorialforces, has been already alluded to, and is exemplified by thestriking resemblance between electricity and magnetism. Wehave seen also that in the crystallized state, similar moleculesprobably combine chemically. Hence, although the rule statedin the text be true, that similar molecules only combine cohen; yet there may be, and probably are, instances in which theycombine chemically. For the same reasons, dissimilar moleculesmay also occasionally combine cohesively. It is probable thatsuch states of combination might be readily detected by theoptical properties, or by some other peculiarity in the physicalproperties of bodies, if in a crystalline form ; but by no otherknown means. Do not some of the phenomena of Isomerism,that is to say, the property which the same body occasionally possessesof assuming different forms, depend upon these changes ?LAWS OF CHEMICAL COMBINATION. 125shown with respect to other gaseous bodies, as,for instance, hydrogen. It cannot, indeed, beinferred from the composition of water, as abovestated, whether the self-repulsive molecule ofhydrogen be double or not ; but this may be demonstratedfrom other compounds into whichhydrogen enters. Thus muriatic acid gas iscomposed of one volume of chlorine and onevolume of hydrogen, which unite without anycondensation, and form two volumes of muriaticacid gas ; now in this case, it is evident that notonly the self repulsive molecule of hydrogen, butalso that of the chlorine, must be double at least,like the molecule of oxygen above mentioned ;and the same might be shown with respect tothe other gaseous bodies.We have said above that the self-repulsivemolecules of oxygen and of hydrogen are atleast double ; but the probability is that theyare in reality much more compounded, as thefollowing observations will show. The self-repulsivemolecule of water, on entering into combination,is often found to be divided into two orthree (perhaps more) parts. Now as we cannotadmit the division of an ultimate molecule oratom, we must of course conclude that the moleculesof oxygen and of hydrogen are much morecompounded than as above represented, and musteach of them contain at least three component orsub-molecules. Hence the self repulsive CHEMISTRY.rules of water will consist of at least nine componentsub-molecules (viz. three of oxygen andsix of hydrogen) which we may suppose to beassociated, — in the first place the hydrogen withthe oxygen, chemically ; and afterwards the threesub-molecules of water with one another cohenso as to constitute one spheroidal molecule; in a manner that with a little ingenuity itwould, perhaps, not be difficult to representmechanically.*Precisely the same laws of union may be supposedto prevail among the molecules of bodiesthemselves, as they actually exist around us.Thus let us take the crystal of oxalic acid as aninstance for illustration. This acid is composed,according to the present language of chemists, oftwo molecules of carbon, and three of oxygen,which by combining, form the acid ; while, tocomplete the compound molecule, and to adaptit for crystallization, three molecules of waterare required to be somehow associated with eachof the molecules of the acid. Now in this case,we suppose, that the two molecules of carbon(each of which is perhaps already made up ofWhen bodies, as ; for example, water, are subjected tointense degrees of heat, it is not improbable that in many instancesthe self-repulsive molecules are more or less separatedinto their constituent sub-molecules ; in which case of course thebodies may be supposed to exhibit altogether different elasticpowers and laws of expansion.LAWS OF CHEMICAL COMBINATION. 127several sub-molecules) are associated togetherinto one symmetrical super-molecule ; that thethree molecules of oxygen are arranged in asimilar manner, and then associated chemicallywith the super-molecule of carbon, and thusform by their union a molecule of oxalic acid ;finally, that the three molecules of water areunited into one super-molecule, which combineschemically with the molecule of oxalic acid, andthus completes the molecule of the acid as itactually exists in the crystalline form.Such are the views we have been induced totake of the nature of chemical combination, andwhether right or wrong, they have the merit ofbeing exceedingly simple and consistent withthemselves throughout, which can hardly be saidof any others with which we are acquainted.Indeed much reflection upon the subject, formany years past, has satisfied us that chemicalcombinations can be rationally explained onlyin some such manner as we have supposed.Any lengthened argument, however, upon thelaws of chemical combination here, would bequite out of place; we shall therefore confineourselves to the following observations.1. The above view of the molecular constitutionof bodies naturally suggests the importantquestion : do the sub-molecules, which we supposeto unite together cohesively and form theself repulsive molecule, of oxygen and CHEMISTRY.gen for instance, possess the same propertiesas those of oxygen and hydrogen, or do theypossess different properties ? This question, inmostinstances, cannot, in the present state of ourknowledge, be satisfactorily answered ; thoughthere is every reason to believe that the propertiesboth of the sub-molecule and of the super-moleculegenerally differ from those of the moleculeitself, but that the differences are rather ofa specific than of a generic character.* Thuschemists have shown that different volumes ofthe same gaseous body, termed carburettedhydrogen, combine together and form variouscompounds : we have, for example, a gas, onevolume of which contains two volumes of carburettedhydrogen ; another, one volume ofwhich contains three, and another four, of thesame gaseous body. Now the sensible propertiesof all these compounds, though resemblingeach other in some respects, are yet specificallydifferent ; and as they are all composed of thesame gaseous body in different proportions, thesedifferences must be considered rather as the resultof cohesive than of chemical union. ThusWhat we term the sensible properties of bodies are, of coursein all instances, the result of a great number of molecules actingtogether at the same time ; hence below a certain point, meredifference of numbers may be supposed to produce a change insensibleproperties, not only in degree, but in kind : of the sensibleproperties of a single molecule we can form no conception.LAWS OF CHEMICAL COMBINATION. 129the supposition, that both the sub-moleculesand the super-molecules of bodies may possessproperties different from one another andfrom the standard molecule, is rendered exceedinglyprobable by the above facts ; and if ourspace admitted, it would not perhaps be difficultto brins; forward other facts of the same kind.This however, would be foreign to our purpose; and we shall only remark, that a greatmany curious circumstances, at present but veryimperfectly understood, evidently appear to bereferable to a similar principle.2. Although we have thus rendered it exceedinglyprobable that the molecules of bodiesconsidered at present as elementary, are immediatelycompounded of many others more or lessresembling them ; yet it is obvious that theremust be a point at which these and other elementsexist in a primary or ultimate form, andbeyond which, if they can be supposed to besubdivided, they must become something altogetherdifferent. In this respect, therefore, theviews we have advanced accord generally withthose at present entertained ; and the only pointin which they differ, is in supposing that theself repulsive molecule, as it exists in the gaseousform, does not represent the ultimate molecule,but is composed of many of them. With respectto the nature of the ultimate sub molecules ofthose bodies which we consider at present as130 CHEMISTRY.elements, as, for instance, of oxygen, they maynaturally be supposed to possess the most intenseproperties or polarities. Indeed such sub-moleculesmay be imagined to resemble in some degreethe imponderable matters, heat, &c, notonly by their extreme tenuity, but in other charactersalso ; and this very intensity of propertyand character may be reasonably considered asone, if not the principal reason, why they areincapable of existing in a detached form. Lastly,are not these ultimate and refined forms of matterextensively employed in many of the operationsof nature, and particularly in many of the processesof organization ?3. By supposing that these laws of combinationare not confined to elementary bodies, butextend to all others throughout nature ; and thatbodies, however complicated they may be, alwayscombine with reference to their volume in thegaseous state, and always act as simple molecules; we are enabled in some degree to explainthat endless variety of property and conditionwhich we see around us. For no sooner is a newcompound molecule formed by an assemblage ofsimilar molecules, than it may be supposed to becapable of combining with other molecules chemically,and of thus entering into a long andnovel series of combinations ; while these combinationsagain in their turn may be imagined tolead to others, and so on, till the variety becomesLAWS OF CHEMICAL COMBINATION. 131extreme. Indeed were not such combinationslimited by the very nature of things themselves,no two substances would probably possess thesame properties. As it is, most of these compoundsare incapable of separate existence ; thusthe compound super-molecules of water in thecrystal of oxalic acid before referred to, are incapableof separate existence: if they couldexist separately, would they assume the form ofwater ?4. It would not be difficult, though perhapsnot very safe or prudent in the present state ofour knowledge, to speculate on the crystallineforms assumed by different bodies, with referenceto the principles we have advanced. Weshall therefore not touch upon this part of thesubject, further than by observing that the cohesiveforce, though supposed to possess somepeculiarity as existing among the molecules ofdifferent bodies, is nevertheless essentially but ofone kind. When therefore the molecules of differentbodies are of the same size (or rather ofthe same weight,) they may be naturally supposedcapable of associating themselves into thesame form ; and if they happen to be mixedtogether, they may even enter indiscriminatelyinto the same crystal. Hence arises what hasbeen termed the isomorphism of bodies ; while ifthere be a near approximation, but not an exactcoincidence in the above relations, they may132 CHEMISTRY.upon the same principles be supposed to giveorigin to plesiomorphism, that is to say, to a nearapproach to a similarity of form.5. With respect to the nature of the circumstanceswhich determine the peculiar charactersand modes of existence of bodies we know verylittle. We are almost equally ignorant also ofthe nature of the causes which determine thecohesion of the molecules of bodies into the crystallineform. A variety of arguments might, however,be brought forward which appear to showthat the size and shape of the molecules have agreat deal to do with crystallization ; certainly,at least, the molecules must be supposed to havea size and shape somehow or other adapted forthe modes in which they are arranged, otherwisethey could not be capable of such an arrangement.The cause of this similarity of size andshape is unknown, but it most probably dependsupon the similarity of weight (Isobar ism) of themolecule ; that is to say, upon the relation oridentity of the absolute quantity of matter whichthe molecule contains; which relation, as far as wecan perceive, is not only the sole circumstancecommon to the molecules of different bodies, butthat which of all others is the most likely to produceidentity in the size and shape of thesemolecules.6. When the molecules of bodies in solutiondo not happen to possess the requisite size andLAWS OF CHEMICAL COMBINATION. 1.33shape for cohesion, there is from the phenomenaevery reason to believe, that they occasionallypossess the power, as it were, of making up thenecessary form, by attaching to themselves themolecules of other bodies. Now, bodies so attachedmay be considered as acting a sort ofcomplementary part ; that is to say, they may besupposed to complete the figure or size of themolecule, so as to adapt it for combining in acertain manner. Thus the water of crystallization(and perhaps occasionally other matters)appears in the greater number of instances toperform an office of this kind, and to be in factstrictly complementary to that particular figureand size of the molecules, which may be supposedto be requisite for enabling them, not only tocombine the more readily with each other, butat the same time, to form a symmetrical solid orcrystal*One or two other circumstances connected withthis part of our subject will be better understoodThere is every reason to believe that one variety of isomorphismis effected on the principles here stated ; and that themolecules of different substances, by attracting to themselvesdifferent quantities of water, or of other matters, may ultimatelymake up compound molecules similar to those of thebodies with which they may happen to be mixed, and may thusenter indiscriminately with these bodies into the crystalline form.Such a state of things is calculated to baffle the mere chemist,however expert ; though it is probable, that if carefully examinedand understood, an intermixture of this kind might be detectedby the optical properties of the crystal.134 CHEMISTRY.after we have considered, a little more in detail,the combinations of bodies with reference to theirweights, and the absolute quantity of matterwhich they contain. To this most interestinginquiry, therefore, we shall in the next placeproceed, confining ourselves, however, as before,principally to the elements of water, hydrogenand oxygen.It has been found by experiment that thesame volumes of different bodies in the gaseousstate have very different weights. Thus for instancea volume of oxygen weighs sixteen timesas much as the same volume of hydrogen.Hence as the number of self-repulsive moleculesin each of these gases is presumed to be thesame, the weight of the self-repulsive moleculeof oxygen must of course be sixteen times greaterthan that of hydrogen ; and generally, theweights of the self-repulsive molecules of all bodieswill be as the specific gravities of these bodies inthe gaseous state, or will bear certain simple relationsto these specific gravities. This relation inweight among the molecules of bodies constitutesthe basis of what is called the Atomictheory, proposed, some years ago by Dr. Dalton,who established the most important fact,that bodies do not, as formerly supposed, combineat random, but in definite proportions byweight ; and if the preceding doctrines be wellfounded, it is evident they cannot combine other-lawsOF CHEMICAL COMBINATION. 135wise.* As however water is composed of onevolume of oxygen united with two volumes ofhydrogen, the relative weights of the hydrogenand oxygen in water will be, not as 1 to 16, butas 1 to 8 only; while the weight of the self-repulsivemolecule of steam will be 9. Hence,as one or the other of the elements of water isusually made the basis of the atomic numbers,this difference between the volumes and thecombining weights of its elements has producedconsiderable confusion, and has given rise tomuch needless discussion. As a mere matter ofconvenience it is certainly preferable to considerthe two volumes of hydrogen as one atom,(to use the language of Dr. Dalton), in whichcase oxygen will be 8, and water 9 ; but astrictly philosophical arrangement, supposing theprinciples we have advanced be well founded,would require that the volume in all instancesshould be made the molecular unit ; in which case,the relative weights of the self-repulsive moleculesof hydrogen and oxygen, as above mentioned,will be as 1 to 16.In this country two volumes of hydrogen, aswe have said, are usually considered as oneatom, or unity, in which case oxygen is 8; butThe reader is referred to " An Introduction to the AtomicTheory," recently published by Dr. Daubed, Professor ofChemistry, at Oxford, for an interesting and able inquiry intothe principles of this theory.136 CHEMISTRY.some have chosen instead of hydrogen, to makeoxygen unity or 10, in which case hydrogen ofcourse will be the one-eighth of 1 or of 10, thatis to say-125 or 1*25 ; and water, instead of 9,will be 1* 125 or 11-25. It matters not which ofthese series of numbers, or whether any other beemployed, so that the same relative proportionsbe observed among them ; but the first series isthat most generally adopted, and is upon thewhole the most convenient. In the above mannerthe atomic weights, as they are termed, of allbodies capable of assuming the gaseous form canbe easily obtained ; but in those bodies that donot assume the gaseous form, in their simplestate, but in some state of combination only, weareobliged to deduce the weight of the primarymolecule from that of the compound. Thuscarbon in its elementary state is incapable ofassuming the gaseous form ; but combined withoxygen it forms carbonic acid gas, one volume ofwhich weighs 22 times as much as our standardtwo volumes of hydrogen. Now it has beenfound by other experiments, that of these 22parts, 16 are oxygen. The remaining 6 musttherefore be carbon ; and accordingly 6 is thenumber upon our scale representing carbon, andthe proportion, with reference to which, this bodyalways enters into composition. In the case ofbodies, as for instance, lime, which are incapableLAWS OF CHEMICAL COMBINATION. 137of assuming a gaseous form either alone or incombination, we are obliged to trust solely toanalysis ; thus common marble or carbonate oflime, as it is termed by chemists, is found to becomposed of 22 parts of carbonic acid, and 28parts of lime ; 28 therefore represents upon ourscale the atomic weight of lime, and so of allothers.It may be observed that we have spoken as ifthe atomic weights of bodies were related to oneanother by multiple ; that is to say, were all multiplesof some common unit. Now this opinionhas been maintained by some, while it has beendenied by others ; who admitting that multiplesin weight are necessary to the union of the samebody, both chemically and cohesively, will notadmit that they are necessary to the union ofdifferent bodies. The matter is one that in thepresent imperfect state of chemistry can hardlybe determined by experiment ; for what With thedifficulty, or rather impossibility, of procuringbodies in a perfectly isolated form, and the unavoidableimperfections of all chemical processes,we can scarcely hope to arrive within the necessarylimits of precision. If the above views ofmolecular relations however, be well founded, itseems almost impossible to arrive at any otherconclusion, than that the combining weightsof all bodies are intimately related by muleCHEMISTRY.title ; though to enter further upon the subjecthere would be quite foreign to our present purpose.*Lastly, it may be remarked that the numbersat present conventionally employed by chemists,to represent what have been called the atomicweights of bodies, are so convenient that theywill not readily, nor indeed ought lightly, to besetaside ; though there is reason to believe thatmany of them require revision, and are destinedto undergo material alterations, even as the sub-forthe sake of those who are interested in such matters,one or two of the leading arguments may be briefly stated. Wehave rendered it probable that when two or more molecules ofthe same body combine cohesively, they form a compound, whichthough having properties in some degree allied to those of the originalmolecule, nevertheless usually possesses a specific difference,(that is to say, the chemical polarities of the compoundmolecule as modified by the union, will be different from thoseof the simple molecule). But a body possessing a specific differencemay be supposed to be a new body, and thus capable ofcombining in future, not cohesively, but chemically with ouroriginal molecule. Now in such a case it is evident that theweight of the original molecule and that of the new compoundmolecule must have a certain relation to one another by multiple.If our space admitted, it would not, we believe, be difficult topoint out instances of such combination among chemical phenomena; but we shall merely observe, that many of the substancesat present considered as elementary, appear to be constitutedupon the above principles from some common molecule ofa still more elementary character. Moreover this law seems tohold universally throughout nature ; and those substances relatedto the same molecule, in general constitute a natural group orfamily, having certain properties in common.LAWS OF CHEMICAL COMBINATION. 139sect is at present understood. If the views howeverwhich we have advanced be correct, thesenumbers certainly do not represent nature ; foras we have already stated, a strictly philosophicalarrangement can be rationally foundedonly upon the volumes of bodies in the gaseousstate, in which state some common volumein all instances should be considered as themolecular unity. Now, as in most instances,this molecular unity seems capable of subdivision,of course the number made to representit can hardly ever be supposed to be aprime number. Hence, as combining moleculesof bodies exist both below and above the molecularunity, they may often (perhaps always) berepresented by a series. Thus suppose 9 torepresent the molecular unity or volume ofwater, and that this be subdivided into three,(which it is at least, and probably into a muchgreater number) ; the molecular combinations ofwater may be represented by the series, 3, 6, 9,12, 15, 18, &c. We mean to say, the moleculesof water as they actually enter into combinationin different bodies, may be supposed to be representedby these numbers ; while, by way ofdistinguishing the different molecules, thosebelow 9, may be designated generally sz^-mole-rules, and those above 9, super-molecules ; andthe molecular unity itself may be simply calledthe molecule, or in the gaseous state the CHEMISTRY.repulsive molecule; distinctions, which for thesake of convenience, we have adhered tothroughout these remarks, and which we havethought it thus necessary to explain.*Section 111.General Remarks upon Chemical Compounds.The number of chemical compounds is so greatthat an attempt to enumerate them here wouldbe quite out of place ; we shall therefore contentourselves with stating, as briefly as possible, thegeneral principles upon which these compoundsare formed.We have already pointed out many of themore remarkable compounds, when speaking ofsimple bodies : and in subsequent parts of thisvolume we shall have occasion to allude to others.In speaking of simple bodies we showed that byfar the greater number of them occur in themetallic state, and are incapable of existenceupon the surface of our globe, on account of thetendency they possess to enter into combination,The above terms are to be considered as a temporary expedientonly. If these views be established it will not perhapsbe difficult to devise hereafter both a notation and a nomenclaturefounded upon them. At present such an attempt would beridiculous.CHEMICAL COMPOUNDS. 141particularly with oxygen. It would seem also,from the intensity of the properties and thegeneral incompatibility of the simple bodies withthe present order of things, that their compounds,rather than themselves, were the objects theAuthor of nature had in view. Hence perhapswe are more immediately interested in thecharacter of the compounds than in that of theelements themselves. Of the general nature ofthese compounds, the following observations,taken chiefly from Dr. Thomson's work onchemistry, will serve to convey some idea to thegeneral reader.The compounds which bodies form with oneanother are either primary or secondary. Byprimary compounds are usually understoodthose which are formed by the combination oftwo or more simple bodies with each other ;while by secondary compounds are meant thecompounds formed by the union of the primarycompounds with each other.The primary compounds naturally dividethemselves into three grand classes, viz. acids,alkalies or bases, and neutrals ; on each of whichwe shall make a few remarks.Of Acids. Formerly it was considered as requisitethat bodies, in order to belong to the classof acids, should have a sour taste, should besoluble in water, and should have the propertyof reddening vegetable blue colours ; and these■'/■"142 CHEMISTRY.properties do indeed belong to some of the mostcommon and powerful acids. But there arevarious acids which have no taste, which are notsoluble in water, and some which are incapableof altering the colour of the most delicate vegetableblues ; hence the term acid, as at presentemployed by chemists, is understood to denotea substance which has the property of combiningwith, and neutralizing, alkalies or bases. Thecelebrated Lavoisier endeavoured to prove thatoxygen constitutes an essential ingredient of allthe acids ; but later observations have shownthat not only oxygen, but the analogous principles,chlorine, bromine, iodine, and fluorine,are also capable of forming acids by unitingwith several of the acidifiable bases. Still morerecently, certain compounds of cyanogen, (a primarycompound of carbon and azote), of sulfur,of selenium, and of tellurium with the acidifiablebases, have been ranked among the acids ; sothat the acids at present known may be dividedinto nine classes, viz., oxygen acids, chlorineacids, bromine acids, iodine acids, fluorine acids,cyanogen acids, sulfur acids, selenium acids, andtellurium acids.The oxygen acids are more numerous andbetter understood in general than the otherclasses ; they may be subdivided into two kinds ;those with a single base ; and those with a compoundbase. The acids with a single base amountCHEMICAL COMPOUNDS. 143to between thirty and forty, and include most ofthe best known and most important of those usedin chemical processes and in the arts ; such ascarbonic acid, sulfuric acid, phosphoric acid,nitric acid, &c. The oxygen acids with a compoundbase are chiefly derived from the vegetableor animal kingdoms ; they are still morenumerous than those with a single base, thenumber at present known amounting to upwardsof sixty ; as instances may be mentioned thetartaric acid, the citric acid, the malic acid, thelithic acid, <S:c.The chlorine acids are perhaps as numerous asthose containing oxygen, but they have beenmuch less studied, and are, consequently, muchless understood. One of the most familiarlyknown belonging to this class is the muriatic orhydrochloric acid, which is composed of chlorine,united with hydrogen : and here may benoticed a remarkable circumstance, that not onlychlorine, but all the other allied principles, whenthey combine with hydrogen, form powerfulacids ; while the compound of oxygen with hydrogen,as we have formerly noticed, is water,a substance altogether dissimilar. Such is thewonderful and inexplicable nature of chemicalcombinations !The acids containing bromine, iodine, andfluorine, are still less satisfactorily known thanthose containing chlorine. As just observed,144 CHEMISTRY.the acids formed by these different principleswith hydrogen, viz. the hydrobromic, the hydriodic,and the hydrofluoric acids, possess the mostdecided properties and are best understood.The cyanogen acids are numerous and important,as most of them are poisonous; thus thecompound of cyanogen and hydrogen (analogousto those above mentioned) is the hydrocyanic, orprussic acid, one of the most virulent poisons innature, and instantly fatal to organic life inevery form.Of the remaining acids, the sulfur acids, theselenium acids, and the tellurium acids, we knowvery little. Those with which we are at presentbest acquainted are analogous to the preceding-acids,and are formed by the union of the differentprinciples with hydrogen. These acidswere formerly known under the names of sulfuret ted, celebrated, and telluretted hydrogen ;but some chemists have now given them newnames conformably to the above nomenclature.Of alkalies and bases. Bodies of this class,are, like the acids, composed of different elementaryprinciples, and particularly of certainmetals, combined with oxygen, chlorine, &c,but usually in less proportions than in the acids.Hence the alkaline bases are as numerous asthe acids, and may be divided in a similarmanner into oxygen alkalies, chlorine alkalies,kc. Of these the oxygen alkalies are by farCHEMICAL COMPOUNDS. 145the best known and most important, and theymay, like the oxygen acids, be subdivided intotwo kinds, viz. those with a single base, andthose with a compound base. The alkalies witha single base include all the well known commonalkaline bodies, potash, soda, lime, baryta,&c. ; while the alkalies with a compound baseare chiefly from the vegetable kingdom, andcomprehend the newly discovered alkaline matters,so successfully introduced into medicine ;such as quinine, from bark, morphine, fromopium, &c, the composition of which at presentis not well understood. Ammonia, or thevolatile alkali, may perhaps be referred to thisclass of alkalies ; though its composition asconsisting of hydrogen and azote only, withoutoxygen, may be considered as constituting anexception or anomaly.The other alkaline bodies into which chlorine,iodine, kc, enter, are very little known, andsome perhaps may be even inclined to doubttheir existence.Of neutral compounds. These are arranged byDr. Thomson, under seven heads, the merenaming of which will probably be all that isrequired, to convey to the general reader a sufficientnotion of their nature. They are water,spirits or alcohol, ether, ethel, (a peculiar oilysubstance obtained from spermaceti) volatile oils,fixed oils, and bitumens.p. LN<; CHEMISTRY.Such is a summary of the primary compoundsand of the principles upon which they have beenmost recently arranged. We come now to considerbrieflyThe secondary compounds, or those formedby the union of the primary compounds. Asthe neutral primary compounds (if we exceptwater) enter into few combinations, it is obviousthat the secondary compounds must consistchiefly of substances formed by the union of theother two general classes of bodies, namely, ofacids and alkalies. These secondary compoundsare usually denominated salts ; they constitutea very numerous and most important class ofbodies ; and as resulting from the mutual unionand saturation of all the different principlescapable of combining with each other, they ofcourse are more abundant than any other bodies ;indeed, the surface of our globe, may in a greatmeasure, be considered as made up of them.The term salt was originally confined to commonsalt ; but by a singular fate, this body, asbeing composed of chlorine and sodiujii only, isnow excluded from the class of salts : saltsbeing, as we have just said, considered by chemists,to be formed by the union of acids andalkalies only. As there are nine classes ofacids, of course there must be as many classes ofsalts ; of these, the oxygen acid scots are by farthe best known and the most important ; and,CHEMICAL COMPOUNDS. 147indeed, this class includes the greater number ofthose salts employed by chemists or in the arts.If these salts be arranged according to theirbases, which perhaps upon the whole, in thepresent state of our knowledge, is the best modeof arranging them, they will be found to constituteupwards of fifty genera ; and if we considerthat each of these genera includes, in mostcases, a great number of species, we may formsome idea of the wonderful variety of bodiesexisting in nature, and with the properties ofwhich the chemist is required to be conversant.Familiar instances of the oxygen acid salts are,nitre, common chalk, gypsum; various metallicsalts, as the white, green, and blue vitriols, &c. &c.Of the chlorine and the other classes of saltsvery little is known, and this little is chieflyconfined to the salts composed of these principlesand of hydrogen. The hydrochloric or muriaticacid combines with ammonia, and forms the wellknown compound sal-ammoniac, a salt supposedto be a true hydrochloric or muriate. But thisis the only instance known ; and in all otheranalogous instances, the hydrogen of the hydrochloricacid and the oxygen of the base, uniteto form water, which is separated or separable ;and thus the chlorine and the metallic base areleft in union by themselves in the state of achloride. This is the case, for instance, withcommon salt ; which, as we before said, is in148 CHEMISTRY.reality a chloride of sodium, that is to say, asimple compound of chlorine and the metalsodium. Similar remarks appear to be applicableto the other analogous compounds. Itmust be confessed, however, that our knowledgewith respect to all these matters is at presentin a very unsatisfactory state, and is probablydestined at no very distant time to undergo acomplete revolution.Section IV.Recapitulation. General Reflections on the Subjectstreated of in the preceding Chapters.The subjects considered in the present chaptermay be viewed as a continuation of what hasengaged our attention in those that have preceded; and the principal circumstances detailedmay be thus recapitulated.1 . All perfectly gaseous bodies combine withreference to their volume ; that is to say, anyvolume or bulk of a gas always combines withan equal volume or bulk of the same or ofanother gas ; or with a volume having somesimple relation to its own volume, as half, ortwice as much ; &c. and not with any interveningfractional part of a volume.2, The same volume of different gaseousRECAPITULATION. 149bodies has very different weights : hence on thesupposition formerly advanced, that all perfectlygaseous bodies under the same pressure andtemperature contain an equal number of self-repulsivemolecules, the molecules of differentgaseous bodies must also have different weights ;which weights will be as the specific gravities ofthe gases, and may be represented by numbersproportional to these specific gravities.3. From the above relation between thevolumes and the weights of bodies in the gaseousstate, it follows, that all bodies must combine withreference to their weights ; that is to say, that thesame weight of the same body (or half or twiceas much, &c.) must always combine with thesame weight (or half or twice as much, &c.) notonly of the same, but of every other body.4. The numbers representing the relationsamong the specific gravities of bodies in thegaseous state, are called the molecular or atomicweights of the different bodies.Such is the foundation of what is usuallycalled the Atomic Theory ; the principles ofwhich are generally admitted as regulating chemicalcombinations.We shall now conclude the present Treatiseon chemistry with a few remarks more especiallyrelating to the object of these volumes.And here it may be observed, once for all,that throughout the preceding pages, as well as150 CHEMISTRY.in what follows, we have endeavoured to stateeach argument as distinctly as possible, withoutencumbering it too much with details — inshort, to illustrate principles rather than to enumerateparticulars. When the principles of acumulative argument are understood, the detailsare readily supplied by the reader.First. On taking a general and collectivereview of the facts brought forward in the precedingchapters, the circumstances calculated tostrike our attention in the first place, are thewonderful coincidence between the priority ofexistence, and the universal prevalence of theprimordial agents and elements of nature, on theone hand ; and on the other, the beautiful adaptationof the agents and elements of a later andmore subordinate character to these primordialprinciples ; so that when the whole are takentogether they constitute one harmonious andconnected series, in which all the various partsare mutually adapted and dependent. In thefollowing chapters we shall have occasion tonotice many of the more important of thesesubordinate arrangements ; at present we shallchiefly confine ourselves to a general review ofwhat has been already stated.We are told by the inspired historian thatafter matter had been created and endowedwith motion, the next Almighty fiat was " letthere be light; " and if we suppose this fiat, toGENERAL ARGUMENTS. 151have included the other imponderable forms ofmatter, heat, &c., how entirely do the wholephenomena of nature accord with the sacrednarrative? Light, and probably its attendantheat, are the most generally diffused and universalof all the subordinate agencies ; so muchso, that they are not confined to our globe oreven system, but extend throughout the universe.Their laws and influences, therefore, seem to beas general and as necessary to the present orderof things, as those of gravitation itself. Thepriority of existence also of light and of heatis self evident ; for until they existed, nothingelse, as we are acquainted with things, couldhave had existence. Now all subsequent creationshave been made with the most exactregard to the influences of these prior agencies.The globe, for example, which we inhabit, isplaced at a certain distance from the sun, thegreat centre of our system and of light and ofheat ; and where of course, according to the lawswhich light and heat obey, they must actwith a certain intensity. Hence it was necessarythat the materials of this globe should have acertain degree of fixity, otherwise they couldnot exist. If indeed there had been no ulteriorviews, with respect to the destination of thisglobe ; all that would have been requisite, wouldhave been to have made it sufficiently firm tomove through space ; and for this purpose the152 CHEMISTRY.more homogeneous and compact its compositionhad been the better. But what are the facts?Our globe, though stable, so far from beinghomogeneous, is composed of a variety of substancesall differing from each other in their properties; some being solid, some fluid, some aeriformunder the common circumstances in whichthey have been placed, and all beautifullyadapted, both by their physical and chemicalproperties, to the purposes they fulfil in nature ;and what is more, to the purposes they weredesigned to fulfil in nature ; for on no other suppositionwould their properties be intelligible.Thus water, within very narrow limits of temperature,is a solid, or a liquid, or a gas ; andyet these very narrow limits of temperature,neither more nor less, are precisely those whichexist upon the surface of our globe ; where theyare the natural and necessary results of its situationin the universe, and of the general lawswhich govern the distribution of light and heat.Had the properties of this body been other thanwhat they are, or had the general temperatureof our globe been different, water would haveexisted altogether in the solid or in the gaseousstate, and its most important properties wouldhave been unknown. Hence it seems almostimpossible to arrive at any other conclusion,than that the temperature of the earth, and theproperties of the water on its surface, have beenGENERAL ARGUMENTS. 153mutually adjusted to each other. And further,since the temperature of the earth, as just stated,is the natural result of the general laws whichgovern the distribution of heat and of light ; theinference must be, that the properties of thewater, as the subordinate and later principle,have, at an after period, been adjusted to theprior temperature of the earth.If we do not admit of this adjustment, wemust suppose that the whole has been the resultof chance, or of some other unintelligent principle; and if water had been the only principlein which such adaptations were apparent, thesupposition of chance might, perhaps, be received; at least it would have been difficult toprove the contrary. But when we see similarhappy adjustments in every object around us, —in the different elements of the air we breathe,the soil we tread upon, the rocks in all theirvarieties, composing the solid crust of our globe,not one of which could have been more happilycontrived for the purposes they fulfil, nor indeedbe scarcely conceived to exist otherwise thanwhat they are, without destruction to the wholeof the present arrangements — when we see allthese things, and duly reflect upon them, it becomesabsolutely impossible to admit that somuch happy adjustment, so much apparentintelligence, so much, in short, of what theveriest sceptic under other circumstances wouldl.">4 CHEMISTRY.have allowed to have been evidences of design,can be evidences of any thing else than design,or have resulted from any unintelligent causewhatever. Hence we are driven irresistibly tothe only rational conclusions which the premisesappear to admit of, viz., that all these happyadjustments and adaptations which we see innature, are really and truly what they appear tobe, — so many evidences of design ; and, consequently,that the whole have sprung from thewill of an intelligent and omnipotent Creator.The above inferences are deducible from theplain and obvious arrangements of nature, whichevery one can readily understand : but whenspeaking of elementary bodies we remarked,that in a variety of instances, their object anduse were unknown to us ; and before we quitthis part of the subject, it may not be out ofplace to consider briefly these difficult points.When we see adjustments so wonderful, andsuch wisdom displayed in those parts of creationwhich are intelligible to us, we cannot imaginethat the Being who made them all wouldact otherwise than with wisdom. Hence whatwc do not understand, or what may appear incongruousto us, we naturally and properly referto our own ignorance. The phenomena of chemistryare so extraordinary and often so unexpected,that little in general can be predicatedof them, beyond what is actually known. TheGENERAL ARGUMENTS. 155most experienced chemist, therefore, as comparedwith the Great Chemist of nature, is immeasurablydeficient ; and can only contemplateHis wonderful operations with astonishment andawe, and own them unapproachable. Who thencan tell what design is latent under apparentincongruities ? What elaborate contrivances andadaptations may have been requisite to haveproduced water or carbon, or any other essentialprinciple, out of the materials and in conformityto the laws, by means of Which the Great Authorof nature chose to operate ? Who can tell thatthe minor evil may not have been essential to \lthe existence of the greater good? That thepoisonous metals, for instance, are not, as it were,the refuse of the great chemical processes bywhich the more important and essential principlesof nature have been eliminated ? Thatthese poisonous principles have not been leftwith such subdued properties as scarcely tointerfere with His great design, — not becausethey could not have been prevented — not becausethey could not have been removed — but on purposeand designedly to display His power ?Secondly. If we pursue the subject a stepfurther, and inquire into the means by which allthe beautiful adaptations we have been consideringare effected, we shall find that theyprincipally depend upon a certain due adjustmentto each other of the qualities and quantities150 CHEMISTRY.of the different substances, and more especiallyof the different elementary principles, of whichour globe is composed. These adjustments areso universal and so varied in their character, thatto enumerate them all, would be little else thanto enumerate all the objects in nature ; we shalltherefore content ourselves with a few of themost familiar of each kind.In the first place, with respect to the adjustmentof quality. Let us consider for a momentand by way of illustration, what would happenif the qualities of water or of air were toundergo a change : were, for example, theimportant fluid water to become sour or sweet,or heavier or lighter, or indeed any thing butwhat it is ; or were the air of the atmosphere toacquire odour or colour, or to become opake : byeither of such changes, slight as they appear,the whole of the present economy of nature wouldbe deranged. Again, if the qualities of the acidexisting in the common salt of the ocean were tobecome so modified as to quit the alkali with\Jl which it is at present associated, and to combinewith the limestone composing our rocks ; whilethe carbonic acid, thus set free, was diffusedthrough the atmosphere : in such a case a large\jj part of the solid crust of our globe would rapidlydisappear and become dissolved in the watersof the ocean, which would thus be totally suumfitted for their present purposes ; while theGENERAL ARGUMENTS. 157liberated carbonic acid would instantly prove ) f (fatal to animal life. Such would be the consequencesof these trifling changes in thequalities of a few substances only ; nor is it pos sensiblescarcely to conceive any other change thatwould not be attended with similar results.In the next place, the importance of the adjustmentsof quantity is equally striking. Letus, for instance, conceive what would happenfrom the simple inversion of the quantities ofdry land and of sea as they now exist : in sucha case there would not be enough of water topreserve the surface of the land in a moist state,and the greater part would be in the situationof the deserts of Africa, and totally unfitted forthe habitation of organized beings. Whenspeaking of the elements of water, we alludedto the happy adjustment of the quantities ofoxygen and of hydrogen in the world ; and tothe consequences that would have ensued ifhydrogen, instead of oxygen, had predominated*The same remarks apply to almost every otherelement ; for example, had the proportions ofchlorine, and of the soda in common salt ; orof the carbonic acid, and of the lime in ourmarbles, been any thing but what they are, theone or the other of the ingredients must havebeen in excess, and the present order of thingscould never have existed. Again, were gold suddenlyto become as abundant as iron, and iron ast£8 CHEMISTRY.rare as gold ; were the carbon existing in thepresent useful form of fossil coals, to assume thecrystallized form and become diamonds ; thewhole order of nature would be subverted, andthe whole of the present arrangements be involvedin ruin. Those who deny the argumentof design, of course consider such suppositionsas these absurd; and if carried too far, theydoubtless, under any circumstances, lose muchof their effect; but admitting the argument ofdesign, the judicious application of such suppositionsis well calculated to place the advantagesand effects of certain arrangements in amore striking point of view than can be obtainedby any other means. More especially, such suppositions,by shewing the wonderful adaptationsof subsequent creations to prior existences, areadmirably calculated to illustrate the fitness, andconsequently the apparent design displayed inthe formation of these prior existences ; andthus to show that they must have been createdwith reference to ulterior purposes.The argument of prior arrangements and thesubsequent adaptation to these arrangements ofother creations is one of such interest, and itsconsequences are so important, that perhaps itmay not be deemed irrelevant if, for furtherillustration, we recapitulate the principal pointsin a condensed form. For this purpose we shallselect the obvious and familiar relation betweenwater and air, and plants and animals.GENERAL ARGUMENTS. 150The prior existence of water and air as comparedwith that of plants and animals, is establishedby the fact, that water and air can existwithout plants and animals, but that plants andanimals cannot exist without water and air.Hence as water and air must have existed withalltheir present properties before plants andanimals were created, the question naturallyarises, how water and air came to be endowedwith their present properties ? We suppose thatwater and air were created with their presentproperties, with reference to the future existenceof plants and animals ; and on this suppositionthe whole becomes intelligible. Further, thatthis is the true explanation, and that water andair have not obtained their present properties bychance or accident is rendered still more probableby the following considerations. We havesaid that water and air can exist without plantsand animals ; now as far as we know, water andair might have existed for ever without plantsand animals ; at least the contrary cannot beproved or even rendered probable. Moreover,plants and animals, as involving new principlesof a higher order (those of life), never could byany law of nature, necessary or probable, haveresulted from an inferior agency. Hence thereis no necessary relation of cause and effect betweenthe prior existence of water and air, andthe subsequent existence of plants and animals ;as some seem to have supposed. Hence too it160 CHEMISTRY.follows irresistibly, that plants and animals havebeen created, and their properties adapted tothose of water and of air at some subsequentperiod, and by some external and superior agent.But the agent that could thus create plants andanimals, could surely have created the water andair likewise ; nay, must have done so ; for, as theprior and subsequent creations taken together,evidently form but different parts of one andthe same general design, the whole design musthave been the work of one and the same intelligentAgent.It yet remains to draw the attention of thereader to another circumstance connected withthese adjustments in quality and quantity, viz.the double adjustment. Of the causes of thequalities of bodies we know but little, andthat little is founded solely on experience. Wesee that these qualities are admirably fitted fortheir apparent purposes, and hence (as theymight have been different), we arrive at the probableconclusion that they have been so fittedby design. The collocation of quantities andnumbers, exactly where they have been required,adds much to the probability of thisconclusion ; as such a collocation could hardlyhave been other than the act of an intelligentBeing. But the double adjustment in quality andquantity of the same thing at the same time, addsalmost infinitely to the weight of evidence ; andGENERAL ARGUMENTS. 101indeed furnishes a proof in favour of design andof its consequences, which amounts to all butactual demonstration.Thirdly. There is another point of view inwhich we may consider what has been stated,and by which we shall at the same time bebrought a step nearer to the existing order ofthings. Amidst all that endless diversity of property,and all the changes constantly going onin the world around us, we cannot avoid beingstruck with the general tendency of the whole toa state of repose or equilibrium. Moreover, thistendency to equilibrium is not confined to theponderable elements, but prevails also in the samestriking degree among the imponderable agencies,heat and light ; which, as we have seen,cannot be any where long retained in a state ofexcess, on account of their natural disposition toacquire a certain state of equilibrium ; dependinggenerally upon the place of the earth in thesolar system. Now, the formation of this stateof equilibrium, and its preservation, may beconsidered as the results of those wonderfuladjustments among the qualities and quantitiesof bodies above alluded to— the qualities beingsuch as to neutralize each other's activity, whilethe quantities are so apportioned as to leave oneor two only predominant.The preceding is a general view of the subject.But it is to be observed, that the state ofp. Ml(j'2 CHEMISTRY.equilibrium here described is not absolutelyfixed; as such an unyielding condition would benot less incompatible with the present orderof things than a condition of unlimited change.The whole are so adjusted therefore, thatslight deviations, or oscillations about theneutral point of rest or equilibrium, take place,and are even necessary, as the world is at presentconstituted ; though these changes arebounded within very narrow limits, and greaterdeviations would instantly prove fatal to thewhole. If we enquire into the principlesupon which these slight deviations take placeand are regulated, we shall find still furtherreason to admire the wonderful arrangementsdisplayed. When speaking of the elementsof water, we observed how much the stabilityof nature depended upon the proportions ofthe elements of this fluid ; and that one of itselements, oxygen, existed in excess, and in afree state, in the air. Now, it is to the agency ofthis oxygen in a free state, and to the annualand diurnal motions of the earth, that mostof the minor operations going on around usare to be referred. The universal presenceand peculiar properties of oxygen are such as tointerfere more or less with every thing ; while themotions of the earth keep every thing in aconstant state of activity and change. Yet, thegeneral tendency of the whole, as before observed,GENERAL ARGUMENTS. 163is towards a state of equilibrium ; and the principlesupon which this tendency operates, arevery intelligible. Thus, all bodies below theneutral point of rest, if we may be allowed theexpression ; that is to say, all bodies of a markedelementary character, have a tendency to combinewith each other synthetically ; while beyondthe neutral point, bodies have very little tendencyto combine further ; and if by intentionon the part of the operator, or from any othercause, they be so made to combine, when left totheir own operations, they speedily revert oroscillate back to the point of equilibrium.Such are the means by which the state ofequilibrium we are considering has been produced,and by which it is still preserved ;nor is it possible to reflect upon the subjectfor a moment without arriving at the conclusion,that this state of equilibrium possesses all thecharacters of a prior arrangement, to which organizedbeings have been subsequently adapted.We are thus led, in the next place, to makea few remarks upon the subsequent adaptationof organized beings to the pre-established equilibriumof nature.The present races of organized beings inall instances are produced only by the processof generation ; and if they were annihilated, thereare no natural operations going on in the world,which can lead us to believe, that by any104 CHEMISTRY.law of nature such organized beings could bereproduced. That is to say, we cannot conceivethat hydrogen, carbon, oxygen, and azote,with heat and light, &c. from what we know oftheir properties, would ever be able, of their ownaccord, so to combine as to form a plant or ananimal. Hence, when plants and animals werefirst produced, it is evident that there must havebeen a power or agent in operation, which haslong since discontinued so to operate ; and thatthis power or agent not only created plants andanimals ; but at the same time imparted to thema capability of perpetuating their existence, foraperiod, at least, commensurate with that stateof equilibrium in which they have been placed.Now, whether we consider the power or agentwho accomplished all these things, to have beenthe Deity himself operating immediately, whichis most probable ; or whether we consider withsome, that He operated by delegated agenciesand laws, the result is the same as far asour argument is concerned ; the object of whichargument is to shew, that the present racesof organized beings are somehow or other influencedby the same general laws which appearto regulate inorganic matters. That is to say,organized beings at the present time, are at leastas fixed and permanent in their nature, asthe state of equilibrium in which they havebeen placed ; and consequently, no new plantsGENERAL ARGUMENTS. 165or new animals can, as the world now exists, beimagined to be produced without a new andspecific act of creation ; or at least, without anentire change in the standard of equilibrium.We have alluded to the commencement of thepresent order of things, and to a possible stateof change in the condition of equilibrium :perhaps it may not be amiss to make a fewfurther remarks upon these points. That thepresent order of things most certainly has had abeginning; and as certainly will come to an end,we cannot doubt; the questions are, when was thisbeginning ; when will be this end ? Of the endof course we can know nothing : the beginning isless obscure ; and there are indelible impressionsleft upon the materials and structure of ourglobe, which throw no ordinary light uponthis question. The consideration of the changeswhich our earth has undergone, however, belongsto another department : we shall only observethat these changes appear to be of two distinctorders, which have alternated with one anotherin succession. The first of these orders ofchanges seems to have been of a slow andgradual kind, and such as might be supposed totake place during a state of things, more or lesslike the present, and existing for a considerableperiod. The changes of the second order, onthe contrary, have evidently been violent, sudden,and disruptive, of comparatively short CHEMISTRY.tion, and differing exceedingly in degree and inextent. In general they appear to have operatedfrom within ; but whether altogether from internalor from external influences, is unknownto us. Now, it is remarkable that these successivealternations seem each time to havechanged the standard of equilibrium ; and thatduring the state of comparative quietude, or theinterval of equilibrium between the convulsions,organized beings have existed, adapted to theexigencies of that particular state of equilibrium ;and which beings must have been successivelycreated : moreover, the later creations graduallyapproach to those at present in existence.Hence, the change in the standard oforganization seems to have been not only simultaneouswith the change in the state of equilibrium; but both appear to have been progressivelyraised after each convulsion. Finally, thelast general catastrophe of the disruptive orderwas evidently a deluge.* Such are the conclusionswhich geologists have deduced from acareful survey of that part of the crust of the- If we judge from what we see going on in nature around us,and from the little tendency there appears to be in things atpresent to combine into new forms, we must be almost led to theconclusion that the development of new elements, as well as ofnew agents, is necessary to produce new and specific arrangements.May we not then infer that during those periodic convulsionsalluded to in the text, new elements have been developed, orold ones decomposed into others of a higher and more elementaryGENERAL ARGUMENTS. 167earth to which they have access; and theseconclusions are of the most important kind.In particular, by demonstrating the existence ofsuccessive adaptations to different successivestates of equilibrium, they place the argumentof design in a new light, and add in no smalldegree to its force. This part of the subject,however, belongs to the geologist, to whom,for the present, we shall leave it.Fourthly. The argument of design as connectedwith the subject of equilibrium abovetreated of, may be considered yet in anotherpoint of view. In this state of equilibrium wehave observed that the properties of bodies, asthey actually exist around us, are all so subduedand passive in their character, that no one predominatesover, or excludes the other. Now,when we reflect that almost all these bodies arecompounds, and when we compare the propertiesof these compounds with the properties of theelements composing them, it is impossible not toinfer, that the properties of the compounds ratherthan those of the elements, were, at their origin,kind; and that in virtue of the general laws in operation, thesenew elements have subsequently combined to form series of newarrangements? Of course this supposition is intended to applyonly to the means adopted by the Deity to affect his purpose.The formation and selection of these new elements must in allinstances be supposed to result immediately from His will andagency.108 CHEMISTRY.the objects contemplated. That is to say ; inorder that the compounds might be perfect, theelements calculated to produce them, were createdessentially such as these compounds mightrequire, without reference to the secondary propertiesof the elements themselves ; which wereleft to be determined as the more general lawsof matter might decide. For instance, the propertiesof hydrogen in water, and of chlorine andsodium in common salt, not being required in theeconomy of nature, the properties of these elementshave not been made compatible with organicexistence ; and the whole attention (if sucha term may be applied to the operations of theDeity) has been directed to the properties of thecompounds, water and salt. Thus, on the onehand, where required, we have the most strikingadaptation of property ; while on the otherwherenot required, this adaptation of propertyhas not been attended to : nor is this true ofwater and salt only, but of almost every othercompound in nature. Nay, what is more, theincongruities of the whole system have, with themost consummate skill, been thrown, as it were,among those properties not required. Hence,the arrangements of nature viewed in this light,not only exhibit novel evidences, but some ofthe most striking evidences of design that wepossess.The subject of the incongruous properties ofVGENERAL ARGUMENTS. 1(JJJbodies is one of great interest. We have seenthat many of the elementary principles are poisonous;and that almost all of them, if liberatedfrom their affinities, and sent abroadin the world, like so many demons let loose,would instantly bring destruction upon thewhole fabric. Now, why should such incompatibleproperties be necessary to the properties \jof the compounds ? Why, for instance, should theincombustible fluid water contain one of the mostcombustible principles in nature ? or the mild andinnocuous common salt be composed of two elements,which, in their separate state, would instantlydestroy life ? Why, do we repeat, are thesedeleterious properties of the elements necessary tothe wholesome condition of the compound ? Whatpart do they perform ; or what property do theycontribute to, or represent ? These are questionsutterly beyond our comprehension, and arelikely always to remain so. That these incompatibleproperties of the elements, however, do,in some way, contribute to the perfection of thecompounds, we cannot doubt ; and the onlygrounds upon which such incompatibility seemsto admit of explanation is, that it results necessarilyfrom those limitations which the Deity hasthought proper to prescribe to his power, and towhich he always most rigidly adheres. Moreover,be the reason what it may, it is evidentthat these arrangements, so immediately callusCHEMISTRY.luted to lead to practical difficulties, have been theresult of choice. For we cannot but believe thatan omnipotent Creator, if he had so willed, couldhave made the elements innocuous, as well asthe compounds ; nay, to our limited understandingthis would have been the easiest and mostnatural mode of proceeding. Why then did hechoose the apparently more difficult course ?Why, to use the language of Paley, but " thathe might let in and thereby exhibit demonstrationsof his wisdom." Throughout nature, theexigences and incongruities necessarily arisingfrom the arrangements we have been considering,have given occasion for the display of the mostastonishing wisdom and power. And instead ofthat jarring and clashing which might have beenexpected from so many conflicting elements, thequalities and quantities of these elementshave, upon the whole, been so wonderfullyadjusted to each other, that they neutralize andbalance each other's evils ; and the generalresult has been, that all have finally settleddown together into that harmonious state ofequilibrium before alluded to, so admirablyadapted for the existence of organic life.Fifthly. We have hitherto confined our attentionto general principles and arrangements ; butthe commonest chemical process may be madeto furnish us with some striking proof of the omnipotenceof the great Creator. Let us for exampleGENERAL ARGUMENTS. 171consider what happens in a simple and familiarinstance of chemical decomposition ; as when asolution of lunar caustic (nitrate of silver) isadded to a solution of common salt. In thiscase, the chlorine of the salt combines with thesilver, and produces a curdy precipitate whichfalls to the bottom ; while the nitric acid combineswith the soda, and forms a soluble saltwhich remains in solution. Now, we showed inaformer chapter that the minutest fragment ofmatter appreciable by our senses, consists of innumerablemolecules. If therefore we suppose asmall quantity, as an ounce, of the lunar caustic,and a proportionate quantity of common salt, to bemixed together ; what countless myriads of molecules,in a portion of time literally inappreciable,must have sought out, and combined eachwith its fellow, in this simple process ! Thehuman mind absolutely recoils from the contemplationof objects so completely beyond itspowers ; for the utmost that we can imagine,must fall almost infinitely short of the reality.Were we, for illustration, to conceive every humanbeing at present in existence, to be collectedtogether into one vast array, and to be all dressedexactly alike, and to perform the same militarymanoeuvre at the same moment ; we should beprobably as far short of the actual numbers ofsimilar molecules, each manoeuvring exactlyalike in the above simple experiment, as a single172 CHEMISTRY.company falls short of our congregated army !Again, to take another familiar illustration, as theworking of a common steam engine ; we areassured that in this simple operation, there aremore self-repulsive molecules of water alwaysconstantly engaged, and conspiring to the sameend, than there are of quadrupeds in existenceupon the whole surface of the globe ! The aboveare designed to illustrate the principles of theargument only : the argument itself, like all thepreceding, is strictly cumulative, and appliesmore or less to every operation in nature.Such is a summary sketch of the wonders developedby chemistry ; and what an idea do theyconvey to us of the wisdom and of the power ofHim who contrived and made the whole! Ofthe capacity of that eternal Mind, who while Hedirects the universe, at the same time takes cognizanceand regulates the movements of everyindividual atom in it ! To whom the inmostnature, and end, and object of every part arefamiliar ; and of whose comprehensive designsthe whole forms but a single link, the antecedentand the consequent to which are mergedalike in infinity !OBJECTIONS TO DESIGN. 173Iii the preceding pages we have pointed outa few of those wonderful arrangements, whichto common understandings appear to indicatedesign, and consequently to prove that sucharrangements are the works of an intelligentand omnipotent Creator. There are howeversome minds so obtuse, or so strangely constitutedthat they either cannot, or will not admit theforce of these arguments, and who consequentlydeny the evidences of design altogether. Theconsideration of this part of the subject properlybelongs to another department, to which thereader is referred for details ; we shall thereforeconfine our observations to a brief recapitulationof the leading objections to design, and offer suchanswers to them as are more immediately furnishedby our own subject.The objectors to the argument of design maybedivided into two classes ; those who denying aFirst Cause, affect to believe that all the beautifuladaptations and arrangements, we see around us,are the result of what they call the " necessaryand eternal laws of nature," and who in fact areAtheists, or rather Pantheists, " to whom thelaws of nature are as gods :" and those who,without denying a First Cause, contend thatdesign cannot be proved ; that the arrangementsof external nature, as they appear to us are littlemore than mental delusions ; and that thingsappear congruous and adapted to us, however174 Chemists .incongruous they may be in reality, simplybecause we have nothing else than our ownintellects with which to compare them.To the first class of objectors, we may thusbriefly reply. The " laws of nature," or ratherour knowledge of them, may be considered as oftwo kinds ; First, laws founded upon reasonor necessity, the phenomena regulated by whichlaws we cannot conceive to be otherwise thanwhat they are ; and laws founded upon experienceonly, among whose dependent and sequentphenomena we can discover no necessaryrelation whatever. Now, few, if any, of thelaws of nature" can be proved to belong to thefirst kind ; we know for instance, no reason ornecessity why hydrogen, carbon, oxygen, andazote must combine to form plants and animals;we only know that they do so combine, but whyand how we know not. Hence, as the Atheistcannot prove his " laws of nature" to have anecessary existence, he has no right to make theassumption. On the other hand, he cannotprove these laws to be eternal; for experience, thesole ground upon which his knowledge of themisfounded, is decidedly hostile to this supposition,as we have in the next place briefly to shew.In reasoning from cause to effect in mattersof experience, two conditions at least are requisite; first the effect must be possible, that is tosay, must not be opposed in any way to the cause,OBJECTIONS TO DESIGN. 175or to the facts of the argument ; and secondly,it must be probable, or in other words, the effectmust accord and harmonize generally with theaccompanying phenomena. But the atheisticaldoctrine of the "eternal laws of nature'' seemsto us to violate one, if not both these conditions.In the first place, as to the facts, or possibilityof the case. We have seen, that a very superficialobservation of the world as it exists, and as itobviously has existed within the limits that itshistory can be traced, is sufficient to show, thatits course at all times has been progressive.That is to say, the world itself before arrivingat its present condition, has not only undergonea progressive series of different states ; but inthese different states, different "laws of nature"have prevailed. In the second place, puttingthe previous history of the world out of the question,and judging solely from what we seearound us, it appears improbable in the highestdegree, that the present variable andjinite order ofthings, should constitute a term or link of an uniformand infinite progression. The notion thereforethat the "laws of nature " have existed as theynow exist from eternity, if not actually impossible,is so exceedingly improbable, that it cannot beadmitted for a moment. Hence as these lawscannot be proved to have a necessary existence,or to have existed from eternity as they now are ;it becomes more than probable that they have had17() CHEMISTRY.a beginning ; and thus the inference of a preexistentLaw-maker, and all its consequencesare at once inevitable.We come now to consider the second class ofobjections to the argument of design; thosenamely, which are founded on the grounds thatdesign cannot be proved ; and that what we calldesign is little more than mental delusion.We admit at once that every thing we know ofexternal nature we know from experience only ;and consequently we admit that what we calldesign in external nature is only very probablydesign ; that is to say, cannot be proved to bey*design by any argument founded on reason ornecessity. But having made this admission, weassert upon the self same grounds, that our parents cannot, by any argument founded onreason or necessity, prove that what we call design,^f is any thing else than design ; that is to say, isnot design. Now until this be proved the forceof their objection may be considered as completelyneutralized ; while the objection itself becomesthus reduced tate condition of a meresophism, that leaves every thing precisely in thesame state as it was at the beginning.Having thus briefly disposed of these objectionsto the argument of design, we finallyrecur with pleasure to that common-sense view ofthe subject which we have already contendedfor, and which we still maintain, viz., that designOBJECTIONS TO DESIGN, ETC. 177is independent of the designer ; in other words,that design is design, whether exemplified in theworks of man or in those of his Maker — a viewwhich has been adopted by the wise and good inall ages — which has all the probabilities on itsside, and which alone, of all others, points out tomanhis true and natural position among createdbeings. When man, indeed, compares himselfwith the universe, his own insignificance appearsquite overwhelming ; but the argument of designassures him that, insignificant as he is, while heinvestigates and approves of the order and harmonyaround him, he is exerting faculties trulygod-like — that his reason though limited in degree,must be immortal in kind, and thus differfrom that of the great Architect of all, only innot being infinite. And hence the proud relationshipin which man justly considers himselfto stand with respect to his Maker ! hence thegrand source of that longing after a future state,where his knowledge will be consummated, andwhere he will no longer "see through a glassdarkly" — notions at once the result and rewardof his reason, and which raise him far aboveall other animals.p. NBOOK II.OF METEOROLOGY I COMPREHENDING A GENERALSKETCH OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE GLOBE ;AND OF THE DISTRIBUTION AND MUTUAL InfluenceOF THE AGENTS AND ELEMENTS OF ChemistryIN THE ECONOMY OF NATURE.In the foregoing chapters, we have endeavouredto convey some idea of the "limits which theDeity has been pleased to prescribe to his ownpower ;" or in other words, of the properties ofthe different subordinate agents and elements ofour globe, and of their mode of operation. Wecome now to consider a little more closely thegeneral distribution of these agents and elements ;and the principles upon which this distributionis regulated, so as to produce all the wonderfulresults which we see constantly going on aroundus in nature.In the present state of the world, as we havealready observed, the general tendency of itsconstituent principles seems to be towards astate of equilibrium or repose. But a very super-introductoryREMARKS. 17.9filial examination of those parts of the earth'scrust to which we can obtain access, is sufficientto convince us that this quietude has notastrays existed ; and consequently that the presentstate of things must have had a beginning. Inshort the phenomena of geology appear to show,that our earth in its progress, has undergone,alternately, periods of comparative quietude likethat in which we now live ; and periods of derangementand convulsion, in which the precedingstates of quietude and their consequenceshave been more or less subverted, and a neworder of things has been induced. To enterfurther into details regarding these changes,however, would be quite foreign to the object ofthe present volume. It is the business of theGeologist to point out the changes which ourearth has evidently undergone before it arrivedat its present condition ; to trace the earth as itwere from a state of chaos through all its metamorphoses,whether sudden and convulsive, orslow and gradual ; and to show that all thesechanges have not resulted from chance, but fromthe agency of an intelligent Being operatingwith some ulterior purpose, and according tocertain laws, to which he had chosen to restricthimself — to demonstrate, in short, that to thesevery convulsions and changes we owe all thatboundless variety of sea and of land, of mountainV180 METEOROLOGY.and plain, of hill and valley ; all that endlessadmixture of rocks, of strata and of soils, soessential to the existence of the present order ofthings ; without which the world would havebeen a mass of crystals, or one dreary monotonousvoid, totally unfitted for the present raceof organized beings ; and particularly as a residencefor man — apparently one great end andobject of creation. Such is the business of thegeologist ; and where his duties terminate, thoseof the Meteorologist may be said to begin. Tohim it belongs more especially to consider theglobe in its present condition of quietude orequilibrium, and the means by which this stateof equilibrium is maintained : in particular, topoint out the influences of heat and of light, andof the energies allied to them ; to study thelaws of the distribution and change of theseimportant agents in the production of climate ;to trace, in short, the effects of these wonderfulprinciples upon the earth, the ocean, and theatmosphere, and all the infinite variety of phenomenadependent upon them.In so wide and varied a field of enquiry it isnot perhaps easy to devise a plan that shall beperfectly unexceptionable. For, as there is noone subject so entirely isolated, as not to bemore or less influenced by the rest, we scarcelyknow which to commence with. After a gooddeal of reflection, w 7 e have adopted that arrange-relationOF SEA TO LAND. 181ment which seems to offer the most natural viewof these subjects ; and at the same time appearsbest calculated to illustrate the design andwisdom of the Great Creator.CHAPTER I.OF THE GENERAL STRUCTURE OF THE EARTH :PARTICULARLY WITH REFERENCE TO THE DistributionOF ITS SURFACE INTO LAND ANDWATER ; AND WITH RESPECT TO ITS ATMOSPHERE.Section I.Of the General Relations of the Sea and the Landto each other.Our earth may be considered as made up ofmaterials naturally existing in the solid, theliquid, and the gaseous state, the absolute proportionsof which to each other we cannot evenconjecture. Of the mean density of the whole,however, we can form some estimate ; andphilosophers have shewn that this density liesbetween five and five and a half, that of waterbeing one. We can also form a tolerably precisenotion of the relative proportions of the surfaceoccupied by the solid and the liquid materials ;and of the pressure and height of the atmospheresurrounding the whole.182 METEOROLOGY.With the general geographical distribution ofland and ocean, we take it for granted that allare more or less acquainted. We shall, therefore,confine our remarks chiefly to their relativeproportions ; which are such, that nearly three-fourthsof the earth's surface may be said to becovered with water, while barely one-fourth, ofcourse, must be occupied by dry land. Of thisdry land, as is well known, by far the greaterpart is confined to the northern hemisphere ;while in the southern hemisphere, the Pacificocean exhibits a nearly continuous surface ofwater, greater than that of the whole dry landof the globe put together. According to theestimate of Humboldt, the dry land in the twohemispheres is in the ratio of three to one ;between the tropics in the two hemispheres asfive to four ; and without the tropics as thirteento one ; the preponderance being in the northernhemisphere.The height of the dry land above the generallevel of the ocean is very various ; but its utmostheight, as compared with the diameter of theearth, is quite trifling ; and it has been shownthat if the whole of the dry land existing wereequally distributed over the bottom of the sea,the quantity of water in the sea is amplysufficient to cover it entirely. Hence " dry landcan be only considered as so much of the roughsurface of our globe as may happen for the timeOF THE OCEAN. 183to be above the level of the waters ; beneathwhich, it may again disappear, as it has done atdifferent previous periods"*The solid portions of our earth are all madeup of various combinations of the elementaryprinciples described in a former chapter. Therelative situations these principles occupy inthe earths structure ; the endless proportions inwhich they exist ; and all the infinite diversity oftheir properties, it is the business of the geologistand of the mineralogist to inquire into and explain: the observations, therefore, which we haveto make on the present part of our subject, willbe chiefly confined to the waters of the ocean,and to the atmosphere.Section II.Of the Ocean.The waters of the ocean are not pure, but contain,as is well known, a variety of salinematters in solution. Indeed, when we reflectupon the immense relative extent and generalcircumstances of the ocean, we may naturallysuppose that its waters will contain more or lessof every existing soluble principle. By far theDe la Biche's Geological Manual, p. 2.184 METEOROLOGY.most abundant principle, however, in sea-water iscommon salt ; which may be said to constitute,in general, nearly two-thirds of the whole salinematter present. The saline matter fluctuatesbetween three or four per cent ; and the specificgravity of the water varies, according to theproportion of the saline ingredients, from about1026 to 1030 ; pure water being supposed to be1000. The late Dr. Market, some years ago,made some interesting experiments on thissubject, and the following are the general conclusionswhich he drew from them : —1 . That the southern ocean contains moresalt than the northern ocean, in the ratioof 1-02919 to 1-02757.2. That the mean specific gravity of seawater,near the equator, is 1-02777 ; or intermediatebetween that of the northern andthat of the southern hemispheres.3. That there is no notable differencein sea-water under different meridians.4. That there is no satisfactory evidencethat the sea at great depths is more saltthan at the surface.5. That the sea, in general, contains moresalt where it is deepest and most remotefrom land ; and that its saltness is alwaysdiminished in the vicinity of large massesof ice.6. That small inland seas, though comoTHE OCEAN. 18-3mutilating with the ocean, are much lesssalt than the ocean.7. That the Mediterranean contains ratherlarger proportions of salt than theocean.*The saltness of the sea, therefore, is considerablyinfluenced, at least at its surface, by theneighbourhood of large rivers, and by permanentaccumulations of ice ; and in this way the inferiorsaltness of small inland seas, particularly in highlatitudes, may in general be explained, as mostof these inland seas are supplied with comparativelylarge quantities of fresh water from therivers flowing into them. On the other hand,the superior saltness of the Mediterranean hasbeen ascribed to the immense evaporation fromits surface ; the consequence principally of itsbeing situated in a warmer climate.The saline contents of the ocean are of immenseimportance in the economy of nature.Such indeed is their importance, that it is doubtfulwhether the present order of things could bemaintained without them. The effects of thesesaline matters will be more particularly pointedout hereafter. In this place we shall onlyremark, that by lowering the freezing point ofwater ; and by diminishing its tendency to giveoff vapour, they perform the most beneficialPhilos. Trans. 1819.186 METEOROLOGY.offices. Another valuable purpose which theyserve may be alluded to here, viz. the greaterpower of buoyancy which they communicate towater; by means of which the waters of theocean are better fitted for the purposes of navigation.Nor are these the only uses of the salinematters ; for there is reason to believe that theycontribute in no small degree to the stability ofthe water ; and that an ocean of fresh water wouldspeedily undergo changes that would probablyrender it incompatible with animal life ; such anocean perhaps would even suffer decomposition,that might seriously interfere with the otherarrangements of nature.Lastly, who will venture to assert that thedistribution of sea and of land, as they now exist,though apparently so disproportionate, is notactually necessary as the world is at presentconstituted ? What would be the result, forinstance, if the Pacific or the Atlantic oceanswere to be converted into continents? Wouldnot the climates of the existing continents, asformerly observed, be completely changed bysuch an addition to the land, and the whole oftheir fertile regions be reduced to arid deserts ?Now, this distribution of sea and of land, sowonderfully adapted as it appears to be to thepresent state of things, depends of course in agreat measure upon the absolute quantity of waterin the world. While on the other hand, theOF THE ATMOSPHERE. 187relative gravity of water as compared with thatof the earth, keeps the ocean within its destinedlimits, notwithstanding its incessant motion.Thus Laplace has shewn that the world wouldhave been constantly liable to have been delugedfrom the slightest causes, had the mean densityof the ocean exceeded that of the earth ! Hencethe adjustment of the quantity of water and ofits density, as compared with that of the earth,afford some of the most marked and beautifulinstances of design.Section III.Of the Atmosphere.That immense body of gaseous matters surroundingour earth, and usually known under thename of the Atmosphere, is essentially composed,as we formerly stated, of two principles, oxygenand azote, in the proportion nearly of onepart of oxygen and four parts of azote. Besidesthese two gases, the atmosphere also containsa small and perhaps a variable quantityof carbonic acid gas, amounting upon an averageto about one part in a thousand of the whole ;and of water in a state of vapour, likewise avariable quantity, (as will be shewn hereafter),but usually fluctuating between one, and one188 METEOROLOGY.and a half per cent. In addition to these, thereare, probably, also other matters constantly presentin the atmosphere ; for as the sea containsa little of every thing that is soluble in water, sothe atmosphere may be conceived to contain alittle of every thing that is capable of assumingthe gaseous form.The atmosphere exerts a pressure or weightupon all parts of the earth's surface, on anaverage equal to about fifteen pounds upon asquare inch ; or in other words, equal in weightto a column of mercury one inch square andthirty inches high. The well-known instrumentthe common Barometer or Weather-glass, consistsof nothing more than such a column of mercury,poised or pressed upwards into a vacuum, by theweight of the atmosphere. With the changesconstantly taking place in the height of such acolumn, every body is familiar, and we shallhave occasion to recur to them hereafter ;at present it is only requisite to observe, thatthese changes are much less remarkable intropical than in temperate climates. Thus, betweenthe tropics the barometer usually variesonly about one-third of an inch ; while in temperateclimates, the changes amount to upwardsof one-tenth of the whole height.The pressure of the atmosphere decreases aswe ascend above the earth's surface ; and forequal ascents, this decrease of density is in whatOF THE ATMOSPHERE. 189is called geometrical progression. Thus, at threemiles in height, the density of the atmosphere isonly one half of what it is at the surface of theearth, or equal to a column of mercury fifteeninches in height ; at six miles, the barometerwould stand at one-fourth of its usual height,or seven and a half inches; at nine miles ofelevation, at three inches and three quarters ;and, at fifteen miles, nearly at one inch only.Hence by far the greater portion of the atmosphereis always within fifteen or twenty miles ofthe earth's surface ; though from various circum \„stances it has been inferred to extend from fortyto forty-five miles in height. This height, however,must be different in different latitudes ; for therotation of the earth upon its axis, and thegreater and more direct influence of the solarheat upon the earth's equatorial regions, willnecessarily cause the atmosphere to be higherthere than in the polar regions ; at the poles,the atmosphere must be lower than over anyother part of the earth's surface. These aremost important circumstances in the economy ofnature, as we shall see hereafter.Much difference of opinion has existed amongphilosophers as to the mode in which thevarious principles entering into the compositionof atmospheric air are associated ; some maintainingthat these principles exist simply in astate of mixture : others considering them as190 METEOROLOGY.chemically united. We formerly stated that allgaseous bodies, when they combine with oneanother, combine with reference to their volumes; that is to say, that one volume of onegas always combines with one, two, or moresimilar volumes of the same, or of another gas,and not with any intermediate fractional part.Now, as atmospheric air is composed essentially ofone volume of oxygen and four volumes of azote,it is evident, whether its elements be in actualunion or not, that it is at least constituted uponstrictly chemical principles ; whence it follows, thatthe composition of the atmosphere has not beenthe result of accident. In this point of view,therefore, atmospheric air may be considered tobe as much a chemical compound as water, orany other similar body ; and instead of viewingthe atmosphere, according to a prevalent notion,as a mere accidental and heterogeneous appendageconnected with the denser matters byno apparent tie, we may fairly rank the atmosphereamong the constituent principles of ourglobe, and as forming a symmetrical part of thegreat harmonious whole.But although atmospheric air has been thusoriginally constituted upon chemical principles,and probably owes to this circumstance, in nosmall degree, its stability ; yet the mode in whichits constituent elements are associated, is verydifferent from that in which the elements ofOF THE ATMOSPHERE. 191compounds in general are associated. Indeedthe constituent elements of atmospheric air donot appear to be combined at all ; but to be onlymixed, or simply diffused through each other,in the same manner that the minute portionsof carbonic acid gas and of vapour are knownto be diffused through the whole atmosphere ;that is to say, according to the laws of the generaldiffusion of gaseous bodies which we endeavouredto explain in a former chapter. To this explanationwe must refer the reader for details. Weshall merely observe here, that the fundamentalprinciple of this explanation consists in theassumption, that the molecules of all bodies inthe gaseous state are self-repulsive (or repulsiveof one another, in preference to others), for thesame reason that in the solid state they areself attractive (or attract one another, in preferenceto others). When different gaseousbodies therefore, are mixed together, they willnot assume a position according to their specificgravities, as they might otherwise be expectedto do ; but the molecules of each gas will beequally diffused throughout the whole spaceoccupied by the mixture. Hence, one directand most important effect of the mixed constitutionof the atmosphere, is its nearly uniformcomposition, at least within the limits attainableby man — a fact that has been confirmed byinnumerable analyses of the air, made in alla'102 METEOROLOGY.parts of the world, both at its surface and at thegreatest heights hitherto reached. Moreover,this constitution of the atmosphere not only originallyproduced such uniformity of composition,but it is the cause constantly operating to preservethat uniformity — the grand conservative principle,as it were, preventing any unequal distributionof the constituent elements of the atmosphere,which would speedily prove fatal to organic life !Were the gaseous principles composing the atmospherein ever so slight a state of union, theycould not readily diffuse themselves througheach other ; and partial accumulations of one orother of them would be constantly taking place ;but as the atmosphere is at present constituted,if a little more oxygen be consumed in one spotthan in another, instantly the deficiency is suppliedfrom the neighbourhood by diffusion, andthe equilibrium is scarcely affected in a sensibledegree. Another curious result of this independentcondition of the gaseous principles of theatmosphere is, that of the whole pressure exerted,each principle exerts its own force accordingto its quantity. Thus, of the thirty inches ofmercury supported by the whole atmosphericpressure, the azote sustains 23 tes inches, andthe oxygen 6 t^b- inches ; while the aqueousvapour sustains only VW inch, and the carbonicacid still less, or only riv inch. Hence it isevident that the fluctuations in the height of theOF THE ATMOSPHERE. 193barometer, amounting to nearly three inchesin our latitude, cannot depend altogether uponthe quantity of aqueous vapour in the atmosphere;for if the whole of this vapour wereannihilated, it would scarcely produce a differencein height of half an inch. Attention isnow drawn to this fact for purposes that willappear in a subsequent chapter.Lastly, had the absolute quantity, or the relativegravity, of the atmosphere been materially differentfrom what they are, the present order ofthings could not have existed. Hence, the samestriking evidences of wise adjustments are displayedin these arrangements of the atmosphere,as in those formerly shewn to exist with respectto the quantity and gravity of the ocean.Before we close the present chapter, let usreflect for a moment upon the great arrangementswe have been considering.Why has the surface of this earth been dividedinto land and sea ? Why have the land and seabeen so adjusted to each other, that their conditionand properties hardly admit of change withoutdestruction to the whole fabric ? Why has theirpresent stability been so wonderfully secured?Again, with respect to the atmosphere ; whyhas there been any atmosphere thrown aroundthis globe ? and why such manifest provisions tosecure its ubiquity and unvarying constitution ?Viewed alone and without reference to organs.o1.0 1 METEOROLOGY.iced beings, all these things appear without anobject. This globe might have revolved aboutthe central luminary — might have occupied itspoint in the universe without any " gatheringtogether of the waters," — without any circumambientair. But the scheme of the great Creatorextended beyond the mere adaptation ofinanimate matter. " Before its foundations werelaid," He had destined this earth to teem withlife, and throughout has displayed his originaldesign of rendering it a fit habitation for livingbeings. For this purpose and acting at the sametime, in strict conformity to those laws, by whichHe had chosen to limit himself, He has, by meansof successive convulsions and changes, so contrivedto mix and blend the different elements,and finally so to arrange the dry land apart fromthe sea ; that, taken as a whole, and with referenceto the present order of things, their relativeproportions will scarcely admit of materialchange. While, to crown his works, and as itwere, the more strongly to evince his design andhis wisdom, He has surrounded the whole withan atmosphere, to preserve the homogeneity ofwhich, its principles have been so associated, asto constitute an exception to his usual operations,and even to the general laws of nature !CHAPTER II.OF HEAT AND LIGHT — THE MODES OF ESTIMATINGTHEIR DEGREE, AND THE WAYS IN WHICH THEYARE PROPAGATED. OF THE GENERAL TemperatureOF THE CELESTIAL REGIONS, AND OF THEEARTH Independently OF THE SUN.Section I.Of Heat and Light, and the Modes of estimatingtheir Degree.Our sensations are a very imperfect and uncertainmeasure of temperature, and when wewish to speak with precision on that subject, itbecomes necessary to have recourse to othermeans of comparison. For the sake of thegeneral reader, we shall, therefore, in the firstplace, briefly describe the principles of the constructionof the Thermometer, the instrument formeasuring heat.All bodies, as we have shown in a formerchapter, become more or less expanded whenthey undergo an increase of temperature. Hencethe relative degrees of expansion of a bodymay be employed as a sort of measure of thedegree of heat ; and most of the thermometers11MJ meteorology.employed, act upon this principle. Thus thecommon thermometer, as is well known, consistsof a portion of some fluid, generally of mercury,enclosed in a small glass ball furnished with ahollow stem, the narrow bore of which communicateswith the general cavity of the ball. Weshall suppose the quantity of the mercury, andthe size of the ball, to be so adjusted to eachother, that when the instrument is placed in iceon the one hand, and in boiling water on theother, the whole expansion of the mercurybetween these two fixed points, shall fall withinthe range of the stem or tube. The points atwhich the mercury stands in the tube, at thefreezing and boiling temperatures are to be accuratelynoted ; and the intermediate space uponthe scale attached to the tube, is to be dividedinto 180 equal parts or degrees ; the freezingpoint is to be marked 32°, and of course, theboiling point 180° above, or 212°. Such is Fahrenheit'sscale, the one employed in this country,and to which the numbers hereafter mentionedrefer. In other countries different scales aremade use of; and in France particularly, whatis termed the centigrade thermometer is generallyadopted. In this thermometer the freezing pointis marked 0° and the boiling point 100°. In otherparts of the continent Reaumur's scale is muchused. In Reaumur's the freezing point, as inthe Centigrade, is 0°, but the boiling point isPROPAGATION OF HEAT AND LIGHT. 197only 80°. These different graduations are easilyconvertible, but it is much to be regretted thatthey exist, as they cause considerable troubleand confusion.The instrument employed for measuring theintensity of light is termed a Photometer ;of such an instrument various forms have beenproposed, but at present they are all very imperfect.Section II.Of the Propagation of Heat and Light.The modes in which heat and light are propagatedfrom one body to another, and throughthe same body, have been already explained,and we need not again enter into details : abrief recital here, however, of the modes inwhich heat and light are propagated, may notbe unacceptable to the general reader.Heat passes from the sun to the earth byradiation ; and again, by the same process,it is freely sent off from the surface of the earthinto the atmosphere. Below the surface of theearth, heat is propagated in all directions throughthe solid matter, by what is called conduction.A third mode in which this important agent isextensively propagated in nature, is by themeans we have termed convection, or the cartesMETEOROLOGY.n/htg process. Convection is confined, of course,to fluids, as water and air. A portion of wateror of air being heated above, or cooled below thesurrounding portions, expands or contracts inmagnitude, and thus becoming specifically lighteror heavier, rises or sinks accordingly ; carryingwith it, the newly acquired temperature, whateverthat temperature may be.Light, at present, is only known to be propagatedby radiation.By bearing in mind these modes of the propagationof heat and light, the general readerwill find no difficulty in understanding whatfollows.Section III.Of the Temperature of the Celestial Regions.From the close and intimate relations betweenheat and light, and from their almost invariableassociation as they exist around us, it seems notvery unreasonable to conclude that these agenciesare generally associated in nature ; and thatwherever one is present, there the other mustbe present also. If this be really the case, theinnumerable fixed stars, considered to be somany suns, must be supposed capable of diffusingheat as well as light throughout theTEMPERATURE OF SPACE. J 99celestial regions ; and consequently there must beacertain degree of temperature common to thewhole. For this reason, and for others that mightbe mentioned, philosophers have not only inferredthe existence of such a common temperatureexisting throughout the celestial regions, independentlyof our sun ; but have even attemptedto determine its degree. Moreover, it is singularthat all the different modes which have been employedto estimate this temperature, concur inshowing that it does not differ much from — 58° ofFahrenheit's scale ; that is to say, about 90° belowthe freezing point of water ; a degree of cold " notgreatly inferior to that at which quicksilver becomessolid, and much superior to some degreesof cold which have been produced artificially"*If such a common temperature really existsthroughout space, or at least in our planetarysystem, it must have no inconsiderable influenceupon the temperature of the planets generally ;and with respect to our own globe in particular,such a common temperature must operate bydiminishing the intensity of the cold around thepoles.Discourse on the Study of Natural Philosophy; p. 157.By Sir J. F. W. Herschel.Section IV.Of the Temperature of the Interior of the Earth.The attention of philosophers has, for some yearspast, been a good deal directed to the internaltemperature of the earth, at great depths, beyondthe influence of the sun or of any otherexternal cause. From the earliest times somevague notions of a central heat seem to have existedamong mankind ; doubtless, arising fromtheir attention being forcibly drawn to the phenomenaof volcanos and hot springs; but it is nottill a comparatively late period that the subjecthas been carefully investigated. It would be quiteforeign to our design to enter here into details uponthis point ; we shall therefore merely state, that thearguments in favour of the probability of a centralheat are — " first, the experiments made inmines, which, notwithstanding their liability toerror from various sources, still seem to show,particularly those made in the rock itself, anincrease of temperature from the surface downwards; — secondly, the existence of thermalsprings, which are not only abundant amongactive and extinct volcanoes, but also amongall varieties of rocks in various parts of theHEAT OF INTERIOR OF THE EARTH. 201world ; — thirdly, the existence of volcanoes themselves,which are distributed over the globe,and present such a general resemblance to eachother that they may be considered as producedby a common cause, and that cause, probably,deep-seated ; — and lastly, the terrestrial temperatureat comparatively small depths, whichdoes not coincide with the mean temperatureof the air above it'*Such is an abstract of the principal argumentswhich have been brought forward in supportof the opinion, that within our earth, even atthe present time, there exists a central heat ofgreat intensity. As corroborative of the sameviews, may be mentioned the evidence derivedfrom the characters of the fossil remains bothof plants and of animals, found in the colder regionsof the world ; which characters are such asto prove beyond a doubt, that these plants andanimals must have existed in a climate muchhotter than that in which their remains are found,and indeed, of equal, if not of superior, heat tothat of the tropical portions of our earth at thistime. Hence it has been inferred, that the temperatureof our earth, formerly much above whatit is now, has been gradually dissipated into thesurrounding planetary regions, and thus helpedto increase the general temperature, aboveDe la Biche's Geological Manual, p. 24, new ed.202 METEOROLOGY.stated, as supposed to exist throughout space.Moreover, the same distinguished philosopher,*to whom we are principally indebted for theseobservations, has attempted to shew that theearth has nearly reached its limit of cooling,particularly near the surface. Near the surfacethe temperature would necessarily decreasemuch more rapidly than in the interior ; whereina globe of the earth's magnitude, the temperaturemight be supposed to remain nearlyunchanged for a very great length of time. Hehas also attempted to shew that the temperatureof the surface is still liable to be influenced,by the gradual escape of heat from the interiorwhich even yet seems to be constantly goingon ; and that the temperature of the surface isthus somewhat higher than it would be if such acentral heat did not exist ; or than if the temperatureof the surface of the earth depended onlyupon the action of the sun. And this brings usto the point at which our subject may be saidproperly to begin, viz. the consideration of thepresent state of the earth's temperature, as liableto be influenced by the presence or absenceof the sun, the great source of heat and of lifeto our system.Before proceeding, we may remark, that thedetails of the subject we have now concluded,1 Baron Fourier.HEAT OF INTERIOR OF THE EARTH. 203fall entirely within the province of the geologist.To him it belongs, as we have already said,not only to trace the wonderful changes whichour globe has undergone in arriving at itspresent condition, but to point out, the beautifuladaptations of organic life and structureto the existing circumstances of its variousepochs. Considered in this point of view,geology is a subject of the highest interestand importance; and, to use the words of aneminent Professor, with which we shall finishthis chapter, " lends a great and unexpected aidto the doctrine of final causes ; for it has notmerely added to the cumulative argument, bythe supply of new and striking instances ofmechanical structure adjusted to a purpose, andthat purpose accomplished ; but it has also provedthat the same pervading active principle manifestingits power in our times, has also manifestedits power in times long anterior to therecords of our existence.But, after all," continues our author, " somemen, seeing nothing but uniformity and continuityin the works of nature, have still contended(with, what I think, a mistaken zealfor the honour of sacred truth) that the argumentfrom final causes proves nothing more than aquiescent intelligence. I feel not the forceof this objection. In geology, however, we canmeet it by another direct argument ; for we not204 METEOROLOGY.only find in our formations organs mechanicallyconstructed, but at different epochs in thehistory of the earth we have great changes ofexternal conditions, and corresponding changesof organic structure ; and all this without theshadow of a proof that one system of thingsgraduates into, or is the necessary and efficientcause, of the other. Yet in all theseinstances of change, the organs, as far as wecan comprehend their use, are exactly thosewhich were best suited to the functions of thebeing. Hence, we not only shew intelligencecontriving means adapted to an end, but atsuccessive times and periods contriving a changeof mechanism adapted to a change in externalconditions. If this be not the operation of aprospective and active intelligence, where arewe to look for it ?" *Address delivered to the Geological Society of London, bythe late President, Professor Sedgwick, 1831.CHAPTER III.OF THE TEMPERATURE OF THE EARTH AT ITS Surface,AS DEPENDENT ON THE SUN.The general temperature of the earth is doubtlessregulated by its situation in the universe, andmore especially by its position with respect tothe sun. To this position, as formerly observed,the properties of its constituent principles have,most obviously, been all adapted with consummatewisdom ; so that, under the circumstances inwhich they are placed, some are solid, someliquid, others gaseous, according to the purposesthey are intended to fulfil in nature.But the heat and light derived from the sunare very unequally distributed over the surfaceof the earth ; and every one is familiar with thefact, that as we recede from the equator towardsthe north or south, the temperature of the earth'ssurface gradually diminishes till we arrive at thepolar regions.Such is the general fact. But the circumstanceswhich conspire to interfere with thisgradual distribution of temperature are so numerousand so influential, that the actual temperatureof a place can be learnt only by observation.2(W METEOROLOGY.Among the circumstances thus more especiallyaffecting the distribution of temperature, maybementioned the nature of the surface, whetherwater or land, — and the situation, whether at agreater or at a less height above the level ofthe ocean. To these may be added the particularconfiguration and geographical relationsof places : such as their aspect to the northor south ; their being sheltered or exposed ;the composition and nature of the soil, such asits colour and state of aggregation, on whichdepend its powers of absorbing and of radiatingheat and light, and of retaining or of partingwith humidity, &c. ; also the proximity or absenceof seas ; the predominancy of certainwinds ; the frequency of clouds, fogs, &c. These,and innumerable other circumstances, many ofwhich will be pointed out in subsequent chapters,contribute to influence the temperatures of particularplaces, and to render them, in fact, asvaried as the places themselves.Nor is difference of place the only cause ofvicissitude of temperature ; every one knowsthat at the same place the temperature is in aconstant state of change. Hence before we canobtain correct notions of the actual temperatureof any given place or period, certain expedientsare necessary which we have in the first placeto consider.Section T.Of Mean Temperature.If, on any given day, we observe the temperatureat the earth's surface, at the commencement ofevery one of the twenty-four hours, we shallfind, as before observed, that at each hour thetemperature is different ; and we naturally enquirewhich of all these temperatures is to bechosen in preference, as the one characteristicof the day and place ? The answer to this questionobviously is ; that temperature, whatever it maybe,which is equidistant from the extremes, or, asit is usually termed, the mean temperature of thewhole. Now this mean temperature may be obtained,nearly, by adding all the results together,and dividing the sum by the number of observations; thus we arrive at the mean temperatureof the day, by adding together the temperaturesobserved at different hours of the day, anddividing the sum by the number of temperatures.In like manner by adding together themean temperatures of every day of a week, orof a month, and dividing the sum by the numberof days, we obtain the mean temperature of theweek or month ; and so on, by similarly treating208 METEOROLOGY.the mean temperatures of the months, or of anynumber of years, we obtain the mean temperatureof the year, at a given place : and it is to beobserved that the greater the number of observationsthe more accurate will be the meanresult.Lastly, it remains to state that the temperaturealways understood by the Meteorologist(except otherwise expressed) is that of the airnear the surface of the earth, as indicated by athermometer effectually protected from radiationand foreign influence of every kind. The temperatureas indicated by a thermometer fully exposedto solar radiation, and which in its turn isallowed to radiate freely in the sun's absence, isaltogether a different thing ; and may be imaginedto coincide very nearly with the actual temperatureof the earth's surface, when similarly exposed.The fluctuations of temperature indicatedunder these circumstances are muchgreater than those of the air above noticed,though it is probable that the mean of the wholeof such observations, if this mean could be accuratelyobtained, would differ little from the meanof those of the air.Section IT.Of the actual Distribution of Temperature overthe Globe. Of Isothermal Lines, 6fc. Climate.The reader is supposed to be acquainted withthe principles of the common division of the surfaceof the globe into five zones or portions,usually denominated the torrid, the two frigid,and the two intermediate temperate zones; andthat generally speaking the poles and theequator present the extremes of temperatureupon the earth's surface. Now, in consideringthe general distribution of temperature over theglobe, the extreme temperatures naturally claimour attention in an especial manner : we shall,therefore, in the first place, proceed to considerthe temperature of the polar and of the equatorialregions.Of the Temperature of the Poles and of thePolar Regions. — The probable mean temperatureof the poles has always been an interestingsubject of meteorological enquiry. It must beconfessed, however, that after all that of lateyears has been done by our enterprizing countrymen,much is yet necessary to enable us toarrive at satisfactory conclusions. Thus it hasbeen shown that in attempting to calculate thetemperature of the North Pole, we shall obtainp. p210 METEOROLOGY.very different results by employing the temperatureoccurring in the old world, and thatobserved in the new world ; the temperature ofthe old world indicating the temperature of thepole to be about 10° ; while the temperature ofthe new world indicates it to be considerablybelow Zero. Hence it has been inferred, thatthere are two points or poles of greatest coldsituated in about the latitude of 80° north, andin longitudes 95° east, and 100° west; and consequentlythat the geographical pole of the globeis not the coldest point of the Arctic hemisphere.Whether this deduction be well founded or notmust be decided by future observation. At presentthe actual temperature of the Polar regionscannot be considered as determined.Although we are thus unable to state withcertainty the temperature of the Polar regions,it may nevertheless be deemed an object ofcuriosity to know the lowest temperatures thathave been noticed. Perhaps the lowest authenticobservations of temperature we possessare those by Captain Parry at Melville Island.Here the thermometer in the ship was oftenobserved as low as — 50° ; and at a distance fromthe ship even as low as 65° under Zero. Webelieve still lower temperatures than these are onrecord, but probably they are not to be relied on.The greatest degree of cold hitherto producedartificially has been 91° under Zero.TEMPERATURE OF THE EQUATOR. 211Of the mean annual Temperature of the Equator.I The mean annual temperature of the equatorial,I like that of the polar regions, is a meteorologicalproblem of considerable interest. Humebold, from a very extensive generalization, fixedj the mean equatorial temperature at 8H°; and| the same temperature has been adopted by< others. Attempts, however, have been recentlymade to shew that this temperature is 3° or 4°j below the truth ; but Humboldt in reply stillmaintains his former opinion. Since at theequator, only about one-sixth of the whole circumferenceof the globe is dry land, the generalequatorial temperature, as actually foundto exist, is perhaps lower than upon theoreticalprinciples it ought to be ; and certainly muchbelow what it ought to be, as deduced from observationsmade on the continent in the neighbourhoodof the equator. Thus the mean temperatureof Pondicherry, in latitude 11° 55' northis at least 85° ; and if from this temperature thatof the equator were deduced according to thecommon principles, the deduction would of coursebe much above the truth. The fact is, as in thecase of the Polar regions, we do not possess therequisite data for determining the equatorialtemperature in a perfectly satisfactory manner.As in speaking of the Polar regions, we noticedthe lowest degree of temperature which hadbeen observed, perhaps while speaking of the212 METEOROLOGY.equatorial regions it may not be deemed irrelevantto notice the highest temperature. Observations,however, of this kind, being principallyfounded on the incidental notices of travellers,are not, in general, much to be relied on ; or areto be considered only as approximations. Thusthe thermometer has been recorded at Benaresto stand at 1 10°, 113°, and even 118°. At SierraLeone, it has been observed, when placed onthe ground to indicate a temperature of 138°.Humboldt also gives many instances of the temperatureof the surface of the earth, amountingto 118°, 120°, and 129°; and on one occasion hefound the temperature of a loose and coarsegranitic sand to amount to upwards of 140°, thethermometer in the sun at the time only indicatinga temperature of about 97°.Of the Temperature of the intermediate Regionsof the Globe. Of Isothermal Lines, §c. Withrespect to the temperatures of those parts of theearth between the poles and the equator, it mayberemarked, that, except for reference only,the old division, before mentioned, of the earth'ssurface into zones is now almost entirely supersededby the more precise and natural arrangement,termed the Isothermal arrangement. Accordingto this arrangement, all the places uponthe globe having the same annual mean temperatureare classed together ; and lines drawn upona map through such a series of places, have beenISOTHERMAL LINES. 213termed Isothermal lines, or lines of equal temperature.As might be expected from what hasbeen already stated, the courses of these linesare by no means regular. Thus, suppose twotravellers set out, the one from London and theother from Paris, and each visit all the places inthe northern hemisphere in which the mean annualtemperatures are the same as in these twocities. It will be found that the lines of theirroutes, or the isothermal lines of these two cities,will not only not follow the parallels of their latitude,but that they will not be parallel to eachother ; and the same may be said to be the casewith any other two places upon the globe.Hence, as the isothermal lines are as numerousas the places, and as diversified as numerous,geographers have grouped them intobands or zones. ■ Thus Humboldt (to whomwe owe most that has been done on this subject)has divided the northern hemisphere into thefollowing six isothermal bands or zones, viz. :1. The zone of mean annual temperature ranging from 32° to 41°.2. from 41° to 50°.3. from 50° to 59°.4. - - - from 59° to 68°.5. . - - from 68° to 77°.6. . from 77° upwards.The tables given in the appendix contain ageneral view of Humboldt's results, Fromthese and from other data the approximate214 METEOROLOGY.courses of the different isothermal lines havebeen traced on the accompanying map; whichwill convey to the reader a much more distinctnotion of their nature than can be done bywords.We shall therefore content ourselveswith briefly pointing out the approximate courseof the most interesting of these lines, viz. theIsothermal line of 32°.If we begin to trace this important linefrom the eastern parts of Siberia in longitude130° east, we shall find that in this meridian itcommences nearly in the latitude of 59° north ;whence it makes a gradual bend northwards,and crosses the parallel of 60°, nearly in longitude90°. From this point it still advances tothe northward, and crossing the arctic circlein longitude 45° east, arrives at its most northernextremity in about latitude 67|°, longitude 10°east. From this its most northerly limit ourline takes a gradual sweep towards the south,recrossed the arctic circle in longitude 15° west,and passing through the north-west of Iceland, idivides the parallel of 60° in longitude 42° west.From this spot it proceeds southwards to the]latitude of 54°, a little to the north of Tab!Bay, in Labrador; gradually declining in itscourse till it arrives at longitude 100° west, inthe central parts of the new continent. Hencethe Isothermal line of 32°, ranges through a spaceof 14° or 15° of latitude ; while its western entreISOTHERAL AND Isochronal LINES. 215city, in the central parts of America, is 5° or6° nearer the equator than its eastern extremityin Siberia — a circumstance strikingly illustrativeof the greater cold of the new continent in thesame parallel of latitude. The other Isothermallines are represented approximately on the map,and do not require to be more minutely described.The most remarkable circumstance connectedwith them is, that as they approach the equatorthey gradually become less convex towards thenorth, so that the Isothermal line of 77° differsbut little from a strait line, coincident with thetropic of cancer.In the arrangement above described the meantemperatures of the whole year are supposed tobe classed together; but it is obvious that thesame principle may be applied to any portion ofthe year, as the extreme winter and summertemperatures. Such classifications are often,as we shall presently see, of great importance inenabling us to estimate the characters of a particularcountry. Thus, lines drawn throughplaces having the same summer and the samewinter temperatures, are denominated SutherlandIsochronal lines ; while lines drawn throughplaces having other common temperatures, receiveother appropriate names.After these general remarks, we proceed togive a summary sketch of the actual distributionof temperature over the northern hemisphere,210 METEOROLOGY.which we shall subjoin in the words of Humboldt.The whole of Europe," says this distinguishedphilosopher, " compared with the easternparts of America and Asia has an insular climate; and upon the same Isothermal line thesummers become warmer, and the winters colder,as we advance from the meridian of Mont Blanctowards the east or the west. Europe may beconsidered as the western prolongation of the oldcontinent ; and the western parts of all continentsare not only warmer at equal latitudes than theeastern parts ; but even in the zones of equalannual temperature, the winters are more rigorous,and the summers hotter on the easterncoasts than on the western coasts of the two continents.The northern part of China, like theAtlantic region of the United States, exhibitsseasons strongly contrasted ; while the coasts ofNew California and the embouchure of the Columbiahave winters and summers almost equallytemperate. The meteorological constitution ofthose countries in the north-west resembles thatof Europe as far as 50° or 52° of latitude. Incomparing the two systems of climates, the concaveand the convex summits of the sameIsothermal lines, we find at New York thesummer of Rome and the winter of Copenhagen ;at Quebec, the summer of Paris and the winterof St. Petersburg!. At Pekin, also, where theTEMPERATURE OF THE N. AND S. HEMISPHERES. 217mean temperature of the year is that of thecoasts of Brittany, the scorching heats of summerare greater than at Cairo, and the wintersare as rigorous as at Psal. So also the samesummer temperature prevails at Moscow in thecentre of Russia, as towards the mouths of theLoire, notwithstanding a difference of 11° oflatitude ; a fact that strikingly illustrates the effectsof the earth's radiation on a vast continentdeprived of mountains. This analogy betweenthe eastern coasts of Asia and America sufficientlyproves," continues Humboldt, " that theinequalities of the seasons depend on the prolongationand enlargement of continents towardsthe pole ; on the size of seas in relation to theircoasts ; and on the frequency of the north-westwinds, and not on the proximity of some plateauor elevation of the adjacent lands. The greattable lands of Asia do not stretch beyond 52° oflatitude ; and in the interior of the new continent,all the immense basin bounded by theAllegheny range, and the rocky mountains, isnot more than from 656 to 920 feet above thelevel of the ocean."The following remarks apply to the temperatureof the southern hemisphere.The general temperatures of the northern andof the southern hemispheres are understood todiffer very considerably. This difference, however,does not depend upon any material diffMETEOROLOGY.terence in the proportion of heat and lightderived from the sun, as will be presently shewn ;but on the very unequal distribution of seaand of land in the two hemispheres. The smallquantity of land in the southern hemispherecontributes not only to equalize the seasons, butalso to diminish the annual temperature of thatpart of the globe ; and hence the Polar ice inthe southern hemisphere advances more towardsthe equator than in the northern hemisphere,particularly where the Antarctic Ocean is freefrom land.Humboldt has shewn, that near the equator,and indeed so far south as 40° or 50°, the correspondentIsothermal lines are in both hemispheresalmost equally distant from the poles ;and that, in considering only the transatlanticclimates between 70° and 80° of west longitude,the mean temperatures of the year, under correspondinggeographic parallels, are even greaterin the southern than in the northern hemisphere.It is the division of heat, therefore, between thedifferent seasons of the year, rather than theabsolute amount of heat during the whole year,that gives a particular character to southernclimates, and approximates them generally tothe character of insular climates. Thus, in thesouthern hemisphere, and on the Isothermallines of 46*4° and 50° we find summers which, inour hemisphere, belong only to the IsothermalCLIMATE. 219lines of 35-6° and 40°. The mean temperature isnot precisely known beyond 51° of south latitude ;yet there is no reason to infer that the Isothermalline of 32° is much further from the south pole,than in the opposite hemisphere, the similarline is from the north pole ; and some circumstancesat first sight appear to shew that theIsothermal line of 32° is even nearer to the southpole than it is to the north pole ; though thesecircumstances are probably deceptive. Withrespect to the temperature of the south poleitself, like that of the north pole, we have nomeans of forming an accurate estimate.Such is a summary account of the generaldistribution of temperature over the northernand southern hemispheres. Now amidst theinfinite changes every where going on, there isnevertheless at the same place a certain averagestate of things which taken together, constitutewhat is called the climate of the place. Ofclimate, undoubtedly, temperature is the mostimportant ingredient. But the circumstances,besides mere temperature, which enter into theformation of climate, are so numerous and diversified,and their operation, in consequence, is socomplicated, that it becomes exceedingly difficultto unravel and display them in a satisfactorymanner. The constituents of climate, however,appear to be most naturally divided into220 METEOROLOGY.two great sections; viz., those of a primary kinddepending upon the globular Sign re of the earth;upon its motion in its orbit, and upon its axis : andthose of a secondary, or subsidiary kind, moreimmediately connected with the globe itself anddepending upon the nature of its surface, as composedof land or vater ; or, as connected tvith itsatmosphere. Under these two points of view, wepurpose to consider the subject of Climate, inthe following chapters.CHAPTER IV.OF THE PRIMARY CONSTITUENTS OF CLIMATE I OR,OF THE TEMPERATURE OF THE EARTH, AS DependentON ITS GLOBULAR FORM ; AND ON ITSANNUAL AND DIURNAL MOTIONS.The distance of the earth from the sun is such,that the solar rays may be supposed to arriveI at the earth's surface in a state of parallelism.Now, when parallel rays fall upon a globe, it isobvious that any number of such rays fallingperpendicularly, as at the equator of our earth,will occupy a very different portion of the surfaceof the globe, from what an equal number ofthe same rays will occupy where they fallobliquely, as in our polar regions. Hence, aswe recede from the equator towards each pole,PRIMARY CONSTITUENTS OF CLIMATE. 221heat and light are diffused over gradually increasingportions of the earth's surface, and thusthe intensity of both decreases in a like proportion.The exact law of such decrease is wellknown to mathematicians, but need not be hererepeated. For our present purpose it is sufficientto observe, that among the natural causesaffecting the distribution of heat and light indifferentlatitudes, the globular figure of theearth is the principal.The second great natural cause of the unequaldistribution of heat and light over the earth, isthe obliquity of the earth's motion in its orbitwith respect to the plane of its equator. Fromthis obliquity it happens that, during the annualrevolution of the earth round the sun, every partof its surface, between the latitudes of 232° northand south from the equator, is in turn exposed tothe perpendicular influence of the sun. To thisoblique motion of the earth in its orbit we owethe endless variations and vicissitudes of seasonsin different latitudes.There is also another circumstance connectedwith the earth's motion in its orbit, which, aspartaking of the character of a primary cause,may here be briefly noticed. The earth's orbitis not a circle, but an ellipse, of which the sunoccupies one of the foci. Now, it has beenso arranged, that in the middle of our winter,the earth is in that part of its orbit which isw222 METEOROLOGY.nearest to the sun. The earth, therefore, is atChristmas actually about three millions of milesnearer to the sun than at Midsummer. Hence itmight be inferred that the temperature of thesouthern hemisphere, which during our winter isdirectly exposed to the sun, would be affectedby this greater proximity. Such, however, is notthe case ; for this greater proximity to the sunis almost exactly counterbalanced by the swiftermotion of the earth along this part of its orbit.The eccentricity of the earth's orbit, therefore,has little or no influence on its temperature asat first sight might be supposed.*The third great natural cause affecting thedistribution of heat and light over the earthis the earth's revolution on its axis. To thisOr, perhaps, to quote the more precise explanation of SirJ. Herschel, " The momentary supply of heat received by theearth from the sun varies in the exact proportion of the angularvelocity, that is of the momentary increase of longitude. Hencethe greater proximity of the sun in the winter is exactly compensatedfor by the earth's more rapid motion, and thus an equilibriumof heat is, as it were, maintained. Were it not for this,the eccentricity of the orbit would materially influence thetransition of the seasons ; and the effect would be to exaggeratethe difference of summer and winter in the southern hemisphere,and to moderate it in the northern ; thus producing a more violentalternation of climate in the one hemisphere, and an approachto perpetual spring in the other. As it is, however, no suchinequality subsists, but an equal and impartial distribution ofheat and light is accorded to both." Treatise on Astronomy,p. 198 (Lardner's Cyclopaedia).PRIMARY CONSTITUENTS OF CLIMATE. 22.3revolving motion we owe the innumerable minorvicissitudes of temperature, and of light andshade, daily and hourly experienced throughout Vthe world.Such are the three great natural causes whichregulate the distribution of heat and light overour globe. They may be considered as thenecessary results of more general laws to whichthe Great Author of nature has chosen to restricthimself, and to which, as usual, He most rigidlyadheres. Why, among the numerous possiblemeans by which heat and light might havebeen, and in other instances, are distributedfrom a central sun over a distant planet, theseregulating causes have been selected for ourearth, is absolutely unknown to us. That thisselection has been made with some ulteriorview we cannot hesitate to believe ; and onesuch view or purpose may have been to demonstrateto us His wisdom and His power, by themethods chosen for obviating the difficultiesnecessarily resulting from these primary arrangements.In other planets, where other primaryarrangements for the distribution of heat andlight have been adopted, there are probablyother modes of obviating the difficulties arisingfrom them. Of such arrangements we can formno conception ; but to the inhabitants of theseplanets, they are doubtless an equal evidence of Wthe wisdom and the power of the Deity.2t>4CHAPTER V.OF THE SECONDARY OR SUBSIDIARY CONSTITUENTSOF climate: COMPREHENDING A SKETCH OFTHOSE CIRCUMSTANCES CAPABLE OF INFLUENCINGCLIMATE WHICH ARE MORE IMMEDIATELY ConnectedWITH THE SURFACE OF THE GLOBE, ASCONSISTING OF LAND OR WATER ; OR WHICH ARECONNECTED WITH THE ATMOSPHERE.In the preceding chapter we have alluded to thedifficulties or exigences necessarily arising fromthe modes in which heat and light are distributedover our globe ; and of these, beforewe proceed, it may be proper to specify some ofthe most striking.Had the heat and light derived from the sun tothe earth not been in any way modified, the equatorialand the polar regions would have been alikeinaccessible to organic life. The heat withinthe tropics and the cold towards the poles,would both have been destructive ; while theintermediate regions would have been exposedto a constant succession of violent and suddenalternations of temperature, that would haverendered the present state of things no lessan impossibility. In order, therefore, to renderSECONDARY CONSTITUENTS OF CLIMATE. 225this earth an appropriate dwelling-place for suchbeings as at present occupy its surface, it wasnecessary that these extremes and sudden vicissitudesof temperature should be in some waydiminished and alleviated. Accordingly theseobjects have been effected with the most consummatewisdom. Indeed, some of the most splendidinstances of design in nature are offeredby those subsidiary arrangements, by which thedifficulties necessarily arising from the primaryarrangements are obviated or mitigated; andby which the greater portion of the earth'ssurface has been made accessible to organicbeings of the same general character. Thesesubsidiary arrangements it will be our businessto explain in the present chapter.The secondary or subsidiary constituents ofclimate naturally divide themselves into twogreat sections; viz., those connected ivith the surfaceof the globe, as composed of land or water ;and those connected with the atmosphere.In the following sketch of these constituents ofclimate we have endeavoured as usual to elucidateprinciples rather than to enter into details ;and, as far as is compatible with a general andpopular view, have attempted to point out themodes in which the laws of light and heat, describedin the first Book, operate, so as to producethe phenomena of climate.I22() METEOROLOGYSection I.Of the secondary Constituents of Climate, immediatelyconnected with the Surface of the Globe;and depending on the Nature of that Surfaceas composed of hand or Water.In attempting to illustrate the operation of thelaws of heat and light in the formation of climate,we shall follow the order nearly in which theselaws were discussed in the previous chapters ;that is to say, we shall first consider the influenceof heat and light as depending on theirlatent and decomposed forms ; and afterwardstheir influence as depending on their radiation,conduction, and convection.In the prosecution of this difficult enquiry,the first circumstance which naturally claimsour attention, is the absolute quantity of heatand light derived from the sun to the earth.1. Of the Proportion of Solar Heat and Lightthat actually arrives at the Surface of the Earth.Of the absolute quantity of heat and light derivedfrom the sun to our globe we have nomeans of forming an exact estimate. M. Pouillethas attempted to show that the amount of heatannually received by the earth from the sun, isSECONDARY CONSTITUENTS OF CLIMATE. 227equal to that which would be required to melt astratum of ice nearly forty-six feet thick, andcovering its whole surface.* This estimate,however, is to be viewed only as a rude approximation.The difficulty lies not only in the impracticabilityof forming precise notions of theheat and light, which actually arrive at any givenplace in a given time ; but in the utter impossibilityof forming even a conjecture of thoseportions, which become latent or are otherwiselost in the passage of the solar rays through theatmosphere. The following observations willgive some idea of the absolute quantity of lightwhich reaches the earth ; but it is proper to apprizethe reader, that the results stated are to beconsidered as liable to much uncertainty. Nor dowe know whether they are equally applicable toheat, which, though it obeys laws somewhatanalogous to those of light, may neverthelesshave its own peculiar laws.A vertical ray of light, in its passage throughthe clearest air, has been calculated to lose atleast a fifth part of its intensity before it reachesthe earths surface. From this cause, and fromthe actual condition of the atmosphere, it hasbeen estimated that under the most favourablecircumstances, of a thousand rays ema-Elemens de Physique experimental et de Meteorologie,torn. ii. p. 704.228 METEOROLOGY.eating from the sun, only 378 on a medium,can penetrate to the surface of the earth atM the equator, 228 at the latitude of 45°, and 110at the poles; while in cloudy weather theseseveral proportions are a great deal less.*At present, our attention is solely directed tothose portions of heat and light which thus maketheir way to the earth's surface. On thoseportions retained in the atmosphere we shalloffer a few remarks hereafter.2. Of the Distribution of Heat and Light overthe Earth's Surface in the latent and decomposedForms. The distribution of heat and light in thelatent state over the surface of the globe, probablyfollows laws nearly similar to those of thedistribution of sensible heat and light formerlymentioned ; that is to say, the quantity latent, likethe quantity sensible, diminishes from the equatortoward the poles. On this subject, however,we want the necessary data, even for forming anopinion, much less for determining the amount andthe exact law of distribution ; all of which mustbe left for future enquirers. But of the infiniteimportance of the latency of heat, in the economyof nature, the following brief remarks will serveto convey some notion.Let us take the familiar instance of water,Article Climate in the Encyclopaedia Britannica.DISTRIBUTION OF LATENT HEAT, ETC. 229than by which important fluid, the influence ofthe latency of heat cannot perhaps be morestrikingly exemplified. We formerly shewedthat the temperature of water in becoming solidon the one hand, and gaseous on the other,makes, as it were, a pause; and that thesechanges never take place abruptly. The consequenceof this arrangement is, that ice andvapour are formed slowly and gradually, andas slowly and gradually again become water ;while sudden transitions from one state to theother are thus entirely prevented. Were it notfor this beautiful provision, we should be constantlyliable to inundations, and other inconveniencies,that would absolutely have renderedthe world uninhabitable. It is impossible, therefore,to reflect upon the arrangement itself, orupon the means by which it has been effected,without being impressed with the most profoundadmiration, not only of the wisdom of the GreatDesigner of the whole, but of his goodness andbenevolence.The distribution of heat and light in thedecomposed forms, like the other conditionsof these great principles, decreases from theequator towards the poles. We formerly alludedto the opinion that heat, whatever it mayconsist of besides, appears occasionally to beconvertible into the electric and magnetic energies.This conversion, under certain METEOROLOGY.stances, may be true of sensible heat ; but heat,in the latent or combined form, is perhaps mostliable to be so converted. Without pretendingto offer any opinion, one way or the other, onthis view of the nature of heat, we shall, nevertheless,adopt it for the sake of convenience,and shall, therefore, next consider the subjectOf the General Distribution of Electricityand Magnetism over the Earth. The recentdiscoveries on the connexion of electricityand magnetism, formerly described, have thrownmuch light on the distribution of these importantagencies over the globe ; and the presentextent of our knowledge regarding them will beunderstood by the general reader from the followingsummary.Every one is familiar with the ordinary phenomenaof a magnetic needle freely suspended,and with its tendency to assume a positionmore or less approaching to parallelism to theearth's axis ; that is to say, that all over theworld it points nearly north and south. Mostpersons, probably, are also acquainted withthe phenomenon termed the clip or inclinationof the magnetic needle : thus, in the latitudeof London, a needle exactly poised and freelysuspended, instead of assuming a horizontalY position, will settle at an angle of 70°, the northpole being downwards. If we carry such aneedle southwards, towards the equator, weDISTRIBUTION OF ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM. 231observe that the dip gradually diminishes ; tillat a certain point, nearly coinciding with theearth's equator, it has no dip at all, but assumesa perfectly horizontal position. As we still proceedtowards the south, the dip again makes itsappearance, but in an opposite direction, thesouth pole being now next the earth's surface.To understand the reason of this dip of themagnetic needle and of its general direction,we have only to consider that the earth itself isa magnet, the poles of which are situated beneathits surface. The directive property ofthe needle is owing to these poles ; and whenthe needle is on the north side of the equator,the north pole of the earth having the greatesteffect, the needle is attracted downwards,towards the north pole ; hence, exactly overthe pole the needle would be vertical. Similarphenomena happen in the southern hemisphere;but here the south pole predominates, and, ofcourse, depresses the corresponding pole of theneedle ; while, at the magnetic equator, fromthe equal action of both poles, the needle willassume an exactly horizontal position. It mayberemarked, that neither the magnetic poles \ ynor the magnetic equator coincide exactly withthose of the earth ; and that this non-coincidenceis owing to, or rather constitutes, what is termedthe variation of the needle ; which is not onlydifferent in different parts of the world, but232 METEOROLOGY.appears to be liable to periodical differences inthe same place, at present not well understood.Such are the principal phenomena of themagnetic needle as demonstrative of the earth'smagnetism, and which we shall now attempt toillustrate a little further.We have mentioned, that the earth may beconsidered as a great magnet. Now, we haveformerly shewn that when a magnetic needle isin its natural position of north and south, thereexist electrical currents in planes at right anglesto the needle, descending on its east side, passingunder it from east to west, and ascending onits west side. Hence, we must suppose currentsof electricity to circulate within the earth, moreespecially near its surface, and to be constantlypassing from east to west, in planes parallelto the magnetic equator ; which electrical currents,if such can be demonstrated to exist, willin their turn completely account for the magneticdirective property of the earth. The nextquestion is, therefore, how far we are justifiedin assuming the existence of such electric currentswithin the earth ?We have already alluded to the opinion thatheat occasionally passes into the electric andmagnetic energies ; an opinion which someconsider to derive much probability from thephenomena of what has been termed thermo-electricity; that is to say, electricity (and mag-distributionOF ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM. 233netism) developed by the unequal distribution \ yof heat through bodies. Now, whether the phenomenaof thermo-electricity actually dependon the decomposition of heat, latent or sensible,or upon any other cause, is of little importance ;the phenomena themselves are well established,and they seem to account, in the most satisfactorymanner, for the general distribution ofelectricity and magnetism over the earth. Theexplanation is this : the earth during its diurnalmotion on its axis from west to east, has itssurface successively exposed to the solar raysin an opposite direction, or from east to west.The surface of the earth, therefore, particularlybetween the tropics, will be heated and cooled insuccession, from east to west, and currents ofelectricity, on thermo-electric principles, will atthe same time be established in the same direction: now these currents once established fromeast to west, will, of course, give occasion to themagnetism of the earth from north to south.Hence the magnetic directive power of theearth, in a direction nearly parallel with its axis yis derived from the thermo-electric currents,induced in its equatorial regions by the unequaldistribution of heat there present, and dependingprincipally on its diurnal motion.These recent and beautiful discoveries shew, inthe most striking manner, that the operations ofnature are more extraordinary, and indicate more234 METEOROLOGY.of simplicity and wisdom of design in proportionas they are better understood. By what simpleexpedients, when known, are those wonderfulphenomena of the earths electricity and magnetismproduced, which formerly appeared soanomalous and perplexing ! And what encouragementdo these discoveries hold out to us,with respect to future discoveries, that may throwstill further light upon the operations of theGreat Architect of the universe.Of the Distribution of Light in the decomposedForm over the Globe. Every one is familiarwith the general fact, that the most splendidexhibitions of colours of every description aredisplayed in the warmer climates ; and that thetints of natural objects, generally speaking, becomemore sad and faded as we approach thecolder regions, till they merge into the white ofthe polar snows. Most persons, also, are awareof the well known circumstances attending thetotal abstraction of light from plants and animals,and that they thus become more or less whiteor etiolated. Hence, we need scarcely do morethan remind the reader, of what must be alreadyfamiliar to him, viz., that the decided colours oftropical productions of every kind, whether weconsider the gaudy plumage of the birds, orthe variegated adornment of the fishes andinsects, &c, are so striking, as to be quite characteristicof these productions. In the higherDISTRIBUTION OF COLOURS. '235latitudes also, where the contrast between thesummer and winter seasons is very great, thecolours of some animals vary with the seasons ;being in the summer generally of some dark hue,but in the winter nearly white ; while stillfurther, in the polar regions all is more or lesswhite, and the natural covering of the earth,the snow, is the whitest body in nature. Puttingout of sight the great importance of the coloursof objects, which will fall more naturally to bespokenof hereafter ; it may be remarked here,that colours have usually been considered asoffering to us one of the most striking instancesof the benevolence of the Deity. Colours areuniversally agreeable to mankind ; and the mostincurious and ignorant are attracted by, anddelighted with, showy exhibitions of them.Now, all this pleasure is the gratuitous gift ofthe Creator, and places his benevolence in thestrongest possible point of view. There was noreason why man should have distinguished co V/lours at all, much less have been delighted withthem : but what is the fact ? not only are wegifted with organs exquisitely sensible to thebeauty of colours; but, as if solely to gratifythis feeling, the whole of nature, from the highestto the lowest of her productions, forms one gorgeouslycoloured picture, in which every possibletint is contrasted or associated in everypossible manner. Is there a human being who236 METEOROLOGY.can witness the splendid colouring of the atmosphereabove him by the setting sun ; whocan witness the beauty and endless variety oftint displayed by every object of the landscapearound him, down to the minutest insect or floweror pebble at his feet; who is conscious of thepleasure he derives from these objects, and whoreflects that this pleasure was not necessaryto his existence, and might have been withheld ?Is there, we ask, a human being who dulyconsiders all these things, and who will dareto assert that the Being who made them allisnot benevolent ?3. Of the Lais of Absorption, Radiation, andReflection of Heat and Light. — These laws asapplied to the earth generally, are at presentbut very imperfectly understood. The followingremarks will serve to convey some idea of thelittle we know on the subject.The reader will bear in mind what was formerlystated, that the absorbing power of bodieswith respect to heat (and perhaps light also) isdirectly as their radiating power, and inversely astheir reflecting power. Such is the generalopinion ; and, as far as solar heat and light areconcerned, this opinion appears to be wellfounded ; but we shall see presently that thereare strong reasons for suspecting that the radiatingpower does not always follow the sameABSORPTION, ETC. OF HEAT AND LIGHT. 237law as the absorbing power. In the meantime,however, we shall proceed to state whathas been advanced on these points.Mr. Daniell has attempted to show that theabsorption and radiation of solar heat increaseas we proceed from the equator towardthe poles. Thus, in a tropical climate, andunder a vertical sun, the greatest extent of thedifference between two thermometers, the onecovered with black wool, and exposed to thedirect rays of the sun, in order that it may absorbto the utmost the incident heat, and theother, uncovered in the shade, is no more thanabout 47°; while two thermometers, similarlycircumstanced, in the middle of summer, inLondon, give a difference of 65°; and in theArctic regions the difference often amounts to90° at least : so that in the Arctic regions there istwice as much heat and light absorbed undersimilar circumstances, as there is in the tropicalregions. The same gentleman has also attemptedto show (what might have been inferred indeedfrom the assumed relation between the absorptionand radiation of heat and light above mentioned),that the radiation of heat from the earth'ssurface obeys similar laws ; that is to say, thatthe quantity radiated from the earth increasesfrom the equator toward the poles. Laws somewhatanalogous, and which, when they arebetter understood, will probably throw much238 METEOROLOGY.information upon these phenomena, seem to holdwith respect to light. Thus we formerly mentionedthat when a ray of light falls upon fluids, transparentbodies, or metals, the quantity reflectedincreases with the angle of incidence reckonedfrom the perpendicular ; while the quantity sobbed of course decreases in the same proportion: but that on the contrary when a ray fallsupon white opake bodies, the quantity reflecteddecreases as the angle of incidence increases;while, of course, the quantity absorbed, increasesin the like proportion. Hence if heatfollows the same law, it is evident that thequantity of heat absorbed by the earth fromthe solar rays, must increase from the equatortowards the poles ; that is to say, as the angle oftheir incidence increases, as Mr. Daniell hasattempted to show. It is proper, however, toobserve that Mr. Daniell's views have been calledin question, and that some late observations madein high latitudes do not entirely corroboratethem.* We have alluded to the subject merelyWe allude here to the observations made in those regions,and given in the appendix to Captain Franklin's Second Journey,by Dr. Richardson, Captain Back, and Lieutenant Kendal. Inthese observations Dr. R. states that the radiation was muchstronger in the spring months, when the ground was covered withsnow, than in the summer months, when the altitude of the sunwas greatest. Dr. R. ascribes this greater radiation to thegreater clearness of the air at these seasons, but were there noother reasons ?ABSORPTION, ETC. OF HEAT AND LIGHT. 239with the view of drawing the attention of Meteorologiststo it as one of great interest and curiosity,and as one by no means at presentunderstood. There is every reason to believe thatthe absorption (and perhaps the radiation) ofheat and light, under some of its modifications,are much influenced by polarization, and consequentlyby certain angles of incidence andreflection ; and that these circumstances, in consequence,have much to do with the distributionof heat and light, particularly in the higherlatitudes, where they may exert no small influenceupon organized beings. The above observationsseem to point to the existence ofcertain general laws, which no doubt hereafterwill be elucidated.In noticing the influence of different colourson the absorption and reflection of heat andlight, we stated that black and dark colours elfgenerally absorb most and reflect least ; and viceversa,that white and light colours, reflect mostand absorb least; and we are now come toillustrate this interesting subject, and to considerthe following questions. — Why does whitenessprevail in the Polar regions ? Why, for instance,is snow white? On the contrary, why are allsorts of dark and decided colours met with inthe tropical climates, except whiteness, which .is comparatively rare ? Might not snow have rbeen black instead of white ; which was just240 METEOROLOGY.as likely if its colour had been the result ofaccident? or might not whiteness have beenpredominant under the equator? Perhaps thebest mode of answering these questions, and ofplacing the subject in a striking view, is toexamine what would have been the consequence,if whiteness had prevailed under the equator, andblackness at the poles.As heat and light are supposed to obey nearlythe same laws, as far as absorption, radiation,and reflection are concerned, it is obvious that ifwhite had prevailed in the tropical climates,almost all the solar heat and light, instead ofbeing absorbed, would have been reflected.The consequence of this reflection would havebeen, that the accumulation of heat and theglare of light in the lower regions of the atmosphere,near the surface of the earth, would havebeen intolerable, and would have rendered theseregions quite uninhabitable, at least by the presentrace of beings. The surface of the earth, also,though it would have been heated slowly, wouldhave been overheated in time ; and at lengthwould probably have become so very hot, fromits comparatively low radiating powers, that theheat could not have been borne. As it is, theheat and light of the sun are absorbed readilyand as freely given off again by radiation ; orperhaps the heat, like the light, is decomposed ;and thus the whole is preserved in that compara-absorption,ETC. OF HEAT AND LIGHT. 241lively moderate and nicely balanced state, whichrenders even the hottest parts of the earth inhabitable.On the other hand let ns consider for amoment what would have been the consequencesif snow had been black, or in otherwords, if blackness had prevailed in the Polarregions. In this case, all the little light andheat that reach them would have been absorbed,and the effect would have been darkness, moreor less complete. From the rapid melting alsoof the snow on the least exposure to heat andlight, we should have been constantly liableto inundations. Thus the whole of the Polarregions of the earth would have been one darkand dreary void, inaccessible to organic life.But by the present arrangement, all theseconsequences are obviated. The white snowabsorbs a certain portion of light and of heat(by a beautiful provision more as the angle ofincidence increases?) while so much light isreflected as is useful, and no more.* Thus theThe reader will observe that, under ordinary circumstances,white reflects most and of course absorbs and radiates least solarheat and light ; but if the above remarks on light be well founded,the absorption of light (and heat?) by white bodies increaseswith the angle of incidence. Now, as nothing of this sort isknown, or can be well conceived to happen, with respect toradiation, the doubt expressed at the beginning of this sectionarises, viz., whether, under all circumstances, the radiatingP. R242 METEOROLOGY.adjustment of the colours of bodies to the circumstancesin which they are placed, constitutes anexample of the expedients by which those minorincongruities are obviated, that are necessarilyincidental to the modes in which heat and lightare distributed over the globe ; and presentsaltogether one of the most obvious and beautifulinstances of design connected with the agencyof heat and light.Lastly, it may be worth while to draw theattention of the reader to the striking contrastdisplayed between the ponderable and the imponderableforms of matter, as to the ease withwhich they are decomposed, and the modes inwhich they exist in nature.We have seen that to preserve the homogeneityand integrity of ponderable bodies,as of water and air, elaborate arrangementshave been adopted, evincing the most extraordinarydesign and wisdom ; because the decompositionor derangement of water and airwould at once prove destructive to organizedbeings. But, to preserve the homogeneity ofheat, and particularly of light, no such care isand absorbing powers of bodies obey similar laws, even as faras the solar rays are concerned. The absorption and radiationof heat of low intensity, and unaccompanied by light, seem todepend more upon the nature of the surface than upon colour.It must be admitted, however, that at present a great deal ofobscurity hangs over the whole of this subject.PROPAGATION OF HEAT BY LAND* 243shewn, because no such care was particularlynecessary. The decompositions of these agencies,therefore, are permitted to take their naturalcourse ; and by an admirable provision, so far arecolours, magnetism, &c. from being injurious tous,that they constitute one of the chief sourcesof our knowledge and happiness !4. Of the Conduction of Heat below the Earth'sSurface on Land. The soil, from a few inches toa foot or more below the surface, participatesvery much in the fluctuations of the surface temperature.In general, perhaps, it may be stated,that the temperature of the surface of the earthis a little above that of the incumbent atmosphereby day, and below it by night ; thoughmuch will depend in this respect upon thenature of the soil, on its radiating and conductingpowers, and on a multiplicity of otherconditions that will readily occur to the reader.At a certain distance, however, below the surface,and varying with the latitude and othercircumstances, there must be a determinatestratum, where the temperature is uniform, ornearly so, throughout the year. Experimentson this subject are very limited ; but there isreason to believe, that the temperature of thisinvariable stratum coincides nearly, with themean annual temperature of the place ; and thatits depth below the surface, in different latina244 METEOROLOGY.tides, varies between forty and eighty feet. Thereader need scarcely be reminded, that the wellknown uniformity of the temperature of cellarsand caves, depends chiefly upon the circumstanceswe are now considering. As an instanceof the uniformity of temperature in such places,it may be mentioned, that a thermometer placedin the caves under the observatory in Paris, ata depth of about eighty-five feet below the surface,has, during fifty years, scarcely variedmore than a quarter of a degree from 11 "82° ofthe centigrade scale ; equal very nearly to 534°of Fahrenheit.A few experiments have been made to determinethe variation of the temperature, throughoutthe year at different depths from the surface,down to the invariable stratum ; and the followingis a summary of the results, which, perhaps,may be considered as generally applicable tothe northern hemisphere.In the month of August the temperature ofthe earth goes on decreasing in nearly a uniformmanner, from a little below the surface to thestratum of invariable temperature. In the monthof September the temperature is nearly uniformto fifteen or twenty feet below the surface ;beyond which depth the temperature decreasesa little and slowly to the stratum of invariabletemperature. During the months of OctoberPROPAGATION OF HEAT BY LAND. 245and November the temperature increases fromthe surface to the depth of fifteen or twentyfeet ; and below this point it remains nearlyuniform to the invariable stratum. During December,January, and February, the temperature,being at its minimum upon the surface,increases in a manner nearly uniform, downwardsto the invariable stratum. During MarchandApril there is a rapid decrease of temperatureto the depth of one or two feet ; belowthis depth the temperature decreases less rapidly; and still lower, the temperature increasesa little. During the months of May, June, andJuly, the temperature being at its maximum, atthe surface, decreases downwards, but less rapidlyand to a greater depth ; it then begins toincrease a little till it attains the temperatureof the invariable stratum. The rapidity anddegree, however, with which these changes takeplace, as well as the changes themselves, appearto fluctuate very considerably, not only in differentplaces under the same Isothermal line, butinthe same place in different seasons.Since heat is propagated through the soil byconduction, of course it is propagated in alldirections. Hence, it may be supposed to movelaterally as well as downwards ; and, generallyspeaking, the temperatures of contiguous spotsprobably tend to equalize each other. But upon246 METEOROLOGY.the whole, the influence of the lateral propagationof heat through the solid parts of the earth,must be very limited.5. Of the Propagation of Heat and Lightbeloiv the Earth's Surface in Water. Water is avery imperfect conductor of heat in the usualacceptation of the term. Thus, almost anydegree of heat may be applied, for a considerabletime, to the upper surface of a massof water, without materially influencing thetemperature below ; so imperfectly and slowlyis heat conducted through this fluid. Theprocess by which heat is communicated throughwater, we have termed convection. When heatis applied to the bottom of a vessel full of thisfluid, the portion of the water first heated expandsin bulk, and thus becomes specificallylighter ; it then rises to the top, carrying withit the newly acquired temperature, while anothercold portion, sinking to the bottom, is heatedin turn, and so on, till the whole mass becomesuniformly heated.With respect to the propagation of lightthrough water, it has been calculated that notatenth part of the incident light can advancefive fathoms downwards in the most translucentwater ; that even of vertical rays, one half islost in the first seventeen feet, and that theybecome reduced to one-fourth by traversingPROPAGATION OF HEAT, ETC. BY WATER. 247thirty-four feet, which correspond to the massof an atmosphere. It thus follows, that onlythe hundred thousandth part of the verticalrays can penetrate below forty-seven fathoms,which is scarcely equal to the glimmer of twilight; and that the depths of the ocean must bealways in perpetual darkness.*Such are the general principles by whichheat and light are propagated in water. Butinspeaking of this fluid in a former chapter,we alluded to one of the physical properties ofwater, of the utmost importance in the economyof nature, and which, perhaps, almost more thanany thing else, indicates design ; since, like thecomposition of the atmosphere, this property ofw r ater constitutes an exception, as it w r ere, toa general law, expressly directed to a particularobject. We have mentioned that it is ageneral law, that all bodies, in every state ofaggregation, expand by heat and contract bycold ; now water forms a marked exception tothis law. Like other bodies, water continuesto contract on the removal of heat, till itstemperature comes down to within a certaindistance (7° or 8°) from its freezing point. Atthis distance, water begins again to expand,and the expansion continues till it becomes ice ;at which moment of freezing, a sudden andArticle Climate, in the Encyclopaedia Britannica.248 METEOROLOGY.considerable expansion takes place. Hence,the specific gravity of ice is decidedly lessthan that of water, and the solid necessarilyswims on the surface of the fluid. The importanceof this anomalous property of wateris so great, that it is doubtful whether the presentorder of nature could have existed withoutit, even although every thing else in the worldhad remained the same. For instance, wereit not for the comparative lightness of ice,this solid, instead of beginning to be formedat the surface of water, would have begun to beformed at the bottom ; as the colder water fromits greater specific gravity would naturally havesunk : for similar reasons, also, the lowest stratumof ice would have been the last to havemelted. Now, let us reflect for a moment uponthe consequences of such an arrangement. Inthe northern and indeed even in temperate climates,the bottoms of all lakes and deep waterswould have been a mass of ice, and totallyinaccessible, therefore, to organized beings.During the summer a few feet of the upper partof the ice would, perhaps, have been melted ;but what little had thus become melted insummer, would again have become solid duringwinter ; and as the accumulations of ice wouldhave been constant, all the seas, even perhapsto the tropical climates, at least at their bottom,Mould, long before this time, have been a massPROPAGATION OF HEAT BY WATER. 249of ice ! But what in reality happens ? In consequenceof the above anomalous properties ofwater, this mischief is entirely prevented, andnot a particle of ice can be formed in a lake orother collection of water, till the whole mass iscooled down to the temperature of 40°, at whichtemperature the specific gravity of water is at itsmaximum.These properties of water operate in the followingmanner. On the application of cold tothe surface of water, the cooled portion sinks,and its descent forces up a portion of warmerwater to the surface, which after communicatingsome of its heat to the superincumbentair, sinks in its turn ; and this process goeson for a greater or less time according tothe depth of the water. If the depth be notvery considerable, the whole body of the waterbecomes cooled down to 40° ; at which temperaturethe specific gravity not increasing,the circulation ceases, and the surface of thewater, (not the bottom) becomes at length sofarcooled as to be covered with ice. If thedepth of the water be considerable, the applicationof cold may be long continued withoutthe result of freezing ; hence, in this and inother countries, not intensely cold, it often happensthat deep lakes remain unfrozen during thecoldest winters.The above anomalous properties of the expandMETEOROLOGY.sion of water and its consequences, have alwaysstruck us as presenting the most remarkableinstance of design in the whole order of nature —an instance of something done expressly, andalmost (could we indeed conceive such a thingof the Deity), at second thought, to accomplisha particular object. Further, if in conjunctionwith this anomalous property of water, wetake into account the still more anomalous constitutionof atmospheric air, and at the sametime consider the relations of water and airto organic existence, we are unavoidably drivento the conclusion, that the Maker of waterand of air has designedly created these anomalies,to obviate difficulties which would haverendered organic existence a physical impossibility.Thus, had means not been takento secure the fluidity of water under the varyingcircumstances of temperature in whichit is placed ; the greater portion of this fluidin the world would long ago have been a solidmass of ice, and consequently inaccessible toorganic life. Had means not been taken tosecure the homogeneity of air at all times, andunder all circumstances ; this important mediumwould not only have been constantly liable tolocal deteriorations ; but its properties, long erenow, would have probably become deterioratedto such a degree, as to have rendered the permanenceof organic life not less physically im-propagationOF HEAT BY WATER. 251possible. Nor do the suppositions which thesceptic will urge, that these properties of waterind air flow naturally from their constitution,diminish the force of the argument. The forceof the argument lies, in the first place, in thefact that water and air have been created withsuch anomalous properties ; and, in the nextand chief place, that these anomalous propertieshave been brought into action precisely where thereare required. Moreover, the argument is greatlystrengthened, by the fact that tito anomalies,rather than that two ordinary circumstances, havebeen thus expressly adjusted.Having stated the general principles on whichheat is distributed through water, and its mostremarkable consequence ; we are now to enterinto a few details with respect to some otherconsequences of this distribution. Of these oneof the most striking is, that the temperature ofthe water at the bottoms of deep lakes or inlandseas, must remain nearly uniform during the Vjjwhole year. Thus it has been found that thetemperature of the water at the bottoms of manyof the lakes in Switzerland often varies no morethan 3° or 4°, while the temperature of thesurface often varies 20° or 30°. Hence in deepwaters, in temperate climates, the changes oftemperature are chiefly confined to the upperstrata of the water ; nor can ice (except fromsome very sudden and powerful accessions of252 METEOROLOGY.frost) form on the surface of such a lake, till, asbefore observed, the whole of the water in it iscooled down to 40°, at which temperature allcirculation ceases. When a coat of ice hasbeen once formed, this ice, as we shall see presently,has also a powerful tendency to preventthe further cooling of the inferior strata.With respect to waters in motion, as smallstreams, or rivers of no great depth and magnitude,and containing fresh water ; though unfavourablycircumstanced for freezing, they donevertheless congeal. The process usually commencesat the shores where the water is shallowest,and its motion is least rapid ; from whencethe ice gradually advances towards the centreof the stream. When the whole of the surfacehas once become fixed, congelation goes onactively, particularly by night. As the thicknessof the ice increases, however, the quantityadded daily, even supposing the cold to remainthe same, gradually diminishes, on account ofthe bad conducting power of the ice. Hencein a block of ice taken from a river or lake,we may often observe the strata correspondingwith the daily, or rather nightly additions, presentinga gradually decreasing series from severalinches down to a few lines in thickness.Of the Temperature of the Waters of the Oceanat great. Depths. — Between the Tropics, the temperatureof the ocean diminishes with the ITEMPERATURE OF THE OCEAN. 253depth ; in the Polar seas, on the contrary, theTemperature augments with the depth. In thetemperate seas, comprised between 30° and 70°of latitude, the temperature of the water graduallydecreases as the latitude increases, untilabout the latitude of 70°; when the temperaturebegins to rise as before mentioned. Hence aboutthe latitude of 70° there exists a zone or bandat which the mean temperature of the oceanis very nearly constant at all depths. Thetemperatures of particular parts of the ocean,however, have been observed to be much influencedby the depth and extent of the water,particularly in high latitudes.We have already mentioned the influenceof the saline matters of the ocean upon thefreezing point of sea-water, and we have now topoint out the important consequence of this propertyin the economy of nature. In its naturalstate sea-water freezes at about 28° or 29°, butwhen it has been concentrated by previousfreezing the congealing point is reduced to 15°or 16°; while water saturated with salt, it issaid, does not freeze at a temperature above 5°.Besides this property of lowering the freezingpoint of sea-water, the saline matters also increaseits specific gravity and its point ofmaximum density. Hence from these circumstances,and from their immense depth andextent, the waters of the ocean resist freezingV'l')i METEOROLOGY.still more effectually than even running freshwater,and are indeed rarely frozen, except inlatitudes where the most intense cold prevails.Of the under Currents of the Ocean existingbetween the Equatorial and Polar Regions. —That the diminished temperature of the watersof the ocean, at great depths near the equator,could not have been acquired in the torrid zone,is evident; nor, on the other hand, could thecomparatively high temperature of the waters,at the bottom of the Polar seas, have been acquiredin the frigid zone ; at least this high temperatureof the Polar seas cannot be caused fromwithout. Hence it has been supposed that thereis a constant interchange going on betweenthe waters of the Equatorial, and those of thePolar regions ; though there are considerabledifficulties at present as to the means by whichthis interchange is effected. These difficultiesarise principally from some uncertainty withrespect to the point of maximum density of seawater,which does not appear to be satisfactorilyestablished. Whether in the profoundand comparatively quiescent abyss of the ocean,the process of diffusion, or the central heat ofthe earth formerly alluded to, exert any influence,we have no means of determining. Butif a central heat really do exist, its effectsmust be considerable, particularly within theTEMPERATURE BY LAND AND WATER. 255frigid zone. Whatever be the cause of thisapproach to uniformity of temperature throughoutthe waters of the ocean, at great depths alloverthe globe, its use in the economy of nature,in tending to equalize the distribution of temperature,cannot be questioned ; since it constitutesone of those beautiful provisions by which thedifficulties of the distribution of temperature,necessarily incidental to the earth's figure andmotions, are obviated ; whilst among the minorcircumstances contributing to the same end,may be mentioned the tides and the innumerablesuperficial currents produced by windsand by other causes which are to be consideredelsewhere.We have alluded, in a former chapter, to thedifference of temperature as depending uponwhether the surface be land or sea; and perhapsit may not be amiss, in this place, to makea few remarks upon the actual general amountof the differences of temperature, as producedby land and water.In the middle of oceans, and far from theinfluence of land, the diurnal change of temperatureof the air near the surface of the sea ismuch less than upon land. Thus, in the equatorialregions the greatest difference between thetemperature of the day and that of the night at25(3 METEOROLOGY.sea is said to amount to 3° or 4° only; while uponland the difference often amounts to 9° or rosintemperate regions, and particularly in latitudesextending from 25° to 50°, the differencebetween the maximum and the minimum diurnalrange of the thermometer at sea is still verytrifling, amounting only to 4° or G° ; while uponthe continents, as for example, at Paris, therange often amounts to 20° or .30°. To thesecircumstances it is owing that small insular situations,partaking of the character of the surroundingocean, are much less liable to greatdiurnal changes than continents ; and hence, ingeneral, they possess more equable climates.Both by sea and land the minimum temperaturetakes place about sunrise. The maximumtemperature at sea occurs about noon,or very soon after ; while upon land it takesplace from two to three hours after noon.Between the tropics the maximum temperatureof the air is said to exceed a little that ofthe surface of the sea. But when the temperaturesare observed at short intervals, as forexample, every four hours, and all the temperaturesare compared, the results are different ; andthey seem to shew that even between the tropicsthe temperature of the surface of the sea ishigher than that of the incumbent atmosphere.Between the latitudes of 25° and 50° the air israrely warmer than the surface of the sea ; andTEMPERATURE OF SPRINGS. 257in the Polar regions it is very unusual to findthe air as warm as the sea ; it is in fact almostalways colder, and generally very much colder.As connected with this part of our subject,it may perhaps, before we close, be desirableto offer a few remarks upon the temperature ofnatural springs, and their relation to the meantemperature of the earth at the places wherethey make their appearance.Springs discharging large quantities of water,and thus indicating that they come from considerabledepths below the surface of the earth,preserve nearly the same temperature duringthe whole year. In our hemisphere, what littleaugmentation of temperature springs undergo,is generally in the month of September, whilethey are coldest in the month of March ;though the differences seldom exceed two orthree degrees. If we compare the temperatureof the springs of any place, with the meanannual temperature of that place, we find thatthere is a near connection between the two, alloverthe globe. In the torrid zone, however,the mean annual temperature of the air isusually higher by three or four degrees thanthat of the springs ; while in the temperatezone, on the contrary, the springs are warmerp. s258 METEOROLOGY.than the air. The excess of temperature ofsprings, as compared with the mean annualtemperature, goes on increasing with the latitude; so that, between 00° and 70° of latitude,this excess amounts to from 5° to 7° ;a circumstance we shall again have occasion tonotice. Other things being the same, thetemperature of springs varies considerably accordingto their copiousness ; as a large bodyof water will be less liable to be influencedby the surrounding soil, than a smaller bodyof water ; and may even, in turn, influence thetemperature of the soil itself.The subject of thermal swings, as intimatelyconnected with the history of volcanoes, belongsto the Geologist.We have thus enumerated the principal circumstancesconnected with the distribution oftemperature upon the surface of the earth, andat such parts below it as are within our reach.We now come to the second great division ofthe subject of climates; viz., that connected withthe atmosphere.Section* II.Of the Secondary Constituents of Climate immediatelyconnected with the Atmosphere.The phenomena of the atmosphere originallyconstituted the proper study of the Meteorologist,and even yet they claim the largest share ofhis attention. The subject, in all its bearings,is very extensive, and many of the details areimperfectly understood. We shall endeavour topresent a brief outline of the principal phenomenaunder the following heads. — Of the distributionof heat and of light through the atmosphere,and of the consequences ;— of the distributionof water through the atmosphere, and of the phenomenadependent upon this distribution; and,lastly, — of the occasional presence of foreign bodiesin the atmosphere.1 . Of the Distribution of Heat and of Lightthrough the Atmosphere, and of the Consequences.Every one is familiar with the general fact ofthe diminished temperature of the higher regionsof our atmosphere ; and that in the hottestcountries, by ascending a lofty mountain, weencounter, at different heights, every variety oftemperature, even to that of perpetual snow,v2()() METEOROLOGY.and of the Polar regions. One of the first circumstances,therefore, that claims the attentionof the Meteorologist, is the law of the distributionof sensible heat, or of temperature, throughthe atmosphere.The law of the distribution of temperaturethrough the atmosphere is tolerably uniform,though it is occasionally liable to variationsand interruptions, depending upon local differences,and perhaps upon other circumstancesnot satisfactorily understood. The mean resultsof a great number of observations made indifferentparts of the world appear to show,that for every 100 yards of altitude, Fahrenheit'sthermometer sinks one degree. This statement,probably, does not, within moderate limits,differ much from the truth ; though some lateresearches have rendered it probable that whileat different heights the rate of the decrease oftemperature is uniform, the rate of altitude increasesconstantly, and according to laws verysimilar all over the world ; that is to say, supposingthe first 252 feet are equal to one degree,the second degree will be equal to 255 feet, thethird to 258, the fourth to 261, &c.The causes upon which this great cold of thehigher regions depends are chiefly the two following; first, the perfect permeability of theatmosphere to the solar rays, on which accounttin y radiate through it almost without affectingDISTRIBUTION OF HEAT IN THE ATMOSPHERE. 20 1its temperature, till reaching the earth they exerttheir utmost force ; and secondly the increasedcapacity for heat which air possesses in proportionas it becomes more rare. From the first ofthese causes it happens that the temperature ofthe lower regions of the atmosphere is derived,not immediately from the sun, but from theearth. The earth absorbing the solar heat, re-communicatesit to that portion of the atmosphereimmediately incumbent on the surface,while all the atmosphere above remains unaffected; for though, from diminished specificgravity, heated air naturally ascends, yet as itscapacity for heat at the same time increases,ascending air rapidly loses its sensible heat ;as in the second place we have to explain.Dr. Dalton, and afterwards Sir John Lesliemore completely, have attempted to show that theequilibrium of heat in an atmosphere is obtainedwhen each of its molecules, or in other words,when the same weight of air, in the same perpendicularcolumn, is possessed of the same quantity ofheat. Now, since atmospheric pressure diminisheswith the height according to a certain law,it is obvious that the same weights of air at thesurface of the earth, and in the higher regions,will occupy very different spaces. But since theabsolute quantity of heat is exactly the same inboth portions, it is likewise obvious that in thehigher regions of the atmosphere, from the METEOROLOGY.creased capacity of the air for heat, the quantityof latent heat is gradually augmented,while the quantity remaining sensible, becomesless. Hence the temperature of the air diminishesas we ascend, exactly in the proportionthat its latent heat, that is to say, its capacityfor heat as produced by rarefaction, increases.In consequence of this arrangement, to use thewords of Dr. Thomson, " if a quantity of cold airwere suddenly transported from an elevated regionto the surface of the sea, its density wouldbe continually increasing during its descent,while its latent heat would diminish in the sameproportion ; and when it reached the level of thesea its temperature would be just as high as thatof other portions of air in the same latitude andelevation. Air, therefore, does not feel cold inconsequenceof falling from an elevated situation,though this be an opinion commonlyentertained, but in consequence of its being suddenlytransported from a more northerly to amore southerly situation"* Thus, to the abovebeautiful and simple law, we owe the permanentstate of equilibrium of temperature in the atmosphere; for, in spite of all the disturbancesconstantly produced by minor causes, this equilibrium,from the natural tendency to right itself,is never very seriously affected.On heat and electricity, p. 129.LIMITS OF PERPETUAL SNOW ; GLACIERS. 2G3Of the Limits of Perpetual Snow.— Connectedwith the diminution of temperature in the higherregions of the atmosphere are the limits of perpetualsnow in different latitudes. These limits,of course, may be naturally supposed to followthe mean temperature of 32°, from the level ofthe sea in the Polar regions to the highest pointof their range under the equator. This inferenceis obvious, and, generally speaking, correct;though it is liable to certain modifications, andto some anomalies, of which the following arethe most remarkable.Under the equator the limits of perpetual snoware the most fixed and steady, and seem to exist -jgenerally at an altitude of between 15,000 and16,000 feet. As we recede from the equator, theoscillations for the most part become morestriking, and all the phenomena assume a moreirregular form. Such, for example, is the case inthe Mexican Cordilleras ; but still more evidentlyin the Himmala range, where there is a differenceof no less than 4000 feet between the limitsof perpetual snow on the northern and on the v\ ;southern sides of the mountain, that on thenorthern being the highest. As we proceedtoward the temperate zones, we find, in mountainouscountries, below the limits of perpetualsnow, immense bodies of ice, or glaciers, as theyare termed. These glaciers are formed by thealternate melting and congealing of the extensive2G4 METEOROLOGY.beds of snow that lie above them. The glaciers,accumulating in valleys, are often by theenormous and increasing weight of the snowand ice in the upper parts, pressed downwardsfar beyond the limits of the snow itself. Suchare the glaciers of Switzerland, of Norway,and of other countries in temperate climates.All these circumstances, with others that mightbe mentioned, and many probably that areunknown to us, combine to render the limits ofperpetual snow irregular. These irregularities areso great, that Humboldt has given as a mean ofmany observations, that at the equator the limitsof perpetual snow are nearly 3° above the freezingpoint, while in the temperate zone they are nearly5° below that point, and in the frigid zone noless than 10° or 11° below freezing; which observationsseem to prove that the general temperatureof the air decreases in the equatorial,otherwise than in the colder regions. Fromthe peculiar distribution of the land in thesouthern hemisphere, little is known of the lineof perpetual snow in that part of the world ; butit will probably be found to be different fromthat in the north, and generally lower.The perpetual snow resting on the tops ofmountains constitutes a most important provisionin the economy of nature, particularlyin the warmer climates, where the accumulatedsnow becomes the prolific source of innumerableLATENT HEAT, ETC. IN THE ATMOSPHERE. 265rivers without which those regions would be uninhabitable.In the accompanying map we have endeavouredto show the analogy between the effectthat height above the surface of the earth, anddifference of latitude produce on the distributionof temperature, &c. There is, however, onestriking difference between the elevated andthe lower regions, which must have considerableinfluence upon organization, though thisinfluence has not been studied so carefully asit ought to be ; viz., the difference of atmosphericpressure. At the surface of the earth,the atmospheric pressure is nearly the same inall latitudes, but as we ascend above the surface,the pressure rapidly diminishes. Everythingelse, therefore, being supposed to be thesame, the difference of pressure is probablyalone sufficient materially to influence organization,and to render certain provisions andaccommodations necessary, of which, at present,we are ignorant; but which might doubtlessbe much elucidated by a careful study ofalpine plants and animals, as compared withthose that occupy the plains.Of the Distribution of Heat and LioJuthrough the Atmosphere in their latent and decomposedForms. — In the preceding paragraphswe have alluded to the quantity of heat existinglatent in the higher regions of the atmosphere.•2(j(j METEOROLOGY.But besides this quantity, which may be supposedto be common to the whole atmosphere,the distribution of latent heat and light must insome degree follow the same law as that of sensibleheat and light ; that is, must decrease fromthe equator toward the poles. Thus there can beno doubt, that the expanded air of the equatorialregions contains much more heat and light inthe latent state, than the comparatively denseand dry atmospheric air of the Polar regions ;and it is probable that the rigours of each extremeare mitigated by this provision. Thedistribution of electricity through the atmosphereseems also to be regulated by very similarlaws. It may, however, be remarked that theeffects of heat and light, in the latent and decomposedforms, are much more striking as connectedwith the water in the atmosphere, thanwith the constituents of the atmosphere itself.We shall, therefore, defer what we have to sayon those subjects till we speak of the water inthe atmosphere.Of the Propagation of Sensible Heat throughthe Atmosphere. — As the diffusion of gaseousbodies through each other is so far a mechanicalprocess that it is regulated solely by the relationsof their specific gravities, it follows that underthe same pressure, different portions of the samegas, having different temperatures, and consequentlydifferent specific gravities, will have aPROPAGATION OF HEAT IN THE ATMOSPHERE. 267similar tendency to diffusion. Hence, independentlyof all other circumstances, the warm andlight air of the equatorial regions has a naturaltendency to diffuse itself toward the poles;while the colder and heavier air of the polespossesses a similar tendency to diffuse itselftowards the equator, though in a greatly mitigateddegree. The exact amount of thesetendencies we have no means of estimating,hut they, doubtless, exert considerable influence ;and, as the diffusive power may happen tocoincide with, or oppose the atmospheric currents,to be next considered, it may augmentor diminish their effects.Though diffusion be thus largely concernedin the lateral propagation of temperature throughthe atmosphere, this propagation is evidentlyeffected to a much greater extent by the processtermed convection. Convection, like diffusion, ofcourse, implies motion or currents ; which currentsas existing in the atmosphere, we needscarcely observe, are denominated Winds. Thewinds, therefore, are of the utmost importance inthe economy of nature, as tending to equalizethe distribution of temperature over the globe ;and the following brief explanation will serve togive a general knowledge of their nature.Atmospheric currents may be considered undertwo heads : those of a general kind, and whichextend more or less over the whole globe ; and208 METEOROLOGY.those depending upon various transient derangementsof the distribution of temperature,the effects of which are limited to particularlocalities. On each of these we shall make afew remarks.The general currents of the atmosphere dependprincipally upon the two following circumstances,which, if borne in mind by the reader, will furnishhim with a clue to the whole subject: viz., theunequal temperature of the equator and of thepoles ; and the diurnal motion of the earth uponits axis. The connective operation of the firstof these general causes may be thus illustrated.We have stated that the entire pressure of theatmosphere all over the earth's surface is nearlythe same, and equal to that of a column of mercuryabout thirty inches in height. We havealso stated that the mean temperature of thisatmosphere near the equator, and at the level ofthe sea is upwards of 80°, while in the Polarregions it is constantly below 32°, the freezingpoint of water. Hence, as air expands by heat,and becomes specifically lighter, it is obviousthat a given bulk of air at the level of the searound the poles, must be considerably heavierthan a similar bulk of air at the level of the seaunder the equator. The air, therefore, roundthe poles being colder and heavier, will have atendency to flow along the earth's surface fromthe poles towards the equator, and to displace theCURRENTS IN THE ATMOSPHERE. 209lighter air under the equator ; while the equatorialair so displaced, will, owing to its lightness,ascend and flow back again over the colder air,north and south toward the poles, so as to preservethe equilibrium. Moreover these currentswill be perpetual ; for the heat of the equatorand the cold of the poles being constant, thesame tendency to change will always exist, andthus the currents will be constant likewise.These atmospheric currents constitute oneprimary, element of the winds, and are thegrand means by which the equalization of temperatureover the globe is effected. If the earthwere at rest, and its surface free from irregularity,these currents or winds would, of course,be in the northern hemisphere always due north,and in the southern hemisphere due south ; whilethe velocity would in each case graduallydiminish from the poles towards the equator,where there would be a perpetual calm.But the earth is in a constant state of motionupon its axis from west to east, by which motionthe currents are deflected from their northernand southern course towards the east; andthis eastern deflection constitutes the otherprimary element of the winds to be next considered.On the surface of a globe revolving like theearth on its axis, the general reader will bear inmind that the motion of any given point at the^270 METEOROLOGY.equator is the greatest, and at the poles the leastpossible. Thus while the poles are quiescent, thevelocity of any given place at the equator of ourearth, is about 1000 miles an hour ; from which extreme,the velocity gradually diminishes towardthe poles. This motion of the earth on its axisoperates in the production of an easterly currentin the atmosphere as follows. Supposing therewere no atmospheric currents from the northand south towards the equator, and that theearth revolved upon its axis as at present, one oftwo things must happen. Either the earthduring its revolution would carry with it theincumbent atmosphere ; in which case therewould be a perpetual calm over its surface : orthe earth would revolve within the atmosphere,leaving, as it were, the atmosphere behind it ;in which case there would be an apparent currentor wind over the whole of the earth'ssurface, in a direction opposite to that of theearths motion, that is from east to west ; whichwind, supposing the atmosphere did not movewith the earth, would, of course, be at its maximumat the equator. Now both these causesare continually operating, and give origin to allthe variety of the eastern currents upon theearth's surface, which, with the northern andsouthern currents, before described, conspireto produce the well known currents calledthe trade winds. Before we attempt to explainTrade WINDS. 271the trade winds, their phenomena may be thusbriefly described.The trade winds in the Atlantic ocean extendto about 28° on each side of the equator. Attheir extreme northern and southern boundariesthese winds generally blow from the east; butas they proceed towards the equator from thenorth and from the south, they gradually passfrom the east through all the intermediate pointsof the compass, till near the equator they becomein the northern hemisphere, due north, and inthe southern hemisphere due south. The tradewinds are subject to some slight variationschiefly arising from the position of the earthwith respect to the sun. On these variationswe do not think it necessary to enlarge. Thegeneral phenomena are as we have statedthem, and they, upon the principles advanced,appear to admit of the following explanation :In the temperate regions of the earth the windsseem to obey no certain laws ; at least laws sodeterminate as those of the trade winds. Butabout the tropics, both in the northern and inthe southern hemispheres, the operation of thedouble currents and motions before described,becomes distinctly perceptible. Thus about thetropics, the surface of the earth begins to movefaster than the incumbent atmosphere ; andhence in these regions, the prevailing currentsare from the east. Indeed near the tropics<272 METEOROLOGY.the currents are nearly due east, principallyon account of the great and somewhat suddenchange of temperature produced by the verticalsun of the tropical regions ; which may besupposed to interfere with, and perhaps tocheck momentarily, the regular progress of thegreat northern and southern currents. As weproceed, however, towards the equator, in bothhemispheres, the atmosphere gradually acquiresthe velocity of the earth, while the intensity ofthe eastern current diminishes in the same proportion,and at length entirely disappears. Atthe same time the currents from the north andthe south continuing, slowly deflect the currents,from the east towards the north in thenorthern hemisphere, and from the east towardsthe south in the southern hemisphere, till leftalone by themselves the polar currents proceedonward to the equator, as if the motion of theearth had no existence.The first clear and satisfactory theory of thegreat atmospheric currents or winds was given,we believe, by Mr. Daniell. The theory of thewinds was subsequently illustrated by CaptainBasil Hall, in his interesting essay on the tradewinds, to which for details we must referthe reader.* Before we quit this subject weSee Meteorological Essays and Observations, by J. F.Daniell, Esq., Professor of Chemistry in King's College, &c,;mei \f>5, second edition.CURRENTS IN THE ATMOSPHERE. 273may remark that Mr. Daniell traces to thesegreat currents the fluctuations of the barometer,and all the innumerable modifications peculiarto different localities of sea and land, of mountainand plain. For, as he justly observes,in the nicely balanced state of the forcesproducing these currents, slight irregularities oftemperature are capable of causing great disturbances;and expansions and contractionsacting unequally upon the antagonist currents,operate by deranging the adjustment of theirseveral velocities. Hence accumulations in someparts, and corresponding deficiencies in others,necessarily arise; and occasion fluctuations inthe barometer, far surpassing what would beoccasioned by the whole vapour, supposing itwere at once added or annihilated. At the sametime these irregular distributions, in seekingto regain the proper level, and in strugglingto restore the equilibrium, produce temporaryand variable winds, which modify the regularcurrents and often reverse their courses, particularlyin the temperate regions; where, asformerly mentioned, the alternations of temperature,and the fluctuations of the barometer,are the most remarkable.Such are the elements of the general currentspervading our atmosphere, and such the modesin which these currents obviate extreme temperaturesand their consequences The samep. T274 METEOROLOGY.causes are constantly operating in different formsand degrees, so as to produce all the infinitevariety among the winds, which we observe innature. These are so numerous and diversified,as actually to baffle all attempts at explanationor arrangement ; we shall therefore content ourselveswith one instance only, by way of illustration,viz., the sea and land breezes.The explanation of what are denominated thesea and land breezes is very obvious, and is notless applicable to many similar phenomena.During the day, the surface of the land acquiringheat, imparts its temperature to the i*j unbent air. This air expanding in bulk becomesspecifically lighter, and rises in consequence; while the cooler air from the surroundingsea rushes in to supply its place, and thusproduces the current called the sea breeze.During the night, on the contrary, the watersof the ocean part with their heat much moreslowly than the land, and the reverse action, orthe land breeze takes place. In hot climatesnear the sea shore, and in insular situations,these alternations constitute a most agreeablevariety.2. Of the Presence of Water in the Atmosphere.— In the foregoing section we have endeavouredto give an outline of the beautifulprovisions that have been adopted to prevent, byWATER IN THE ATMOSPHERE. 275means of the air of the atmosphere, the consequencesnecessarily arising from the unequaldistribution of heat and light over the globe.We now come to another subject of not less importance,viz., the phenomena depending uponthe existence of water in the atmosphere, andwhich, taken together, principally constitutewhat we emphatically denominate the Weather.Of the Relations of the Water in the Atmosphereto Temperature. — We have before statedthe fact, that water has a tendency to assumethe elastic form at all temperatures. From thetendency of water, thus to rise " above theFirmament," not only the ocean, but ice andsnow, are unceasingly contributing their supplyof moisture to the air ; and this importantfluid, so indispensable to vegetable and animalexistence, is distributed over the surface ofthe whole earth. In considering, therefore, therelations of the water of the atmosphere to temperature,the phenomena which first claim ourattention, are the processes by which water istaken up and again separated from the atmosphere; that is to say, the processes of Evaporationand Condensation.In treating of the nature of Evaporation, thequestions to be answered at the outset are, —Why is moisture present in the atmosphere ?By what force is its presence determined, and itsquantity limited ? The reply to these questions276 METEOROLOGY.depends upon the properties of matter in general,and of vapour in particular, as formerly described; which, if the reader bears in mind, willenable him readily to understand what follows.When water is exposed to the air in an openvessel, the molecules of its uppermost or superficialstratum, being released from the influenceof those below them, have a natural tendencyto assume that degree of polarity which isappropriate to their temperature. Hence, afteracquiring the latent heat necessary to producethis polarity, either at the expense of a portion oftheir own sensible heat, or of that of the atmosphere,the superficial molecules of water becomeself-repulsive, and fly off into space in the formof vapour. If the space over the water be circumscribedand be a vacuum, the molecules flyoff with such rapidity as instantaneously to fillit. But, if the space be occupied by air, or beof indefinite magnitude, the molecules fly offmore slowly, so as gradually to diffuse themselvesthrough the whole space ; quite on thesame principle, and in the same manner, thatone gaseous body is diffused through another.Such, in few words, may be deemed a simplestatement of what evaporation is. We shallnext proceed to enquire into the nature andoperation of the means by which evaporationnot only takes place, but is limited within certainboundaries.EVAPORATION AND CONDENSATION. 277In a former chapter, we remarked, that theelastic force exerted by all bodies in the gaseousstate bears a certain relation to their temperature,but that the degree of this elastic forcevaries according to other circumstances ; particularlyaccording to whether the gaseous body,at the given temperature, be capable of existingin the fluid or in the solid states, as well as inthe gaseous state. Thus, atmospheric air, at thetemperature of 32° (and indeed at all knowntemperatures), is a gaseous body, and, underordinary circumstances, exerts an elastic forceequal to the weight of a column of mercury 30inches high ; whereas, at the same temperatureof 32°, water is a solid, and the force of the elasticityof its vapour is not more than equal toabout 15th of an inch of mercury. But at, andabove 212°, its boiling point, water, under ordinarycircumstances, can exist only as a gas ;and in this gaseous form, and at the temperatureof 212°, water obeys precisely the same laws,and exerts the same elastic force as atmosphericair would do under similar circumstances. Henceit will be readily understood, that the law of theelastic force of vapour below 212°, is verydifferent from the law of that force above 212° ;as by experiment is found to be the fact.From the preceding remarks it will appearthat, all other things being the same, the tendencyof water to assume the form of vapour,278 METEOROLOGY.or the rate of its evaporation, as well as theactual quantity of water in the state of vapourin the atmosphere, will increase as the temperatureincreases. The exact law of thisincrease, in all its details, we need not state.It is sufficient for our purpose to observe, thatat all temperatures below the boiling point ofwater, that is to say, at all common atmospherictemperatures, while the rate of the increase oftemperature is sloiv and uniform, or in an arithmeticalprogression, the corresponding rate ofthe elastic force of vapour, by which the quantityof water as vapour is determined, increasesmuch more rapidly, or nearly in a geometricalprogression. This important fact is connectedwith several most interesting circumstances.The phenomena of the Condensation of vapourfrom the atmosphere, are next to be explained.As the quantity of water in solution in the atmospherecan never be greater, though it maybeless, than the quantity proper to the temperature; when vapour (or what is the same thing,when a portion of air saturated with vapour), atany given temperature, is cooled below thepoint of saturation ; a portion of the vapour isseparated in the form of fluid water, while theremainder assumes the elastic condition properto the newly acquired and diminished temperature.The forms assumed by the water so separatedare various, and depend very muchATMOSPHERE OF VAPOUR. 279upon the quantity separated, and on the separationtaking place in atmospheric air. When thequantity of water separated is small, the minutedetached particles diffused through a large space,are suspended in the atmosphere by its buoyancy,and assume the form of what, for the sakeof distinction, we shall call Visible Vapour, viz.mists, clouds, &c. When the quantity separatedis greater, the particles collect into drops too largeto be upheld by atmospheric buoyancy, and theyfall to the earth in the shape of rain, hail, &c.Of the two great processes of evaporation andcondensation, it may be further remarked, thatby a beautiful provision, they have a constanttendency to limit each its own operations ; evaporationis increased by heat and produces cold ;condensation is produced by cold and liberatesheat. Moreover, in virtue of another wonderfularrangement, by evaporation, water is separatedentirely from all foreign bodies, and is thus condensedin a state of absolute purity.We now come more particularly to considerthe subject of the vapour of the atmosphere. Tofacilitate the understanding of this, we shall, inthe first place, suppose the air to be absent, andshall inquire what would be the conditions of anatmosphere of vapour, under the pressure andtemperature existing at the surface of the earth,and at different heights above the earth's surface.As the elastic force of vapour increases faster¥280 METEOROLOGY.than the temperature of the vapour ; and as themean temperature at the Equator is, at least,80°, and that at the Poles below 32°; it follows,that in an atmosphere of vapour, heated similarlyto that of our earth, the specific gravity ofthe vapour at the Equator, would greatly exceedthe specific gravity of the vapour at the Poles.Vapour thus exhibits a condition directly oppositeto that of air, under the same circumstances.Hence the tendencies of the currents, and ofdiffusion, in an atmosphere of vapour, at thesurface of the earth, would be precisely thereverse of those in an atmosphere of air ; thetendency of the currents would be from theEquator toward the Poles, while the tendency ofdiffusion would be from the Poles toward theEquator.*We have elsewhere stated the law of thedecrease of the temperature of the atmosphere,observed in ascending from the surface of theearth ; the atmospheric air being supposed to beWe may here observe, once for all, that our former remarkson the diffusion of air of different temperatures, and our remarksnow on the similar diffusion of vapour, are inferences only fromthe general law of diffusion ; and that the diffusion of suchfluids has not, at least in so far as we know, been yet the subjectof experiment. We do not, therefore, think it necessary todwell on the precise law of this diffusion. Our remarks havebeen chiefly made with the view of drawing the attention of philosopherstoward these interesting phenomena. The diffusion ofgases and of vapour, taken in conjunction with the diffusion orradiation of imponderable matters, would form a noble field tothose competent for such physical inquiry.ATMOSPHERE OF VAPOUR. 281free from moisture. A similar law would regulatethe decrease of temperature in an atmosphereof vapour ; but the rate of decrease wouldbe much more slow than in an atmosphere ofperfectly dry air. Thus under the Equator,where, at the level of the sea, the mean temperatureis at least 80°, the temperature of anatmosphere of perfectly dry air would sink tothe freezing point at a height of 15,000 feet ;while the temperature of an atmosphere ofvapour would, at the same height, sink only to70°. At all the parallels of lower mean temperature,onward to the lowest round the Poles,at any height above the level of the sea, similardifferences would exist between the temperatureof an atmosphere of perfectly dry air andthe temperature of an atmosphere of vapour ;these differences, of course, varying with themean surface temperature. At the same time,throughout the whole range, from the Equator tothe Poles, the specific gravity of the vapour atthe level of the sea would always exceed itsspecific gravity at any height above. Hence,in an atmosphere of vapour, there would be novertical currents ; but there would be a strongtendency to diffusion from above downwards ;while the tendency to lateral diffusion would, atall heights, be nearly the same as at the surface,or would be quite contrary to what would holdin an atmosphere of perfectly dry air.Having thus stated the leading properties of282 METEOROLOGY.an atmosphere of air and of an atmosphere ofvapour separately, we come to the proper subjectof our inquiry f viz., the condition of an atmos-\ there resulting from a mixture of air and vapourof such an atmosphere, indeed, as that inwhich we actually live.The reader will have no difficulty in understandingthe nature of a mixed atmosphere,provided he has clearly apprehended what hasbeen above stated, regarding the simple atmosphereswhich are its components, and will advertto two other circumstances that are now to benoticed. These two circumstances are intimatelyconnected with the principles previouslystated, and with each other ; and an expositionof them is absolutely necessary for obtaininga true knowledge of the relations of an atmosphereof vapour with an atmosphere of air.These circumstances have not been mentionedsooner, the consideration of them having beenintentionally delayed, in order that their influencemight be seen, where their application ismore immediately requisite. They are as follow.When vapour and air are mixed together,the resulting volume of the mixture depends onthe amount of the elastic forces of the vapour andof the air ; not on any relation between theirvolumes. Thus when a cubic foot of air at thetemperature of 52°, and exerting an elastic forceequal to 30 inches of mercury, is mixed withMIXED ATMOSPHERE OF VAPOUR AND AIR. 283a cubic foot of vapour, having the same temperature,and exerting an elastic force equal toonly l-5th of an inch of mercury ; the volume ofthe mixture resulting is not two cubic feet, butonly 1*0066 foot. Hence, as the addition ofvapour to air adds comparatively little to thebulk of the air, and consequently diminishesonly in a trifling degree its specific gravity ;the great aerial currents formerly described aspervading the atmosphere, are scarcely affectedby the vapour they contain.When two portions of vapour, having differenttemperatures, are mingled together; or when aportion of vapour is brought into a state ofmixture or contact, with a portion of water, orwith any other body colder than the vapour ; theresulting mean temperature, whatever that maybe,is, in both cases, the temperature whichregulates the elastic force of the mixture. Now,since the elastic force of vapour increases mostrapidly from the temperature of 32° to 212°, theincrease being in a geometrical progression,while the increase of the temperature is in anarithmetical progression ; it follows, that whentwo portions of vapour of equal bulk but ofdifferent temperatures, are mixed together; orwhen a portion of vapour is brought into contactwith any solid colder body ; the resultingmean temperature is always below that requisiteto preserve the water in a state of vapour.284 METEOROLOGY.Hence, such mixture or contact is always followedby a portion of the vapour being condensedinto water. In a future part of thissection, it will be necessary to illustrate furtherthis important fact, but a familiar instancemay be noticed here. Let us suppose that apound of water at the temperature of 212°,which being in a state of steam would occupya space of about 27 cubic feet, were suddenlybrought into mixture with a pound of waterat a temperature of 32°; the effect would beaninstantaneous condensation of the greaterpart of the steam into water. For the resultingmean temperature would obviously be far shortof 212°, below which temperature the elasticforce of vapour most rapidly diminishes. Onthis property of vapour depends the working ofthe common steam-engine.The reader is thus at length prepared to enteron the complicated subject of a mixed atmosphereof vapour and of air.We have shown that the rate of decreaseof the temperature of an atmosphere of vapour,in ascending from the earth's surface, would bevery much slower than that of an atmosphere ofair. Now since, at all temperatures, the existenceof atmospheric air is permanent ; while thevery existence of vapour is dependent on temperature; it follows, that in a mixed atmosphereof vapour and of air, the quantity of vapour con-mixedATMOSPHERE OF VAPOUR AND AIR. 285gained in the mixture is regulated solely by thetemperature of the air : that is to say, the quantityof vapour present in an aerial atmosphere,can never exceed, though it may be less than,the quantity which is proper to the temperatureof the air. If the quantity of vapourin such a mixed atmosphere, be precisely thequantity that is proper to the temperature ofthe air, such an atmosphere is said to besaturated with vapour.But, neither at the earth's surface, nor at anyheight above it, can the degree of saturation of amixed atmosphere of air and vapour, be quiteequal to that which is proper to the temperatureof the air ; and the difference between these twodegrees of saturation, augments from abovedownwards. The cause of this difference maybethus explained. The rate of increase of thetemperature of air, from above downward, beingin arithmetical progression, and the air being,in a mixed atmosphere, that ingredient whichcontrols the whole mixture ; the rate of increaseof the tension of the vapour, instead of followingthe geometrical rate which belongs to it asvapour, is obliged to conform to the arithmeticalrate of increase of the temperature of theair. The result of this controlment necessarilyis, that the quantity of vapour present in a mixedatmosphere will, at any successive diminutionof the height above the surface of the earth,286 METEOROLOGY.become successively less and less than thatwhich would be required to saturate the air.An example will make this result evident.At the Equator, as we have said, the temperatureof the air, at the height of about 15,000feet above the level of the sea, is nearly snowsfor the sake of illustration, let us supposethis air to be saturated with vapour. From Dr.Dalton's table of the tension or elastic forces ofvapour at different temperatures, it appears thatthe tension of vapour at 32° is equal to theweight of *200 inch of mercury ; and that thedifference between the tension of vapour at sandthe tension of vapour at 33°, that is to say,the value of the first term or unit, in our assumedarithmetical series is *007 inch of mercury.Now, the difference between 32°, and 80° themean temperature at the level of the sea underthe Equator, is 48° ; and supposing each of these48 degrees to increase in an arithmetical progression,"007 for each degree, the tension forthe whole 48 degrees will amount to .336, whichadded to-200, the tension at 32° gives the tensionof *536 inch, as that corresponding to thevapour at 80°, the temperature of the earth'ssurface under the Equator. But, by Dr. Dalton'ssame table of tensions, we find that-536 doesnot represent the proper tension of vapour at 80°,but of vapour at about 61° only. According tothis estimate it follows, that at the Equator,MIXED ATMOSPHERE OF VAPOUR AND AIR. 287while the temperature of the air over the earth'ssurface is 80°, the point of saturation with vapouris 19° below that temperature. Hence, at theEquator, the air immediately incumbent on theearth's surface must be comparatively very dry.Moreover the cause which has been thus shownto produce the dryness of the Equatorial air, atthe earth's surface, must all over the globe exertdifferent degrees of the same influence. The air,everywhere incumbent on the earth's surface, must,therefore, always be under the point of saturation;the relative degree of dryness being highestunder the Equator, and gradually diminishing aswe recede north or south toward the Poles.*In such a mixed atmosphere as we have supposed,and as in reality surrounds our globe, ifits equilibrium be undisturbed, and if it be atrest ; the vapour it contains will have nearly thesame tendencies to motion and to diffusion thatwould exist in such an atmosphere of purevapour, as we have formerly described. But,from the more equal distribution of the vapour,when mingled with air, the contrasts betweenThe mathematical reader will observe, that the quantitiesgiven in the text are not rigidly accurate, but are intended onlyfor familiar illustration of the principles regulating moisture. Thetruth is, as has been noticed in the text, in no part of a verticalcolumn of a mixed atmosphere, in a condition of equilibriumand at rest, can the air be in a state of saturation. It has beenremarked, that the degree of saturation often continues nearlyuniform up to a certain point, and then suddenly decreases.288 METEOROLOGY.the specific gravities of different portions ofvapour, in different parts of the atmosphere, willbe much less striking than if the atmosphereconsisted of vapour alone. Consequently, therates of motion and of diffusion, which dependupon such differences of specific gravity, willbe less remarkable in a mixed atmosphere,even though saturated with vapour, than theywould be in a purely aqueous atmosphere;while in an unsaturated atmosphere the motionsof the vapour must be still more liable to beinfluenced by the motions of the air, than theywould be in an atmosphere of air, at its utmostpoint of saturation.Before we close this part of our subject let usreflect for a moment upon the consequences ofsuch a state of comparative dryness of the loweratmosphere next the earth. Over the greaterportion of the earth, the air which, during theday at least, is warmed by contact with theearth's surface, and thus becomes lighter, has, aswe have observed, a constant tendency to riseinto the higher atmosphere. Now, if this airwere saturated with vapour, of course, wheneverthe air by rising became mixed with colder air,its vapour would be more or less condensed, anda cloud would be formed. Hence, if we lived insuch an atmosphere, we should be always envelopedin a mist, through which the sun wouldnot be visible. But, by the benevolent arrangeMIXED ATMOSPHERE OF VAPOUR AND AIR. 289ment we enjoy, this consequence is so entirelyprevented, that, unless under peculiar circumstances,and always for beneficial purposes, theair at the earth's surface is hardly ever saturatedwith moisture. The air that has been warmedby contact with the earth can, therefore, risefrom the surface, without any condensation of itsmoisture within the limits of its point of saturation.Thus, at the Equator, before the airreaches the temperature of 61°, the presumedpoint of its saturation, it must ascend to theheight of 6000 or 7000 feet. At this height itsvapour will be condensed, and a cloud willbe formed ; which may either be precipitatedon the spot from which its constituent vapourhad risen, or may be transported by the currentsof the atmosphere, similarly to refresh adistant country, or may be again dissolved inthe air ; while under all these contingenciesthe whole of the lower part of the atmosphereis exempt from mist, and continues perfectlytransparent. These operations are unceasinglycarried on in our atmosphere, over the wholesurface of the earth. Moreover, the very clouds,by giving out their latent heat, and shieldingthe earth's surface from the direct influence ofthe sun, produce a still further effect, and have aconstant tendency to modify their own formationand existence.The general result of all the complicated andp. u290 METEOROLOGY.beautiful machinery connected with the movementof vapour is, that water is incessantly raisedinto the higher parts of the atmosphere, whereit is again condensed in the form of rain, &c.over the whole earth. We have, therefore, in thenext place to examine a little more in detail therelations of these two great processes of evaporationand condensation, as they are exhibitedin nature.Of the general Relations of Evaporation andCondensation. — The first point in the inquirythat naturally claims our attention, are the mechanicalmotions by which the relations between evaporationand condensation are maintained.The motions of vapour, in a mixed atmosphereof vapour and air, may be considered as of threekinds : those motions arising from convection, inwhich the vapour is carried along by the air ;those motions arising from the tendency of thevapour to recover its dynamical (and thermal)equilibrium, when that equilibrium has been disturbed,and which motions we shall, for distinction,term the proper motions of the vapour ; andthose motions of vapour which are caused bydiffusion.In a mixed atmosphere of vapour and air, themotions of the vapour, on the large scale of theoperations of nature, are influenced, no doubt, inavery great degree, by the motions of the air.For example, large masses of air, more or lessMIXED ATMOSPHERE OF VAPOUR AND AIR. 291saturated with vapour, in proportion to their respectivetemperatures, and having either verticalor lateral motion, must carry with them thevapour they contain, whether there be much orlittle vapour so contained. On the other hand,motions of the air, on a smaller scale, as weshall presently see, may be even caused — maycertainly be accelerated or retarded, accordingas the proper motion of the vapour, to be nextconsidered, may agree with, or may be opposedto, these motions of the air. When once, however,the vapour in the atmosphere has been separated,and has assumed the form of visible vapour,its own proper powers of motion cease, and itbecomes entirely subject to those of convection.Visible vapours, therefore, of all kinds, from theirbeing liable to be wafted by every breeze, are inaconstant state of motion, and are thus frequentlycarried where vapour, in virtue of itsown tendency to motion, would never reach.In an atmosphere of vapour, when the temperature,and consequently the elasticity, of anyportion is reduced ; the surrounding vapour, byvirtue of its greater elastic force, continues toadvance towards the cooler locality, and to bethere condensed until the thermal equilibrium isrestored. The motion thus arising, which dependsupon its dynamical properties, constituteswhat we have denominated the proper motion ofvapour. In an atmosphere of vapour this restoresMETEOROLOGY.tion of the dynamical equilibrium, upon whichthe thermal equilibrium also depends, would takeplace with so great rapidity, as to be almost instantaneous.But in a mixed atmosphere thecase is different. In such an atmosphere, thepresence of the heavier and more abundant airmodifies, in a remarkable degree, the rapidmotion of the lighter and less abundant vapour.Hence, instead of a rush of vapour and a momentarydeluge, the motions of the vapour takeplace slowly ; and sudden evaporation and condensation,with their consequences, are effectuallyprevented.These tendencies to motion, in vapour of differenttemperatures, have, no doubt, great influenceon the contiguous surfaces of largemasses of air differently saturated ; and, in particular,are liable to affect smaller masses of airdifferently saturated, when they are in the immediateneighbourhood of each other. Thus, aswe have already noticed, the disturbance of theequilibrium of the vapour may be to such anextent, in some portion of the mixed atmosphere ;that the surrounding vapour, urged to moveby its tendency to restore the equilibrium, mayoccasionally be supposed to drag with it the airand the clouds, and thus produce local currents.For instance, let us imagine a mass of warm andalmost perfectly dry air to be brought into theMIXED ATMOSPHERE OF VAPOUR AND AIR. 293neighbourhood of another mass of air of preciselythe same temperature, but saturated with vapour.The two masses of air, from being of thesame temperature, would, as air, have no tendencyto intermingle. But as being portions ofa mixed atmosphere of vapour and air, thedryer air would be, as it were, a vacuum,towards which the vapour from the moist airwould have a tendency to flow till both massesof air became equally moist. In such a case,the motion of the vapour might be supposed tocause more or less of motion in the air, while amomentary cloud would probably be formed ;which cloud would be dissipated when the equilibriumwas restored. In this way, it is likelythat many of the minor motions of the atmosphereare produced.*The motions of vapour arising from its diffusivepowers are quite distinct from thosemotions of vapour which are controlled by themotions of the air, or by the dynamical tendenciesof the vapour itself to recover its condition ofthermal equilibrium. These diffusive motionsof vapour, as formerly observed, depend ondifferences between the specific gravities (theabsolute quantities of matter) of contiguousand communicating gases, under the same cir-In all the cases given in the text, the effect of electricity is,for the sake of distinctness, kept out of view.294 METEOROLOGY.substances of pressure and temperature. Thoughthe motions of vapour depending on diffusionmay retard, or be retarded by, the other motionsto which vapour is liable ; in general, there isreason to believe that the motions of vapourby diffusion, in their most decided form, surpass,or take place independently of, all the othermotions of vapour, and in this freedom fromcontrol, resemble the radiation of imponderablebodies. The laws which diffusion obey havebeen already stated, and need not be againrepeated. These laws may be applied to theconsideration of the diffusion of vapour in thefollowing manner.The diffusive tendencies of an atmosphere ofperfectly dry air, and of an atmosphere of vapour,would, as we have seen, at the earth'ssurface be in opposite directions ; the diffusivetendency in the aerial atmosphere, being fromthe Equator toward the Poles, and that in theaqueous atmosphere being from the Poles towardsthe Equator. The vertical tendencies also ofthe two atmospheres would be very different. Anatmosphere of perfectly dry air, in a state ofthermal and dynamical equilibrium, would haveno tendency to diffusion ; for the colder air in descending,and the warmer air in ascending, bychange of bulk, acquire the temperature appropriateto the height. The effect of this changeMIXED ATMOSPHERE OF VAPOUR AND AIR. 885of bulk and acquisition of temperature is, as wehave elsewhere stated, such, that if air from anyheight in the atmosphere were brought to thesurface of the earth, it would have precisely thesame temperature as the air already incumbenton the surface. But the case is different withvapour, even in the comparatively rare statein which it exists in a mixed atmosphere.We have seen that in an atmosphere of vapour,if the temperature at the surface of the earthwere 80°, the temperature at the height of 15,000feet would be only 70° ; while in an atmosphereof perfectly dry air, having a similar surfacetemperature of 80°, the temperature, at the sameheight of 15,000 from the surface, would be snowsas in a mixed atmosphere of vapour andair, the temperature of the air determines that ofthe vapour ; if in such a mixed atmosphere,vapour having the temperature of 32°, werebrought from the height of 15,000 feet to thesurface, where the temperature is 80° ; the temperatureof the vapour would, by increased pressureand the consequent evolution of more latentheat, be increased only to about 42° ; while, aswe have seen, where the temperature of the surfaceis 80°, the point of saturation of the air withvapour is at least 61°. Hence the specific gravityof vapour from the height of 15,000 feet, whenreduced to the same degree of pressure as that296 METEOROLOGY.at the surface, is found to be much below thespecific gravity of that vapour which actuallyexists at the surface. Consequently, throughouta mixed atmosphere of vapour and air, there isa tendency to vertical diffusion, the predominanttendency being from above downwards. Fromthe extreme tenuity of vapour in the higherregions of the atmosphere, and the great tendencytherefore, which that vapour has to diffusion,it is probable that the diffusive motion ofthe vapour may occasionally have a velocityapproaching, as we have said, to that of radiantmatter, itself. In this way the rare and coldmolecules of water may be supposed to dart, orradiate, as it were, far into the warmer atmospherebefore their velocity is arrested. Nay, inthe Polar latitudes, the molecules of water, fromthe higher parts of the atmosphere, may evenreach the earth's surface, by shooting, like raysof heat and light, directly through the air, withoutmaterially affecting its temperature.After these general remarks on the motions ofvapour, we shall now take a rapid view of themutual relations of the two great processes ofevaporation and condensation.We have already described the general phenomenaof evaporation and condensation, andhave stated the laws on which these phenomenadepend. It will, therefore, in this place,EVAPORATION AND CONDENSATION, MUTUAL. 297be sufficient to remind the reader that the degree,and the rate, of evaporation though theyincrease with the temperature, are regulatedchiefly by the existing degree of saturation ofthe air. That is to say, under all temperaturesevaporation decreases, as the air that receivesthe vapour, approaches its point of saturation.Hence it follows, that in an atmosphere perfectlysaturated with moisture, and in a state ofthermal and dynamical equilibrium, there can beneither evaporation nor condensation. The processesof evaporation and condensation, therefore,always indicate a disturbance of the thermalequilibrium in some part of the atmosphere :condensation denoting a depression of the temperaturebelow the mean, or point of thermalequilibrium : evaporation, on the contrary, denotingthat the temperature in some part ofthe atmosphere has been raised above the mean ;or at least that the temperature having beendepressed below the mean, is again undergoingan elevation to the mean point. Evaporationand condensation may be thus considered asmutually dependent ; so that one process cannottake place without the other. For thisreason, in the great expanse of nature, thesetwo processes oscillate or fluctuate about thepoint of equilibrium, within certain limits whichare never passed ; and which limits, though298 METEOROLOGY.subject to countless anomalies, in general, decreasefrom the Equator toward the Poles.With respect to the temperature which constitutesthe point of equilibrium ; in an atmosphereof vapour, that point would, of course, bethemaximum point of saturation. But in amixed atmosphere of vapour and air like that ofour globe, the point of equilibrium cannot bethepoint of utmost saturation, but must be thatinferior point of saturation formerly described,as being determined by the temperature of thepredominant air. Thus at the Equator, wherethe mean temperature at the level of the sea isabout 80°, the mean point of saturation will,according to our former estimate, be 61° ; whilein London, where the mean annual temperatureis about 491°, the mean point of saturation, (orthe dew point, as it is termed,) has been fixedby Mr. Daniell at 441°. In temperate climates,the mean point of saturation at any particularplace, varies with the seasons from day to day,being higher in summer than in winter. Duringany shorter period, as that of a day and night,the mean point of saturation, as might be expected,generally bears a certain relation to thelowest degree to which the temperature has fallenduring the period ; since the Hygrometer* showsThe Hygrometer is an instrument for measuring the degreeof moisture of the atmosphere. That of Mr. Daniell is hereEVAPORATION AND CONDENSATION, MUTUAL. 299that the degree of saturation, at any hour, isseldom below the point of saturation correspondingto the lowest temperature of the twenty-fourhours ; at which point it continues nearlyuniform, so that the point of saturation duringthe warmer parts of the day generally variesonly a few degrees. The elevation and depressionof the dew point in temperate climates isthus another, and unceasing cause of change,and produces a variety in evaporation and condensationso great as to baffle any attempt ataccurate enquiry.From what has been said, it will appear thatin a mixed atmosphere, the rate of evaporationand of condensation, other things being equal,will depend, not on the difference of the temperatureof the air from the maximum point ofsaturation, but on the difference of the temperatureof the air from that of the mean dew point ;that is to say, will increase or diminish as thisdifference increases.The accidental circumstances which principallyoperate to affect the rate of evaporation,are the greater or less extent of the evaporatingsurface, and the velocity and degree of satura-alludedto, which is the only one that acts upon scientific principles.Daniell's hygrometer shows the degree of temperatureat which water is deposited from the atmosphere, and consequentlyits state of saturation.300 METEOROLOGY.tion of the current of air over that surface. Butbesides these causes of variation, there are othercircumstances which probably have great influenceon evaporation ; some of which are to usof the utmost interest, as being brought moreimmediately in contact, as it were, with our existence.The chief of these additional circumstancesaffecting evaporation which we shallnotice, are, Diffusion ; — Circumstances incidentalto the Water which undergoes evaporation ; andCircumstances incidental to the Air into whichthe water is evaporated.By the general arrangement which we formerlyconsidered, it appears that evaporationand condensation diminish from the Equator,onward to the Poles. But since increased temperature,which is the cause of evaporation,predominates at the Equator ; while diminishedtemperature, which is the cause of condensation,predominates at the Poles ; it may perhaps beinferred, that generally speaking, evaporationwill be relatively greater at the Equator ; and,on the other hand, that condensation will berelatively greater at the Poles. In an atmosphereof vapour such unequal effects could notindeed take place ; from the rapid nature of themotions which would arise throughout the wholeof such an atmosphere, so as instantaneously torestore the equilibrium. But in a mixed atmosphereof vapour and air, the result would beEVAPORATION AND CONDENSATION, MUTUAL. 301different. If there were an excess of condensationat the Poles ; before the corresponding evaporationcould take place at the Equator, innumerablechanges would be produced in the atmosphereover all the other parts of the globeintervening between the Equator and the Poles.Further, we shall see presently that much morewater is at all times condensed on the land,than is ever evaporated from the land. Theexcess that is condensed flows off in rivers inwarm and temperate climates, and thus accumulationis prevented ; but in the Polar regionsthis outlet is cut off, and the superfluous waterwould be locked up in the shape of ice. Fromthese circumstances, therefore, and from othersthat might be noticed, it is not unreasonable tosuppose, that in the colder climates, other thingsbeing alike, and the arrangements which regulatevapour being alone considered, condensationof water would proceed much more rapidlythan its evaporation ; and hence that around thePoles there would be a constant accumulationof water in the condition of ice. But we knowthat there is not anv such accumulation, in thoseparts of the Polar regions which have been explored.It is manifest, therefore, that in theseregions the energy of evaporation must be fullyequal to that of condensation. It is indeedtrue, that evaporation goes on very rapidlyfrom snow and ice. Thus Howard mentions302 METEOROLOGY.an instance in the month of January, in a certainyear, when the vapour, from a circular area ofsnow five inches in diameter, amounted to 150grains between sunset and sunrise ; and beforethe next evening, 50 grains more were added tothe amount, the gauge having been exposed to asmart breeze on the housetop. Under like circumstancesan acre of snow would, in the courseof twenty-four hours, evaporate the enormousquantity of 64,000,000 grains of moisture ! Evenby the evaporation during the night only, athousand gallons of water would, in that shorttime, be raised from an acre of snow. It maythus be easily understood how a moderate fall ofsnow may entirely vanish during a succeedingnortherly gale, without the slightest perceptibleliquefaction on the surface.*We have given this statement to satisfy thegeneral reader of the fact, that evaporation isconstantly going on from snow and ice. Butthe quantity, great as it appears, does not surpass,or even equal, what it might be supposed tobe, intermitted principles. Whether, therefore,evaporation really takes place in a relativelygreater degree in the Polar regions, so as tocompensate for that portion of the condensedwater which is there fixed as ice, but which inwarmer climates flows off to the sea, in the formof rivers, remains to be proved ; though, toArticle Meteorology in the Encyclopedia Metropolitan.EVAPORATION AND CONDENSATION, MUTUAL. 303preserve the equilibrium and to prevent accumulations,some such supposition appears to benecessary. Can the difficulty be solved by theaid of the principles of diffusion? Does not aportion of the attenuated vapour of the Polarlatitudes diffuse itself, and penetrate from thencetoward the Equator ; thus leaving the higherregions of the atmosphere in the Polar latitudescomparatively dry, and the lower portion of theatmosphere more apt for evaporation ? And isnot this diffusion of moisture from the Polesone of those beautiful expedients, which compensatefor the inequalities of evaporation andcondensation, and by which these inequalitiesare obviated?The circumstances incidental to water, andaffecting evaporation and saturation, arise chieflyfrom its purity or impurity. The presence offoreign bodies, as of saline matters, for instance,is well known to raise considerably the boiling Vpoint of water ; in other words, they lower itstendency to become vapour, and thus diminishits evaporating and saturating powers. Hencethe air over the sea, though, of course, muchnearer, in general, to the point of saturation appropriateto the latitude and temperature, thanair over the land, is comparatively seldom in astate of perfect saturation ; and sea-water, so farfrom being capable of saturating the air withmoisture, up to the dew point, has even the7304 METEOROLOGY.power of abstracting a portion of the moisturefrom an atmosphere so saturated, and of thus,to a certain extent, drying the air.Evaporation on land is precisely similar toevaporation from sea water, since the variousrocks and soils may be considered as so manysaline matters, diminishing, in their severaldegrees, the tendency to become vapour possessedby the water united with them. Hence,under like circumstances, some rocks and soilsare dry, while others are moist ; so that, in proportionto the evaporating powers of the rocksand soil of a country, will that country be liableto all the consequences of dryness or of dampnessof soil. Plants also seem to differ much intheir capacity for retaining water. The drynessof a country will, therefore, be considerably affectedby the nature of its vegetation ; and thepredominance of certain plants or trees in a districtmay thus increase the dampness of its soil.Regarding the effect that foreign matters inthe atmosphere have in influencing evaporationfrom the subjacent land or water, we are unableto speak with as much confidence, as we havespoken of the controlling power of the foreignmatters in the water itself. Many years ago,particular circumstances led us to form theopinion, that a combination of water and oxygenis a frequent, if not a constant, ingredient in the Iatmosphere. This ingredient, which we supposeEVAPORATION AND CONDENSATION, MUTUAL. 305to be a vapour, and analogous to (we do not sayidentical with) the deut oxide of hydrogen, maybethe cause of numerous atmospheric phenomena,which at present are very little understood.Among such phenomena are those ofevaporation we are now considering.The difficulties attending an investigation ofthe atmosphere, and more than all, the total wantof opportunity, have rendered us unable satisfactorilyto verify the opinion we have advanced.We have stated the opinion as conjectural only,and in order that the attention of those morefortunately situated may be drawn to so importantan inquiry.When treating of the composition of atmosphericair, we observed that the best analysesalmost invariably indicated a slight excess ofoxygen above the amount of 20 per cent., whichthere ought to be in the atmosphere, if its compositionwere, as there can be little doubt that itis, determined by the laws of chemical proportions.Now this excess of oxygen in theatmosphere, we have every reason to think, becomesperiodically associated in some way withthe vapour that is also in the atmosphere ; andthus not only modifies the properties of the vapour,but at the same time materially influencesthe rate of evaporation from the earths surface.This excess of oxygen may operate in the followingmanner. The vapour in union withp. x306 METEOROLOGY.oxygen (deut oxide of hydrogen?) ceases, ofcourse, to act as vapour ; hence in air saturatedwith vapour, and as moist as possible, if a portionof the vapour were suddenly to combine withoxygen, the air would as suddenly appear to becomedry, though in reality it contained thesame quantity of water in solution as before.Moreover the rate of evaporation would be increasedby such a combination of vapour andoxygen ; for its effects, whatever these might be,would be superadded to the ordinary effects ofevaporation, and would thus more or less increasethe quantity of water converted into vapour.Oxygen in this state of combination with vapourseems to be particularly grateful, if notnecessary to animal life. The air in which itabounds is dry, bracing, and exhilarating, whilethe predominance of moisture, from its occasionaland sudden abstraction, induces the oppositefeeling of dulness and listlessness. It isprobable that some soils and situations are morefavourable than others to its existence, and thatplaces are more or less healthy according as it ispresent or absent.The oxygen and vapour in this combination areso feebly associated that they appear to be separatedby the slightest cause. Hence the resultsof every common analysis and examination of airare the same nearly as if such a state of combinationdid not exist. We may mention, however,QUANTITY EVAPORATED AND CONDENSED. 307as corroborative of our opinion, the bleachingqualities of dew and of the air itself, as also thelarge proportion of oxygen sometimes containedin snow water and in rain water ; attention beingat the same time directed to the well knownbleaching qualities of the deut oxide of hydrogen.Much more might be said on this curioussubject, especially regarding its relation to theelectricity of the atmosphere. But as our observationsmust be in some measure speculativewe shall for the present desist.Of the actual Quantity of Water that is evaporatedand condensed over the Globe. — From theprinciples we have stated it will appear that thequantity of water evaporated and condensedover the globe may be supposed to vary withthe mean temperature, and consequently withthe latitude. But, from local or other causes,the quantity varies so much, even in the sameplace, in different years, that the exceptions aremore numerous than the instances of the correctnessof the rule.The following table, however, shews the generaltruth of the supposition, and that the averagequantity of rain diminishes from the Equatorto the Poles. In fact, a much larger quantityof rain must fall in the Equatorial than in thePolar regions, as is sufficiently proved by themagnitude of the rivers within the Tropics ; forthe size of the rivers of course depends on thesoh METEOROLOGY.quantity of the rain ; the rivers being the conduitsalong which a certain portion of the precipitatedwater is borne to the sea.TABLE. . .Inches.Uleaborg \3'5Petersburg 16, 17-5Paris 19-9London *20-7, +22-2, J25-2Edinburgh 22-, 24-5, §26-4Mean of Carlsruhe, Manheim, Stuttgart, Wartburg,Augsburg, and Regensburg, (Show) 25*1Epping 27*0Bristol 29-2England (Dalton's mean) 31*3Liverpool 34-1Manchester 36*1Rome 390Lancaster 39*7Geneva 42-6Penzance 44*7Kendal 539Mean of twenty places in the lower valleys at the base ofthe Alps 58-5Great St. Bernard . . . . • 63-1Vera Cruz . . . 63-8Keswick 67-5Calcutta 81-0Bombay 82-0Ceylon 84-3Adam's Peak, ditto 100*Coast of Malabar 123-5Legate, St. Domingo 150* ||Dalton. f Daniell. J Howard. § Die.|| From the Encyclopaedia Metropolitan. Article Meteorology,p. 123.QUANTITY EVAPORATED AND CONDENSED. 309In this table the names of the places to whichit refers are arranged progressively, according tothe amount of rain that falls in each place ; andthough the progression exhibits great irregularities,yet the table fully establishes the generaldecrease of rain with the increase of distancefrom the Equator.Sir John Leslie has shewn that if all theaqueous vapour which can at any time be held insolution by the whole atmosphere, were at onceprecipitated on the earth in the form of rain, itwould not be more than about five inches indepth : now as in the course of a year manytimes this quantity of rain fall from the atmosphere,its replenishment of course must dependupon evaporation ; of which evaporation we maythus infer the general amount. With respectto the quantity of rain that descends annuallyon the entire surface of the earth, we want themeans of forming an estimate, though there is noproof that this quantity is subject to any materialdifference. The distribution indeed, as we haveseen, diminishes with the latitude, and varies accordingto numerous local peculiarities, to someof which we shall hereafter allude. Often also,no doubt for the wisest purposes, the same placeis liable to considerable fluctuations in the annualamount of rain, or at least in the times ofits precipitation ; yet all these variations oscillatewithin certain limits, and scarcely affect310 METEOROLOGY.the mean quantity proper to the place ; thusshewing that the distribution of rain obeys thesame laws that regulate the more general andfixed operations of nature.Of the whole water that is condensed uponthe surface of the earth, a certain portion, ofcourse, enters into the soil. The depth to whichsuch water sinks is determined by the declivityof the surface, by the nature of the inferiorstrata, and by other circumstances ; but, after agreater or less period, and range of circulation, itusually again makes its appearance in the openday, in the form of Springs. The conjunction ofsprings and the occasional addition of a portionof rain water, which is neither immediately absorbedby the soil, nor evaporated, constitutebrooks and rivulets ; these again uniting in theirprogress from the higher and interior parts ofthe countries where this water has been deposited,form the larger rivers, which, after dispensinginnumerable benefits to the inhabitantsof the plains in their course, finally dischargetheir superfluous waters into the ocean. Asthe origin of the superfluous water which flowsfrom the rivers to the ocean is thus, unquestionably,derived from the vapour condensed in theinterior of the countries where the rivers originate,it follows, that in every country where thereare rivers, condensation must surpass evaporation.That is to say, a large proportion of water con-quantityEVAPORATED AND CONDENSED. 311denied on the land, must have been evaporatednot from the land, but from the neighbouringocean.The relative proportions of the water that iscondensed, and of the water that is evaporatedvary exceedingly in different countries. Suchindeed is the amount and variety of the differencesthat it is impossible to estimate them ;though it is probable that in the same countrythe proportions are nearly constant ; or, at least,that there is a mean proportion about which thedifferences oscillate within trifling limits. Inthis country, Dr. Thomson has estimated that,taking the whole of Great Britain together, themean fall of rain amounts in the course of ayear to 36 inches, the dew being included,(which is considered to amount to about fourinches) ; and that the quantity of water evaporatedis about 32 inches. Consequently, theexcess of four inches must be supposed to go tosupply the springs and rivers ; and as these fourinches are thus not taken up again by evaporationfrom the land, they must be drawn from theseas that encircle our shores.* These estimatesOn heat and electricity, p. 266. It is proper to observe,that this estimate differs considerably from a previous estimateof Dr. Dalton, who fixes the proportion of water as flowingoff by the rivers, in England and Wales, at thirteen inches.It is probable that the truth lies somewhere between the twoestimates.p-312 METEOROLOGY.of the water that is condensed and evaporated inGreat Britain can only be viewed as rude approximations; and, even admitting them to becorrect, they could scarcely be applied with anyadvantage to an inquiry into the actual condensationand evaporation in other countries orclimates, which in all instances must be determinedby observation and experiment.Having spoken of the accidental circumstanceswhich influence evaporation, we are now, in thelast place, to treat of those accidental circumstanceswhich influence condensation.The condensation of vapour from the atmosphere,as we have already stated, differs in somedegree, according to the origin of that diminishedtemperature by which the condensation is produced.We shall, therefore, commence with thephenomena of the precipitation of moisture dependingon the radiation of heat from the earth'ssurface ; the most remarkable of these phenomenaare Dew, Hoar Frost, and certain forms ofMist.Of Dew. — The phenomena of dew were firstsatisfactorily explained by the late Dr. Wells,who showed by the most decisive experimentsthat, apparently, they were all owing to theeffects of the radiation of heat from the earthssurface into space, during the absence of the sun.The reader is referred to Dr. Wells' " Essay onDew" for details. It is sufficient for our presentwDEW. 313purpose to observe, that when the direct influenceof the sun is removed in the evening,and the surface of the earth thus no longercontinues to acquire heat ; at that instant, fromthe ceaseless activity of heat to maintain astate of equilibrium, the surface of the earth,being the warmer body, radiates a portion ofits superfluous temperature into the surroundingspace ; and thus the air immediately in contactwith the surface becomes cooled below thepoint of saturation, and gives off a portion of itswater in the form of dew.We formerly stated that the radiating powersof bodies differ exceedingly according to theircomposition, the nature of their surface, theircolour, &c. These differences, of course, producecorresponding effects on the deposition ofdew ; and, as beautifully demonstrated by Dr.Wells, explain its greater or less depositionunder certain circumstances, or its entire absenceunder others. Thus, what formerly appearedso extraordinary, viz. why in the selfsamestate of the atmosphere, &c. one portion ofthe earth's surface, or one portion of herbage,should be covered with dew, while another in theimmediate neighbourhood should remain dry, is .no longer a mystery, but is perfectly explicable tonthe supposition of their different radiatingpowers.The deposition of dew is always most abundantw..314 METEOROLOGY.during calm and cloudless nights, and in situationsfreely exposed to the atmosphere. Whateverinterferes in any way with the process ofradiation, as might be expected, has a greateffect on the deposition of dew. Hence theradiation of heat, and consequently the depositionof dew, is not only obviated by the slightestcovering or shelter, as by thin matting, or even*>i muslin ; by the neighbourhood of buildings, andinnumerable other impediments, near the earth'ssurface ; but matters interposed at a great distancefrom the earth's surface have precisely thesame effect. Thus clouds effectually preventthe radiation of heat from the earth's surface ;so that cloudy nights are always warmer thanthose which are clear, and, in consequence, thereis usually on such nights little or no depositionof dew.From dew there is an insensible transition toHoar Frost ; hoar frost being in fact only frozenV) dew, and indicative of greater cold. We observe,therefore, that frosty nights, like simply dewynights, are generally still and clear.The influence of radiation in producing coldat the earth's surface would scarcely be believedby inattentive observers. Often on a calm night,the temperature of a grass plot is 10° or 15°less than that of the air a few feet above it.Hence, as Mr. Daniell has remarked, vegetables,HOAR FROST. 315in our climate, are during ten months of the yearliable to be exposed at night to a freezing temperature,and even in July and August to atemperature only two or three degrees warmer.Yet, notwithstanding these vicissitudes, in thewords of the same gentleman, — " To vegetablesgrowing in climates for which they are originallydesigned by nature, there can be no doubt thatthe action of radiation is particularly beneficial,from the deposition of moisture which it determinesupon the foliage ; and it is only to tenderplants, artificially trained to resist the rigours ofan unnatural situation, that this extra degree ofcold proves injurious"* It may be observedalso, that trees of lofty growth frequently escapebeing injured by frost, when plants nearer theground are quite destroyed.Such is the explanation of the phenomena ofdew now universally admitted, of the generalaccuracy of which there cannot be the leastdoubt. But, we may ask, are all the phenomenaof dew strictly referable to radiation?and does not a portion of the water deposited asdew arrive at the earth's surface by diffusionfrom the higher and colder regions of the atmosphere,as formerly suggested ?Meteorological Essays and Observations, p. 511, secondedition.31(3 METEOROLOGY.Of Mists and Fogs. — Mists are not necessarilyconnected with the deposition of dew, becauseduring the deposition of dew the atmosphereoften continues transparent, even to the earth'ssurface. At other times, however, and for reasonswhich, in the present state of our meteorologicalknowledge, cannot be satisfactorily explained,the deposition of dew is accompanied by a visiblevapour or mist, more or less dense, and extendingfrom the surface of the earth to a greater or lessheight in the atmosphere. When mists, fromother causes, are general, and extend to considerableheights above the earth's surface they acquirethe name of fogs. The optical propertiesand the buoyancy in the atmosphere of mists andfogs, Mould seem to indicate that they are notformed of solid particles, but of minute hollowvesicles, having the quality of mutual repulsion ;the tendency to repel each other, preventing thecoherence of the vesicles into drops, at leastunder ordinary circumstances. These vesicleshave been occasionally observed of considerablemagnitude. Thus Saussure, in one of his Alpinejourneys, saw vesicles float slowly before himhaving greater diameters than peas, and whosecoating seemed inconceivably thin. It is properto mention, however, that there is diversity ofopinion respecting the actual constitution ofvisible vapour.MISTS AND FOGS. 317That the cause of the formation of mists andof fogs is, to a certain extent, similar to that ofthe formation of dew, appears by their prevalenceover rivers and large masses of water,especially during the autumnal months. Theradiation of heat from the land and from thewater is at these seasons very different; thedifference being greatest when the temperatureof the water approaches 40°, its point of maximumdensity. The water is then of a temperaturenearly uniform, both by day and by night,while the temperature of the land is, during theday, much higher than 40°, and during the night,often much under that temperature. The waterin most cases occupying the lowest situations ;whenever, from the inequalities of the surface ofthe land, or from any other cause, the colder airproduced by radiation over the land, is made tomix itself with the warmer air over the water,the moisture in the warmer air is condensed soas to become mist. Hence the formation of mistdiffers slightly from that of dew, inasmuch asthere is occasionally (not always) an intermixtureof air of different temperatures. The reason isthus evident of the fogs and mists so frequentlyseen over rivers and in valleys, or in other situationswhere there is a collection of water. Theoccurrence of these mists is usually on clear andcold nights, — oftener in autumn, and seldom or,318 METEOROLOGY.never in cloudy weather ; the state of the atmospherehaving exactly the same influence onthem, as on the deposition of dew. There cannotbe a doubt that these mists, like clouds, producea great effect in impeding radiation, and in thusmitigating the intensity of cold. Mists are thereforeof much importance in the economy ofnature. Plants growing in low grounds are bythem shielded from the destroying influence ofthe sudden cold, that would almost certainly beproduced, not only by the free radiation of heatin such situations, but by the descent of coldair from the surrounding high grounds.The fogs that hang over great towns admit ofan explanation similar to that of other aqueousfogs. The air of the town being warmer thanthat of the surrounding country, and being atthe same time charged with moisture nearly tothe point of saturation, is, in cold weather, suddenlycooled, either by the radiation of its ownheat, or by the admixture of the neighbouringcold air ; while the superfluous moisture is condensedas a fog.The fogs of high latitudes, more especially thefogs of the Polar seas, are in the same mannerowing to the radiation of heat. The cooling ofthe warmer air over the immense masses offloating ice, gives rise to an unequal distributionof temperature, and thus at certain seasons, toCLOUDS. 319uninterrupted fogs. In all these instances theeffect of fogs is probably beneficial in alleviatingthe severity of cold by checking great andsudden alternations of temperature, which wouldotherwise interfere much with the operations oforganic life.Fogs have been sometimes observed of astrong odour, apparently the result of an admixtureof foreign bodies. In a subsequentparagraph these fogs will be fully considered.Of Clouds. — From mists and fogs the transitionto clouds is easy and natural ; as clouds, inreality, are nothing more or less than masses ofvisible vapour, precisely similar to that composingfogs, but existing at a distance above theearth's surface. Clouds differ principally frommists and fogs in their mode of formation. Thusmists, like dew, as we have seen, are the resultof the cooling of the lower strata of the atmosphereby radiation. Fogs are so far the resultof radiation that they usually arise from theinfluence that air cooled by radiation, exerts onwarmer air. While clouds probably dependaltogether on convection, and result from theintermixture of strata of air of different temperatures,and in different states of saturation, inthe higher regions of the atmosphere.Such is the general opinion of the formationof clouds ; but it must be confessed that there320 METEOROLOGY.are considerable difficulties about the subject ;and that the mere assumption of strata of differenttemperatures, more or less saturated withvapour, and having the proper motions supposedto depend upon such different temperatures anddegrees of saturation, seems quite inadequate toaccount for all the phenomena connected withthe formation and appearance of clouds. Maynot many of the phenomena of clouds dependupon the diffusion of vapour from cold anddistant regions ? May not other phenomenaresult from the more or less sudden decomposition(by electricity ?) of the deut oxide of hydrogenwhich we conceive to exist in the atmosphere?From the principles formerly stated when wedescribed the phenomena and properties of amixed atmosphere of air and vapour, it appearsthat clouds. in general must be formed at thatelevation in the atmosphere in which the meantemperature of the air becomes equal to, or fallsbelow the point of saturation of such air. Thiselevation which may be said to constitute theregion of clouds, must of course be highest underthe Equator — an inference supported by fact;for it has been observed that within the tropics,the clouds are most frequently higher than inthe temperate zones ; and in the temperate zonesthe clouds appear to be higher in summer thanthey are in winter. In the temperate zonesCLOUDS. 321Gay Lussac thinks that clouds, in general, areupheld at an average distance from the earth'ssurface of between 1500 and 2000 yards. Occasionally,however, clouds have a much greateraltitude ; and the Cirrus, a form of cloud tobe presently described, has been seen farabove the greatest elevation hitherto attained byman.In some parts of the world clouds are rarelyseen, while in other parts the sky is seldomcloudless. Such extremes are usually confinedto extreme climates, or depend upon localcauses. In the temperate zones, from theirregularity of the atmospheric currents, andfrom the other innumerable circumstances calculatedto disturb the equilibrium of the atmosphere,the general character of clouds variesmuch even under the same parallel of latitude.Hence all the infinite variety of sunshine, ofcloud, and of shower, which more especiallydistinguish the temperate zones, and our ownvariable sky in particular ; where they exertsuch constant and commanding influence uponour comfort and wellbeing, as to become almostinterwoven with our very existence.Though clouds are of such endless diversity offigure and appearance, they have been classedby Howard under three primary forms, and fourmodifications. The three primary forms are :The Cirrus, composed of fibrous-like stripes,p. YIV1-1 METEOROLOGY.parallel, flexuous, or diverging, and extensiblein all directions.The Cupids, heaped together in convex, orinconical masses, and increasing upwards froma horizontal base.The Stratus, spreading horizontally in a continuouslayer, and increasing from below.The first of these forms, the cirrus, is confinedchiefly to the higher regions of the atmosphere.The second form, the cumulus, occupies a lowerbut still an elevated station ; while the third form,the stratus, usually rests on the surface of theearth, constituting the mists already describedin this chapter.Of the four modified forms of clouds, two areintermediate, and two are composite.The first of the intermediate forms is theCirro- Cumulus, consisting of small roundish, andwell-defined masses in close horizontal arrangement.The masses that compose the second intermediateform of clouds, the Cirro- Stratus, arelikewise small and rounded, and are attenuatedtowards a part or towards the whole of their circumference.They are sometimes separate;when in groups, their arrangement is eitherhorizontal, or slightly inclined, and the massesare either bent downwards, or are undulated.Of the two composite forms of clouds, the firstis the Cumulo- Stratus, made up of the Cirro-clouds. 323Stratus blended with the Cumulus ; the Cirro-Stratus being either intermingled with the largermasses of the Cumulus, or widely enlarging theemulous base.The second composite form, and the last of thefour modifications, of clouds, is the Cumulo-Cirro-Stratus, or Nimbus, the rain-cloud ; being thatcloud or system of clouds from which rain is falling.The nimbus is a horizontal layer of aqueousvapour, over which, clouds of the curious formare spread, while other clouds of the emulousform enter it laterally and from beneath.A little attention will enable any one to discriminatethese varieties of clouds, at least whentheir forms are well defined. Yet, it must beacknowledged that clouds often assume forms towhich it is difficult to give a name.With respect to the motion of clouds, it mayberemarked that there is not perhaps a morefrequent subject of optical delusion, nor anythingregarding which, we are more liable to bemistaken. Into such enquiry it would be quiteinconsistent with the design of this treatise werewe to enter minutely ; but we offer the followingbrief illustration . Let us suppose a cloud movingfrom the distant horizon towards the place wherewe stand. Let us also suppose that the cloudduring its motion retains the same size andfigure, and that it proceeds along its course in auniform horizontal line. A cloud so moving,324 METEOROLOGY.when first seen, will appear to be in contact withthe distant horizon ; and will thus necessarily,from its remote position appear to be muchsmaller than in reality it is. During its advancetowards us, the cloud will seem to rise into thesky, and to become gradually larger, till it is almostdirectly overhead. Continuing its progressit will then seem again to descend from the zenith,and to lessen in size as gradually as it hadbefore increased, till at last it vanishes in the distance,opposite to where it commenced its movement.Thus the same cloud, without deviatingfrom its motion in a straight line, and retainingthroughout the same size and figure, will, by opticaldelusion, seem continually to vary in magnitude.The line of its motion also, instead ofbeing straight, will appear to be a curve havingits vertex directly above us, and its extremesboundless in opposite points of the horizon. Wehave given the most simple case that can be supposed.But clouds, as they exist in nature, areunceasingly varying in shape, in magnitude, indirection,and in velocity ; so that to form a justestimate of their figure and direction, or tounravel their motions, becomes absolutely impossible.After what has been stated, it will be superfluousto dwell upon the uses of clouds in theeconomy of nature ; we shall therefore brieflyremind the reader of a few only of the mostclouds. 325obvious benefits derived from clouds. The firstof these that claims our attention is, that uponthe large scale at least, clouds constitute a sortof intermediate state of existence between vapourand water, by which sudden depositions ofwater and their consequences are entirely prevented.If all the water separated from theatmosphere fell at once to the earth, in thestate of water, we should be constantly liable todeluges and other inconveniences, the whole ofwhich are obviated by the present beautifularrangement. Again clouds are one great meansby which water is transported from seas andoceans to be deposited far inland, where waterotherwise would never reach. Clouds also greatlymitigate the extremes of temperature. By daythey shield vegetation from the scorching influenceof the solar heat, and produce all theagreeable vicissitude of shade and sunshine : bynight, the earth, wrapt in its mantle of clouds, isenabled to retain that heat which would otherwiseradiate into space, and is thus protectedfrom the opposite influence of the nocturnalcold. These benefits arising from clouds aremost felt in countries without the Tropics, whichare most liable to extremes of temperature.Indeed, clouds constitute one great means bywhich, in temperate climates, the extremes ofheat and cold are regulated. Lastly, whetherwe contemplate them with respect to their form,326 METEOROLOGY.their colour, their numerous modifications, or,more than all, their incessant state of change,clouds prove a source of never-failing interest,and may be classed among the most beautifulobjects in nature.Having finished the consideration of the variousstates of visible vapour, we are now toexamine the phenomena of the precipitationof water from the atmosphere in the form ofSnow, Sleet, Rain, and Hail. We shall firstspeakOf Snow. — We commence with snow becauseit offers the most simple case of the precipitationof water from the atmosphere ; snow beingnothing more than the frozen visible vapour composingclouds. Hence a flake of snow examinedwith a high magnifier exhibits a beautifuldisplay of minute crystals, often possessingthe greatest variety of form.When the temperature of the atmosphere,down to the earth's surface, is constantly belowthe freezing point, it is obvious that any moistureseparated from the atmosphere must assumethe solid form. If the quantity separated besmall, the frozen particles of water remainingdetached, float in the atmosphere in the form ofcrystallized spiculae, and thus give origin to whatis called the frost-smoke, a phenomenon not unfrequentlywitnessed in polar latitudes. Even intemperateclimates, the same thing has beensnow. 327supposed occasionally to take place in the higherregions of the atmosphere, and thus to producecertain optical phenomena to which weshall hereafter refer.The above are comparatively rare phenomena.Most generally the quantity of water separatedis so large that the crystallized particles areagglutinated together into masses or flakes, andthus fall to the earth in the. form of snow. Whenthe quantity deposited is very great, as is oftenthe case, there can be no doubt that the causesoperating to produce such large deposition, areprecisely similar to those which produce ram inwarmer climates, and which will be consideredin a subsequent paragraph.Such, in few words, are the principles uponwhich snow is formed, and from these the reasonis at once apparent, why during the winter intemperateclimates, and throughout the wholeyear in the Polar climates, most of the water thatfalls to the earth assumes the form of snow.We formerly mentioned how much we owe tothe whiteness of snow ; and we may now remarkthat we owe still more to its low conducting properties,and to its lightness. Thus by its low conductingproperties snow shields vegetation fromthe rigorous cold of the higher latitudes, whereevery thing herbaceous would be destroyedduring the winter, w r ere it not for the protectinginfluence of snow. Again if the water which328 METEOROLOGY.now descends to the earth as snow, were to beprecipitated in the form of solid masses of ice,vegetation would be destroyed, and the whole ofthe colder parts of the earth would be uninhabitable!It has been remarked, in temperate climatesmore especially, that the air is usually warmerduring a fall of snow, than before or after. Thisincrease of temperature probably arises from theextrication of heat in the sensible form duringthe transition of the vapour from a fluid to asolid state. Snow-water has also been said tocontain much oxygen, and thus to be particularlyfavourable to vegetation.Sleet is snow in a half melted condition, andconstitutes the intermediate state between snowand rain, to be next considered.Of Rain. — When the temperature of the airis above 32°, the freezing point of water, thewater separated from the air falls to the earthin the state of rain. Such is a general expressionof the fact ; but after all the attention thathas been bestowed on the phenomena of rain,many difficulties attend the investigation, thathave not yet been surmounted.It cannot be doubted that rain is in some wayconnected with change of temperature ; the perplexityattending the subject, arises, partly fromthe impossibility in many instances of accountingfor the supposed change of temperature ; butRAIN. 329much more from the difficulty of understandinghow this change of temperature operates. Accordingto the usual opinion, the precipitationof water from the atmosphere is the effect ofthe mingling together of currents of warm andof cold air, which are supposed to operate oneach other in the following manner.From the law of the tension of vapour, alreadydescribed, it follows, that when two currentsof air having different temperatures, butboth alike saturated with vapour, are mixedtogether; though the resulting temperature ofthe mixture will be the mean of the two,the resulting tension of the vapour will notbe likewise the mean. The resulting tensionof the vapour will always exceed the tensionbelonging to the resulting mean temperature ;consequently there will be an excess of vapourwhich will be precipitated in the form of water.Thus let us suppose two currents of air, bothsaturated with vapour, the one having a temperatureof 40°, and the other a temperature of60° and that these two currents of air aremingled together ;Inches of Mercury.The tension or elastic force of vapour at 40° is equal to-263of vapour at 60° is . .-524Whence it appears that the mean temperature ofthe two volumes of air is 50°, and the mean ofthe elasticity of their vapour 393 inches. But330 METEOROLOGY.the actual tension or elastic force of vapour at50° is not '393 inches, but only-375 inches;after the intermixture, therefore, of the two currents,a quantity of vapour will remain, proportionateto the tension of '018 inches ; and as thissuperfluity of vapour cannot be held in solutionby air of the mean temperature of 50°, it willbe separated in the form of clouds, or of rain,according to circumstances.Such, in few words, are the opinions respectingrain first advanced by Dr. Sutton ; and notwithstandingsome difficulties about these opinions,there can be little doubt of their generalaccuracy. The subject of condensation, ingeneral, may perhaps receive some additionalelucidation from the principles regulating amixed atmosphere of vapour and air formerlydescribed ; and which may be thus applied.When two currents of atmospheric air of differenttemperatures, and each charged with vapour uptothe point of saturation, are brought into contact; they will begin to intermingle in virtueof the proper motions of the air and vapour,and the immediate result will be the formation ofvisible vapour, that is to say, of a cloud. If thecurrents are continuous and uniform, the cloudssoon spread in all directions, so as to occupy thewhole horizon ; while the additional moistureincessantly brought by the warmer current,or the occasional diffusion of vapour from aRAIN. 331distant and colder region, keeps up a constantsupply for condensation, and produces a greatand continued deposition of moisture in theform of rain. By degrees the currents completelyintermingle, and acquire a uniformtemperature; condensation then ceases, theclouds are redissolved, and the whole face ofnature, after being cooled and refreshed by thenecessary rain, is again enlivened by the sunshine,thus rendered still more agreeable byits contrast with the previous gloom.In this manner the principles formerly detailedmay be applied to the explanation of thephenomena of rain ; and as far as the explanationgoes it is perhaps quite satisfactory.It must, however, be allowed, as we have beforestated, that the utmost information which wecan at present bring to bear upon the subject ofthe general condensation of moisture from theatmosphere, and of rain in particular, leaves itinvolved in considerable obscurity.The following additional particulars regardingthe effects of different localities, and of differentcircumstances in the same locality which appear toinfluence the fall of rain, may interest the generalreader.It has been remarked that in the greaternumber of instances more rain falls in the neighbourhoodof the sea than in the sea ; a fact easilyunderstood from the principles that have been332 METEOROLOGY.stated. Among mountains also more rain fallsthan on plains ; the excess is indeed striking.Thus in our own country, at Kendal and atKeswick, both inclosed by mountains, the annualfall of rain amounts to 67 1 and 54 inches respectively,while in many inland places thequantity of rain that falls in the course of ayear hardly exceeds 25 inches. So at Paris,the annual fall of rain is only about 20 inches,but at Geneva 42 J inches ; and on the Great St.Bernard, the highest meteorological station inEurope, upwards of 63 inches of rain fall duringthe twelve months.Although more rain falls in mountainous districtsthan in plains, it has been completelyestablished, that more rain falls at the foot of amountain than on its top. In general, too, alarger proportion of rain is separated from theair, near the earth's surface, than at any heightabove it ; a discrepancy of which the presentextent of our knowledge does not enable us togive a satisfactory explanation.In most Tropical countries rain falls only atparticular seasons of the year, there beingscarcely any rain during the other seasons.Thus, at Bombay, the rainy months are June,July, August, September, and October, whilethe other months are almost without rain ; buton the opposite side of India, along the Coromandelcoast, the time of the occurrence of therainy season is reversed ; a fact strikingly illus-rain.333native of the effect of the intervention of thehigh table land that separates the two coasts,and which probably, by influencing the atmosphericcurrents, gives rise to this singular alternationof weather.In temperate climates, though the total quantityof rain that falls be much less than within theTropics, there is no protracted dry season ; andthe rainy days in the year are more numerousthe nearer we go to the Poles. Still in general,more rain seems to fall in temperate climatesduring the last six, than during the first sixmonths of the year.Among the circumstances which influence thequantity of rain in the same locality, the mostremarkable are diminution of temperature, andthe unusual prevalence of certain winds.With respect to diminution of temperature ithas been observed that almost all wet seasons,or at least wet summers, in temperate climates,are unusually cold. Now from the principlesformerly advanced it will be easily understood,how a depression of the temperature below thegeneral standard in any locality, may give rise toa greater precipitation of moisture in that locality.The locality that has become colder thanthose around it, acts as a refrigeration, and notonly condenses and thus deprives of their elasticforce, all the vapours that are in contact withit ; but the neighbouring vapours rush towardsthe colder locality as towards a vacuum, either in334 METEOROLOGY.the form of visible vapour or clouds, in whichcase they are carried by the winds ; or as invisiblevapour, in which form their movementmay be determined by diffusion.The effect of the unusual prevalence of certainwinds in producing an increase of rain, orthe reverse, is well known, and is quite intelligibleon the principles we have explained. Thusin tropical climates, during the steady prevalenceof the trade winds, the currents interminglebut little, the atmosphere is perfectly cloudless,and no condensation takes place. But whenthese great currents, following the course of thesun, begin at certain seasons of the year to shifttheir direction ; their uniform course suffers derangement,they become intermixed, and condensationsof moisture commensurate with thehigh temperature, are produced to an extentquite unknown in temperate climates. Thesecondensations form the violent periodical rainsof hot climates. So also in temperate climates,as for instance in our own country, winds comingfrom the south and from the west are froma warmer climate, and hold much vapour in solution; while winds from the opposite points arecolder, and are therefore relatively drier. Hencewinds from the south and from the west, aremore frequently accompanied by rain, than windsfrom the north and from the east : though as we |might expect, the precipitation of rain is mostHAIL. 335decided during the conflicts between these oppositecurrents, which sometimes extend over alarge tract of country. The long prevalence ofcertain winds may thus cause the seasons to bewet in one part of the world, and dry in another ;the water being as it were, distilled off from theone in order that it may be precipitated on theother. Yet the whole amount of the rain in thetwo countries may perhaps differ very little fromthe usual average, while the two countries havethe benefit of variety in the general amount oftheir rain ; which variety may be salutary atparticular periods, and may even be necessaryto their well being.Before we end the examination of the phenomenaof rain, it may be proper to advert to thegenerally admitted influence of the Moon onthe weather, and especially on the fall of rain.This influence, however, can hardly in the presentstate of our knowledge be brought to elucidatethe phenomena of rain ; so great are thedisturbing effects of local and other peculiarities.Of Hail. — The last form in which we have toconsider the precipitation of water from theatmosphere, is hail. Hail may be regarded asconsisting of drops of rain more or less suddenlyfrozen by exposure to a temperature below 32°.If the degree of cold has been very sudden andintense, which is often the case, the icy nucleus,from its being of a temperature far below336 METEOROLOGY.the freezing point, acquires magnitude as itdescends, by condensing on its surface the vapourof the lower regions of the atmosphere.Hence, even under ordinary circumstances, hailstonesoften become of considerable size, arenearly always more or less rounded, and whenbroken are seen to be composed of concentriclayers.From what has been stated it will be readilyinferred that hail is not a product of extremeclimates ; indeed hail may be said to be peculiarto temperate climates, as it rarely ever occursbeyond the latitude of 60°. Hail is most frequentin spring and in summer, when it is oftenaccompanied by thunder. It seldom hails inwinter, and hail during the night is very uncommon.In tropical countries there is littlehail in any place that is not more than 2000feet above the level of the sea : in temperateclimates, on the contrary, mountain tops arealmost free from hail. Certain countries, especiallysome parts of France, are very liable tohail storms ; and such is at times the fury ofthese storms that they lay waste whole districts.There are on record many instances of thesecalamitous visitations, which are usually accompaniedby whirlwinds and by the most appallingelectrical phenomena. During storms of suchdegree of severity, hail stones have sometimesfallen of enormous magnitude, and often of anRELATION OF ELECTRICITY TO VAPOUR. 337irregular shape, as if they were the fragments ofa thick sheet of ice suddenly broken : a suppositionwhich alone will explain the formationof angular masses, many inches in size, andmany pounds in weight. The production in themiddle of summer of the intense cold that isthus indicated is a puzzle which philosophershave been unable to solve.Of the Distribution of Heat and Light in theirlatent and decomposed Forms through the Vapourof the Atmosphere ; and of the Effects of that Distribution.— The general distribution of heat andlight in their latent forms through the vapour ofthe atmosphere, seems to follow the same laws asthe distribution of sensible heat formerly explained.That is to say, the distribution of theseforms of heat and light decreases from theEquator toward the Poles. The most remarkableeffects of the distribution of latent heathave already been incidentally mentioned, andneed not be here repeated. We shall thereforeproceed to consider the particular distributionof the decomposed forms of heat and light inthe vapour of the atmosphere, and the effects ofthis distribution.Of the Relations of Electricity to the Vapourof the Atmosphere. — Atmospheric air, when perfectlydry and pure, is one of the most complete %non-conductors of electricity that are known.Whether water in the state of vapour possessesp. z,-,'•V338 METEOROLOGY.similar non-conducting properties does not appearto be satisfactorily established. But thenon-conducting powers of aqueous vapour mustbe very considerable, otherwise, since the atmosphereis never entirely free from vapour,electrical insulation could not take place. Onthe other hand, the moment that vapour assumesthe form of water, it acquires the property ofbeing a conductor of electricity. Hence a massof visible vapour or cloud, when floating in amixed atmosphere of air and vapour, is perfectlyinsulated, and is thus capable of electrical accumulation.Now the phenomena arising from theequalization of such derangements of electrical distribution,are lightning and thunder. Lightningand thunder therefore are nothing, either more orless, than the phenomena of electricity on a largescale ; that is to say, a cloud and the earth, ortwo clouds, become surcharged with the two oppositeforms of electricity, and thus represent theinterior and the exterior coatings of an electricaljar similarly surcharged ; the intervening andnon-conducting air are represented by the interposedand non-conducting glass ; while thelightning and the thunder are the spark andthe explosion caused by the union of the twoelectricities. If the reader bear in mind thisanalogy, it will enable him to understand thewhole electrical phenomena of the atmosphere.The distribution of electricity, like that of heatRELATION OF ELECTRICITY TO VAPOUR. Demandlight, decreases from the Equator towardthe Poles. Thus, in intertropical countries alone,are the effects of this energetic agent displayedin all their power; there, thunder storms arequite terrific, and far surpass any thing of whichthose, who have not witnessed them, can form aconception. In temperate climates the effects ofatmospheric electricity are usually most severein the summer; and their severity is greaterin mountainous districts than in plains. Yet,even under these circumstances, they are muchsubdued, as compared with what takes placebetween the Tropics ; while in the Polar regionselectrical phenomena are still less striking.Notwithstanding, however, that the generaldistribution of electricity in the atmosphere, evidentlyfollows the general distribution of sensibleheat, it is a remarkable fact, that whenever electricalphenomena are more than ordinarily vehement,they are accompanied by some unusualappearance of cold. Thus the alarming descentsof hail formerly noticed, which occur most generallyin temperate climates, have, in nearly everyinstance, been attendants of violent thunderstorms.Snow also is almost always highlyelectric. These, and many other circumstancesconnected with the great and sudden productionof cold in the higher regions of the atmosphere,during the display of electrical agency,cannot, in the present state of our knowledge,v340 METEOROLOGY.be explained. For example, whence, in themiddle of summer, arises that instantaneousdevelopment of extreme cold, which occasionallyproduces the terrific hailstorms above alludedto? At present the answer does not appear.Whether the principles advanced in thepresent volume be capable of solving the difficulty,time must determine.With respect to the sources of the electricity ofthe atmosphere there have been many opinions.It seems now to be admitted that electrical excitementdoes not arise from the mere evaporationand condensation of water ; but that in orderto produce such excitement, there must alwaysbe some chemical combination or separation.*Thus electrical excitement is the result of thechemical changes which often accompany theevaporation of water. During combustion alsothere is an ample evolution of electricity ; theburning body giving out negative, the oxygenpositive electricity. In like manner, the carbonicacid sent forth during vegetation is chargedwith negative electricity, and at the same timethe oxygen, as is most likely, is charged withpositive electricity. Derivation from these sourceshas been deemed quite sufficient to explain thevery large quantities of electricity that are sooften accumulated in the clouds. It is howeverPouillet, Elemens de Physique experimental et de Meteorologie,torn. ii. p. 823.AURORA BOREALIS. 341probable that there are yet other causes, or atleast one other cause, on which, in numerousinstances, this accumulation may still more immediatelydepend. We allude to the combinationof oxygen with the vapour of the atmosphereformerly mentioned. For reasons whichwe cannot here detail, our opinion is, that thiscombination of aqueous vapour with oxygen,more than any other cause whatever, is in somewayconcerned with the phenomena of atmosphericelectricity.The Aurora borealis is a phenomenon supposedto have some connection with electricity, thoughits precise nature is involved in considerableobscurity. The phenomenon evidently indicatescurrents of some kind ; and if the light beelectrical, we can only suppose such electricalcurrents to take place in an imperfectly conductingmedium. That is to say, if the phenomenon,as some contend, exist in the lowerregions of the atmosphere, luminous electricalcurrents can be produced only by water in theliquid state ; if the phenomenon exist in thehigher regions of the atmosphere, as at presentis supposed, such currents may depend uponthe extreme tenuity of the atmosphere in thesehigher regions. Our own opinion is, that atdifferent times, the aurora borealis exists atdifferent heights in the atmosphere, and consequentlymay depend upon both these causes.S 12 ». METEOROLOGY.Has the diffusion of vapour from the Polartowards the Equatorial regions of the globe anyconnexion with the phenomenon ?The phenomena depending upon the decomposition,refraction, and reflection of light by thevapour of the atmosphere are not less striking andimportant than those produced by electricity.To such effects upon light by the atmosphericvapour we owe not only the cerulean tint ofthe sky, and all the splendid colouring of theclouds, but the beneficial morning and eveningtwilight, nay even the light of day itself. " Wereit not," says Sir J. Herschel, " for the reflectingand scattering power of the atmosphere, noobjects would be visible to us out of direct sunshine,every shadow of a passing cloud wouldbe pitchy darkness; the stars would be visibleall day, and every apartment into which thesun had not direct admission would be involvedin nocturnal obscurity." Again to usethe words of the same author, in speaking oftwilight, — " After the sun and moon are set, theinfluence of the atmosphere still continues tosend us a portion of their light ; not indeed bydirect transmission, but by reflection upon thevapours and minute solid particles which float init, and perhaps the actual material atoms of theair itself"* Such are the beautiful phenomenaTreatise on Astronomy, p. 33.MIRAGE. FATA MORGANA. HALOS, ETC. 343and the important results of the action of thevapour of the atmosphere upon light. It remainsto mention a few others, of a similarcharacter, produced by the same causes, but ofless frequent occurrence and of less importancein the economy of nature.The first of these minor phenomena which weshall notice is the Mirage, a phenomenon dependingpartly on the vapour of the atmosphere,and partly on the intermixture of strata ofair of different temperatures and densities. Themirage is not unfrequent in level countries, whentheir surface is strongly heated by the sun's rays,and evaporation results from the continuance ofthe heat. The mirage assumes the appearanceof a sheet of water, often exhibiting the reflectedor inverted images of distant objects. InEgypt and in the neighbouring sandy plains,where the mirage is very common, the illusion isat times so perfect, that travellers can hardly beconvinced of the non-existence of what theyimagine they see.* The phenomena are quiteexplicable on well known optical principles. fNearly allied to the mirage is the appearancetermed Fata Morgana, which is occasionallywitnessed in the Straits of Messina. There aremany similar phenomena, all of them owing toSee Clarke's Travels.t See Wollaston, Philosophical Transactions, 1800, p. 239.:M4 meteorology.the refraction of light by media of variousdensities.The next class of phenomena to be noticedare those produced upon light by crystals ofice floating in the atmosphere, or by visiblevapour. The angular forms of the crystals ofice, by determining the rays of light in differentdirections, give origin to various eccentric halos ;which, by their united intensities, particularlywhere they cross one another, occasionallyproduce conspicuous masses of light, denominatedparhelia and paraselenes, or mock sunsand mock moons. Visible vapours, consisting ofwater in the fluid state, likewise sometimesform halos ; but these halos (when more than oneexists) are always concentric, the sun or moonbeing in the centre. These two phenomena notunfrequently take place at the same time.The last and most frequent phenomenon ofthe general kind which we shall notice is producedby the action of fluid drops of waterupon light, viz. the well known phenomenontermed the Rainbow. The concomitants of therainbow are familiar to every one : there mustbe rain along with sunshine. Under these circumstancesif the spectator turns his back tothe sun, he sees the coloured bow projected onthe opposite cloud, and displaying all the tintsof the prismatic spectrum.We are informed in the sacred narrative, thatFOREIGN BODIES IN THE ATMOSPHERE. 345this beautiful phenomenon was chosen as asymbol to mankind of their exemption fromfuture deluge. The sceptic may be challengedto state what pledge could have been more felicitousor more satisfactory. In order that therainbow may appear, the clouds must be partial.Hence the existence of the rainbow is absolutelyincompatible with universal deluge from above.So long, therefore, as " He doth set his bow inthe clouds" so long have we full assurance thatthese clouds must continue to shower down goodand not evil upon the earth.3. Of the Occasional Presence of ForeignBodies in the Atmosphere and of their Effects.—The foreign bodies that occasionally exist inthe atmosphere may be considered as of twokinds ; viz. those which are merely suspended inthe atmosphere in a state of mixture ; and thosewhich pervade the atmosphere in a state ofsolution.Both in ancient and in modern times, andin various parts of the world, rain and snowhave been observed to be coloured by an admixtureof extraneous matters. The natureof these colouring matters has been found tobe very different in different instances ; somehave proved to be of vegetable origin, consistingof minute lichens and other cryptogamous plants,brought from a distance by the agency of therw846 . METEOROLOGY.winds, and diffused in myriads through theatmosphere. Such vegetable matters have beensometimes more or less red: whence those imaginedshowers of blood we read of as producingso much popular excitation. In other instancesthe colour has been given by earthy andmetallic matters in a state of very fine powder,and in this case their descent has been usuallyaccompanied by violent electrical phenomena,similar to those which almost always attend thedescent of Meteoric stones or Aerolites, to whichperhaps they are nearly allied.Of the falling of stones from the atmosphere,there can now be no doubt ; though the originand the nature of these stones are very obscure,and indeed cannot, in the present stateof our knowledge, be explained. There havebeen various opinions on the subject. Some, consideringaerolites to be the productions of ourown planet, have viewed them as masses projectedfrom volcanoes to a great height anddistance in the atmosphere ; or as formed by theagglutination of the earthy and metallic powdersfrom volcanoes, as before mentioned. Othersascribing to aerolites quite a different origin,have viewed them as fragments scattered throughspace, which happening to come within thesphere of our earth's attraction, have been determinedto its surface, &c.Although we are thus uncertain regarding theAEROLITES. DRY FOGS. 347origin of aerolites, or their use in the economy ofnature ; it now seems by innumerable observationsto be completely established, that aerolites,while in the higher regions of the atmosphere,are often in a state of intense ignition. Theythere assume the form of brilliant meteors, whichas they approach the earth, burst with a loud explosion,followed by a shower of stones. Thesestones generally exhibit evident marks of fusion ;and many of them have been picked up while stillwarm, so as to leave no doubt of their being realaerolites. It is singular too, that the compositionof aerolites is in some degree peculiar. They invariablycontain, either iron, or cobalt, or nickel,or all these three metals, in union with variousearthy substances. Aerolites have been found ofevery size, from that of a few grains to the weightof several hundreds of pounds ; for of this weightare some of those isolated masses of iron seen indifferentparts of the world, and which are generallyallowed to be of meteoric origin.Intermediate, as it were, between substancessuspended, and substances dissolved, in the atmosphere,are those matters, whatever theirnature may be, which have been known tospread as a haze over large districts, and havebeen termed " Dry Fogs"In the year 1782, and still more in the year following,a remarkable haze of this kind extendedover the whole of Europe. Seen in mass this348 METEOROLOGY.haze was of a pale blue colour. It was thickestat noon, when the sun appeared through it of ared colour. Rain did not in the least degreeaffect it. This haze is said to have possesseddrying properties, and to have occasionallyyielded a strong and peculiar odour. It is alsosaid to have deposited in some places a viscidliquid, of an acrid taste, and of an unpleasantsmell. About the same time, there were, inCalabria and in Iceland, terrible earthquakes, accompaniedby volcanic eruptions. These earthquakesand eruptions were supposed to havebeen connected with the haze. Indeed it hasbeen generally remarked, that such a conditionof the atmosphere has been usually precededby an earthquake, either in the same orinsome adjoining country. The dispersion ofthis haze in the summer of 1783 was attendedby severe thunder storms. As might be expected,the general state of health has, for themost part, been deranged during the continuanceof these phenomena. Simultaneously therehave been epidemic diseases of various kinds.>&// Thus, in the above mentioned years, 1782 and1783, an epidemic catarrh, or influenza, prevailedthroughout Europe ; affecting not onlymankind but likewise other animals.*The nature of the matter thus diffused throughSee article Influenza, in the Encyclopaedia of PracticalMedicine.EFFECTS OF FOREIGN BODIES IN THE AIR. 349the atmosphere is quite unknown. It may be asvarious at different times as the character of theepidemics to which it gives origin. As an exampleof the extraordinary effects which foreignbodies, when diffused through the atmosphere,are capable of producing, we may mentionthose produced by Selenium when, in combinationwith hydrogen, it is diffused as a gasthrough the air, even in the most minute quantity.The effects of this gaseous combination ofselenium with hydrogen are thus described bythe celebrated chemist, Berzelius, its discoverer.In the first experiment which I made on theinhalation of this gas, I conceive that I letup into my nostrils a bubble of gas, about thesize of a small pea. It deprived me so completelyof the sense of smell, that I could applya bottle of concentrated ammonia to my nosewithout perceiving any odour. After five or sixhours, I began to recover the sense of smell, butasevere catarrh remained for about fifteen days.On another occasion, while preparing this gas, Ibecame sensible of a slight hepatic odour, becausethe vessel was not quite close ; but theaperture was very small, and when I covered itwith a drop of water small bubbles were seen toissue, about the size of a pin's head. To avoidbeing incommoded with the gas, I put the apparatusunder the chimney of the laboratory. Ifelt at first a sharp sensation in my nose; myif350 METEOROLOGY.eyes then became red, and other symptoms ofcatarrh began to appear, but only to a triflingextent. In half an hour, I was seized with a dryand painful cough, which continued for a longtime,and which was at last accompanied by anexpectoration, having a taste entirely like that ofthe vapour from a boiling solution of corrosivesublimate. These symptoms were removed bythe application of a blister to my chest. Thequantity of Sulphuretted Hydrogen Gas whichon each of these occasions entered into myorgans of respiration incas much smaller thanwould have been required of any other inorganicsubstance whatever, to produce similar effects"*As we have already stated, selenium is for themost part found in association with mineralsulfur. Selenium is also, like sulfur, a volcanicproduct. Now, though we can hardlyimagine the possibility of the diffusion ofselenium through the atmosphere in combinationwith hydrogen ; selenium may be so diffusedin some other form of combination, whichmay produce effects analogous to those of sulphurettedhydrogen. We do not mean to assert thatthe diffusion of any such substance really takesplace. Our intention is merely to show that asmall quantity of an active ingredient, likeselenium, is sufficient to contaminate the atmosphereover a wide extent of country. Such aAnnals of Philosophy, Old Series, vol. xiv. p. 101.EFFECTS OF FOREIGN BODIES IN THE AIR. 3-31substance being ejected from the crater of avolcano during an eruption, or through a crevicein the earth during an earthquake, may thusproduce an epidemic disease. Nor is it improbablethat many epidemics, particularly those ofa catarrhal kind, have so originated.The matters occasionally diffused through theatmosphere, which appear to be in a state ofsolution, are not often perceptible by our senses,unless in some cases, perhaps, by the sense ofsmell.As an instance of the presence of such bodiesin the atmosphere we may mention a very remarkableobservation which occurred to thewriter of this treatise during the late prevalenceof epidemic cholera. He had for someyears been occupied in investigations regardingthe atmosphere ; and for more than six weekspreviously to the appearance of cholera inLondon, had almost every day been engaged inendeavouring to determine, with the utmost possibleaccuracy, the weight of a given quantity ofair, under precisely the same circumstances oftemperature and of pressure. On a particularday, the 9th of February, 1832, the weight ofthe air suddenly appeared to rise above theusual standard. As the rise was at the timesupposed to be the result of some accidentalerror, or of some derangement in the apparatusemployed ; in order to discover its cause, the suer¥35*2 METEOROLOGY.feeding observations were made with the mostrigid scrutiny. But no error or derangementwhatever could be detected. On the days immediatelyfollowing, the weight of the air stillcontinued above the standard ; though not quiteso high as on the 9th of February, when thechange was first noticed. The air retained itsaugmented weight during the whole time theseexperiments were carried on, namely, about sixweeks longer. The increase of the weight of theair observed in these experiments was small ;but still decided, and real. The method of conductingthe experiments was such as not toallow of an error, at least to an amount so greatas the additional weight, without the cause of thaterror having become apparent. There seems,therefore, to be only one mode of rationallyexplaining this increased weight of the air atLondon in February, 1832 ; which is, by admittingthe diffusion of some gaseous body throughthe air of this city, considerably heavier than theair it displaced. About the 9th of Februarythe wind in London, which had previously beenwest, veered round to the east, and remainedpretty steadily in that quarter till the end ofthe month. Now, precisely on the change jlof the wind the first cases of epidemic cholerawere reported in London ; and from that timethe disease continued to spread. That theepidemic cholera was the effect of the pecu-MALARIA. 353liar condition of the atmosphere, is more perhapsthan can be safely maintained ; but reasons,which have been advanced elsewhere, lead thewriter of this treatise to believe that the virulentdisease, termed cholera, was owing to the same \\'fmatter that produced the additional weight ofthe air. The statement of these reasons herewould be quite out of place : it is enough to say,that they are principally founded on remarkablechanges in certain secretions of the humanbody, which, during the prevalence of the epidemic,were observed to be almost universal ; andthat analogous changes have been observed in thesame secretions of those, who have been muchexposed to what has been termed Malaria. ; *The foreign body, therefore, that was diffusedthrough the atmosphere of London, in February,1832, was probably a variety of malaria, a subjectwhich we now proceed to consider.In districts partially covered with water, andhaving a luxuriant vegetation, such as marshes *tVand fens, particularly in warm countries ; or in ^colder countries, at seasons of the year when thesun is most powerful ; noxious exhalations arise,whose nature differs perhaps in some degree accordingto the locality. Such exhalations havereceived the general name of Malaria, and arewell known to be the fertile source of variousdiseases, more or less, of the intermittent febriletype. In cold and in temperate climates, thesep. A A."$5-1 METEOROLOGY.diseases for the most part assume the characterof regular ague, or of rheumatism : but oni approaching to, and within the Tropics, theyappear as the more formidable remittent andcontinued fevers, the well-known scourges ofhot climates.With respect to the nature of these exhalationsour knowledge is very imperfect. Evidently,they are in some way connected withvegetation ; not however with vegetation livingand in a state of growth, but with vegetation in astate of decay. It has therefore been thoughtlikely that these exhalations contain some gaseousbody, composed chiefly of hydrogen and carbon.Their effect may arise from a gaseous compoundof this description, though no such compound isat present known ; and the probability is, thatmalaria occasionally owes its properties to otherelements, besides the hydrogen and carbon disengagedfrom decaying vegetables.We have thus endeavoured to give a concisestatement of that wonderful assemblage of Laws,of Adaptations, and of Arrangements, whichviewed together constitute what we term Climate;and which, as affecting the welfare of thedenizens of this globe, undoubtedly, are not surpassedin interest or importance by any othersthroughout the whole of nature. Of the innumerablesuns and planets that may occupy theGENERAL DESIGN EVINCED JiV CLIMATE. 355boundless expanse of the universe we feel not theinfluence ; even their existence scarcely obtrudesitself upon our notice. But in the lightand the heat of our own sun, and in the wind andthe rain of our own atmosphere, every organizedbeing on this earth, from Man, the Lord ofits creation, down to the humblest plant thatdrinks the dew, is alike most intimately concerned.The subject of Meteorology, therefore,in all ages and countries, has attractedthe especial attention of mankind. In ruderstates of society empirical prognostic, foundedon the aspect of the clouds, on the movements ofanimals, and on other incidental occurrences,formed the study of those who pretended to afore-knowledge of the weather; while electricalphenomena were to them objects of superstitiousawe. In modern times much of this wonder anduncertainty has been removed. The gloom orthe clearness of the air, the mists and the halosof a stormy sky, the restlessness and clamourof animals, &c, are now referred simply tothat overcharge of moisture, and to that unequaldistribution of electricity which precede a fall ofrain. Nay, the very thunderbolt has beenarrested in its course, and from being no longeran object of amazement, has been divested of halfits terrors.But is this advance in knowledge calculatedto lessen our veneration for the great Author¥'4 30(J METEOROLOGY.of Nature, or to derogate from his wisdom andhis power? On the contrary, our estimate ofboth must be greatly increased. Of the Deity,infinite as he is, and dwelling in infinity, wefinite beings can form no conception. Whatlittle, therefore, we can know of Him, we knownearly altogether from His works. Consequentlyhe who has the most studied His works, will bethebest qualified — nay, will be alone qualified,to form an adequate conception of Him. Thusto measure, to weigh, to estimate, to deduce,may be considered as the noblest privilegesenjoyed by man ; for only by these operationsis he enabled to follow the footsteps of hisMaker and to trace His great designs. Instructedby these, he sees and appreciates thewisdom and the power, the justice and the benevolencethat reign throughout creation : he nolonger gazes on the sky with stupid wonder ; nordreads the thunderbolt as manifesting the wrathof a vengeful Deity.The constituents of climate, even imperfectlyas they can be understood by us, are seen to beadjusted and arranged in a manner so surprising,that to those who admit the existence of design,they require only to be stated and apprehended,in order to their being received as additionalproofs of that great argument. Where all aregreat, and splendid, and good, selection is precluded; but the circumstances accompanyingGENERAL DESIGN EVINCED BY CLIMATE. 357the distribution of Water over this globe, moreperhaps than any other, arrest our notice asindicative of design. Leaving out of view theother properties of water ; on what other supposition,besides that of design, can we accountfor all these astonishing properties on whichdepend its evaporation and diffusion throughthe atmosphere — its subsequent condensation,not at once in the form of water or of ice, but inthe intermediate state of clouds — its colour andlightness when in the state of snow — its power ^jfof refracting light and of conducting electricity *in short, all the numerous, minute, and happilycontrived qualities displayed by this highlyelaborated fluid ? These together form such aunion of adaptations and arrangements, eachmost successfully accomplishing a particularpurpose, and apparently directed to, and designedfor, that purpose, that to doubt the agencyof design would seem impossible. Yet thereare some men's minds so warped that theyeither cannot or will not be persuaded of theexistence of design; but asserting the omnipotenceof the laws of nature, they forget Himwho framed these laws, and are reluctant to givecredence to His being or to His power. Tosuch persons Meteorology offers one or two exclusivearguments, which, at the risk of beingaccused of tediousness, and unnecessary repetition,we shall urge briefly in this place.358 METEOROLOGY.The great Author of Nature, as we havebefore said, has chosen to act agreeably to certainestablished laws, by which he is invariablyguided. Some of these laws we are able moreor less to comprehend, and we can refer themto more general principles. Others are beyondour comprehension : we see only their effects ;and even these effects are most imperfectly revealedto us. As instances of the laws of naturewhich it is in our power to refer to general principles,may be mentioned the currents in theocean and in the atmosphere, by which the equilibriumof temperature over the globe is maintained.These currents, we know, are strictlyreferable to hydrostatic and pneumatic principles.The argument of design, which is deduciblefrom these principles, rests, therefore,not so much on the principles themselves, ason their application precisely where they arerequisite. On the other hand, as we stated atthe commencement of this book, the laws ofchemistry are founded solely on experience ;so that our acquaintance with them is very defective; for in very few instances are theyreferable to the laws of quantity, and evenwhen they can be so referred, it is only in amanner very imperfect. But though we donot comprehend the laws of chemistry, we seethat many of them, perhaps all, in so far asthey are intelligible to us, are entirely consistDEi>I(iN EVINCED BY CLIMATE. 359tent with each other ; and are as uniform in theiroperation as those which obviously depend onmechanical principles, or on the laws of gravity.Thus the laws, that all bodies are expanded byheat and are contracted by cold — that chemicalsubstances do not mix, but always combinein certain proportions, and in no others, — aregeneral laws, to which there are so few exceptions,that they are calculated on almost withas much certainty, in the operations of nature,and in the common intercourse of mankind ;as the invariable and necessary results, that aheavy body will fall to the earth, or that twoand two make four. We have selected theselaws of chemistry partly from their generaland indisputable character, and partly that theforce of the argument which follows may bemore conspicuous:All bodies are expanded by heat and are contractedby cold. If water had not constituted anexception to this law, though all its other propertieshad been the same as they now are, longbefore this time, as we have seen, half thewater on the globe would have been convertedinto ice ; and the existence of organized beingswould have been physically impossible.All chemical substances combine in certainproportions, and in no others. If air had beenformed according to this law, every thing elsebeing the same as at present, long before thisVDGO METEOROLOGY.time, half of the air in the atmosphere wouldhave been contaminated, and rendered unfitfor the support of animal life. In order, therefore,that water might not be frozen ; and thatair wight not become irreparable ; laws must beinfringed — and they are infringed ; infringedtoo, precisely where their infringement, both inkind and degree, is indispensably necessary toorganic existence. Now, we appeal to the mostinflexible sceptic regarding the argument ofdesign, and ask him, on what other principle,unless that of express adaptation and design,can two such general laws have been infringedexactly in those instances in which their infringementis wanted, and no where else? Ofthe sophistry by which the evasion of thisplain question may be attempted, we are quiteignorant. But we cannot resist the conviction,that one purpose of the arrangement has beenthat of confounding the presumptuous sceptic ;who is thus perpetually reminded of the infringementof his boasted " laws of nature," bythe very water he drinks, and by the very airhe breathes.With respect to foreign bodies in the atmosphere,which have been treated of in the lastsection, it remains to observe, that though ofvery opposite characters, they have yet thisresemblance ; that they all apparently exist lessontheir own account, than as being the in-generalDESIGN EVINCED BY CLIMATE. 3(31suitable results of general laws established forahigher purpose. Such results of generallaws may be considered as analogous to thecoldness and darkness, which necessarily prevailaround the poles, from the earth's position inrelation to the sun ; and they have been alikepermitted, not because they could not havebeen avoided or removed, but in the languageof Paley, before quoted, " because the Deityhas been pleased to prescribe limits to his ownpower, and to work his ends within theselimits."Man, forgetting how insignificant he is, andhow limited his utmost knowledge, is too aptto measure Omnipotence by the standard of hisown narrow intellect, and to be guided by his ownselfish feelings, in judging of the extent of Divinebenevolence. That this earth, a minute fraction,as it is, of a great and wonderful system, shouldbe amenable to the general laws by which thewhole system is governed, is, at the least, exceedinglyprobable. Of such general laws, oftheir changes, of their aberrations, or of theirinfluences, we, situated in this extremity ofthe universe, cannot see the object. What, therefore,appears to us anomalous or defective,may in reality be parts of some great cycle orseries, too vast to be comprehended by thehuman mind, and only known to beings of ahigher order, or to the Creator himself. So:)(i'2 METEOROLOGY.again, amidst the desolation of the hurricane,or of the thunderstorm ; in the settled afflictionof malaria, and in the march of the pestilence ;the goodness of the Deity is impugned, hispower even, is regarded doubtfully. But what,in truth, are all these visitations but so manyexamples of the "unsearchable ways" of theAlmighty ; " He sits on the whirlwind, anddirects the storm: 1 ' a hamlet is laid waste;a few individuals may perish ; but the generalresult is good : the atmosphere is purified ; andpestilence with all its train of evils disappear.Nay. however inscrutable the object of thedeadly malaria itself, do we not see one endwhich it serves, namely, to stimulate the reasoningpowers, and the industry of man ! By hisreason, man has been guided to an antidote beneficentlyadapted for his use, which has striptmalaria of half its terrors. By his industry,the marsh has been converted into fertile land,and disease has given place to salubrity.When, therefore, we duly consider all thesethings ; when we reflect also on the number,the properties, the various conditions of thematters composing our globe ; the wonder surelyis, not that a few of these matters occasionallyexist as foreign bodies in the atmosphere,but that others of these matters are notat all times diffused through it, and in suchquantity as to be incompatible with organiclife. Thus, the original constitution of theADAPTATION OF ORGANIZATION TO CLIMATE. 363atmosphere, and the preservation of its purityagainst all these contaminating influences, maybeviewed as the strongest arguments we possess,in demonstration of the benevolence, thewisdom, and the omnipotence of the Deity :benevolence in having willed such a positivegood ; wisdom in having contrived it ; and omnipotencein having created it, and in still upholdingits existence.CHAPTER VI.OF THE ADAPTATION OF ORGANIZED BEINGS TOCLIMATE ; COMPREHENDING A GENERAL SKETCHOF THE DISTRIBUTION OF PLANTS AND ANIMALSOVER THE GLOBE ; AND OF THE PRESENT PositionAND FUTURE PROSPECTS OF MAN.In the general survey of climate, and of itsreference to organization, given in the precedingchapter, we have seen, on the one hand,that, by a series of wonderful expedients, theclimate or temperature of the greater portionof the earth's surface has been so equalized asto be brought within the range of organic existence.On the other hand, we shall find that,by a series of expedients, no less wonderful,organic existence has been so diversified andextended, as to include all the possible varietiesof soil and climate. Hence, the arrangement,304 METEOROLOGY.taken altogether, presents us with such extraordinaryinstances of mutual adaptation of its variousconstituents to each other, as to admit ofexplanation only upon the supposition of thewhole being different parts of the same magnificentDesign ; while the infinite variety, whereall might have been otherwise, must be consideredas equally indicative of the Benevolence,and the Power of the Designer.Next to Climate, the circumstance in whichorganized beings are more immediately concernedis Soil ; a subject already alluded to,but which it will be necessary to illustrate alittle further before we proceed.The soil is that collection of matters, moreor less in a state of comminution, which immediatelycovering the general surface of theearth, fills up its minor inequalities, and roundsoff its asperities. On this layer of comminutedmineral substances and organic remains, allvegetables and animals, at least all land animals,depend for their existence ; and, if thereever was a time when the materials composingthis globe were collected into solid masses, itis evident that such a condition must haveexcluded organic life ; even if every thing elsehad existed the same as at present.The formation of the soil has apparentlybeen a work of time, and the result of thegradual attrition of the solid materials com-soils.365posing the crust of this globe. Hence theformation of soil has probably been always progressive,and is still going on. Besides this gradualattrition, the harder materials of our globeseem to have suffered much disintegration duringthose periodic convulsions formerly mentioned,By the same convulsions, also, the differentcomminuted materials have evidently beenmixed and scattered, and finally deposited overthe surface of the whole earth, so as to giveoccasion to that infinite variety which everywhereprevails.The foregoing remarks naturally lead to theconclusion that the characters of the soil willgenerally agree with those of the rocks composingthe crust of the earth ; and this infer ^N/once is correct. The more common ingredientsin rocks are silex, alumina, lime, magnesia,and iron ; and these mineral matters actuallyconstitute the greater bulk of every soil. Theremaining matters consist of more or less ofvarious other earthy and saline principles, andof vegetable and animal remains.After these general observations upon soils,we come to the prOper subject of this chapter,which we shall consider under the three followingsections : — Of the Distribution of Plantsover the globe; — Of the Distribution of Animalsover the globe ; and, — Of the present Conditionand future Prospects of stan.'MUi METEOROLOGY.Section I.Of the Distribution of Plants over the Globe.From what has been stated, it will be readilyunderstood that Soil and Climate are the twogreat and immediate causes by which vegetableand animal existence are likely to be affected.We shall, therefore, in the first place, takea view,1. Of the differences of Vegetation, as liable tobe influenced by Soil, and by other minor LocalCircumstances, in the same Climate. The mostincurious observer, in travelling through acountry, must be struck with the differentvegetation that prevails in different parts ofthe country ; and with the effect which thisdifference produces on the manners and onthe health of the inhabitants. Thus, in someparts of England, the Apple and the Pear areseen growing spontaneously in every hedgerow; while, in other parts, apple and peartrees will not flourish, even with the utmostcare. Some situations are favourable to theOak, others to the Beech, others to the Elm.Accordingly, these well-known and beautifultrees predominate in some districts, almost toDISTRIBUTION OF PLANTS. 307the exclusion of every other, and thus constitutethe leading feature in the landscape.These are familiar examples of partial changesamong the larger vegetables of a country ; whilethe general vegetation is supposed to remainnearly the same. Between such partial change,and the complete establishment of a peculiarvegetation, there exists among different localities,every possible shade of diversity. Many ofthese differences in vegetation are obviously connectedwith differences in soil and in situation.Thus, some plants will thrive only on a calcareoussoil ; as a few of the Orchis tribe in ourown country, and the Teucrium montague inSwitzerland. Others, like the Salsolas and theCalifornia, will only grow in salt marshes.Some plants flourish in sea water, some infresh ; while to others again, water, at leastin excess, is so prejudicial, that they can existnowhere, unless on bare rocks, or in arid deserts.Mountainous situations are most favourable tothe increase of some plants, while others aboundin plains. The larger number of plants prefersunshine, but some are most vigorous in theshade ; and others are so impatient of light,that they are found only where there is absolutedarkness. There are, besides, parasiticplants, like the Mistletoe, whose nourishmentis derived from the plants to which they areattached. In short, the varieties in the nature^308 Meteorology.of plants are countless, nor is the enumerationof them requisite. What has been stated ismore than enough to show the wonderful arrangementsthat have been made, to ensurethe clothing of every part of the earth's surfacewith vegetable organization. There is notasoil, however barren, nor a rock, howeverflinty, that has not its appropriate plant ; whichplant has no less wonderfully found its way tothe spot adapted for it, nay, will perish if removedelsewhere. Saline plants, for instance,will grow only where saline matters are abundant; plants of the marsh, and of the bog,flourish only in marshy and boggy ground ;those of the parched desert and of the cloudymountain, each in its fitting locality. Thus thesoil and its occupant seem to have been madefor each other ; and hence one source of thatastonishing variety exhibited in nature.There are still more remarkable deviationsamong the plants of different countries remotefrom one another ; even where the circumstancesof climate and of soil are in everyrespect alike. The plants of the Cape of GoodHope, for instance, differ exceedingly fromthose of the south of Europe, though the climateand much of the soil be not dissimilar. Often,on the same continent, nay, on the same ridgeof mountains, the plants on the opposite sideshave no resemblance. " Thus, in North AmesOF PLANTS. 309rica, on the east side of the rocky mountains,Azaleas, Rhododendrons, Magnolias, Vacciniums,Access, and Oaks, form the principal featuresof the landscape ; while on the western sideof the dividing ridge, these genera almost entirelydisappear, and no longer constitute astriking characteristic of the vegetation"*In general, the plants of America are differentfrom those of the old world, except towards thenorth, where, as it might be expected from thenear approximation of the two continents, many ygsindividuals are common to both. The plantsof islands, an those growing in isolated situationsare often quite peculiar. Thus the plantsof New Holland, with comparatively few exceptions,differ from those of all the rest of theworld ; and, " of sixty-one native species, in thelittle island of Saint Helena, only two or threeare to be found in any other part of the globes']These facts are quite inexplicable upon anyknown principles ; and are calculated to excitea more than ordinary degree of attention, asbeing solely referable to the will of the GreatCreator ; who has chosen to provide infinitediversity where all might have been uniformand monotonous ; and has thus rendered moreLindley's Introduction to Botany, page 489.f See Principles of Geology, by C. Lyell, vol. ii. where thisinteresting subject is considered in detail.P. B B;}7<> METEOROLOGY.conspicuous his wisdom, his power, and hisgoodness.2. Of the Influence of Climate on Vegetation.The climate of a place, as has been beforeshewn, independently of minor local causes,is influenced chiefly by the two following circumstances: — the Latitude of the place ; in otherwords, the general portion of heat and lightwhich it receives from the sun ; — and its Heightabove the surface of the sea ; by which circumstanceof elevation, the heat at least receivedfrom the sun, is liable to be varied as muchas by latitude ; but the variation is accordingto other laws than those which depend on merelatitude, indeed, according to laws which varyin different latitudes.Every one is acquainted with the generalfact of the difference between the plants ofwarm and those of cold countries ; betweenthe plants that grow on plains, and those thatgrow 7 on mountains. Thus, " in the countrieslying near the Equator, the vegetation consistsof dense forests of leafy evergreen trees, Palms,and arborescent Ferns, among which are intermingledepiphytal herbs, and rigid Grasses.There are no verdant meadows, such* as formthe chief beauty of our northern climate, andthe lower orders of vegetation, such as Mosses,Fungi, and Conserve are very rare. As werecede from the Equator, the plants aboveDISTRIBUTION OF PLANTS. 371mentioned gradually give way to trees with deciduousleaves ; rich meadows appear, aboundingwith tender herbs; the epiphytal Architect are nolonger met with, and are replaced by terrestrialfleshy-rooted species ; Mosses clothe the trunks ofaged trees ; decayed vegetables are covered withparasitical Fungi; and the waters abound withConferva. Approaching the Poles, trees whollydisappear; dicotyledonous plants of all kindsbecome comparatively rare ; and Grasses andcrypt organic plants constitute the chief featuresof the vegetation"*Changes not very dissimilar are observed inthe vegetation at different heights on the mountainsof warm climates. Thus, at the base ofthe celebrated Peak of TenerifFe, the plantshave all the distinguishing characters of thoseof Africa. There flourish the succulent Euphorbia,the Mesembryanthema, Draccena, &c. :also the Date palm, the Plantain, the Sugarcane,and the Indian-fig. A little higher, growthe Olive tree, the fruit trees of Europe, the Vine,and Wheat. Then succeeds the woody regionof the mountain ; where from the numeroussprings the ground is always verdant. In thatregion is seen a profusion of beautiful evergreens: such as various species of Laurel, oneof Oak, two species of Iron tree, an Arbutus, andseveral others. Next above is the region of pines,Lindley's Introduction to Botany, page 484.272 METEOROLOGY.characterized by a vast forest of trees resemblingthe Scottish fr, intermixed with Juniper. Thenfollows a tract remarkable for the abundance ofa species of broom. At last the scenery is terminatedby Scrofularia, Viola, a few Grasses, andcryptogamia plants.*The proportions which different groups ofplants bear to each other, vary exceedingly indifferentlatitudes. An interesting table givenin the Appendix, slightly altered from Humboldt,exhibits the proportional amount of somenatural groups of plants to the whole mass ofvegetation in the zones mentioned ; and will |enable the reader to understand the relation ofvegetable forms to the greater or less distance oftheir place of growth from the Equator. Thearrangement is so obvious as scarcely to requireexplanation. Thus in the equatorial zone, between10° north and 10° south latitude, the firstgroup, including Ferns, Lichens, Mosses, andFungi, constitutes on the plains only 1-loth, buton the mountains 15th of the whole number oflplants that exist in that zone. While in the tern joperate zone the proportion of the first group of. 1plants is at least one-half of the whole number,and in the frigid zone, the entire vegetation consistsof plants of that group. The distributionof the other groups is equally remarkable.From this table we learn many interesting!Humboldt.IDISTRIBUTION OF PLANTS. 373particulars in addition to what has been alreadystated regarding the distribution of plants overthe surface of the globe. We may noticeespecially the striking difference between theFlora of the Old and that of the New world, incorresponding parallels of latitude. These differences,in a great many instances, are undoubtedlyreferable to the unknown causes towhich we have before alluded. But in otherinstances, they are obviously connected with thedifference of temperature that prevails in the twocontinents under the same parallel. Before weproceed, let us dwell a little longer on the considerationof these beautiful arrangements.In Tropical countries alone, beneath a verticalsun, do we see vegetation in all its gloryand magnitude. There, the form, the colour,and the odour of plants are developed to theutmost ; and where else could they be so developed? where else could the majestic palm rearits towering stem, and send forth its giganticleaves? where else could we expect to findgroves ever verdant, blooming, and productive?Amidst eternal summer, all this is in character ;forests denuded of their leaves, and for half theyear assuming the appearance of death, would insuch a climate be perfectly incongruous. Butincountries remote from the Equator, and inwhich, during many months, the temperatureis more or less depressed, a vegetation thus374 METEOROLOGY.incessantly active could not exist, nor wouldit be appropriate. Accordingly, the palm tribe,and many of the more distinguishing productionsof the Tropics become gradually fewer innumber as we recede from the Equator, andat last give way entirely to deciduous plants;that is, to plants endued with the power ofhyberfiating, or sleeping, as it were, in thecolder season ; and which Vegetate only duringthe warmer portion of the year. And here wehave displayed another of those admirable provisions,which at once strike us irresistibly asbeing the effect of design ! In Tropical countries,where the seasons are uniform, and wherethere is no cold to injure, the leaf buds of plantsare without covering or protection, and are freelyand Confidently exposed to the atmosphere. Butinclimates where the seasons change, and wherevegetation is liable to be suspended by the cold,the leaf buds exhibit a structure remarkablydifferent. Developed in the latter end of summer,or autumn, they are almost invariably providedwith segments or coverings ; within which, duringtheir period of torpor they are cradled, safe fromcold and from accident !As we advance still further to the north or tothe south, where the winter becomes more severeand of longer continuance, deciduous plants intheir turn diminish both in number and in magnitude; and after having shown themselves underDISTRIBUTION OF PLANTS. 37-3a variety of stunted forms, are at length almostentirely superseded by a few coarse grasses andlichens. Yet even here design is apparent.These hardy natives of the poles are, from thesimplicity of their structure, wonderfully adaptedto the climate of the region they occupy ; in whichalone they will flourish, and for which alone,therefore, they have been expressly created.Though it be generally true that plants willgrow only in the soil and climate adapted forthem ; yet, as if intentionally to evince Hispower, the Great Author of nature has createdsome manifest exceptions to this rule. Allorganized beings have been more or less endowedwith the faculty of accommodating themselvesto circumstances. In the larger numberof plants this faculty scarcely exists ; but insome it is much stronger ; and in others, constitutingthe exceptions to which we allude, the extentof the accommodating faculty is almost incredible.In general, plants that are the nativesof peculiar soils, and of extreme climates, are themost impatient of change ; while the natives ofordinary soils, and of temperate climates, have awider range of growth. The exceptions to therule of adaptation are chiefly among plants thatare natives of such soils and climates. Thusthe Famous ValerancU is found all over theworld, from the frozen north to the burningsouth ; associated here with Birches, and similar.376 METEOROLOGY.northern forms, and there mixed with Palmsand the genuine denizens of the tropics. Thenumber of plants, however, which can thusaccommodate themselves to all circumstancesand climates is limited ; while those whichreadily naturalize themselves in climates similarto their own, are, on the other hand, numerous.Of the latter, indeed, examples presentthemselves at every step. All the hardyplants, for instance, of our gardens may in somesort be considered of this nature ; for althoughthey do not grow spontaneously in the fields,they flourish almost without care in our gardens.The Pine apple has gradually extended itselfeastward from America, through Africa, into theIndian Archipelago, where it is now as commonas if it were a plant indigenous to the soil ; andin like manner the Spices of the Indies havebecome naturalized on the coast of Africa andthe West India islands." To this property ofnaturalizing themselves, no doubt, is to be referred,in a variety of instances, the presence ofthe same plants in different countries. Forthough, as we have just stated, the Flora ofdifferent countries is generally different, yet inalmost all instances, some plants exist whichare found in other countries. Thus " above 350species are said to be common to Europe andNorth America ; and even among the peculiarfeatures of the Flora of New Holland, Mr. BrownDISTRIBUTION OF PLANTS. 377recognised 166 European species. The presenceof many such strangers may undoubtedlybe referred to the agency of man and otheranimals ; to currents in the ocean, to winds, anda variety of natural causes." While " the presenceof others, seems inexplicable on any othersupposition than that they have been created inthe places where they now exist"*Hitherto we have considered plants only in relationto the soil and to the climate in which theygrow ; and have not entered into details respectingall the beautiful arrangements, by which theirgrowth has been accomplished. The considerationof these arrangements belongs to the Physiologist,the Botanist, and the Geologist, withwhose duties we wish as little as possible, tointerfere. There is, however, yet one point ofview in which our argument naturally leads usto consider vegetation ; namely, as forming thelink, by which animals are connected with theearth ; in other words, as furnishing to animalsthe means of subsistence.One circumstance, which, perhaps, more thanany other is calculated to arrest our attentionwith respect to vegetable productions in generalistheir vast profusion in every sense of theterm ; whether we contemplate their variety, theirmagnitude, or their number. Thus the numenIntroduction to Botany, p. 501.378 METEOROLOGY.rous and varied plants growing in tropical climatesare equally remarkable from their size,their luxuriant foliage, and the exuberance oftheir roots and seeds. Let us take, for instance,the palm tribe. It has been estimated that thereare a thousand species of palms ; and thoughthe number actually known to exist is by nomeans so large, yet late discoveries seem torender the estimate not improbable. In manyof the palm tribe the development of the form,and the quantity of flowers and fruit is altogetherextraordinary. Among others, the specieswhich yields the well known Cocoa nutsgrows to the height of eighty feet ; each plantflourishes for a century, and, during the greaterpart of that time, continues to produce annuallyat least a hundred of these large nuts. Yet thecocoa nut species may be considered as one ofthe least productive of the palm tribe : for everybunch of another species, the See palm of theOrinoco, bears as many as 8000 fruit ; while asingle spatula of the Date palm contains 12,000flowers ; and in a third species, the AlfonsoMagdalena, there is the enormous number of207,000 flowers on each spatula ; or 600,000 on asingle individual plant !In superlative exuberance, however, the Palmtribe must yield to the Banana, or Plantain,another inhabitant of tropical countries. Thefruit of this plant is often a foot in circum-distributionOF PLANTS. 379terence, and seven or eight inches long : itis produced in bunches, containing usually fromloo to 180 fruit; and each bunch weighs from66 to 88 pounds avoirdupois. As Humboldthas remarked ; the small space, therefore, of1000 square feet, on which from thirty to fortyBanana plants may grow, will, on a very moderatecomputation afford, in the course of a year,4000 pounds weight of fruit; a produce 133times greater than could be obtained from thesame space, if covered with wheat ; and 44 timesgreater than if occupied by potatoes. TheOrange tree may be mentioned as another instanceof extraordinary fecundity ; thus a singletree at St. Michael's has been known to bear in aseason 20,000 oranges fit for packing, exclusivelyof those damaged and wasted, amounting to atleast one third more. An example to the sameeffect, but of a different kind, is the Sugarcane,which furnishes an unlimited supply ofsaccharine matter in its purest form ; while variousroots, as those of the Cycas Jatropa, andmany others abound equally in farinaceousmatters.As we withdraw from the Equator into theregions of liberating plants, vegetation is seenon a much less magnificent scale ; though in thetemperate climates, and even where we mightexpect to find utter sterility, number, in somedegree, compensates for magnitude. Thus, METEOROLOGY.stead of the single stupendous tuft of thepalm, we have the numerous congregated budsof our deciduous trees ; instead of the giganticand solitary grasses of the torrid zone, we havethe smaller and gregarious varieties. Some ofthese varieties, as the Cereals, or Corn tribe,with their myriads of seeds, give us an inexhaustiblesupply of farinaceous aliment ; whileothers, as the Grasses properly so called, clotheour meadows with verdure, even to extremelatitudes ; and are equally productive of matterpurely herbaceous. In the warmer parts of thetemperate zone, the Olive and the Vine affordthe oleaginous and the saccharine principlesunder a form, different, but not less useful thanthe oil and the sugar of the tropics ; while inthe colder parts, various seeds, and hardy fruits,produce an ample store of the same valuable articles,though in a condition still further modified.In the preceding sketch we have intentionallykept out of view the existence of animals,that we might here ask the question, Of whatuse is all this amazing exuberance of superfluousmatter throughout the globe ? The adaptationof plants to the climates in which theyflourish is evidently the work of an intelligentCreator. But is this apparent waste of materialsand of labour to be reconciled with thesame wise agency ? Surely, the mere existenceof vegetation did not require such prodigality.DISTRIBUTION OF ANIMALS. 381Seeds, for instance, need not have been envelopedin bulky fruits ; nor need they have been producedby myriads : and all that foliage, all thoseflowers, and roots, in such amazing profusion,of what use are they ; why were they so created?Regarding vegetation as a thing simply adaptedto climate, and existing for its own sake alone,the question scarcely admits of a rational answer.But, considering at the same time theexistence of animals, and viewing these superfluitiesas the means by which animal existenceis principally upheld, every difficulty vanishes,and the splendid design of the whole wonderfulscheme becomes at once apparent. We are thusbrought to the consideration of animal existence.Section II.Of the Distribution of Animals over the Globe.Animals have been so constituted that food isto them indispensable : they can, therefore, existonly where their food has been supplied by nature.On land, at least in the warm and temperateclimates, by far the greater proportion ofanimals derive their subsistence, either directlyor indirectly, from the vegetable kingdom. Forthose animals that are themselves carnivorous,w3i\'2 METEOROLOGY.prey on vegetable feeders much oftener thanotherwise ; and are thus remotely dependent onvegetables. Of the habits of animals living inthe sea, and thus concealed from our view, weknow still less ; but in general they appear toprey on each other, the stronger, as is usual,devouring the weaker.We have seen the wonderful diversities thatprevail among vegetables, in different situationsand climates ; and it may be truly said thatthe diversities among animals are not less numerous,and are even more extraordinary. Thus,in every climate and soil, almost every herbhas its appropriate inhabitant ; some little being,that comes into existence, passes its ephemerallife, and dies on that plant ; to which, therefore,that plant constitutes the world. Nay, ingeneral, even different parts of the same planthave each its separate occupants, one feedingon its fruit, another on its flowers, a thirdon its leaves, perhaps a fourth on its verywoody core. This almost infinite diversity,and infinity of number, are principally confinedto the smaller animals, or insects. Asanimals increase in size, the number of speciesas well as of individuals constantly diminishes.Thus, while there are hundreds of species of theBeetle tribe, and the individuals are countless,there may be considered to be only one Elephant; and while Shrimps are in numbers likeDISTRIBUTION OF ANIMALS. 383the sand on the sea-shore, the Whale is asmuch a solitary species. This striking differencewith regard to numbers has been consideredto arise necessarily from a law of nature, andin one respect such an explanation is veryobvious ; but, in another point of view, we maycontemplate an admirable evidence of design.It is clear that millions of elephants couldnot exist, if for no other reason, from want offood ; but why should millions of beetles exist ?why should these little creatures, — whose lifeis so transitory, that it consists of little morethan of being born, and of dying, whosestructure is so frail as to be liable to be annihilatedby the slightest accident, who areeverywhere surrounded by all sorts of enemies,to many of which they constitute a naturalprey, — why, we ask, in spite of all theseobstacles and dangers, should these insignificantanimals contrive to exist in the numberswe see them? No natural law, surely, willexplain the appearance of such multitudes.The difficulty requires another solution ; andthe only solution that can be offered is design— that it was so designed by the GreatAuthor of nature. And how has He effectedHis purpose of multiplying to such an extentthese little animals? The answer is, simply,by increasing their fecundity. Had beetles,like elephants, brought forth only one young384 METEOROLOGY.at a time, long ere now, their race wouldhave been exterminated ; but, being producedby thousands, some of the numerous offspringchance to escape, and thus the race is perpetuated.We shall not dilate further on the arrangementsthat have been made for the existenceand preservation of animals, but shall proceedto consider their distribution.The distribution of animals over the globemay be conveniently treated of under the sameheads as the distribution of vegetables ; and,first : —1 . Of the Differences existing among Animalsthat Jive in similar Situations in different Partsof the World. — The dwelling of animals in thewaters is, perhaps, the most remarkable as regardstheir localities. Now, since, from circumstancesformerly stated, the distribution of temperatureis very different in the sea from whatit is on land ; and since most aquatic animalsprey on each other, and consequently in somedegree are independent of climate ; the distributionof such animals over the globe follows lawsmaterially different from those which regulate thedistribution of land animals. This distributionof temperature more especially affects the distributionof animals in high latitudes ; and mustbe taken into account at the very outset ofthis part of our enquiry. We shall, therefore,DISTRIBUTION OF ANIMALS. 385state concisely the distribution of land animals,and of sea animals, apart from each other.The distribution of land animals resembles toa certain extent that of vegetables; for thoughanimals differ from plants, in being endowedwith the power of locomotion, yet, as the largernumber of animals are dependent on vegetablesfor their subsistence, they are necessarily confinedto those places where their peculiar foodmay be obtained. This limitation of range ismost observable in the case of the smaller animals.The existence of many kinds of insects,especially, is intimately connected with that ofcertain plants. In every tribe of animals,however, there are species that occupy verydifferent localities. Thus, in the same tribe,some species dwell on the mountains, otherson the plains ; some are most numerous onthe sea-coast, others live on trees, while thereare others that burrow beneath the surface ofthe ground. All these diversities, in regardto residence, are probably influenced, like manyothers, by the greater or less degree in whichthe locality affords the means of obtainingsubsistence. But, in many animals, there isalso a wonderful adaptation of structure to theplace they inhabit ; proving, beyond a doubt,that the distribution of animals has been arrangedby design ; and that they form but apart of the great symmetrical whole of creation.p. c c38<> METEOROLOGY.In animals that dwell in the water, the samepeculiarities of habitude are observable, as inthose that dwell on the land. Thus, it is perfectlyknown that many animals can live only insalt water ; others only in fresh. Some preferthe deep and open sea, others are met withonly in shallow water, or at the mouths of rivers.Of those that flock to the coast, some shunturbid water, others burrow in the mud. Inshort, though the habits and adaptations ofaquatic animals can be less satisfactorily ascertained; there is every reason to believe thatthey are at least as wonderful, as those of theoccupants of the land.There is an equally striking diversity in theanimals, as in the plants, of similar localitiesand climates in different parts of the world.Thus, in the old world, in the analogous climateson the north, and on the south of theequator, though many genera exist in common,yet the species are totally different. For instance,the northern hemisphere possesses theHorse, and the Ass ; while, in the south, thesespecies are represented by the Zebra and theQuaggd. In the southern hemisphere, therealso exist many species which are quite peculiar; as the Giraffe, the Cape Buffalo, and avariety of animals having the Antelope form.So, likewise, the animals of the old and those ofthe new m old are, in general, quite distinct ;DISTRIBUTION OF ANIMALS. 3tt7unless, perhaps, towards the north, where thetwo continents approximate ; and where, in consequence,there are some species common toboth. Thus the Elephant, the Rhinoceros, theHippopotamus, the Giraffe, the Camel, the Dromedary,the Horse and the Ass; also the Lionand the Tiger, and various species of Apes,Baboons, and other animals, with which we arefamiliar in the old world, were not found in America.On the other hand, the American species,the Lama, and the Peccary; and among carnivorousanimals, the Jaguar, or American tiger ;also the Agouti, the Paca, the Coati, the Sloth,and others, were equally unknown in the oldworld. Again, the animals of New Holland differ,like its vegetation, not only from all thoseof our continent, but from those of all the worldbesides. In New Holland, there are more thanforty species of marsupial or pouched animals,of which the Kangaroo is that with which wehave become best acquainted; while every whereelse, there is hardly a known instance of apouched animal. Nor are these differences confinedto the more perfect animals. They areeven more striking as we descend in the zoologicalscale. Thus among birds ; the individualspecies of the Parrot tribe, that are found in ^[/America, differ altogether from those of Africa ;and those of Asia differ from both. The minuteand beautiful family of Humming birds is pecu-388 METEOROLOGY.liar to America. While the species of the commonGrouse of this country is met with in noother part of the known world.From the class of reptiles, may be mentionedthe Great Saurian, or Lizard tribe. Thus theCrocodile of the Nile is entirely different fromthe Cayman of America ; and even from theGavial of the Ganges. In the division of snakes,too, the Boa of India differs from the nearly alliedPython of America ; and of the poisonousvarieties, the Rattlesnake is peculiar to America,the Ceases to Africa, the Hooded snake toAsia. As we have already stated ; the diversitiesamong insects are still more numerous andremarkable than among the larger animals. Toenter into details would be endless ; we shalltherefore mention only one of the best knownand widest extended of all the insect tribe, viz.our common Bee. This insect did not exist inAmerica, or in New Holland ; though it is foundin all parts of the old world ; the wax and honeyof Europe, Asia, and Africa being obtained fromspecies having a close resemblance to eachother.Nor are these differences confined to landanimals ; the inhabitants of the waters areequally diversified. Thus the Whales of \henorthern ocean are quite unlike those of thesouth ; as are the Seals, and other analogousanimals in the polar regions. The fishes of diffOF ANIMALS. 389fervent seas, also, not only when far apart; buteven of some which freely communicate, havefish exceedingly dissimilar. Thus the fishes ofthe Arabian Gulf are said to differ entirely fromthose of the Mediterranean ; notwithstanding theproximity of these seas. Nor do these remarksapply only to the larger fish in these seas, buthold equally with respect to their testaceous andmolluscous species.Such are a few of the more striking facts withregard to the distribution of animals in similarclimates and localities throughout the world.We shall now briefly speak,2. Of the Effects of Diversity of Climate onthe Distribution of Animals. In tropical climates,the qualities of animals, as well as thoseof vegetables, are developed to the utmost ;whence arises that harmonious adaptation ofall the works of nature, conspicuous, indeed,in all climates, but in Tropical climates moreespecially. For, where else than amidst theprofuse exuberance of the vegetation withinthe tropics, could the Elephant, the Rhinoceros,the Giraffe, and other large quadrupeds findsubsistence ? Where else could we expect to seesuch birds as the Ostrich and the Cassowary?such reptiles as the Crocodile ? such serpents asthe Boa ? To what other part of the world couldthe magnificent butterflies, the enormous beetles390 METEOROLOGY.and spiders be so appropriate. Even among themarine animals of Tropical climates, some displaythe same wonderful enlargement of size.Thus certain species of the Crab and Lobster,and various shell fish, often attain an enormousmagnitude. Nor is there a development of sizeonly, but of every other property in an equaldegree. Countries within the tropics exhibitthe most beautiful forms — the most splendidcolours in nature. There, in short, is themost astonishing display of all those thingswhich seem to be entirely ornamental : as, forexample, the singular plumage of the Birds ofParadise — the gaudy liveries of many of theParrot tribe — the extraordinary and diversifiedforms and colours of many insects and shells.Not only is there in Tropical climates anassemblage of all the concomitants of productiveness,and utility, and embellishment of everykind ; in these climates, there is another andnot less marked demonstration of the power andthe wisdom of the great Creator. Within theTropics death, the last, the inevitable scene,assumes a character as new and diversified asthat of the life it terminates. There, rages theimplacable ferocity of the Tiger, and of thelarger beasts of prey ; there, are the fangs of theserpent charged with the most malignant venom ;there, even the insects are as formidable as theyare numerous. Nor is this intensity of the de-distributionOF ANIMALS. 391straying power incongruous or without an object ;but obviously is in perfect harmony with the restof creation, and with the design of the Creator.The wonderful productiveness of animals inTropical countries renders unavoidable somechecks against their excessive increase : and indevising these, the great Author of Nature hasdisplayed the same attributes that are manifestin all his other works. No one who seriouslyreflects can doubt either the wisdom or the benevolenceof the provision. For why are Tigersand Serpents confined to those parts of the worldwhere their existence is not only accordant, butwhere, for one great purpose at least, they areeven necessary. Surely such limitation couldhave happened only from design ; and the argumentis strengthened a hundred fold ; when wecontemplate the striking display of wisdom andof power exemplified in the singular adaptationof structure in these animals, to their peculiarhabits. Thus how wonderfully appropriate isthat of the Tiger ; and how extraordinary as wellas wonderful that of Serpents ! Who (unless hehad witnessed the fact) could have believed thatthe animal frame was capable of separating fromits juices, and of retaining with impunity, apoison instantly fatal, not only to other animals,but to the animal itself; if again mingled withthe juices from which it had been separated !Nor in all these things is the benevolence of392 METEOROLOGY.the Deity less conspicuous than his wisdom.All must die ; and death from rapacious or venemousanimals is probably not in any degree morepainful than many other modes of death, whichwe constantly witness. There is, in truth, toour own narrow and selfish feelings somethingexceedingly painful in the idea of being torn topieces by a Tiger, or stung to death by a Rattlesnake;but how many thousands of little miceare destroyed by cats? and how many myriadsof unfortunate flies are poisoned by spiders,every day we live? and yet we hardly commiseratethem. The question, therefore, is simplya question of degree ; and viewing the existenceand the destruction of animals, as they ought tobe viewed, on the great scale, we find that thewhole is perfectly in unison. While in temperateclimates we have cats and spiders, designed aschecks on over productiveness ; amidst the grandeurand the luxurious development of theTropics, the same wise purpose is executed bythe Tiger and by the Rattlesnake.As we advance from the Equator into thetemperate climates, the size of animals in general,like that of vegetables, becomes graduallysmaller. Like the vegetables, too, the animalsof temperate climates are more gregariousthan within the Tropics. Hence number, asamong vegetables, compensates in some degreefor diminished magnitude. The two kingdomsDISTRIBUTION OF ANIMALS. 393of nature therefore are beautifully analogous ;for the gregarious grasses, which, as we beforeobserved, form so marked a feature in the vegetationof temperate climates, constitute in oneshape or other the principal food of the gregarioustribes of animals. Thus the whole cattletribe— The Ox, the Sheep, the Goat; the differentvarieties of Deer; the Rabbit and Hare;also the Horse and the Ass ; with a multitude ofother well-known animals, of a similar character,are natives chiefly of temperate climates, andobtain their nourishment almost entirely fromthe grasses. Among birds, the numerous speciesof the Gallinaceous, or Fowl tribe, may be said toderive their food from the same source. Therefore,as regards the existence of animals, thegramineous tribe of plants is more importantthan perhaps any other ; and could not be annihilated,without the destruction of the presentorder of living beings.As further examples of animal species indigenousto temperate climates, may be mentionedthe Canine species and those allied to it, most ofwhich are more or less carnivorous ; also theHog, and a variety of other animals that neednot be here enumerated. The Hog tribe, as iswell known, are omnivorous; but in their naturalstate, they feed principally on the seeds androots of plants. Among birds peculiar to temperateclimates are various tribes of Water-fowl394 METEOROLOGY.that subsist on fish and on insects. Of thesmaller land birds, the various Songsters offer aremarkable contrast to those of similar formwithin the Tropics ; not only from their moremelodious notes, but from the simple colouringof their feathers. In temperate countries theInsects are still exceedingly multiplied ; though,in general, like the other animals, they are muchsmaller in size than those within the Tropics ;their forms, their colours, and other peculiaritiesalso are much less remarkable.As we advance toward the Poles, the animalsof temperate climates are observed gradually todecline in number. The vegetable feeders becomereduced to a few hardy species ; and atlength in the remote north and south scarcelyany vegetable feeders remain. So far as shrubbyplants continue to grow in these inhospitableregions, individuals of the Squirrel tribe findsubsistence on their seeds and roots. But themost remarkable herbivorous animal is the Reindeer; whose principal food is afforded by naturein a species of moss peculiar to very cold climates.Those that exist beyond, are eithercarnivorous or piscivorous. The Arctic Fox andthe Bear are familiar instances, as terminatingthe Zoological series, viewed in connection withthe influence of climate.We have, in the last place, to notice what isDISTRIBUTION OF ANIMALS. 395most remarkable in the distribution of Marineanimals.For the reasons before stated, the generaltemperature of the ocean differs considerablyfrom that of the land. Owing to this differenceof temperature, and to the peculiar mode ofsubsistence of marine animals, which find theirprey chiefly in the waters they inhabit ; thedistribution of these animals varies much, ascompared with the distribution of animals thatare entirely terrestrial ; particularly within thefrigid zone. It is true, indeed, that in all climates,the denizens of peculiar localities, asfresh water species and those that resort to theshallows on the coast, are influenced by theclimate nearly as much as land animals : andwithin the Tropics, this influence extends insome degree even to the species that dwell onthe wide ocean. But far to the north, and tothe south, such species are influenced in amanner altogether different. Thus the largestof known animals, the Whale, and of coursethose other animals that become its prey, roamthrough the utmost Polar seas ; where on landthe intensity of the cold would prevent the existenceof any animal whatever. In that climatethe whale is enabled to live, solely on account ofthe greater warmth of the Polar ocean, as has Wbeen formerly explained. Among the larger METEOROLOGY.habitant! of the ocean in Tropical climates, maybementioned the Shark tribe ; which in respectof ferocity and voraciousness, may be classedwith the tiger, or any kindred species on land.The influence of climate on marine animals isfurther shown, as we have said, by the enormoussize of many of the Tropical shell-fish and mollusca.The colouring of these and also of otherproductions of the Equatorial seas, often exhibitsso much lustre and beauty, as to rival the mostsplendid of the feathered race. In temperateclimates, and from the equal temperature of thesea, even within the frigid zone ; it is remarkablethat fish, like terrestrial animals, are much disposedto be gregarious. The shoals of Herring,Mackarel, and other well known visitants of ourcoast, are familiar examples of the gregarioustendency. The Salmon and the Sturgeon maybeadduced as instances of fish inhabiting chieflythe rivers of the temperate and colder countries.While in the same climates, instead of the magnificentPearl oyster of the Tropics, there appearsour common Oyster, so diminutive andunsightly, yet so profitable to man.We have thus seen that animals, like plants,have in general been adapted to particularclimates. The numerous cold-blooded animalsof the Tropics — even the warm-blooded Tigeritself, amid the Polar snows would instantlyperish. The Arctic bear would be not lessDISTRIBUTION OF ANIMALS. 397unable to live, tinder the scorching rays of avertical sun. Yet though adaptation to oneclimate be the general law regarding animals aswell as plants ; some species of animals have, asremarkably as some species of plants, the facultyof accommodating themselves to all climates.These species, like the plants similarly endowed,are for the most part natives of temperate climates ;the transition from such climates to either extreme,being much less violent than from oneextreme to the other. Thus our domestic animals,that have been successively introducedinto the New World at various periods sinceits discovery, are now, in incredible numbers,spread over the whole of that vast continent,from Canada to Paraguay. The greatest increasehas been of the Horse, the Ox, the Sheep,the Goat, the Dog, the Cat, and the Hog. TheRat, too, though an unwelcome intruder, hasbeen not the least prolific. The different varietiesof domestic Poultry have multiplied toan equal extent. Even Insects have been introduced,and spread in like manner, as is wellknown to horticulturists.Like plants, most animals also are readily domesticated,and thrive in climates similar tothose of which they are natives. The moststriking instance is the Rein-deer ; so lately asin the year 1773 introduced into Iceland, andnow exceedingly numerous in the interior ofV.398 METEOROLOGY.that country. From these powers of accommodationto climate, from the agency of man, andfrom accidental causes ; the distribution of thelarger animals over the globe has, in comparativelyrecent times, been very much modified.Nor is there any reason to believe that the distributionof these animals is yet stationary ; but,on the contrary, that their distribution will undergostill further changes.Among the more remarkable habits of animals,may be noticed the migratory propensities ofcertain species. The migration of land animalsis, of course, always much limited, and may beentirely prevented by natural obstacles — the asperitiesof the earth's surface — sands — deep riversor other large accumulations of water. Butmany birds and even insects, possessing powerfullocomotion, and whose course is through the air,may literally be said to follow the sun in theirmigratory progress. It is hardly necessary tostate, as examples, the birds of passage, so wellknown as the Swallow and the Cuckoo. Thesebirds during the summer months visit ournorthern climate, and feed on insects, whosemultiplication would otherwise be boundless.Having fulfilled their office here ; on the declinationof the sun, they again retire to the south ;and are succeeded by different birds from countriesstill further north. Such are the Woodcockand others, which escape to our shores from theDISTRIBUTION OF ANIMALS. 399rigorous cold of a Polar winter. Nor is migrationconfined to the higher classes of animals.The wonderful powers of flight possessed bymany insects, enable them to travel over animmense extent of country. The Locust andthe Ant tribe are familiar examples. Theseinsects occasionally migrate in countless swarmsfrom the lands to which they are indigenous, andlay waste others far remote.Equally remarkable is that habit of animalstermed Hybernation. Like the plants of temperateclimates, some animals have the facultyof passing the colder season of the year in astate of sleep. The Hedgehog and the Dormousemay be mentioned as examples of quadrupedspossessing this faculty. Additional instancesmight be given in all the classes of animals.Nearly allied to Hybernation, is that remarkableinstinct which guides many of theinferior animals to deposit their eggs in theearth, or in some other place of safety ; that theymay be preserved during the season of diminishedtemperature. This instinct is particularlyobservable in insects whose lives are ephemeral,or are, at the utmost, prolonged for asummer.There is yet another circumstance that remainsto be noticed, as being connected withthe adaptation of animals to the climates inwhich they live ; namely, the Clothing or MKTEOltOLOGY.ing with which they have been supplied by nature.Every one is acquainted with the generalfact, that wool, fur, eider-down, and similar articles,are obtained for the most part, not from thecopious source of every superfluous production,the countries within the tropics, but from thecold, and comparatively prolific regions of thetemperate and of the frozen zones ; where theyhave constituted the appropriate vesture of differentanimals. Perhaps, in the whole range ofcreation there is not any thing more calculatedto excite our admiration. However we mayview these means of guarding animals frombeing injured by the cold ; whether as a partof that conservative faculty with which animalshave been endowed, and by which theirexistence is maintained ; or as an immediateact of Providence ; still the adaptations are sostriking and obvious, as to render it impossibleto doubt for a moment, that they have allbeen contrived for the purpose which is accomplished; and that they are the results of foreknowledgeand of design.We have thus given a rapid sketch of the distributionof animals over the globe. In thissketch we have endeavoured to point out thewonderful adaptations of the several classes ofanimals to the circumstances in which they areplaced ; together with the beautiful symmetryand equilibrium exhibited in zoology, not lessDISTRIBUTION OF ANIMALS. 401than in the arrangements of inanimate matter.Throughout we have intentionally, and as far aswas possible, avoided those details, the considerationof which belongs to other departments.But it has been our aim to state such prominentfacts, as appeared best calculated for the elucidationof our argument. In particular, it has beenour desire to shew — how number among the weakis made to compensate for magnitude among thestrong ; how exuberance in one species is madeto contribute to the existence of another ; howornament and boundless profusion characterizethe countries within the tropics, while the temperateclimates are not less distinguished by utilityand capacity for change ; how, even in the rigorousand barren neighbourhood of the Poles, wherelife becomes a struggle for existence, animalshave been expressly furnished with clothing appropriateto these regions ; — in short, we haveendeavoured to demonstrate, how every animal, inevery climate, has its day; and by some peculiarcontrivance, has been enabled to maintain itsrank in creation, and to assist in preserving thegeneral equilibrium.Hitherto we have considered the works ofnature without reference to Man. For aughtwe can see to the contrary, they might all haveexisted, and every arrangement and operationmight have been very nearly, if not exactly,the same as at present; though man had neverp. D Dr40*2 METEOROLOGY.been called into being. But still, for a momentlonger, keeping man's existence out of view;let us, as under a former division of this Treatise,enquire, what would have been the use of allthis elaborate design, without an ulterior object.Would an intelligent Creator have made sucha world, and have left it thus incomplete ? Itis evident that the other beings inhabiting thisearth, live and die, without in the slightest degreecomprehending the vast system of whichthey constitute a part. Hence they are merelyunconscious agents, from which their Maker,while he has furnished them with the instinctsnecessary to their existence, and has awardedequal justice to all, has yet chosen to withholdthe privilege of reason. That a Creator, evidentlyas benevolent as he is wise, might, forhis own gratification, have made such a world,and without any other inhabitants, is indeedpossible. But, even admitting that possibility,the probability surely is, that he would notthere have finally " rested from his labour."His benevolence would have prompted him tocommunicate to other beings a portion of thegratification, which he himself is supposed toderive from the contemplation of his works.In the beautiful world which he had created,He would have wished to see one being at least,capable of appreciating to a certain extent hisdesign and his objects. Such is a plain infer-distributionOF ANIMALS. 403once deducible from the manifest attributes of theCreator ; and what is the fact ? Is not man sucha being as we have supposed ? Throughout theworld, though perfectly independent of him, isthere not a clear foretoken of his existence ?Has he not been placed at the head of thatworld, so obviously prepared for him, and thusconstituted " the Minister and Interpreter ofnature?" Surely no one will be inclined todoubt that such is the situation of man in theworld. Equally undeniable, is the striking accordanceof these deductions from the viewof external objects, with what is written of theorigin of man by the sacred historian : " andGod said, that it (the world which he hadprepared) was good. And God said, let usmake man in our own image, after our ownlikeness, (that is to say, endowed with reasonand with the power of reflection). And lethim have dominion over the fish of the sea,and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle,and over every creeping thing, that creeperon the earth."We thus arrive at another, and to us the finalstep in the great design of the Omnipotent :the creation and the faculties of Man.404 METEOROLOGY.Section III.Of the present Position and future Prospectsof Man.The consideration of the faculties of man, andof his position in the world he inhabits, belongs,in all its details, to another department. Weadvert to these subjects here, with the view onlyof completing our sketch of the physical relationsof animated beings. The observationswe have to offer will be comprised under twoheads : — as to the means, by which man hasacquired and maintains the ascendency he enjoys: — as to the conclusions to be drawn, fromman's elevated position, and from his superiorintellectual character.With regard to the means by which man hasacquired and maintains his ascendency, it maybeobserved, that these means are quite peculiar ;and far from being such, as at first, perhaps, wemight deem conducive to such an object : thoughwhen once known and understood, the beautifuldesign and harmony they evince, immediatelybecome apparent.The supremacy of man has not been the resultof his own personal strength, nor is it soupheld. On the contrary, many animals arelarger and more powerful than he is ; while fewPOSITION AND PROSPECTS OF MAN. 405of his size, are naturally so incapable of self-defence;or during so long a period suffer fromthe dependent helplessness of infancy, and of oldage. Neither is his frame superior in externaladaptation to climate : for while nature has furnishedother animals with clothing appropriateto the temperature in which they live, man hasbeen brought into being absolutely naked ; andmoreover remains so, in every climate he inhabits,from the Equator to the Poles. Lastly, thepre-eminence of man has not been owing to hismore extensive range of diet ; or to his greaterability for assimilation : for though man be omnivorousin one sense of the term, he is notomnivorous according to the application of theterm to other animals ; that is to say, man doesnot eat indiscriminately of every kind of aliment,in the state in which it is afforded by nature ;for even in his rudest condition, he adopts someprocess of cookery. How then has man gainedthe high station which he occupies? The answeris simply — by his Reason. Man has beencreated a reasonable being ; and this endowmentamply compensates to him for the want of theanimal requisites of strength — for deficiency ofnatural covering— and for his restricted abilityin assimilating his food. By his reason he isenabled to command the strength of the elephant; to choose from every production of naturewhatever is adapted for his clothing, andthus to array himself according to his pleasure,400 METEOROLOGY.or the exigencies of the climate in which he resides;to extract wholesome nourishment fromthe most unpromising, even from the most deleteriousarticles. There was no necessity, therefore,why man should himself he as unwieldy asan elephant ; or be encumbered with any vesturethat in some situations might be oppressive ; orbeable to digest, without culinary preparation,any coarse and intractable substances. Thus,mere animal endowments not being requisite,the Creator's wisdom has been displayed in anothermanner, and with a wider scope. In furtheranceof his design, He has limited the bulkof the human species to that happy medium,combining strength with convenience ; and toan organization delicate and sensitive in thehighest degree, but nevertheless accommodating,He has superadded a form at once peculiar, appropriate,and beautiful !When speaking of temperate climates, we remarked,that they seemed to be characterizedby the utility of their productions ; and that theplants and animals of these climates, generallypossessed greater powers of accommodation thanthose of either of the extreme climates. NowMan, by an express arrangement of his Maker,has apparently been constituted a native oftemperate climates ; and only in these climatescan his powers be said to be completely developed.Within the tropics, indeed, human existenceis flourishing ; for there the immediatePOSITION AND PROSPECTS OF MAN. 407bounty of Providence affords to man a copiousand admirably adapted nutriment. Yet in themidst of that profusion, and without any adequatemotive to call forth exertion, his reasontoo often languishes ; while his animal tendenciespredominate ; and his life is spent in apathy andin sensual gratifications. On the other hand,under the cheerless sky of the frigid zone, imperfectlynourished by scanty and unsuitablefood, the powers of his mind, like those of hisbody, are stunted ; or are engaged solely in combattingthe rigours of his situation. But in thetemperate climates the evil consequences of boththese extremes are avoided, while the beneficialinfluences of climate remain. Urged by thestimulus of necessity, and at the same timehaving at his command the astonishing capabilityof nature, man is, in temperate climates,surrounded by motives of every kind, and hisfaculties thus attain their utmost development.As familiar examples of the effect of this expansionof the human reason, let us view manunder the three aspects to which we have beforealluded ; namely, with reference to his strength,his food, and his clothing, inclusive of his habitation.In the first place, with regard to his strength-thestrength of man is not only that which ishis own, almost infinitely magnified by ingeniousmechanical devices of every kind, and ofevery degree, up to the stupendous agency of\!408 METEOROLOGY.steam ; man has, moreover, subdued to his servicemany of the larger animals, while thosewhich he cannot so appropriate, he destroys.As weapons, he wields every instrument offensiveand defensive, from the rude but effectiveclub or arrow, to the warlike engines to whichhe has applied the discovery of gunpowder.Whatever his wants require, he obtains by tools ;from the humble spade, to that perfection of machinery,which almost rivals the operations ofintelligence itself. In the next place, view manwith reference to his food : what wonders has nothis reason enabled him to achieve among thefellow inhabitants of his own temperate climate.In the vegetable kingdom, let us consider theastonishing mutations and increase of the cereals,or corn tribes ; the transformation of the sourand forbidding Crab into the rich and fragrantApple ; of the harsh and astringent Sloe into thedelicious Plum ; of the coarse anc!Jt>itter sea sideJurassic into the nutritious and grateful Cauliflower: all which changes, and numerous othersof a like kind, have been effected by man. Norhave the transformations which he has producedamong animals been less wonderful than thoseamong vegetables. All the numerous varietiesof cattle, of sheep, of horses, of dogs, of poultry,and of all the other animals reared as food, orfor any purpose domesticated, have sprung froma few wild and unattractive species ; and havebeen made what they are, in a great degree,POSITION AND PROSPECTS OF MAN. 409by his intervention. Moreover, the most usefulof these varieties of animals have been transportedby man into every region of the globe,to which he has himself been able to penetrate.Lastly, in the clothing and habitations of man,the surpassing influence of his reason is equallyconspicuous. For covering his naked body, asurface of considerable extent is necessary ;larger, indeed, than is presented by any naturaltexture, unless, perhaps, by the skins of otheranimals, or by the leaves of some plants ; whichtherefore, in the rudest states of society, usuallyconstitute his only dress. But by the art ofweaving, he has been enabled to produce garmentsof any size, and from materials that wouldseem the least fitted for such conversion. Thusman can not only clothe himself in any manner,and according to the temperature of theclimate in which he lives ; but he can associatewith the articles of his dress every species ofornament which his fancy may dictate. Hischoice of materials for the construction of dwellingsis not less extensive than that of his clothing.As climate and other circumstances may require,he abides in the humble cabin, or in the splendidpalace ; in the temporary hut, or in the enduringcastle, conned to withstand alike the tempest ofwar, and of the elements.Such is man, and such are a few of those greatchanges in this world, which, under the guidanceof his reason, he has had the power to accom-f410 meteorology.polish. And what a splendid evidence of designand of preconceived arrangement on the part ofthe great Creator is thus exhibited, by viewing theinherent properties of matter, and its various conditions,with reference to the works of man.Had water, for instance, not been constituted as itis, man could never have formed the steam engine.Had not the productions of the temperate climatesbeen formed with that capability for change,by which they are so much distinguished, mancould never have so moulded them to his uses,by altering their character. There was no reasonwhy such properties should have been communicated; there was even no reason why the objectsin which these properties exist, should have beencreated. But they have been so created ; andwhat are we to infer ? No one surely will contendthat they have been the result of chance, or havebeen created without an object. They musttherefore have been created with design ; and ifwith design — most obviously with design havingreference to the being man, not yet in existence.Thus far we have considered the state at whichthe earth has arrived, and man, an animal endowedwith reason, placed as its chief inhabitant.But we may yet extend our view to the prospectsm futurity.We have seen that this earth has not suddenlyemerged from chaos to its present condition ;but that by a succession of violent and disruptivechanges, it has been progressively broughtPOSITION AND PROSPECTS OF MAN. 411into different conditions, and progressively te fjwanted by higher orders of beings. We, thelast of the series, in our own creation and in thefaculties with which we have been endowed,behold the most striking exemplification of thewisdom, and of the power of the Deity. But doesthe great design abruptly terminate here ? Hasthis earth arrived at the ultimate stage of itsexistence ? Have its inhabitants attained theutmost perfection of which they are capable?Are there not further convulsions, and still higherorders of beings in contemplation ? The answersto these questions are known only to the greatAuthor of the universe, and concern us not.There is one question, however, connected withthis subject, in which we are deeply and personallyinterested — What is to become of man? Isthe being who, surveying nature, recognises toa certain extent, the great scheme of the universe; but who sees infinitely more which hedoes not comprehend, and which he ardently desiresto know ; — is he to perish like a merebrute — all his knowledge useless ; all his mostearnest wishes ungratified ? How are we to reconcilesuch a fate with the wisdom — the goodness,— the impartial justice — so strikingly displayedthroughout the world by its Creator ? Isit consistent with any one of these attributes,thus to raise hopes in a dependent being, whichare never to be realized ? thus to lift, as it were,a corner of the veil — to show this being a glimpsef412 METEOROLOGY.of the splendour beyond — and after all, to annihilatehim? With the character and attributesof the benevolent Author of the universe, asdeduced from His works, such conceptions areabsolutely incompatible. The question then recurs— What is to become of man ? That he ismortal, like his fellow creatures, sad experienceteaches him ; but does he, like them, die entirely ?Is there no part of him, that, surviving the generalwreck, is reserved for a higher destiny ? Canthat, within man, which reasons like his immortalCreator — which sees and acknowledges His wisdom,and approves of His designs, be mortallike the rest ? Is it probable, nay, is it possible,that what can thus comprehend the operations ofan immortal Agent, is not itself immortal ?Thus has reasoned man in all ages ; and hisdesires and his feelings, his hopes and his fears,have all conspired with his reason, to strengthenthe conviction, that there is something withinhim which cannot die. That he is destined, inshort, for a future state of existence, where hisnature will be exalted, and his knowledge perfected;and where the great design of his Creator,commenced and left imperfect here below,WILL BE COMPLETED.BOOK III.OF THE CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION I ParticularlyOF THE CHEMICAL PROCESS OF DIGESTION ;AND OF THE SUBSEQUENT PROCESSES BY WHICHVARIOUS ALIMENTARY SUBSTANCES ARE AssimilatedTO, AND BECOME COMPONENT PARTS OF, ALIVING BODY.Having in the foregoing pages, given a summaryview of the Chemical properties of bodies not organized,and of the laws of their union ; havingalso considered the general relations of inanimatematter and of organized beings, on the great scalein which they are offered to us by nature, togetherwith the present position and future prospectsof man ; we now proceed, in the last place,to enquire more particularly into the means bywhich organization is accomplished ; or, in otherwords, to give a summary view of those chemicalproperties, and laws of union, by which organizedbeings are distinguished from inorganicmatters.414 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.CHAPTER I.OF THE NATURE AND COMPOSITION OF ORGANIZEDBODIES IN GENERAL, AS COMPARED WITH InorganicMATTERS.A living being considered as an object of chemicalresearch, is a laboratory, within which anumber of chemical operations are conducted ;of these operations, one chief object is to produceall those phenomena, which taken collectivelyare denominated Life ; while another chief objectis to developed gradually the corporeal machineor Laboratory itself, from its existence inthe condition of an atom, as it were, to its utmoststate of perfection. From this point of utmostperfection, the whole begins to deckne as graduallyas it had been developed ; the operations areperformed in a manner less and less perfect, tillat length the being ceases to live ; and the elementsof which it is composed, again set free,obey the general laws of inorganic nature'*Such is the history of organic existence ; nor,though the periods of development and of decayBerzelius Traite de Chimie, torn. v. p. 1 .ACOMPOSITION OF ORGANIZED BODIES. 415be infinitely varied in different species, does asingle individual remain for a moment stationary ;but all, sooner or later, transcend their prime,and finally share the common lot of dissolution.That peculiar principle or principles, whichunder some condition or other, exists in all organizedbeings, and by which they are distinguishedfrom inanimate matter, has received various appellations.In the present enquiry these principlesmay be viewed as agents ; and to discriminatethem from Heat, Electricity, and otheragents or inorganic matters, they may be denominatedorganic agents. In conducting our investigationsinto the nature of these principles oragents, our difficulty will be much lessened, byendeavouring previously to have a clear understandingof what these agents actually do. Weshall, therefore, in the first place, give a shortsketch,1 . Of Organic Bodies considered as ChemicalCompounds. — In their well-marked forms no twothings perhaps can be conceived to offer a strongercontrast, than the two great divisions of organicbodies — vegetables and animals. Yet these twokinds of bodies so gradually approximate, andseem even to coalesce, that it is not possible tosay where the one ends and the other begins.The same remark applies to the chemical compositionof vegetables and animals. Vegetable sur4\d CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.stances, in general, contain essentially no morethan three elements, Hydrogen, Carbon, and Oxy-yU gen ; while animal substances usually involve afourth, Azote. Yet there are many vegetablesubstances, of whose composition, azote forms aconsiderable part ; while certain animal substancesare entirely wanting in that principle.It is obvious, therefore, that the mere chemicalcomposition of a substance, at least its essentiallyconsisting of three or of four of these elements, will■ not enable us to determine whether it be vegetableor animal ; and that, in many instances,when this point happens to be doubtful or unknown,we must have other data before we canform a conclusion. Besides these four elements,of which all organic substances are essentiallycompounds ; other principles generally enter intotheir composition. These other principles are invery minute quantity, and are not so essentialto the actual existence of organic substances, asthe four constituent elements above named ; yet,however minute the quantity, the influence ofthese other principles seems to be most important; they are, Sulfur, Phosphorus, Chlorine,Fluorine, Iron, Potassium, Sodium, Calcium,Magnesium, and probably more besides. Theseprinciples have, by most chemists, been deemedextraneous, or foreign to organized bodies; butwe shall presently show, that there is good reasonto believe, that the office of such additional prin-compositionOF ORGANIZED BODIES. 417cipher, though different from that of the constituentelements, is nevertheless most remarkable.These four elements, along with the additionalprinciples, are, in the present state of our know 1ledge, alike denominated, The Ultimate Elementsof organized bodies ; but hydrogen, carbon, oxygen,and azote, may be termed, for sake ofdistinction, the essential elements ; and sulfur,phosphorus, &c. the incidental elements of suchbodies. The combinations of these ultimate elementswith one another, according to certain laws,produce what are denominated the Immediate,or Proximate Elements of organized bodies. Ofthese proximate elements, Sugar, Oil, Albumen,&c. are familiar examples.Perhaps it may be stated as a general law,that no substance, entering into the compositionof a living plant or animal, is so pure as to becapable of assuming a regularly crystallizedform. Instead, therefore, of being defined bystraight lines and angles, almost all solid organizedsubstances are more or less rounded, andtheir intimate structure is any thing but crystallized.The composition of organized fluids isequally heterogeneous ; and though the basisof nearly every one of such fluids be water,many of them contain a variety of other matters.Organized bodies may be ranged under twogeneral classes ; those which though they donot crystallize, while in the living plant or animal,p. E EV¥418 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.can yet, by various processes, be so far separatedfrom extraneous matters, as to be obtainedin a state of purity, and thus be madeto assume the crystallized form ; and those whichcannot under any circumstances be made tocrystallize. The first substance of the crystallizableclass which we shall notice, is Sugar.Sugar has been ascertained, and is now generallyadmitted, to consist of three essential elementaryprinciples — hydrogen, oxygen, and carbon; it is besides remarkable, that the hydrogenand the oxygen in sugar are exactly in theproportion to each other, in which they formwater. It has been, therefore, with great probabilityinferred, that these two elements are reallyso associated in sugar ; consequently, that sugaris a compound of water and carbon ; or, in thelanguage of Chemists, is a Hydrate of Carbon.We cannot, however, produce artificially eithersugar, or any other organic compound, by directlycombining their elements ; because wecannot bring the elements together, precisely inthe requisite states and proportions. Still, thereis no doubt, that if the elements could be sobrought together, the compound thence resulting,would be the same as the natural compound.For, as hereafter we shall endeavour to shew, theorganic agent does not change the properties ofthe elements ; but simply combines them inmodes which we cannot imitate.Vinegar is another well known proximateCOMPOSITION OF ORGANIZED BODIES. 419principle, which not only forms crystallized compoundsreadily with many other bodies ; butinits most concentrated state, is itself also crys ^tallied. Now, it is not less worthy of note thanin the case of sugar, that vinegar, altogether sodifferent from sugar in its properties, is generallyconsidered to be precisely analogous in its composition;that is to say, vinegar is a binary compoundof water and carbon ; but the proportions Vof water and carbon are different from thosethat form sugar. There is however, a characteristicdistinction between these two substances,inasmuch as vinegar can be formed artificially ;not indeed, any more than sugar, by directlyassociating its elements : but, by the process offermentation, and by other means, this acid maybeformed from sugar and from the allied substancesto be presently mentioned. Yet we cannotwork backwards, and by any artificial processagain form sugar from vinegar ; though the or Wfpanic agent seems to possess this power, as we **shall have occasion to notice more particularlyhereafter.We now proceed to consider the composition ofa totally different class of substances, whichunder no circumstances, natural or artificial, everassume the crystallized form ; and the structureof which, in the common and strict sense of theterm, may be said to be organized. Starch isa well known instance of these uncrystallizableor organized substances.V420 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.The amylaceous or starchy principle is obtainedin slightly modified states, from a greatvariety of vegetables, but principally from theseeds of the Cereals. Even by the unassistedeye, starch is seen to be composed of minuteparticles; and when these particles are examinedwith a microscope, they are found to begranules more or less rounded, and without theleast trace of crystallization. These granulesare conceived to be moulded in the cellules ofthe texture by which they are formed ; for itwould appear that their state when first secretedand deposited in the cellules is semi fluid ;and that the excess of water is subsequently removed.Rascal and Dumas have shewn thateach of these little grains is covered with a smoothintegument, not affected by water at the commontemperatures; within which integumentis enclosed a substance rather more soluble.According to some chemists, this interior substancehas an analogy with gum ; but probablyit is only a variety of amylaceous matter. Berzeliusaffirms that starch when burnt, leaves about•23 per cent of residuum, consisting entirely ofthe phosphates. But when this residuum is abstractedand allowed for, the essential compositionof starch is found to coincide very nearlywith that of sugar ; that is to say, starch is composedof water and carbon, and the proportionsof their combination are very nearly the sameas in sugar. Here a question arises : HowCOMPOSITION OF ORGANIZED BODIES. 421does it happen that substances which appearto resemble each other so closely in their composition,should yet differ so widely in theirsensible properties ? This question we shallsoon consider. But in the mean time, we shallmake a few remarks on another principle of organizedbodies, still very different, in its sensibleproperties, from the three of which we havespoken, but apparently of a similar constitution.This fourth principle is the ivoody fibre, orLignin, as it is termed by chemists.The woody fibre, though assuming a great varietyof appearances in different plants, and includingvery different incidental matters ; hasnevertheless, in all those plants in which it has yetbeen examined, been found to possess very nearlythe same essential composition; or to consist ofequal weights of water and of carbon. Such, atleast, is the composition of woods, so very differentas the Box and the Willow, the Oak andthe Beech ; and these are the chief, if not thewhole, of the woods which, we believe, have yetbeen analyzed. Hence, it is perhaps not unreasonableto suppose that every variety of Ligninhas a similar composition. All woods, whenburnt, leave a greater or less quantity of incidentalmineral residuum, in the shape of ashes ;the nature of which, as above observed, differsexceedingly in different sorts of wood.The following Table presents a summary viewof the composition of the four organic principlesCHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.which we have considered in the preceding paragraphs.It is offered, not only as an example ofthe boundless subject of the Chemistry of Organization,but as an instance of the mode bywhich we conceive, that department of Chemistrymay be best elucidated.(0<a?•eonosenI>£»cous©©MusUsaofaX<>4<coa©US«rereTfTf4§a>■•-0a) •Is •-3■•4-»s•c"C!0ec3Soov.bbQO*IN«S as.5 4)-5 COoo-|aat3^"MO C<X-<sscis"5« 73C °z~zgo"3EoUSb-©osnac~US«•X©ac*-iCPSMr.t•cSusL-LUS«XMSUS•f)ISao©XeUSte£1iMreXXeu©©©SI■N£■•2PSceia•<*-r"=S•*fr-4)oa>>sB'Ssi"us-a■fc.=aHbeccco"=a>-"3aSs«-.VTiv.Oocc<swpqW-<sTtSu<COMPOSITION OF ORGANIZED BODIES. 423A cursory inspection of the foregoing Table willevince to the reader, how nearly the general compositionof sugar and of starch agree together ;and that the agreement extends even to theirseveral varieties. Vinegar, or acetic acid, hasnot, at present, any known representative, amongother organic principles ; though it is not improbablethat several substances exist of conformableproportions. The composition of vinegar,or acetic acid, is intermediate to that of sugarand of Lignin; while among crystallizable organicsubstances, there is no known compoundanalogous to Lignin. It may, at the same time,be remarked, that both starch and wood can, bydifferent artificial processes, be converted eitherinto sugar or into vinegar. We can also convert atwoodinto a sort of starch, as we may convertsugar into vinegar ; but we are unable to reversethe process, and convert vinegar into sugar, orstarch into wood ; though these and innumerablechanges of a similar kind are easily effected byorganic agency.We proceed now to consider briefly the questionwe have already stated,2. How does it happen that substances, so nearlyallied in their composition, exhibit sensible propertiesso entirely different? — This question, in all itsbearings, is probably beyond our powers of investigation: at least the extent of the requisite424 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.knowledge we have yet attained, must beallowed to be exceedingly inadequate. The fewobservations which we have to offer regarding thisquestion may be comprised under the two followingheads : — The peculiarity of the compositionof organic substances ; and the nature of the agentsby which these substances are produced.The composition of organized bodies may beviewed as of two general kinds, viz. their composition,as depending simply upon differencesamong the proportions of their essential elements; and their composition as depending upondifferences among their incidental elements, theproportions of the essential elements being thesame.* As instances of the first kind of composition,we may mention sugar and vinegar.Thus, sugar is composed of 42*85 per cent ofcarbon, and the rest water ; while the same ingredient,carbon, in the larger proportion of 47*05 percent,with the residue water, constitutes vinegar,a powerful acid. Why, with such similarity ofcomposition, the sensible properties of these twosubstances should be so unlike, we know not; anymorethan we know why oxygen and hydrogen,when combined, form water, or than we know anyOf course there is a third, and perhaps the most extensiveclass of bodies, in which both the essential and the incidental elementsmay be supposed to vary ; but partly from want of data, andpartly to avoid too much complication, we shall not enter uponthe consideration of this class at present.COMPOSITION OF ORGANIZED BODIES. 4*25ultimate chemical fact. However wonderful,therefore, the results of these slight differencesof composition may, at the first view, appear ; alittle reflection will convince us, that in reality,they are not more wonderful than any other chemicalphenomenon ; and that they only form aparticular variety of such phenomena. The sameremarks are applicable, in part at least, to thestriking differences exhibited by Sugar andStarch ; the essential composition of which twosubstances, as we have before observed, is nearlythe same ; but the starch contains incidentalbodies, from which the sugar is free. On theoperation of these incidental bodies we shall offera few conjectural remarks.At the commencement of this chapter, we statedthat the incidental substances existing in organizedbodies have hitherto been considered asforeign ; but that we could not subscribe to thatnotion. We may now observe, that they seemto us, to contribute chiefly towards the productionof those striking differences, observed amongbodies having the same essential composition ;and which diversity, at first sight, appears somysterious. How these minute quantities operatewe do not precisely understand ; but we canimagine them to be interposed among the constituentmolecules : further, that the moleculesof these incidental matters are in a state ofstrong self repulsion. Such being the case, it4'2C) CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.is not un reason able to expect that they mayhave the power of modifying the arrangementof the constituent molecules; and thus of alteringthe sensible properties of the substance producedby their combination.We have stated our opinion that the moleculesof incidental matters in organic substances arein a state of self repulsion. This opinion isfounded principally, on the equal diffusion ofthese incidental molecules throughout the organicsubstances in which they exist; and ontheir consequent great distance from each other,which, perhaps, can hardly be otherwise explained.If these incidental matters were detached,or merely in a state of mixture withthe constituent elements, as is implied in thenotion of their being foreign, they would probablyretain their self-attractive powers ; and insteadof being equally diffused among the constituentelements, they would be collected togetherinto a mass or crystal ; an arrangementnever observed. For, though crystallized bodiesare found, not unfrequently, within organized substances; yet these bodies are always extraneous,and do not form any part of the living structure ;of which, the molecules under our considerationdo actually appear to be interests. Infurther corroboration of this opinion, may be adducedthe beautiful experiments of Sir JohnHerschel, who has shown, that an enormousCOMPOSITION OF ORGANIZED BODIES. 427power, not less than 50,000 times the powerof gravity, is instantaneously generated by thesimple agency of common matters submitted togalvanic influence ; as, for example, by theagency of mercury alloyed with a millionth partof its weight of Sodium. These facts, while theyplace beyond all doubt, the efficacy of minutequantities of matter, in producing the most extraordinarychange of the polarities of larger quantities; at the same time appear to throw greatlight on many natural operations. Thus thesubtle matters of contagion and miasmata ; variousmedicinal substances, whose effects aremost astonishing even in the smallest doses ; thestill more refined and recondite matters of heatand of light, with many others, all probably actonsimilar principles. At least, the results of theoperation of these matters cannot be explainedby their mere quantity ; which in the ordinarychemical acceptation of the term, is altogetherincommensurate with the evident and strikingchanges, constantly arising in the processes ofnature, from such agency.The observations that have now been offered,are intended to apply to all those elementary substances,entering into the composition of a livingorganized being. For, no one element, whenthus assimilated, appears to be in its naturalstate ; or to be capable of exerting preciselythose powers which it is known to exert, when428 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.acting in virtue of its original inorganic properties.In short, we may thus recapitulatewhat has been said : besides the essential moleculesconstituting the ground-work of a living organizedbeing, and which probably exert oneach other, to a certain extent, the ordinary chemicalinfluences of matter ; it would seem thatthere are, at the same time, diffused throughoutthe whole living mass, in exceedingly minuteproportion, various other matters, the moleculesof which appear to be in a high state of self-repulsion.By these incidental matters, it would furtherseem, that the ordinary chemical propertiesof the essential elements of the organized livingstructure are variously modified ; in particular,that, the essential elements are hindered from assuminga regularly crystallized form. Moreovdt\these incidental matters entering into the compositionof a living body, apparently furnish to theorganic agent new powers utterly beyond our comprehension; which powers the organic agent hasbeen endowed with the ability to control, anddirect, in any manner that, from the exigenciesof the living organized being, may become requisite.*In addition to what is stated in the text, we may remind thereader of what we have elsewhere alluded to, viz. that the organicagents have probably the power, within certain limits, of separatingthe molecules of bodies, considered at present as elementary,into more refined forms of matter (sub molecules ?).COMPOSITION OF ORGANIZED BODIES. 429The intimate nature of the organic agent oragents, or by whatever other name we may chooseto designate the peculiar energies which exist inplants and in animals, and by which they aredistinguished from inanimate matter, is now,and probably will ever remain, altogether unknownto us. But though we be thus ignorantof what these agents are ; we can not only com apprehendwith tolerable certainty, what they arenot; but we can also in some degree ascertain,what they are capable or incapable of effecting.As it is of the utmost consequence to obtainjust views on these points, we shall considerthem somewhat in detail.When we were treating of inorganic elementsand agencies, and of the laws which they appearmutually to obey, we found, that though theirnature be obscure, and the investigation of themvery difficult; we were nevertheless enabled toadduce some, not altogether implausible, conjectureson the modes, in which the elements u-combine, to form regular crystals and the otherconditions of inanimate matter. Now with thisinsight into the nature of inorganic operations,and with all the additional knowledge of everykind that we can command, let us attentivelysurvey the most simple plant or animal ; let usobserve the actions, the changes, the modificationsof form and properties it continuallyexhibits ; and then let us seriously ask ourselves,430 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.whether every thing that we know, will enable usto make, even an approach, toward an explanationof what we see. It is indeed true, that theplant or animal we examine is composed of charcoaland water, and of other ingredients withwhich we are equally familiar ; that it is liableto be affected by Heat, Light, Electricity, andby other inorganic agents. But it is perfectlyascertained that these elements and agents, outof an organized body, and left entirely to themselves,never would or could unite, either in virtueof their own properties, or from accident, soas to form any plant or animal however insignificant.Are we not then compelled to infer, thatwithin a plant or animal, there exists a principleor agent superior to those whose operations wewitness in the inorganic world ; and which agentmoreover possesses, under certain restraints, thepower of controlling and directing the operationsof these inferior agents? That this is anatural and a just inference, no one who calmlyviews all the circumstances will ever deny ; andif the existence of one such agent be admitted,the admission of the existence of others canscarcely be withheld ; for the existence of oneonly, is quite inadequate to explain the infinitediversity among plants and animals. Thus, inthe words of the excellent Paley, " there maybemany such agents, and many ranks of them :"in other words, there may be an ascending grasOF ORGANIZED BODIES. 431dation of these agents, from that of the comparativelysimple plant, onward to that of the mostcomplicated animal.Such being the suggestions concerning organicagency that arise from a general survey of organicoperations ; let us, with reference to thefurther bearing and tendency of these suggestions,enquire a little more minutely into the powersand modes of operation of organic agents.3. Of the Modes of Operation of OrganicAgents. — In the first place, with regard to whatcannot be effected by organic agency, we mayobserve, that no organic agent has the power \IJeither of creating material elements, or ofchanging one such element into another. Byelement, it may be right to premise, is heremeant, a principle that is not made up of others ;and which, consequently, possesses an absoluteand independent existence. Whether one, ormore, such elements exist, it is not now ourobject to enquire. The astonishing discoveriesof modern chemistry have shewn, that many ofthose substances, formerly considered as elements,are, in fact, compounds ; and as thescience of chemistry is still progressive, it is probablethat, with the enlargement of its boundaryries, there will be a still further diminution ofthe number of those substances which are, asyet, held to be simple. Admitting, however, for4.*5*2 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.the sake of argument, that elementary principlesdo exist, of such immutable character as hasbeen supposed ; from the nature of organic beings,at least of all animals, it is impossible to conceivethat they possess the power either of creating orof altering these elementary principles. For noorganized being has an independent existence,but all animals derive their support from previousorganization, which might be otherwise,did they possess a creating power ; nor can theybe nourished by all substances indiscriminately,as they ought to be, were they possessed of atransmuting power. Yet, while it is thus deniedthat organized beings possess the power, either tocreate or to change, in the strict acceptation ofthese terms ; it has been admitted to be exceedinglyprobable, that the organic agent is, withincertain limits, qualified to compose and decomposemany substances which are now viewed aselements ; and that the organic agent does thusapparently form and transmute these imaginedelements. But to enter further, in this place, onthe elucidation of these obscurities would beforeign to our present purpose.The organic agent has not the power of combiningelements in such a manner, that the propertiesof the resulting compound shall differfrom those of a compound, formed from the sameelements similarly combined by any other agent.The Deity has chosen to prescribe limits to hisCOMPOSITION OF ORGANIZED BODIES. 433power, and to establish certain laws, to whichHe at all times rigidly adheres ; and, againadopting the language of Paley, " when a particularpurpose is to be effected, it is not by makinga new law, nor by the suspension of the old ones,nor by making them wind, and bend, and yieldto the occasion ; but it is by the interposition ofan apparatus corresponding with those laws, andsuited to the exigency which results from them,that the purpose is at length attained." In theinstance before us, the attainment of the particularpurpose of organic life is effected, not by anydeparture from the great scheme, but by newand different combinations. To suppose, therefore,that the organic agent can, for example,combine oxygen and hydrogen, in exactly thesame proportion, and in the same manner, inwhich they are combined, when they exist aswater; and, from these elements so combined,can yet produce something different from water,is contrary to all reason, and would be, in truth,to accuse the Deity of subverting, and of actingin opposition to, his own laws. We have dwelt themore strongly on these points, because amongphysiologists a vague notion seems to have prevailed,that organic agents have the power, notonly of changing the inherent and peculiarproperties of bodies ; but likewise, of causingthe results of their combination to be altogetherdifferent from those that are produced, under .F FX434 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.aptly similar circumstances, by inorganic agency.If however the arguments we have advanced bewell founded, this notion must be erroneous ;and its erroneous character will be rendered stillmore evident, by the observations, we shall, inthe second place, offer, regarding the principleson which the operations within living organizedbodies are really conducted.The means by which organic agents accomplishthe purposes for which they are designed, maybenaturally divided into two kinds ; thosewhich are dependent on peculiarity of compositionand of structure ; and those by which this peculiarityof composition and of structure is produced.Enquiry into the first of these means of actionhas already been in a great degree anticipated.A brief recital, therefore, is all that is herenecessary. We have seen that organized substancesare composed of the same elements,which exist abundantly throughout the world inthe reorganized state ; moreover, that theseelements are subject to all the influences andagencies of inorganic nature. We have seenthat organic agents are enabled to form certainproximate principles, by variously combiningtheir elements ; which proximate principles,even when in the condition of crystals, it is notpossible to imitate artificially. We have, at thesame time, seen that these proximate principles,COMPOSITION OF ORGANIZED BODIES. 435though they may have a natural tendency tocrystallize, are, as they usually exist in livingbodies, prevented from undergoing that process,by the diffusion of minute quantities of otherelements throughout their mass ; the moleculesof which are in some unknown state of activity ;such perhaps as cannot naturally exist in the universe,except when conjoined with organization.Finally, we have inferred, that the differencesand peculiarities of these minute additional matters,are probably adequate for explaining thedifferences and peculiarities, of the sensible andchemical properties of the substances that areformed by organization. Having thus pointedout the general differences of composition existingamong organized bodies ; it remains tostate, that such differences of composition almostinvariably indicate differences of structure. Forthough similarity of composition does not necessarilyimply similarity of structure ; yet similarityof structure perhaps, without exception, indicatessimilarity, or, at least, analogy of composition;and, consequently, similarity of action.Thus the woody fibre of plants is always formedof the principle termed Lignin, and never ofresin, or of albumen. The relation of structure tochemical composition is not less striking in the wmuscular fibres of animals, and indeed in all organiccompounds of a definite character; theessential composition of such substances, though43G CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.exhibiting endless minor diversities, being, nevertheless,in all instances, precisely the same.The means by which that peculiarity of compositionand of structure is produced, which isso remarkable in all organic substances, like theresults themselves, are quite peculiar ; and bearlittle or no resemblance to any artificial processof chemistry. For example, we have not, in artificialchemistry, any control over individualmolecules ; but are obliged to direct our operationson a mass, formed of a large collection ofmolecules. The organic agent, on the contrary,having an apparatus of extreme minuteness, isenabled to operate on each individual moleculeseparately ; and thus, according to the objectdesigned, to exclude some molecules, and to bringothers into contact. In these processes, it maybeconceived, that the molecules thus appropriatelybrought together, and, at the same time,guarded from extraneous influence, by the organicagent, are in virtue of their own properaffinities, sufficiently disposed to unite, withoutrequiring that any new properties should becommunicated to them. Hence the organicagent, in its simplest state, may be viewed as apower which so controls certain inorganic matters,as to form them into an apparatus, by whichit arranges and organizes other matters, and thuseffects its ulterior purposes. Where the operationsof this simple organic agent terminate, those ofCOMPOSITION OF ORGANIZED BODIES. 437another and more effective organic agent may besupposed to begin ; which, by carrying the generalprocess of organization a step further, adaptsthe organized material for the operations of athird and yet higher agent. Thus, each newagent may be supposed to possess more or lesscontrol over all those below itself, and to havethe power of appropriating their services ; tillat length, at the top of the scale, we reach theperfection of organized existence. The excellentPaley sanctions this view of organic operations,and continues in the following words : " We donot advance this as a doctrine either of philosophyor of religion ; but we say that the subjectmay safely be represented under this view ; becausethe Deity, acting himself by general laws,will have the same consequences upon our reasoning,as if he had prescribed these laws to another."This view of the successive creation of organicagents, which harmonizes not only with the phenomenaof Geology, but with the differenceswhich are observable among plants and animals,and with the development of the more perfectspecies ; is directly opposed to the notion ofspontaneous development maintained by somedistinguished French philosophers ; as well asto the opinion that life is the result of organization.Thus we consider it impossible that byany accidental concurrence of circumstances,a dog can, in the progress of time, be gradually438 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.converted into an ape, or an ape into a mau ;and moreover, we not only think such an hypothesisdirectly at variance with the whole tenorof the laws of nature, but quite absurd. Thelaws of nature, as we have shewn, are in allcases most rigidly adhered to by the Deity.These laws, therefore, are unalterably stable,within the limits that have been assigned tothem. Now, from what we know of the laws ofnature, or of the properties of the elements of matter,or of the agents by which they are moved,it is, as we have already stated, impossible to conceivethat carbon, water, and electricity, of theirown accord, and from any inherent influence,can so unite as to form the humblest plant or animal; much less, so as to secure its perpetual existenceby reproduction. For similar reasons it isequally impossible to conceive, that there can everbe such a spontaneous arrangement or combinationof inferior organic agents, as to form a superioragent. Whenever, therefore, a new andspecific agent is required, a new and specific actof creation must be performed by the Great Architectof the universe. Nearly similar remarksapply to the opinion that the living principleis the result of organization. The living principleis not the result of organization*, but the came oforganization. In accounting for the phenomenaof life, it is absolutely necessary to assume the existenceof some agency different from, and superOF ORGANIZED BODIES. 439prior to, that which operates among inorganic matters.Now since, as we have seen, no inferioragencies can be supposed so to combine as toform a superior agency ; does it not accordbetter with our reason, as well as with our experience,to assume at once a new creation of thehigher principle ?The first circumstance that arrests our attention,with reference to the preceding remarks, isthe wonderful adaptation of the elements and theagents of organic nature to each other. For example,had not carbon, and azote, and water,been formed with the properties which they nowpossess, organic agents, as we know them, wouldhave existed in vain ; and without organic agents,the properties of these elements would equallyhave been useless. And how truly wonderful,and utterly beyond our comprehension, are theproperties and adaptations displayed in the processesof organization ! To enable ourselves toform some conception of these processes, bybringing to a level with our understanding, thosethings which they accomplish ; let us propose toourselves the question, — What ought to be theinherent properties and the constitution of anelementary principle, which should not only becapable of being formed into the hardest and thesoftest bodies in nature ; but which should also becapable of entering as an essential ingredientr"( '440 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.into substances so very unlike, as sugar, vinegar,wood, oil, albumen, and many others, in all theircountless forms and varieties? Do we not feelall our fancied knowledge annihilated by such aquestion ? Nay what is more, even when thequestion is answered for us; and when, with theutmost care, and to the furthest extent of ourability, we have studied all the chemical propertiesof Carbon — the substance by which the conditionsof the question are fulfilled ; how totallyunable are we to explain these properties, oreven to trace them through their simplest modifications?Why, for instance, is the diamondcapable of assuming the form of charcoal ; or whyis charcoal capable of assuming the form of thediamond ? And how are these properties modified,and altered, in all the numerous states ofcombination into which we know carbon enters ?On what property or quality, not possessed byother elements, do all those astonishing capabilitiesof change depend, which are inherent in thiselement carbon ? And why has carbon beenchosen for forming organized beings, in preferenceto silex, or iron, or any other element?*Since there is nothing peculiar in the elements of which organizedbeings are composed, and no reason can be assignedwhy carbon and other elements have been chosen for their formation,we are compelled to ascribe the choice of these materialsto the will of the Great Creator. But as He never actswithout a purpose, we cannot doubt that these elements haveCOMPOSITION OF ORGANIZED BODIES. 441To us all these things are absolutely unknown ;but what a conception do they give, of that inscrutableagency by which the elements are governed; of the powers of that Almighty Mind whois conversant with them all — by whom they werefirst designed, and by whom they have all beencreated ! How infinitely must His knowledge surpasswhatever we can imagine : how far is Hispower beyond our utmost calculation !On the other hand, if the properties of the elementsof matter be wonderful, yet more wonderfulare those agents within organized bodies, bywhich they are directed. With the intimate natureindeed of these agents we have not theremotest acquaintance, nor, probably, ever shallhave. But, as has been already stated, we canbeen selected for some specific design ; which design hasprobably been, that the fabric of the beings dwelling on thisearth, might be adapted to its general position in the Solarsystem. When we consider that the same heat, and the samelight are diffused by the same central sun ; that the whole systemobeys the same laws ; and that the different planets influence,and are influenced by each other ; we are warranted in believingthat the planets are essentially composed of the same elementaryprinciples. But admitting that the heat and light of the sun aredistributed according to the laws which they seem universally toobey ; the heat in Mercury, close to the sun, and the cold in Saturn,at the other extreme, must be alike so intense, that organizedbeings, such as inhabit this earth, could not exist for amoment. In the different planets, therefore, may not the livingprinciple be attached to different elements, more or less fixed orvolatile, as the distance of the planet from the sun may require ?442 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.trace, to a certain extent, the laws of actionwhich these agents obey ; we observe their unvaryingadaptation to the properties of carbon,azote, and water, on which they chiefly act ;their power, within certain limits, of guiding andcontrolling inorganic agents ; and more than all,that mysterious periodic development and decay,which every organized being undergoes. Thesefacts which continually present themselves to ournotice, are totally inexplicable according to thoselaws by which inorganic bodies are governed ;and are referable only, to an order of laws, whichthe Great Author of Nature has not chosen toreveal.Lastly, we cannot close this chapter, withoutpointing out to the reader a very remarkablecontrast, in the two classes of objects which haveengaged our attention. The number and diversityof organic agents appear to be endless ; inthe creation, therefore, of these agents, the GreatAuthor of Nature has chosen to manifest his attributeof infinity. But in the creation of thematerial elements which compose the frame oforganized beings, He has adopted a plan directlyopposite. Instead of different principles; thesame carbon, the same azote, the same water,enter into every living being, from the lowest plantupward to man. Amidst the wonders of creation,it is perhaps difficult to say what is mostwonderful ; but we have often thought, that theMODES OF NUTRITION. 443Deity has displayed a greater stretch of power, inaccommodating to such an extraordinary varietyof changes, a material so unpromising and so refractoryas charcoal, and in finally uniting it withthe human mind ; than was requisite for the creationof the human mind itself. To Him, however,all things are alike easy of accomplishment ; andHe, doubtless, has willed these and other proofsof His omnipotence, in order to convince us ofthis truth, — that the Creator of the mind, couldalone have created the matter with which themind is associated !CHAPTER II.OF THE MODES OF NUTRITION ; COMPREHENDING ASKETCH OF THE ALIMENTARY APPARATUS ; ANDOF ALIMENTARY SUBSTANCES, IN PLANTS ANDIN ANIMALS.The subsistence of all organized beings is derivedfrom sources external to themselves.Their means of subsistence, however, as well asthe modes in which the aliments are applied, exhibitan almost endless variety. As might beexpected, the widest differences, both in the CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.tture of the alimentary substances, and in themanner of their introduction, are between plantsand animals. We shall, therefore, consider thesubject of nutrition under these two heads.Section I.Of the Modes of the Nutrition of Plants ; and ofthe Nature of those Matters by which their Nutritionis effected.A minute investigation of the anatomy and thephysiology of plants would be quite foreign tothe object of this treatise. At the same time,it is necessary that the reader should havesome insight into these departments of knowledge,in order that he may be enabled to understandthe collateral researches which it is ourduty to illustrate.If we reflect upon the phenomena of vegetation,"says Professor Lindley, " our minds canscarcely fail to be deeply impressed with admirationat the perfect simplicity, and, at the sametime, faultless skill, with which all the machineryis contrived, upon which vegetable life depends.A few forms of tissue interwoven horizontallyand perpendicularly constitute a stem ; the development,by the first shoot that the seed produces,of buds which grow upon the same planNUTRITION OF PLANTS. 445as the first shoot itself, and a constant successionof the same phenomenon, causes an increase inthe length and breadth of the plant ; an expansionof the bark into a leaf, within which ramifyveins proceeding from the seat of nutritive matterin the new shoot, the provision of air passagesin its substance, and of evaporating pores on itssurface, enables the crude fluid sent from theroots to be elaborated and digested until it becomesthe peculiar secretion of the species : thecontraction of the branch and its leaves forms aflower; the disintegration of the internal tissueof a petal forms an anther ; the folding inwardsof a leaf is sufficient to constitute a pistillum ;and finally, the gorging of the pistillum withfluid which it cannot part with, causes the productionof a fruit"*The " crude fluid sent up from the roots" ofplants, or their sap, as it is termed, is found toconsist of water, mucilage, and sugar, with some Vminute portions of other matters, generallysaline. Though, under certain circumstances,moisture be absorbed by the leaves of all plants,yet there is no doubt that a great part of theirnourishment enters by their roots ; not, however,by the whole root indiscriminately : the nourishmentof plants is taken up chiefly by theminute fibrous parts termed spangles. Hence,Introduction to Botany, p. 216.440 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.these minute fibrous parts are of the utmost importancein the vegetable economy, and ought tobe carefully preserved in transplantation, otherwisethe plant will certainly perish. In some instances,roots appear to be intended to act as reservoirsof nourishment for the support of theplants of the succeeding year, on their first development.There are such roots in the Orchisand Dahlia tribes, and in others. Of late itseems to have been satisfactorily established, thatthe roots of all plants, besides imbibing nourishment,perform also an excretory office ; and that"^ in the soil in which plants grow, there are depositedby the roots, certain matters of an excrementitiousnature, injurious to the plants fromwhich they have been separated ; and which therefore,cannot be absorbed again, till they have undergonedecomposition. Such excreted mattershave been adduced as the reason, why a soil becomesso much deteriorated by any one species ofplant having long grown in it, that it will notsupport other individuals of the same species :whence the necessity of a rotation of crops.The principal ingredient in the sap of plants,as already observed, is water. The quantity ofsap in some plants, is almost incredible ; and notless so, is the force with which, on the approachof warm weather in our climates, and at the commencementof the rainy season within the tropics,that sap is determined upwards. The general contritionOF PLANTS. 447position of the sap varies considerably in differentparts of the same plant. For instance, sap takenfrom the roots is little more than water ; while thequantity of saccharine and other matters containedin the sap, increases in its progress alongthe stem to the higher parts of the plant. Whenthe sap begins to rise, the leaves at the sametime begin to be developed. From the leavesprincipally the watery portions of the sap areevaporated ; and the evaporation is copious andunceasing. The more solid matters thus remaindissolved in a less proportion of water;and after undergoing further changes, as is supposed,in the leaves chiefly, these matters arereturned, along with the remaining water, tobe deposited in other parts of the plant, for itsfuture uses. It seems now to be generallyadmitted, that one part of the food of plantsis the matter extracted from the soil ; andthat this matter is taken up with the watery portionof the sap above mentioned. It seems alsoto be admitted, that carbonic acid gas is in somewayindispensable to vegetation ; "for it has beenascertained, that feed plants as you will, theywill neither grow nor live, whether you offerthere oxygen, hydrogen, azote, or any othergaseous or fluid principle, unless carbonic acid ispresent." Like the other nutritious matters, thiscarbonic acid is partly taken up by the roots ; butunder certain circumstances, it is also separated448 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.from the air, and absorbed by the leaves. Thecircumstances under which this absorption, orrather decomposition, of carbonic acid, by theleaves takes place, are most curious and important.They are understood to be as follows :During the day, and particularly during sunshine,the leaves of plants have the power of abstractingthe carbonic acid from the atmosphere.The carbon of the acid, and perhaps also a littleof its oxygen combine with the plant ; while thegreater part of the oxygen remains, and is diffusedthrough the atmosphere in a gaseous state.During the night, on the contrary, or in theshade, plants, in general, convert a portion of theoxygen of the atmosphere into carbonic acid ;but the quantity thus converted, is less than thatseparated from the carbonic acid which theydecompose, under the influence of the solar light.At the same time with this formation of carbonicacid by plants during the night, they are saidalso to absorb from the atmosphere a certain portionof oxygen ; to replace that which had beengiven off, during exposure to sunshine, on the precedingday. Plants absorb carbon as long as theyare exposed to the light; during the season,therefore, when the day is long and the night isshort, plants give off much less carbon than theyabsorb. This excess of the absorption of carbon,is probably one reason why in the Polar latitudes,the progress of vegetation is so rapid. By aNUTRITION OF PLANTS. 449beautiful provision of nature, in the course of theshort summer of a few weeks, but of unvaryinglight, plants, in these latitudes, go through all thechanges which in hotter climates require manymonths.These phenomena of gaseous absorption andsecretion in the leaves of plants, seem to be producedby a portion of the leaf peculiarly organized,and situated immediately under its externalcovering or epidermis. Professor Burnethas lately explained these phenomena, by referringthem to the respiration and digestion ofplants. The process of respiration in plants, issupposed to be continual ; and to be accompanied,as in animals, by the formation and emissionof carbonic acid gas. While digestion, whichconsists in the decomposition of carbonic acidgas, takes place only during the exposure ofplants to the influence of the light — the carbon ofthe carbonic acid being separated from the oxygen,and absorbed. Hence a plant exposed tosunshine purifies the air, by digesting the carbonicacid, the carbon of which it appropriates ; whileit sets the oxygen free. In the dark, on thecontrary, digestion ceases, but respiration continues; and carbonic acid gas is thus accumulatedin the surrounding atmosphere.With respect to the " peculiar principlesof plants," these are as numerous as the individualplants themselves; so that to attemptp. G G450 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.any detailed account of them here, would bequite impracticable. Generally speaking, thepeculiar principles found in plants may bedivided into three great classes : — those vegetableprinciples in which hydrogen and oxygenare combined in the proportions that form water ;as in the division of saccharine bodies, describedin a former chapter : — those principles in whichhydrogen, or rather carbon and hydrogen, predominate; which generally have more or less of anoily character ; — and those principles in whichoxygen predominates ; which have usually anacid character. Besides these three great classesof vegetable principles, there are some that containazote, and perhaps other elements ; manyof which principles also exhibit weak alkalinepowers : such are the peculiar principles ofOpium and other Narcotics ; also of Cinchona ;and a variety of others, chiefly employed asMedicinal agents.Section II.Of the Modes of Nutrition in Animals ; and of theAlimentary Substances by which they are nourished.To beings, like animals, endowed with locomotivepowers, the absorption of their nourishmentfrom without, would have been exceedinglyORGANS OF DIGESTION IN ANIMALS. 451inconvenient. Animals have, therefore, been furnishedwith an additional receptacle and apparatussubservient to nutrition, into which, as inclinationor circumstances may prompt them;their food is conveyed at intervals; and fromwhich, after having undergone certain changes,the food is absorbed, and distributed over theirsystem, as the exigencies of that system mayrequire. Hence the distinction between plantsand animals; — plants absorb their nourishment »by external, animals by internal, roots or spon- \tgiles. We need scarcely remark, that thestomach and alimentary canal, with their appendages,are the internal apparatus to which weallude ; and that this internal apparatus constitutesa marked difference between plants andanimals.1 . Of the Organs of Digestion in Animals, —Among the different tribes of animals, there is analmost endless diversity in the formation of thealimentary organs ; and as these organs vary,not only in their own formation, but also withrespect to the auxiliary apparatus, and appendagesof every kind, connected with them ;any detailed account of the alimentary systemwould at present be quite uncalled for. Ingeneral, the alimentary canal of the higherclasses of animals, consists of a tube of greateror less elongation; expanded in some parts of452 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.its length ; terminated at one extremity by amouth, into which the food is received; andat the other, by a provision for the removalof excrementitious matters. In some of the lessperfect animals, the alimentary canal has onlyone aperture ; in these animals, of course, insteadof a canal, there is a kind of sac. In avery few other animals, the alimentary cavity hasnumerous apertures. In all instances, however,and whatever may be the nature of the alimentarymatters, these matters, after having beenretained for some time in the organs appropriatedto nutrition, are reduced, more or less, to a fluidstate — are digested, in the common sense of theterm, and are converted into what is denominatedchyme. The more nutritious parts of thefluid chyme, or the chyle as they are termed, arethen absorbed, and distributed through the systemfor the reparation of the animal ; while theinsoluble and other matters, are separated asexcrementitious.We have already alluded to the endless diversityobservable in the form and arrangements ofthe alimentary canal in the different kinds ofanimals. A few of the most remarkable of thesediversities among the more perfect animals willbe noticed, in the outline we are now to give ofthe alimentary canal as existing in the humanbody.Of the Mouth and its Appendages. — " In noORGANS OF DIGESTION IN ANIMALS. 453apparatus put together by art," says Paley, " doI know such multifarious uses so aptly contrivedas in the natural organization of the humanmouth." " In this small cavity we have teeth ofdifferent shape, — first for cutting, secondly forgrinding ; muscles most artificially disposed forcarrying on the compound motion of the lowerjaw, half lateral and half vertical, by which themill is worked ; fountains of saliva springing upin different parts of the cavity for the moisteningof the food, while the mastication is going on ;glands to feed the fountains ; a muscular constructionof a very peculiar kind in the backpart of the cavity, for the guiding of the preparedaliment into its passage towards the stomach, andin many cases for carrying it along that passage."In the meantime, and within the same cavity,is going on another business altogether differentfrom what is here described — that of respirationand of speech. In addition, therefore, to all thathas been mentioned, we have a passage openedfrom this cavity to the lungs, for the admissionof air, exclusively of every other substance ; wehave muscles, some in the larynx, and withoutnumber in the tongue, for the purpose of modulatingthat air in its passage, with a variety, acompass, and a precision of which no other musicalinstrument is capable. And lastly, we havea specific contrivance for dividing the pneumaticpart from the mechanical, and for preventing onetft454 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.set of actions interfering with the other." " Themouth, with all these intentions to serve, is asingle cavity ; is one machine, with its partsneither crowded nor confined, and each unembarrassedby the rest"* Such is Paley'sgraphic description of the human mouth andits appendages : we have quoted it at length,that it may serve as a text for illustration.Man has been observed to differ more fromother animals in the form of his lower jaw, than inthe form of any other bone of his body. Thisdifference consists chiefly in the prominenceof the chin ; that peculiar characteristic of thehuman countenance, which distinguishes moreor less every race of mankind, and is found inno other animal whatever. There is likewisea striking difference, among the various tribes ofanimals, in the mode of articulation of the lowerjaw ; which in all cases is singularly adapted tothe nature of the food of the animal. Thus, inthe carnivorous tribes, the articulation is so arrangedthat the jaw can move only up anddown ; and is almost entirely incapable of thatlateral movement, which is essential to genuinemastication. Hence such animals cut and teartheir food, and swallow it in large pieces. Butthose animals that live on vegetables, in additionto the vertical motion of their lower jaw, have theNatural Theology, chap. ix.ORGANS OF DIGESTION IN ANIMALS. 455power of moving it backwards and forwards, or toeither side, so as to produce a grinding effect,admirably fitted for triturating the vegetablematters on which they subsist.The teeth next claim our attention, as beingnot less suited to the habits of the animal, thanthe form of the jaw in which they are set.Teeth are divided by naturalists into threeorders: — The Incisors, or cutting teeth, placedin the front part of the mouth ; the Cuspidati,canine, or corner teeth, usually placed near theangles of the jaw ; the Molars, grinding, or lateralteeth, which always occupy the sides and backpart of the jaw. In man, and in those animalswhich most nearly resemble him in their structure,teeth exist of all the above varieties of form. Butmany species want one or other of these varieties;while the teeth they possess, are of a form andsize very unlike the same teeth in man. Thus,in animals which live chiefly on the harder vegetablesubstances, and which, from their peculiarmode of feeding, have been termed gnawing animals,the incisor teeth are the most remarkablydeveloped ; as these teeth are the best adapted,and indeed are the most necessary, to their habits.In carnivorous animals, on the other hand, thecanine teeth are of chief importance; as enablingthese animals to seize and hold their prey : insuch animals, accordingly, the* canine teeth are450 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.the most perfectly formed. Lastly, in the animalsthat feed on grass, and other herbaceoussubstances, and whose aliments require long andcomplete mastication, the Molars, or grindingteeth, attain the greatest enlargement ; and inmany of these animals the incisor and the canineteeth are entirely wanting. Besides the adaptationof the form, the enamel or harder cutting portionof the teeth, is distributed over and throughouttheir texture, according to their intendeduses, in a manner that is truly extraordinary.The description however of the arrangement ofthe enamel, as well indeed as a minute accountof the teeth themselves, belong to the physiologist,on whose province we shall not further intrude.But it is impossible to take even the mostsuperficial view of the teeth of animals, withoutbeing struck with the admirable design andfitness they display, throughout their whole fabrication.The next auxiliary appendages of the mouthare the glands that secrete the saliva ; in whichwe observe the same beautiful arrangement as inthe form and structure of the teeth. In man,though the apparatus for the secretion of thesaliva, is by no means of large size, yet thequantity of fluid which the salivary glands arecapable of secreting, and do secrete during mastication,is very considerable ; often amounting,V it is said, to half a pint or more. This fluid, inORGANS OF DIGESTION IN ANIMALS. 457its perfectly healthy state, is neither acid noralkaline, or alkaline only in a slight degree ; butoccasionally it assumes an acid character. Besidesthe great utility of the saliva in moisteningthe food, we cannot doubt that it assists, and iseven necessary to the full completion of the succeedingdigestive process. By a beautiful arrangement,those animals that do not masticatetheir food, as the carnivorous tribes, have verysmall salivary glands ; while in animals whosefood requires long mastication, as in ruminatinganimals — the cow and the sheep, for example,the salivary glands are very large.The passage by which the masticated food isconveyed from the mouth to the stomach istermed the oesophagus. Like the whole frame,the oesophagus is admirably adapted for itsoffice ; and in different animals, varies in sizeand structure, according to their habits. Thesedifferences, however, scarcely concern us atpresent, and we pass on to that important organthe Stomach.The human stomach is a membranous bag, ofa shape rather difficult to be described, so as toconvey a clear notion of it to the reader. If weimagine two cones united at their bases, and thefigure thus produced to be bent into a semicircularform, some idea may be obtained ofthe outline of the stomach in the human species.In respect to its size, the human stomach458 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.varies : but in the adult, its capacity is usuallysuch as to contain about two or three pints.The stomach is situated immediately under thediaphragm ; but the precise place of the organdiffers somewhat with its state of repletion. Thegeneral position of the stomach is transverse,or horizontal, supposing the body to be upright ;the left orifice, or cardia, which communicateswith the oesophagus, being somewhat higher thanthe right orifice, the pylorus, through which thefood is transmitted to the further portion of thealimentary canal. The upper space betweenthe two orifices is usually termed the smallcurvature ; the lower space, the great curvature,of the stomach. Numerous glands occupy theinternal surface of the stomach, particularlynear its pyloric orifice. By these glands afluid is secreted of the highest importance in thedigestive functions, on the nature of which weshall enlarge hereafter.Such is the stomach of man ; but the form andthe magnitude of this organ vary almost infinitelyin different animals, according to the natureof their food, and other circumstances. Wecan, at present, notice only two or three of themost remarkable diversities. In most carnivorousanimals, the stomach bears a resemblance to thatof man. There is also a resemblance, at leastexternally, in certain herbivorous animals ; asORGANS OF DIGESTION IN ANIMALS. 4o9in the horse, the rabbit, and others. The internalarrangements, however, are different ; thus, inthe animals above mentioned, the left or cardiachalf of the stomach is lined with cuticle ; while theother half, toward the pylorus, has the usual villousand secreting surface. Hence, these two portionsof the stomach perform very different offices, andgenerally contain food in very different states ofreduction. The most complicated and artificialarrangement, however, both with respect to thestructure of the parts, and the lining membranes, ,is found in the well-known four stomachs of the 'animals that ruminate and have divided hoofs ; asthe cow and the sheep. We shall endeavour togive a general description of these four stomachs.The first stomach is denominated the Paunch,and in the adult animal is by far the largest.The second stomach follows, and may be regardedas a globular appendage to the paunch ;from which it is distinguished, principally, by theregular and beautiful distribution of its internalmembrane into polygonal cells. The third stomachis the smallest of the four, and is the mostremarkable in its structure : its capacity is muchdiminished by numerous and broad duplicatesof its internal membrane, which are placedlengthwise, and vary in breadth in a regularorder. The fourth stomach is next in size to thepaunch, and is lined with a villous membraneapproaching to that of the human stomach,400 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.which this fourth stomach may be supposed torepresent ; the three preceding stomachs havingbeen evidently intended to prepare the refractoryfood of the animal for the true digestive process,which it undergoes in this last stomach. Everyoneis acquainted with the fact that animals furnishedwith the gastric arrangements above described,ruminate ; that is to say, have the facultyof masticating a second time, and at their leisure,that food which had been hastily swallowed, anddeposited in their first stomach. The contrivanceby which rumination is effected is very beautiful ;and is connected with the peculiar arrangementalready mentioned of the four stomachs, with respectto the oesophagus : but, as it would notbe easy in a few words, to give more than ageneral outline ; we must refer the reader toanatomical works, for a more particular descriptionof the stomachs of ruminating animals.The only other modification of the stomachwhich we shall notice, is that which exists insome birds; as for example, in the common fowl.The common domestic fowl, as well as manysimilar birds, has a sort of preliminary stomach,termed the crop, formed by an expansion ofthe oesophagus. In the crop, the hard seeds,and other compact substances which birds devour,are macerated and softened, and perhapsundergo further changes, before they enter theproper stomach, to be next considered. TheORGANS OF DIGESTION IN ANIMALS. 461proper stomach, or gizzard, of birds, is a hollowmuscle of great strength, lined with a firm andthick epidermis, disposed in rugae, and admirablyadapted for triturating the hard matters thatconstitute their food. The small stones whichthese birds constantly swallow seem also to promotethis trituration.We have given the above short sketch ofthe structure of the stomachs of animals, notonly that we might impart to the general readera faint conception of the extraordinary designmanifested in that structure ; but to enable us toshow the object of diversity of structure, whenwe come to speak of the function of digestion alittle more in detail.After the stomach we proceed to the considerationof the Intestinal Canal. In man, and inthe more perfect animals, this canal assumes twowell marked forms, usually termed, from theirrelative size, the small and the large intestines.In most animals resembling man, the small intestinesare the longest, and their internal surface isvillous. The coats of the large intestines arethicker, and the membrane with which they arelined is very rarely villous. The first portion ofthe small intestines, from its supposed lengthtermed the duodenum, or twelve-inch intestine,begins from the pyloric orifice of the stomach ;and, in many animals has a course not easy tobe described, so as to be intelligible to the CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.oral reader. The duodenum terminates in thesecond portion of the small intestines, called thejejunum, from its being usually empty. Theduodenum differs from the stomach and otherparts of the canal, in being secured in its positionby various attachments ; while the stomach andother parts of the canal, are comparatively looseand floating. This fixedness appears to servemany wise purposes, on which we cannot dwellhere ; but one purpose probably is, to ensurethe easy and regular passage of the bile and thepancreatic fluids into this part of the canal. Asthe organs producing these important fluids arefixed, the conducting tubes necessarily requirealso to be connected with a fixed organ ; otherwisethe passage of the fluids from the secretingorgans to the intestine, would be constantly liableto interruption. The duodenum is very highlyorganized, and its functions are probably not lessimportant than even those of the stomach. Theremainder of the small intestines is divided intothe jejunum already mentioned, and the ilium ;but the precise place where one ends, and theother begins, is scarcely definable ; nor are thedifferences of structure between the two so obvious,as to require to be noticed in this place.The large intestines exceed the small intestinesin diameter, but are considerably shorter : theirform and structure are also different. The firstdivision of this portion of the alimentary canal isORGANS OF DIGESTION IN ANIMALS. 463termed the ccecum; and, in man at least, may beconsidered as little more than the head or commencementof the next division of the large intestines,termed the colon. The colon is of muchgreater diameter than any other part of the intestinalcanal, and constitutes almost the entirelength of the large intestines. The colon beginslow down on the right side of the abdomen, thenascending to the level of the stomach, passesacross to the left side, immediately below thatorgan. On the left side, the colon descendsagain, and at the same time forms what is calledthe sigmoid flexure. The colon and the alimentarycanal at length terminate in what is namedthe rectum. The texture of the colon is muchthicker than that of any other portion of thecanal. Its organization also is peculiar ; and,like the whole arrangement, wonderfully adaptedfor the purposes which this portion of the canalissupposed to serve in the animal economy.Such is a short account of the alimentarycanal in man. We shall now state some of themore remarkable diversities that are observed inthe lower animals.One of the most striking circumstances relativeto the alimentary canal in animals, is its variouslengths in the different classes. In man, and otheromnivorous animals, the proportion is intermediatebetween that of carnivorous animals on theone hand, and herbivorous animals on the other.4()4 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.In man, the whole length of the canal is aboutsix or seven times that of the body ; while in carnivorousanimals it is only from about three tofive times that length ; and in graminivorous animals,as in the sheep, the length of the canal istwenty seven times that of the body. In otherherbivorous animals, the length of the canal variesfrom twelve to sixteen times that of the body.In most birds the alimentary canal is muchshorter than in quadrupeds ; the length in general,being between twice and five times thatof their bodies : while in many reptiles andfish, the length of the canal scarcely exceedsthat of the body : in some fish it is even less ; asfor example, in the shark. There are animalsthat feed on vegetables, the length of whose alimentarycanal is not so great, as in the instanceabove stated ; the deficiency in length being apparentlymade up in breadth. Thus, in the horsethe stomach is simple, and not much developed,when compared with the size of the animal ; norare the intestines very remarkable for theirlength ; but the ccecum and the large intestinesare enormously expanded in diameter. Theccecum of the horse seems to perform many ofthe offices of a second stomach, and is of fullyequal capacity. There are in animals, manyother beautiful arrangements of the digestiveorgans, which we shall pass without further notice; as our desire is to inform the reader of theORGANS OF DIGESTION IN ANIMALS. 465general connection and adaptation, which existsbetween the structure of animals, and the foodon which they live. It remains to concludethis outline of the digestive organs, with a fewremarks on those almost invariable accompanimentsof the alimentary canal, — the liver, thepancreas, and the spleen.The liver is the largest glandular apparatusin the body, and one of its important offices is tosecrete the Bile ; which secretion, as before observed,enters the intestines, near the commence X.ment of the duodenum. The general situationof the human liver, is in the upper part of theabdomen, under the ribs on the right side ; fromwhence it extends more or less to the region ofthe stomach, and in some instances, even to theleft side. The appearance and form of the liver,are too well known to require descriptionhere ; while to those who are unacquainted withthese particulars, they cannot be adequatelymade known by words. In man, and thegreater number of animals, the bile is collectedin a small bag, termed from its office, the gallbladder.The animals wanting a gall-bladderare chiefly vegetable feeders ; as the horse andthe goat among quadrupeds, the pigeon and theparrot among birds. On the contrary, most amphibiahave a gall-bladder ; but it exists in fewanimals lower in the zoological scale. The liverassumes a variety of forms in different animals.p. H H4<ti) CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.In many, and particularly in carnivorous, animals,the liver is more divided than in man :while in ruminating animals, also in the horse,the hog, and others, its divisions are not morenumerous than in man. The liver of birds consistsof two lobes of equal size.The pancreas, or sweetbread, is a large gland,which, in the human body, lies across the upperand back part of the abdomen, behind thestomach ; and between the liver and the spleen.The pancreas is composed of numerous smallglands, whose ducts unite and form the pancreaticduct. In man the pancreatic duct joinsthe gall duct, at its entrance into the duodenum,and thus the peculiar secretion of the pancreasis poured into that intestine, commingled with thebile. In animals the pancreas, like the liver, ismuch varied in its form ; and its duct, instead ofentering with the biliary duct, often joins theintestinal canal separately ; as in the hare andothers. In fishes the pancreas is wanting ; butwhat are termed the ccecal appendages, are supposedto have a similar office. The nature of thepancreatic fluid will be considered presently.The spleen in man is situated in the upper andleft side of the abdomen. Its shape is oblong, andits colour a deep mulberry; more nearly resemblingthat of the liver than of any other organ.The spleen has no excretory duct, and its useis very little understood. Among the less perfectORGANS OF DIGESTION IN ANIMALS. 467animals, the spleen is much smaller than inthose whose structure resembles that of man :and where there is more than one stomach, thespleen is always attached to the first. The situationalso of the spleen varies in the less perfectanimals ; thus in the frog, it is fixed in the mesentery.We proceed to notice, very briefly, the peculiarcirculation of the blood in the abdominalviscera ; together with the character and agencyof that portion of the nervous system, whichis connected with the digestive and assimilatingfunctions of animals.In the general circulation of the blood throughan animal body ; a large tube or artery, communicatingwith the heart, is gradually subdividedas it is prolonged from that organ, tillits subdivisions finally become imperceptible.While in this state of minute subdivision, the arteriesassume the character of veins. The changethe veins undergo in their progress, is the reverseof that of the arteries. They unite gradually,and, at length, form one or two principal tubes,which proceed to the side of the heart oppositeto that from which the artery originated. Suchis the circulation of the blood through the bodygenerally; the circulation through the lungs ismerely a repetition of the same arrangement.Throughout the body, therefore, the general motionof the blood in arteries is from greater to4G8 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.smaller tubes ; while in the veins it is fromsmaller to greater tubes. By a beautiful provision,the veins are also furnished \vithvalves,whichmost effectually prevent the regurgitation of theblood : without such valves, the blood couldscarcely flow in a regular stream. We have introducedthese remarks, with the view of stating,that the circulation of the blood through theorgans of digestion, presents a remarkable exceptionto the general circulation of the body.The venous blood, from these organs, undergoesa preliminary arterializing process in the liver,before it is reminded with the venous bloodfrom the rest of the body. That perfect animals, whichis not essentially a natural compound of at leasttwo, if not of all the three great principles of aliment.But it is in the artificial food of man thatwe see this great principle of mixture moststrongly exemplified. He, dissatisfied with thespontaneous productions of nature, culls fromevery source ; and by the force of his reason,or rather of his instinct, forms in every possiblemanner, and under every disguise, the samegreat alimentary compound. This after all hiscooking and his art, how much soever he may bedisinclined to believe it, is the sole object of hislabour ; and the more nearly his results approachto this object, the more nearly do they approachperfection. Even in the utmost refinementsof his luxury, and in his choicest delicateCHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.lies, the same great principle is attended to; andhis sugar and flour, his eggs and butter, in alltheir various forms and combinations, are nothingmore or less, than disguised imitations of thegreat alimentary prototype milk, as furnished tohim by nature.CHAPTER III.OF THE DIGESTIVE PROCESS ; AND OF THE GENERALACTION OF THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM.We proceed now to consider the most importantfunction of the stomach, by which the assimilationof the food is begun. But before that functioncan be well understood, it is necessary tomake a few remarks on the influence of water, inmodifying the intimate constitution and the peculiarproperties of alimentary substances. Wehave intentionally delayed these remarks, inorder that in this place the chemical influence ofwater might be more strikingly exemplified.Water enters into the composition of most organizedbodies in two separate forms ; whichmust be clearly distinguished, and which it isrequisite that the reader should always bear inmind. Water may constitute an essential elementof a substance, as of sugar or of starch inPROCESS OF DIGESTION IN ANIMALS. 481their driest states; in which case, the water cannotbe disunited without destroying the compound: or water may constitute an accidentalingredient of a substance, as of sugar or of starchin their moist states ; in which case more or lessof the water may frequently be removed, withoutdestroying the essential properties of the compound.Now, a very large number of organizedbodies, (perhaps all those to which our presentenquiry relates) contain water in both theseforms ; both as an essential element, and as anaccidental ingredient ; and in most instances, itis impossible to discriminate between the waterthat is essential, and that which is accidental.The mode of union, however, among the elementsof bodies, in these two states of their combinationwith water, must be altogether different.Wherein the difference consists, is very imperfectlyknown ; but perhaps the following remarksmay throw some light on the subject ; at least,they will serve to point out, the nature of thesetwo modes of union, to the reader.In the first part of this volume, we stated thatthe molecular, or combining, weights of carbonand of water are, by chemists, usually consideredto be represented by the numbers 6 and 9 ; theweight of hydrogen being one. We also advancedthe opinion, that the molecules or atoms of carbonand of water, where more than one exist, insteadof remaining separate, as is now supposed, arep. i iV48*2 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.associated together into groups, or supermole-rules; and that carbon, water, and similar bodies,always enter into combination, not as singlemolecules, but as one super molecule. To illustrateour meaning, let us take as examples, thestate of combination of the molecules constitutingthe different varieties of sugar.Sugar from the cane, in its purest state, andwhen as free as possible from accidental water,is, according to the present language of chemists,composed of 9 atoms of carbon and 8atoms of water. Now, we suppose these 9atoms of carbon, and 8 atoms of water, to beassociated into two super molecules, weighing(9 X 6) 54, and (8 X 9) 72, respectively. Sothat, we conceive a molecule of sugar fromthe cane to be a binary compound, of a super-moleculeof carbon weighing 54, and a super-moleculeof water weighing 72. Again, thesugar of honey, according to the present languageof chemists, is composed of 9 atoms of carbon,and 12 atoms of water ; or, according to ourview of molecular arrangement, the sugar ofhoney is composed of two super molecules, one ofthem, carbon, weighing 54, as in the sugar ofthe cane — the other, water, weighing no less than(12 X 9) 108. A similar statement may be givenof the composition of Lignin, another of thesaccharine class of bodies. This substance,which, in all its various forms appears to consistPROCESS OF DIGESTION IN ANIMALS. 483essentially of equal weights of carbon andwater, may be said to be composed of 9 atoms ofcarbon, and 6 atoms of water ; or, according toour views, of two super molecules weighing(9 x 6) 54, and (6 x 9) 54, respectively. Hence,the saccharine class of bodies may be representedin the following manner : —Carbon.Water.+Lignin.+Cane Sugar ; Wheat Starch.+Sugar of honey ; Arrowroot.The molecular constitution of the saccharinebodies, above stated, may be compared with thatof Vinegar. According to the present languageof chemists, vinegar, in its purest and most detachedform, is composed of 4 atoms of carbon,and 3 atoms of water; or, according to ourviews, of two super molecules weighing (4 X 0) 24,and (3 x 9) 27, respectively. Thus, the molecularconstitution of these two different states ofvinegar may be represented as follows : —Absolute vinegar.Crystallized or solid vinegar.We have stated the composition of vinegar, inorder to draw the attention of the reader, to thedifference between the super molecule of the carbonin that acid, and the super molecule of thecarbon in the saccharine class of bodies ; a differenceto which these two classes of bodies proba-Carbon.Water++[84 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.ably owe the striking differences in their sensibleproperties. But why the super molecule of carbonshould be 54 in bodies of the saccharineclass, and why this super molecule should ingeneral exist in the self attractive form, and producesweetness ; or why the super molecule of carbonin vinegar should be 24, and why this super-moleculeshould have such a tendency, as it exhibits,to assume the self-repulsive form, and toproduce sourness ; we do not know, and probablyshall never be able fully to explain. Still,there can be little doubt that a careful and philosophicalexamination of the phenomena, wouldgo far to dispel the obscurity in which the subjectis now involved.Such are the principles, which, we conceive toregulate the chemical union of organic, and indeedof all other compounds ; and if chemicalunion be so regulated, the inferences are mostcurious and important. With these inferencesin general, we have at present no concern : butthose more particularly relating to alimentarycompounds are the following :—First. We would draw the attention of thereader to the contrast between the two super-moleculesof carbon, and of water, constitutingsugar ; the super molecule of carbon being uniformthroughout the whole saccharine class,while the super molecule of water is that whichis variable. Now, there is reason to believe thatthis contrast holds in other instances ; and thatPROCESS OF DIGESTION IN ANIMALS. 48-Jin different organized substances of the samekind, the super molecule of carbon, or of someof its compounds, remains the permanent andcharacteristic element ; and that the differentmodifications are produced by variations in thesuper molecule of water; which may be calledthe modifying supermolecule.Secondly. The manner of the operation ofthe modifying agency may be thus illustrated.If to a portion of cane sugar, we add that quantityof water, which, by an easy calculation, we learnis necessary to be united with it, in order to itsconversion into sugar of honey ; we find that wecannot succeed in producing such conversion;and that the excess of water which had beenadded, flies off, and leaves the cane sugar in itsoriginal state. On the other hand, if we applyheat to the sugar of honey; though we mayindeed drive off part of the water essentiallyassociated with that sugar, we do not obtain sugarsimilar to that of the cane; but we destroy, oraltogether decompose the sugar of honey. Thesefacts, therefore, shew that the excess of water,constituting the difference of the sugar of honeyfrom the sugar of the cane, is really in somestate of essential union, incapable of being-imitated; while, in the cane sugar, the watermay exist as an accidental ingredient only. Infact, according to our views of molecular arrangement; every individual super molecule of theweaker sugar contains a portion of this excess of4P>(J CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.water, as an essential element of its composition.Hence such water cannot be separated from anycompound, without destroying the entire crasis,or constitution, of its molecular elements; which,as in the case of the sugar of honey, we find, byexperiment, to be the result. On the other hand,we suppose the molecules of accidental water toform no essential element of the molecules of sugar,or of other bodies, but to be only loosely associatedwith them; and hence, the ease with which accidentalwater may be separated without destroyingsuch bodies.Thirdly. It may be advanced as a generalrule, that the larger the number, representing theweight of the super molecule of any compoundsubstance ; whether such number represent thecharacteristic, or the modifying super molecule ;the more easily may that compound substance bedecomposed. Thus, the sugar of honey is moreeasily decomposed — is much less permanent,than the sugar of the cane ; and the purest sugar,is much less permanent than Lignin. In likemanner, when water is the modifying element ofany compound, as it is in most organic compounds,the larger the number representing thesuper molecule of the water, the greater, for themost part, is the solubility of the compound.Fourthly. There are at present no chemicalterms corresponding to those differences of composition,which we have brought under the noticePROCESS OF DIGESTION IN ANIMALS. 487of the reader. Now, the terms strong and weak,which in commerce, distinguish the different varietiesof sugar, are sufficiently expressive ; wehave, therefore, made choice of them, to denotethe similar varieties of other organic compounds.Thus, when we speak of a strong compound ; wemean that its constituent super molecules are,like those of strong cane sugar, less complicatedthan the super molecules of a weak principle, likethose of the sugar of honey. Again, there areno terms expressive of the conversion of a strongsubstance into a weak substance, or the contrary.To express such conversion we have adopted theterms reduction, and completion.In the above illustrations of the modifyinginfluence of water in organic compounds, wehave selected sugar as our example, solely fromits being the most familiar. But, as we havemore than once noticed, exactly the same lawsappear to regulate the composition of all organizedbodies. Thus in the strong, fixed, andsolid, oils or fats, the characteristic supermoleculeof which, as we have already said, has some relationto defiant gas ; the modifying moleculeof water is very small, perhaps, in some oleaginousbodies, is even a sub molecule. Whereas,in alcohol, which is the weakest condition of theoily principle, the weight of the modifying of water is more than half that ofthe defiant gas, and alcohol is perfectly solublein water.488 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.Gelatinous and albuminous substances, also,exhibit precisely the same variations. The strongtenacious glue, employed in the arts, is made fromthe firmer parts of the hides of old animals ;while the gelatinous size, or weak glue, is madefrom the skins of younger and more delicateanimals. These two varieties of glue differ fromone another, in the weights of the modifyingsuper molecules of water which enter into theircomposition. In general, it may be observed,that the substances composing the frame ofold and of young animals, differ chiefly in theweights of their modifying super molecules ofwater ; and that the dissimilarity of their properties,is chiefly owing to this difference.If the reader has clearly apprehended, andwill bear in mind, the principles that have nowbeen stated, as regulating the chemical constitutionof organized bodies, and the modes in whichthey are influenced by their modifying constituent,water ; he will be able to accompany us inthe observations we are about to offer ; and he willthus, more especially, be able to form a generalconception of the chemical operations of the stomach.The operations of the stomach, viewedas a whole, may be stated as follows : —1. The stomach has the power of dissolvingalimentary substances, or, at least of bringingthem to a semi fluid state. This operation seemsto be altogether chemical ; and is probablyPROCESS OF DIGESTION IN ANIMALS. 489effected by reducing the properties of these alimentarysubstances.2. The stomach has, within certain limits, thepower of changing into one another, the simplealimentary principles, which have been describedin the last chapter. Unless the stomach possessedsuch a power, that uniformity in the compositionof the chyle, which we may imagine tobe indispensable io the existence of every animal,could not be preserved. This part of theoperations of the stomach, appears, like the reducingprocess, to be chemical ; but not so easyof accomplishment ; it may be termed the convertingoperation of the stomach.3. The stomach must have, within certainlimits, the power of organizing and vitalizingthe different alimentary substances ; so as torender them fit for being brought into more intimateunion with a living body, than the crudealiments can be supposed to be. It is impossibleto imagine, that this organizing agency of thestomach can be chemical. This agency is vital,and its nature is completely unknown.1. Of the Reducing Powers of the Stomach. —In order to render more intelligible that functionof the stomach, which it owes to its reducingpower, let us endeavour to trace the series ofphenomena, which appear to arise during theconversion of simple albuminous matter into the490 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.albumen of the chyme; without taking into accountany other change.When a portion of fluid albumen, as of thewhite of an egg, or of milk, is introduced intothe stomach of an animal, as of a dog, it instantlybecomes solid ; or, in ordinary language, iscoagulated. This coagulation is probably a merechemical change ; for the same change, would,under similar circumstances, stake place out ofthe body. That is to say, if the white of an egg,or milk, were mixed with a fluid more or lessacid, like that which exists in the stomachs ofanimals while the food is undergoing the processof digestion ; it would be coagulated. There maybe,however, and probably is, some object in thechange produced by coagulation ; since the stomachsof animals are fitted to operate chiefly onsolid matters. Admitting the object of the change,we can hardly consider it to be essential to thesubsequent processes ; for gelatine, a staminalalimentary principle, nearly resembling albumenin its composition, undergoes, under similar circumstances,no such solidifying change. Thealbumen thus solidified by the stomach into amass or curd, is soon altered further ; more especiallythat part of the mass, with which the membraneof the stomach is in contact. The curdymass assumes a gelatinous appearance ; then eachportion is successively more and more softened,till at length, the whole becomes nearly fluid,PROCESS OF DIGESTION IN ANIMALS. 491and after some additional modifications, graduallypasses into the state of chyme. Throughall these apparent changes, however, the albumenhas undergone no real change. Whatwas introduced into the stomach as albumen,is still albumen in the chyme ; at least chemistshave pronounced it so to be. Yet it hasassumed an appearance altogether different.The albumen of the egg, out of the stomach, maybecoagulated by heat, into a firm and elasticsolid. The albumen of the chyme is indeedcoagulable by heat, but its coagulation is so imperfect,and so wanting in tenacity, as to offer astriking contrast with the coagulated albumen ofthe egg. What then, in the stomach, has happenedto the albumen ? Viewing only its susceptibilityof coagulation, the albumen has merelybecome chemically combined with a portion ofwater. The solid and tenacious albumen has,by this combination with water, been reducedto the weakest possible state — to the delicatestate, as it were, of infancy ; in short, to a stateprecisely analogous to that of the weak sugars,and other organic compounds, as compared withthe strong and perfect varieties of the same substances,described in the preceding chapter.Such is, we believe, an accurate account ofthe merely solvent or reducing powers of thestomach. We have next to show the means bywhich this solution or reduction is effected.VJ'2 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.The process of combining different substanceswith water, and of thus reducing them from astronger to a weaker condition, may, in someinstances, and to a certain degree, be effectedartificially. But in no instance do we appearto be able to invert the process ; or to completean organic compound, by again separating thewater. For example, we can, in some respects,make a strong sugar weak, but we cannotchange a weak into a strong sugar ; though sucha change, within certain limits, seems to be, tothe organic agents, just as easy, as the reducingprocess.The different operations of cookery, as roasting,boiling, baking, &c. have all a reducingeffect ; and may, therefore, be considered as preparatoryto the solvent action of the stomach.Of these operations, Mans nature has taught himto avail himself, and they constitute the chiefmeans by which he is enabled to be omnivorous: for, without such preparation, a very largeportion of the matters which he now adoptsas food, would be completely indigestible. Bydifferent culinary processes, the most refractorysubstances, can often be rendered nutritious.Thus, by alternate baking and boiling, the woodyfibre itself may be converted into a sort of amylaceouspulp; not only possessing most of theproperties of the amylaceous principle, but capableof being formed into bread. The culinaryPROCESS OF DIGESTION IN ANIMALS. 493art engages no small share of attention amongmankind ; but, unfortunately, cooks are seldomchemists ; nor indeed do they understand themost simple of the chemical principles of theirart. Hence, their labour is most frequently employed,not in rendering wholesome articles offood more digestible, which is the true object ofcookery ; but in making unwholesome things palatable; foolishly imagining that what is agreeableto the palate, must be also healthful tothe stomach. A greater fallacy can scarcelybe conceived ; for, though by a beautifularrangement of Providence, what is wholesomeis seldom disagreeable ; the converse is by nomeans applicable to man ; since those thingswhich are pleasant to the taste are not unfrequentlyvery injurious. Animals, indeed, forthe most part, avoid, instinctively, all unwholesomefood ; probably because every thing thatwould be prejudicial, is actually distasteful tothem. But as regards man, the choice of articlesof nourishment has been left entirely to hisreason.In order to illustrate the importance of a judiciousadaptation of cookery, we may observe,that the particular function of the stomach, nowunder consideration, namely, the dissolving orreducing function, is liable to very great derangements.In some individuals, the reducing poweris so weak, that their stomach is almost incapable494 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.of dissolving solid food of the most simple kind.In such a state of the stomach, a crude diet of theflesh of animals in a hardened state, or of othercompact substances, is little else than poisonous ;while the same animal and vegetable mattersoften agree well, if reduced to a pulpy state. Onthe other hand, as in the disease termed Diabetes,the solvent powers of the stomach are often inordinatelyincreased ; and every article of food isdissolved and absorbed almost as soon as it isswallowed. In such cases, a diet and a modeof preparation are required, directly the reverseof those which are found to be so beneficial,when there is a debility of the solvent powers;and aliments which are firm and solid, but at thesame time nutritious, must be chosen.Regarding the intimate nature of the agency,by which the combination of alimentary substanceswith water is effected in the stomach,we cannot be said to possess much certain knowledge.This combination appears to be chieflyowing to the agency of a fluid, secreted by thestomach ; the glands for the formation of whichfluid, are most numerous toward the pyloric orifice.The aliment having been . previouslybroken down by mastication, and having receivedan admixture of saliva and of otherfluids, is brought into contact with the fluid secretedby the stomach ; by which secretion, or bysome other energy there in operation, the foodPROCESS OF DIGESTION IN ANIMALS. 495that has been introduced into the stomach isassociated with water; and thus becomes itselfmore or less a fluid. Of this important secretionof the stomach, chlorine, in some state orother of combination, is an ingredient ; it wouldseem a necessary ingredient ; for the secretion inits healthy state, always contains more or less yof chlorine, the powerful influence of whichelementary principle, seems mainly to contributetowards effecting the union of the food withwater. The chlorine, thus so indispensable tothe reducing process, is perhaps more frequentlythe subject of derangement, than any thingconcerned with the assimilation of the food.It often happens that instead of chlorine, oralittle free muriatic acid, a large quantity offree muriatic acid is elicited ; which not onlygives rise to much secondary uneasiness, but Vmore or less retards the process of reductionitself. The source of this chlorine or muriaticacid, must be the common salt which exists inthe blood : to suppose that it is generated, isquite an unnecessary hypothesis. The chlorineis therefore secreted from the blood ; and it maybedemanded, what is the nature of the agency,capable of separating that element from a fluidso heterogeneous as the blood ? We are acquaintedwith one agent that exerts such apower, namely, electricity ; and this agent, aswe formerly observed, seems to be employed by49(i CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.the animal economy for its operations, in thesame manner, and on the same principles, as thematerials themselves are employed, from whichthe animal body is constructed. Perhaps, therefore,the decomposition of the salt of the bloodmay be fairly referred to the immediate agencyof this principle, electricity. But here the questionarises, What becomes of the soda fromwhich the muriatic acid has been disunited ?The soda remains behind, of course, in the blood,and a portion of it, no doubt, is requisite to preservethe weak alkaline condition essential to thefluidity of the blood. But the larger part of thissoda is probably directed to the liver, and iselicited with the bile in the duodenum, where it isthus again brought into union with the acid,that had been separated from the blood, by thestomach. These observations, illustrating the importanceof common salt in the animal economy,seem to explain, in a satisfactory manner, thatinstinctive craving after this substance, which isshewn by all animals.Admitting that the decomposition of the salt ofthe blood is owing to the immediate agency ofgalvanism ; we have, in the principal digestiveorgans, a kind of galvanic apparatus, of whichthe mucous membrane of the stomach, and perhapsthat of the intestinal canal generally, maybeconsidered as the acid or positive pole ; whilethe hepatic system may, on the same view, bePROCESS OF DIGESTION IN ANIMALS. 497considered as the alkaline or negative pole.Whether such galvanic action be admitted ornot ; and the admission is of no very great importance; what we have above stated may bereceived as a simple expression of the facts, in sofaras they relate to the saline constituents of theblood. Moreover, be the nature of the energieswhat they may, by which these changes areeffected ; along with these changes, and probablyby the aid of the same energies, other very importantchanges or processes are carried on, tosome of which we shall presently have occasionto allude. In the mean time, we may close thissection by observing that there is strong reasonto believe, that the solvent power, which we havedescribed, or some power having a great resemblanceto it, exists not only in the stomach, but inevery part of an animal body. In all animalsthere are minute tubes, called absorbents, whichoriginate in every part of their bodies, andat length uniting, enter the sanguineous systemalong with the chyle. Now, the office ofthese tubes, is to remove all those portions ofthe animal frame, which after having performed Yrtheir several functions, require to be withdrawn.Of course, before solid parts can be thus removed,they must be dissolved, (digested infact) ; and such solution, in many instances, isprobably effected, as it is in digestion, by combiningthese solid parts with water. This supr.k K498 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.posed analogy between the solvent powers of thestomach, and those which must prevail all overthe body, seems to be strongly confirmed by thatsimilarity of structure and of function existingbetween the lacteals and the absorbents : theyindeed form but one system. We shall resumethis subject hereafter.2. Of the Powers of Conversion possessed by theStomach. — Though the proportions of the differentingredients of the chyle, as ultimatelyformed, are liable to be much varied, accordingto the nature of the food ; yet, whatever the natureof the food may be, the general compositionand character of the chyle, remain always thesame. The stomach must, therefore, be endowedwith a power or faculty, the agency of which isto secure this uniform composition of the chyle,by appropriate action upon such materials, ascircumstances may bring within its reach. Two,indeed, of the chief materials from which chyleis formed, namely, the albuminous and the oleaginousprinciples, may be considered to bealready fitted for the purposes of the animaleconomy, without undergoing any essentialchange in their composition. But the saccharineclass of aliments, which form a very largepart of the food of all animals, except of thosesubsisting entirely on flesh, are by no meansadapted for such speedy assimilation. In-processOF DIGESTION IN ANIMALS. 499deed, one or more essential changes must takeplace in saccharine aliments, previously to theirconversion, either into the albuminous, or intothe oleaginous principles. Most probably, underordinary circumstances, these essential changesare altogether chemical ; that is to say, they aresuch as do take place, or rather, such as wouldtake place, if the elements of the substances thuschanged in the stomach, could, out of the body,be so collected, as to bring into action the affinitiesnecessary to produce these changes. Thus,as we know, the saccharine principle spontaneouslybecomes alcohol ; which, as has beenstated, is merely an oleaginous body of a weakkind. When, therefore, in the stomach, it is requisitethat sugar be converted into oil, it is probablethat the sugar passes through precisely thesame series of changes it undergoes, out of thebody, during its conversion into alcohol. We cannottrace the conversion of sugar into albumen ;because we are ignorant of the relative composition,and of the laws which regulate the changes,of these two substances. The origin of the azotein the albumen, is likewise at present unknownto us ; though in all ordinary cases, it seemsto be appropriated from some external source.That the oleaginous principle may be convertedinto most, if not into all .the matters necessaryfor the existence of animal bodies, seems to beproved by the well-known fact, that the life ofV500 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.an animal may be prolonged by the absorptionof the oleaginous matter, contained within its ownbody. Thus, many liberating animals, whenthey retire in autumn, to sleep during the winter,are enormously fat. But while they sleep,their fat is gradually removed ; till they awakein the spring quite divested of it, and in a stateof inanition.The reader will have remarked that we havemade use of the term ordinary circumstances ; andperhaps it may be not amiss to explain whatmeaning we attach to that term.When an animal is duly fed according to thatdiet which is natural to it, and for which its organizationhas been adapted ; a regular and ordinaryseries of changes takes place within theanimal, and the alimentary matters are convertedinto chyle. But one general characteristic oforganized beings is that within certain limits, andfor a certain time, they possess the power of varyingtheir habits, and of accommodating themselvesto circumstances. Under extraordinarycircumstances, therefore, extraordinary changesmust, and do, take place. In some instances,these changes out of the ordinary course, are toan extent altogether astonishing ; and such asdefy our utmost calculation. The assimilatingorgans appear even to decompose principleswhich are still considered as elementary, nay, toform azote or carbon ; so that it is impossible toPROCESS OF DIGESTION IN ANIMALS. 501define what, on an emergency, these organs arecapable of doing. But what is thus done bythese organs on an emergency, will, usually,be found to constitute an exception to what theydo in ordinary ; their ordinary mode of actionbeing always that which is most simple, andwhich is thus to be considered as the rule.3. Of the Organizing and Vitalizing Powersof the Stomach. — In this part of our investigation,we meet the real difficulties we haveto overcome in explaining the operations ofliving beings. The whole of the great and essentialchanges which alimentary substances undergo,may, and perhaps will be, traced by careand attention ; but all beyond, will probably remainfor ever unknown to us. Now at least, itmay be truly said, that though we understand, insome degree, the chemical changes ; of the vitalizinginfluence we know absolutely nothing.There is, however, every reason to believe thatvitality is imparted through the agency of theliving animal itself. For though, from the naturalcomposition of alimentary substances, theybe to a certain extent, fitted for the purposes ofthe animal economy ; yet, alone, they are incapableof uniting themselves with the animalframe ; and unless the living economy contributelikewise its share of the labour, the future workof assimilation will be incomplete.V50'J CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.Of the Changes the Food undergoes in the Duodenum.— We alluded in general terra to the bileand the pancreatic fluids, when we were treatingof the organs by which they are secreted. Wehave now to consider, more particularly, thenature of these secretions, and their share in theperformance of the functions of the duodenum.With the yellow colour, and the intenselybitter taste of the bile, all are familiar : we neednot, therefore, dwell on the sensible propertiesof the secretion, but proceed to notice its chemicalcomposition. The chemical compositionof the bile is very heterogeneous, though notperhaps so heterogeneous as has been represented; since it is probable that many of theingredients said to be contained in the secretion,are products that have resulted from the methodsemployed in its analysis. Bile, like all animalfluids, is composed essentially of water; but thesolid matters contained in the bile, are nearlyaltogether formed from one or more proximateprinciples, in which carbon and hydrogen predominate.These proximate principles exist simultaneously,if not in conjunction, with soda, andwith various salts of soda, besides other substances.The properties of the bile vary somewhatin different animals; but in all animalsits essential characters remain wonderfullysimilar.We are much less acquainted with the pro-processOF DIGESTION IN ANIMALS. 503perties.of the pancreatic fluid, than with those ofthe bile. The nature of the pancreatic fluid wasformerly supposed to be very analogous to that ofthe saliva ; but recent observations have shownthat it contains albumen, and a curdy substance.The pancreatic fluid is, for the most part, in aslight degree acid, and holds in solution mattersof a saline nature, closely resembling those foundin all animal fluids.When the food that has undergone the firstprocess of digestion in the stomach, quits thatorgan, and enters the duodenum, some otherchanges of a very remarkable kind take place.If the food originally contained no albuminousmatter, no albumen is developed in the stomach; but immediately on the entrance of thesemi-fluid mass into the duodenum, and its mixturewith the bile and the pancreatic fluids ;albuminous, and other chylous matters, becomedistinctly perceptible. At the same instant,those fluid parts, which in the stomach wereacid, are so far altered, by the addition of thebile, and the pancreatic fluids, as to becomeneutral, or almost neutral : some gas is frequentlyextricated ; and that portion of the food which isdestined to be excrementitious, is evidently separated.The albumen, which is thus found toexist in the chyme, (as the food is termed, after ithas been acted on by the stomach, and has enteredthe duodenum), may be partly derived from the504 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.pancreatic fluid, which, as we have alreadymentioned, has been said to contain albumen.But the quantity of albumen, and of other proximateprinciples of the chyle, that are found inthe contents of the duodenum, at some distanceonward from the pylorus, is much too great to beexplained in this manner. Indeed, the properties,as well as the quantity, of the albuminousmatters, show, beyond a doubt, that the albuminousmatters are developed from the food, andconstitute the chyle, which is subsequently takenup by the lacteal s.Such are those most interesting, and at thesame time obvious, phenomena, that are observedin different animals, in which the changesproduced on the food by the action of the duodenumhave been examined. These phenomenaappear to vary considerably, according tothe nature of the food ; but so far as we canunderstand the phenomena, under every changeof food, the essential character of the changeswhich the food undergoes in the duodenum, remainsunaltered. That is to say : the acidformed in the stomach, combines, in the duodenum,with the alkali of the bile ; the albuminousprinciples are developed ; and the excrementitiousmatters are, more or less perfectly, separated.Of the nature of the more recondite andvitalizing changes which take place in the duodenum; we are in the same state of completePROCESS OF DIGESTION IN ANIMALS. 505ignorance, as we are of the similar changeswhich take place in the stomach, and probablyshall long so remain.In the preceding remarks on the different processeswhich take place in the stomach and duodenum,and which are necessary for the conversionof the food of an animal into the living materialof its body ; we have endeavoured to distinguishbetween what, to a certain extent, iswithin our powers of comprehension, and what iscompletely beyond them. It remains to be observedin conclusion, that though the three greatand essential processes of digestion, namely, thereducing, the converting, and the organizing processesbe sufficiently distinct from each other ; yetit is not to be understood that they take place insuccession, or in the order in which they havebeen described. The fact is, that all these processesgo on at the same time ; and as soon as aportion of food begins to be dissolved, its futurechanges seem to be determined. If it be necessarythat the portion of food undergo an essentialchange, that change is accordingly begun. If nosuch change be required, the organizing processitself begins simultaneously with the reducingprocess. The consequence of this union of thedigestive processes is, as we have stated, thatthe staminal principles are all developed in thechyle; as soon as the excrementitious matters areseparated by the biliary and pancreatic fluids.506 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.4. Of the Functions of the Alimentary Canitl,beyond the Duodenum. — Compared with the functionsof the stomach and duodenum, the functionsof the succeeding portions of the alimentarycanal, as far as we can judge, are unimportant.The digested mass passes from the duodenuminto the jejunum, and ilium ; though before thefood reaches the end of the ilium, the whole ofthe chyle contained in it, has been absorbed\/ into the apertures of the numerous tubes namedlacteals. These tubes open in greater or lessnumber, into the whole interior surface of thethree portions of the alimentary canal, alongwhich the food is moved from the stomach tothe colon. From the ilium, the undigested or excrementitiousmatters proceed into the ccecum ;in which cavity, in some animals, as for example,in the horse, even these excrementitiousmatters appear to undergo a second digestion ;but in all animals, the contents of the ccecumhave a very different aspect from those of anypart of the alimentary canal, nearer to the stomach.The mass of excrementitious matterscontinue their course from the ccecum into thecolon, where they are still further changed.The nature of these changes, however, is notwell understood, though they are probably ofno small importance in the animal economy.Finally, all the nutritious portions of the food,having entered into the system of the animal,PROCESS OF DIGESTION IN ANIMALS. 507nothing remains but what is entirely excrementitious.Such is a short sketch of the phenomena ofdigestion and assimilation, in as far as theseprocesses are effected by the stomach and thealimentary canal. The phenomena suggest thefollowing reflections :First. With regard to the nature and thechoice of aliments, and the modes of their culinarypreparation ; it follows from the observationswe have offered ; that, under similar circumstances,those articles of food, which are the leastorganized, must be the most difficult to be assimilated: consequently, that the assimilation ofcrystallized, or very pure substances, must be Vmore difficult, than the assimilation of any others.Thus, pure sugar, pure alcohol, and pure oil, aremuch less easy to be assimilated, than substancespurely amylaceous ; or than that peculiar conditionor mixture of alcohol existing in naturalwines ; or than butter. In these forms, the assimilationof the saccharine and the oleaginousprinciples is comparatively easy. Of all crystallizedmatters, pare sugar is perhaps the mosteasily assimilated ; but every one is taught byexperience, that much less can be eaten of articlescomposed of sugar, than of those composedof amylaceous matters. In some forms of dyspepsia,the effect of pure sugar is most pernicious;perhaps fully as pernicious as that of pure alco-I•508 chemistry of organization.hoi. Nature has not furnished either pure sugaror pure starch ; and these substances are alwaysthe results of artificial processes, more or lesselaborate ; in which, as in many of the processesof cookery, man has been over-officious ; and hasstudied the gratification of his palate, rather thanfollowed the dictates of his reason. In manydyspeptic individuals, the assimilating and preservativepowers of the system, are already somuch weakened, as to be unable to resist thecrystallization of a portion of their fluids. Thusin gouty invalids, how often do we see chalk-stonesformed in every joint? Now, with solittle control over their own fluids, how can theyreasonably hope to assimilate extraneous crystallizations? If, therefore, such an invalid, onsitting down to a luxurious modern banquet,composed of sugar, and oil, and albumen, inevery state and combination, except those bestadapted for food, would pause a moment, andask himself the question ; Is this debilitatedand troublesome stomach of mine, endowedwith the alchemy requisite for the conversionof all these things into wholesome flesh andblood ? He would probably adopt a simplerrepast, and would thus save himself from muchuneasiness. The truth is, that many of theelaborate dishes of our ingenious continentalneighbours, are scarcely nutritious, or designedto be so. They are mere vehicles for differentPROCESS OF DIGESTION IN ANIMALS. 509stimuli —different ways, in short, of gratifyingthat low animal propensity, by which so manyare urged to the use of ardent spirits, or of variousnarcotics. In one respect indeed, namely,that of reducing to a state of pulp those refractorysubstances which we have before mentioned,the culinary processes of our neighboursare much superior to ours ; but in nearly everyother respect, and most of all, in the general useof pure sugar and pure oil, their cookery is eminentlyinjurious to all persons who have weakdigestion. On the other hand, in this country,we do not in general pay sufficient attention tothe reducing processes of the culinary art.Every thing is firm and crude ; and though themode of preparation be less captivating ; thequantity of indigestible aliment is quite as greatin our culinary productions, as in those of France.We are not, however, writing a treatise oncookery or dietetics ; but in treating of the functionof digestion, it is impossible altogether topass over these important subjects. The foregoingobservations are merely intended as illustrationsof those general principles which oftenregulate the choice, and the preparation of thefood of mankind, in a state of civilized society.Reason is too little followed, the indulgence ofthe palate is the sole object ; so that the organsof digestion already enfeebled, and incapacitatedfor the assimilation, even of the most properT510 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.nourishment, are daily oppressed with a task forwhich they are altogether unequal. The consequenceis, that though for a time the labourbe sustained, the digestive energies are at lengthovercome. The dyspeptic being passes half hisdays in misery ; his offspring inherit their parents'constitution ; and if they persist in a like courseof slow poison; after a few generations, the racebecomes extinct, — " his name even is cut off fromamong men V Providence has gifted man withreason ; to his reason, therefore, is left the choiceof his food and drink, and not to instinct, as amongthe lower animals : it thus becomes his duty toapply his reason to that object ; to shun excess inquantity, and what is noxious in quality ; toadhere, in short, to the simple and the natural ;among which the bounty of his Maker hasafforded him an ample selection; and beyondwhich if he deviates, sooner or later, he will sufferthe penalty.Secondly. The view we have now taken of theprocesses of digestion, removes in some degreethat mysterious character with which they havebeen invested ; and by lessening the field of ourenquiry, brings us nearer to our object. We hadpreviously known, that the articles employed asfood by animals are essentially composed ofthree or four elements. But we have now learnt,that all the more perfect of those matters on whichanimals subsist, are compounds of three or fourPROCESS OF DIGESTION IN ANIMALS. 511proximate principles ; the whole of which compounds,except one, are, in their essential characters,identical with those composing the frameof the animals themselves. We have also learnt,that owing to this identity of composition, manyanimals are saved the labour of forming theseproximate principles from their elements ; andhave only to re-arrange them, as their exigenciesmay require. The task of forming theproximate principles is thus left to the inferioranimals or to plants ; which are endowed with thecapacity of compounding them from matters stilllower than themselves, in the scale of organization.Hence there is a series, from the lowestbeing that derives its nourishment from carbonand carbonic acid, up to the most perfect animalexisting. Each individual in the series preferringto assimilate those immediately below itself;but having on extraordinary occasions, and in aminor degree, the power of assimilating all, notonly below, but above itself, in the system oforganized creation.We stated that the immediate influence employedby the organic agent is probably galvanism,or the common agents that operateamong inorganic matters ; and that the digestive v»/apparatus, viewed as a whole, seems to bearranged on galvanic principles. We wish, however,our readers clearly to understand, thatwe consider the organic agent residing in theCHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.ganglionic system of nerves, and employingthe electric agency, to he not electricity itself;though the agency is probably the lowest kindexisting in animal bodies, and only, as it were,one degree above the agencies of inanimatematter. We dwell on this point the more, becausefrom deficient recollection of what electricityis, and what are the living powers actingthrough the nervous system of animals, it hasbeen maintained, nay, has even been endeavouredto be experimentally proved, that these nervouspowers are identical with the powers of electricity.It is impossible to imagine a greater fallacy.Admitting that electricity, properly directed,could change the proximate elements ofthe food into those of chyle ; can we imagine thisprinciple to vary spontaneously its mode of operation,so as to produce the same chyle from everysort of aliment — that electricity is an intelligentagency acting with a certain object? Besides, ifthe nervous agency be identical with electricity,how different must be its functions in differentnerves ; in one nerve, for example, digesting andassimilating the food ; in another conveying sight ;in a third conveying sound ; in the brain itself,shall we say, actually thinking ! As to the experiments,on which it has been attempted torear this most untenable opinion, they provenothing whatever ; and are easily explained onother principles. Such explanation would bePROCESS OF DIGESTION IN ANIMALS. 513foreign to our present object, were we to introduceit here. But there is one observation,which has always appeared to us conclusiveagainst this fancied identity of the nervousenergy with electricity ; and with which, we shallclose what we have to offer, regarding the presentsubject. Most persons are aware that there arecertain fishes endowed with the power of evolvingelectricity, and of communicating a smartshock to other animals. Now, in all the fishesin which this power resides, as in the Torpedo,there is a complicated apparatus, extendingover a large portion of the fish's body, expresslyfor the purpose of forming the electricity, whichthe fish communicates ; thus, proving beyond adoubt, that mere nerves are not sufficient to deelope electricity ; and that, when electricity iswanted, an express and peculiar organ is as requisitefor its secretion or formation, as for thesecretion and formation of any other product ofthe animal economy.The reflections suggested by the facts we havenow detailed, will be given in conjunction withthose suggested by the facts to be detailed in thenext chapter.St!P. L LilCHAPTER IV.OF THE PROCESSES OF ASSIMILATION SUBSEQUENTTO THOSE IN THE STOMACH AND ALIMENTARYcanal; PARTICULARLY OF THE CONVERSION OFTHE CHYLE INTO BLOOD. OF RESPIRATION,AND ITS USES. OF SECRETION. OF THE FINALDECOMPOSITION OF ORGANIZED BODIES. GeneralREFLECTIONS, AND CONCLUSION.1 . Of the Passage of the Chyle from the AlimentaryCanal into the Sanguineous System; andof the Function of Absorption generally. — TheChyle, as we have already said, is taken up fromthe alimentary canal, by numerous minute tubes,named lacteals ; these tubes being part of thesystem of similar tubes, which arise from allparts of the body, and are termed absorbents.The whole of the absorbing tubes, after passingthrough various glands, at length unite into oneor two of larger size ; that on the left side beingby far the largest, and known by the appellationj of the thoracic duct. These larger absorbenttubes pour their contained fluids into the veinsnamed the sub-flavian; and thus into the generalmass of the blood. The exact nature of thechanges which the chyle and the lymph undergoABSORPTION OF THE CHYLE, ETC. 515in their passage through these tubes, is not wellunderstood. One change appears to be, that thechyle, as first formed in the alimentary canal, isto a certain extent, completed, or freed from water,during its course through the lacteals : forthough, when the chyle is mixed with the blood,its albuminous principles are much less perfectlydeveloped than those of the blood itself; yettheir development, on their mixture with theblood, is more perfect, than when the chyle isfirst taken up from the alimentary canal.The matters conveyed from the other parts ofthe body, by the tubes of the general absorbentsystem, have, by most physiologists, been supposedto be of an excrementitious character.That some of the absorbed matters are excrementitious,is very probable ; arguments may,however, be adduced, to show, that the whole ofthe matters absorbed are by no means excrementitious;but that they are repeatedly consignedto the uses of the vital agency : every new organizationraising them, as it were, a step higher,and qualifying them for those refined and ulteriorpurposes; for which the crude chyle canhardly be imagined to be at once adapted.The circumstances favouring the above opinion,which we are now desirous to mention, are —First. It is unreasonable, and contrary to everythingwe know respecting the operations of theanimal economy, to suppose that the chyle51G CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.should be separated from one kind of excrementitiousmatter, in the alimentary canal ; in orderto be immediately mixed again with other excrementitiousmatters, in the chyliferous tubes. Itis, therefore, a just inference, that if the matterscontained in the absorbents are really and whollyexcrementitious, they would be carefully keptapart ; and would be removed from the systemby some other means, than by tubes united withthose conveying the nutritious fluids.Secondly. By admitting that the fluids containedin the absorbent tubes possess a highlyannualized character, the design of their unionwith the crude and imperfectly animalized chyle,becomes apparent : the fluid in the absorbentswill be seen to execute an important and necessaryoffice ; by raising the vital character of thechyle, and qualifying it, for becoming a part ofthe general mass of the blood. We thus obtaina cogent reason, why the fluids taken up from theinternal surface of the alimentary canal, shouldbe mingled with those that are absorbed from theother parts of the body ; a mixture which is inexplicable,on the hypothesis of these absorbedfluids being wholly excrementitious.Thirdly. The gradual development of the staminaprinciples of animal bodies, by repeatedorganizing processes, fully accords with thosegeneral views of the operations of nature which,throughout this work, we have endeavoured toBLOOD. 517illustrate ; and which lead to the general conclusion,that the operations of nature are never abrupt,but always slow and gradual. Further, itis more reasonable to conceive, that mattersalready assimilated to the animal body, are betterfitted for its immediate uses ; than those which,like the chyle, have only received an imperfectassimilation.Fourthly. Many animals can and do live, for aconsiderable time, on substances contained intheir own bodies. Thus, liberating animals,as previously stated, have the ability to assimilatefurther, those matters which have alreadybecome part of themselves ; consequently, sucha faculty of progressive organization as we havesupposed, actually exists ; and a sort of digestionis carried on in all parts of the body, to fit for absorptionand future appropriation, those mattersthat have been already assimilated. Were it necessary,other arguments to the same effectmight be added : but we shall at present delay thefurther consideration of the assimilating characterof the whole absorbent system; that wemay recur to it again, in a succeeding part of thepresent chapter.2. Of the Blood.— The blood is that well-knownfluid pervading the tubes, named fromtheir function the blood vessels; which tubes areextended more or less over every part of antOltt CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.animal. We have already described the generaldistribution of the blood vessels ; and shall nowconfine ourselves chiefly to the properties of theblood itself.The chyle, as we have stated, is poured intothe general mass of the blood near the heart ;and from the heart is almost immediately propelledthrough the lungs. The chyle, thus setin motion, is not only united thoroughly withthe blood ; but undergoes those other importantchanges, by which its final conversion into bloodis accomplished. The exact nature of thesechanges is unknown ; but they are evidently ofa completing character — that is to say, the weakhydrated ingredients of the chyle, are freed froma portion of the water with which they were associated; and are transmuted into the strongalbuminous matter of the blood.The chief constituents of the blood are essentiallyalbuminous. Blood contains albumen inthree states of modification : namely, albumen,properly so called ; fibrin ; and the red particles.In addition, there are oily matters ; besidesvarious minute portions of other animal matters,and saline matters, all dissolved, or rather suspended,in a large quantity of water. The followingshort table exhibits the relative proportionsof the constituents of human blood to eachother, as they exist in most individuals.BLOOD. 519ONE THOUSAND PARTS OF HUMAN BI-good CONTAINOf Water 783,37Fibrin 2,83Albumen . . . 67,25 ,Colouring matters 126,31Fatty matters, in various states 5,16Various undefined animal matters, and salts. 15,081000,00*The reader will not fail to remark, that amongthese constituent principles of the blood, gelatineis not mentioned. In fact, though existingmost abundantly in various animal structures,gelatine is never found in the blood, or in any productof glandular secretion. We formerly noticedthat gelatine appears to rank lower than albumenin the scale of organized substances : and wemay now add, that a given weight of gelatine,contains at least three or four per cent, lesscarbon, than an equal weight of albumen. Theproduction of gelatine from albumen must,therefore, be a reducing process. We shall presentlyhave occasion to revert to these facts. Inthe mean time we subjoin the few observationswe have to offer, on the organization or structureof the blood.The organization of the blood is even morewonderful than its chemical composition, and isstill less understood. The red portion of theLe Can ; mean of two analyses.X520 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.blood, for example, is composed of innumerableminute globules, varying in size in different animals; and in all instances, highly organized :the real structure indeed of these globules isvery imperfectly known ; but they are generallysupposed to be formed of solid colourless nuclei,within red vesicles. The fibrin, also, is diffusedthrough the mass of the blood in a state ofequally minute subdivision ; though the particlesof the fibrin are colourless, and their magnitudemuch less than that of the red particles. Fromthis inferiority in size, some physiologists havebeen led to think, that the colourless particles ofthe fibrin, are identical with the nuclei of the redparticles. During the life of an animal, the particlesof the fibrin, as well as the red particlesof its blood, seem to be in a state of extremeself repulsion ; by which self-repulsion, the unionof these particles is prevented ; except as theeconomy of the animal may require, and maydetermine. After death, however; or in bloodwithdrawn from the body of a living animal,the property of self-repulsion, more especiallyamong the fibrinous particles of the blood,ceases, and they readily cohere : this cohesion istermed the coagulation of the blood. Muchbeautiful design is probably concealed underthat peculiar organization of the blood, to whichit owes its coagulating tendency. One result ofthe coagulation of the blood, indeed, is as obvi-RESPIRATION. 521vous as it is important ; namely, the preventionof haemorrhage. If the blood did not coagulate,the existence of animals would be most precarious;as on the slightest injury, they would beliable to bleed to death.3. Of Respiration. — The function of Respiration,or breathing, is one of the most importantin the animal economy, and cannot, like manyof the other functions, be suspended ; the interruptionof that function being immediately destructiveof life. When we described the phenomenaof the circulation of the blood, we observed,that the blood, in passing through thelungs, is exposed to the action of the atmosphericair. Now, during this exposure of the bloodto the atmospheric air, it undergoes certainchanges. The blood from the right side of theheart, when it enters the lungs, is of a dark redcolour ; it is then dispersed, in a state of mostminute subdivision, through the ultimate vesselsof the lungs, and in these vessels is brought intocontact with the atmospheric air, and becomes ofa bright red colour. In other words, the bloodchanges in the lungs its venous appearance, andassumes the character of arterial blood. Theblood thus arterialized, returns to the left side ofthe heart, and from that organ, is propelledthrough the whole arteries of the body. In theminute terminations of the arteries, the blood522 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.again loses its florid hue, and, reassuming itsdark red colour, is returned through the veins,to the right side of the heart ; to be exposedas before to the influence of the atmosphericair, and to undergo the same succession ofchanges.On examining the respired air, a remarkablealteration of its properties is found to have takenplace ; a portion of its oxygen has disappeared,and a similar bulk of carbonic acid gas, has beensubstituted. With respect to the origin of thiscarbonic acid gas, there have been various opinions.Formerly, the greater number of physiologistsmaintained, that carbon, in some form, wasexcreted by the lungs ; and that this excretedcarbon, uniting with the oxygen of the inspiredair, was converted into carbonic acid gas.No one imagined that oxygen gas could be passinginwards through the membrane of the lungs,while carbonic acid gas was, at the same time,passing outwards, through the same membrane.Accurate observations have, however, demonstrated,that such a simultaneous passage ofgases really takes place through the membraneof the lungs ; and the observations are not confinedto the two gaseous bodies in the lungs ; butare applicable to all gases whatever, under similarcircumstances. In consequence of these observations,it seems now to be generally admitted,that the oxygen of the atmospheric air is ab-respiration.523sobbed by the blood, and, in some unknown stateof combination, reaches the extreme subdivisionsof the arteries ; where it is united with a portionof carbon, and forms carbonic acid gas : thatthis carbonic acid gas is retained in some unknownstate of combination in the venous blood ;till, in the lungs, it is expelled, and oxygen isabsorbed in its stead ; according to the lawswhich regulate the diffusion of gaseous bodies,formerly explained. Further, with the carbonicacid gas, a large quantity of aqueous vapour, as y/we have stated, is at the same time separated.It would be foreign to the objects of this treatise,were we to enter further into the reasons forthe view we have given of the phenomena of respiration.These reasons are many and strong ; andseem indeed to prove clearly, that the changeswhich the blood undergoes, during its circulationthrough the body, are as we have describedthem. We shall, therefore, assume, that ourview of respiration is correct ; and shall offer afew remarks on the attendant circumstances, andon the consequences of respiration.First. To what influence are we to ascribe thedifferent colours of arterial and of venous blood ?The opinion formerly held, was, that the arterialcolour arose from the absorption of oxygen ;and the venous colour from the presence of carbon.But recent observations seem to show thatthe change in the colour of the blood during its524 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.circulation, if not entirely independent of oxygen,is much influenced by the saline matters ; particularlyby the common salt, which the bloodcontains : and that the dark colour of venousblood, is principally owing to the presence ofcarbonic acid gas.Secondly. What is the source of the carbonicacid in venous blood, and of the aqueous vapourthat is expelled from the lungs ? These questionscannot be answered with certainty. But someobservations lately made, have induced us to believe,that the conversion of albuminous muttersinto gelatine, is one great source of the carbonicacid in venous blood. Gelatine, which, as beforeobserved, contains three or four per cent, less ofcarbon than albumen contains, enters into thestructure of every part of the animal frame, andespecially of the skin : the skin indeed consistsof little else besides gelatine : it is most probable,therefore, that a large part of the carbonic acidof venous blood is formed in the skin, and in theanalogous textures. Indeed, we know that theskin of many animals gives off carbonic acid, andabsorbs oxygen ; in other words, performs all theoffices of the lungs ; a function of the skin perfectlyintelligible, on the supposition that nearthe surface of the body, the albuminous portionsof the blood are always converted into gelatine.With respect to the aqueous vapour thrown offfrom the lungs : we have every reason to believe,RESPIRATION. ANIMAL HEAT. 525as before stated, that much of this vapour is derivedfrom the chyle, in its passage through theseorgans ; and that by such separation of water,the weak and delicate albumen of the chyle, isconverted into the strong and perfect albumenof the blood ; according to the principles detailedat the commencement of this chapter.Thirdly. What are the uses of the continualextrication of carbonic acid from living animals ;and could not a little superfluous carbon havebeen thrown off from their bodies in a moresimple manner? The precise use of the constantevolution of carbonic acid, or how it iseffected, we know not ; but one great use whichhas been assigned to this evolution, is, the formationof the heat of the body ; and not only thepower of forming that heat ; but also the power ofvarying it according to circumstances — a powerso characteristic of organized life. Out of thebody, carbon does certainly give off heat oncombination with oxygen. Hence, it has beenmaintained with great plausibility, that the samecombination, within a living body, may give originto its heat ; though it must be confessed, thatthere are some difficulties about this view of theorigin of animal heat, which detract considerablyfrom its likelihood. Moreover, it is exceedinglyprobable, that though the evolution of carbonicacid gas, may be one of the means possessed bythe animal economy for generating heat ; theref520 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.are yet other means, the nature of which at presentare quite unknown.The quantity of carbon thrown off by thelungs, is very abundant ; but has probably beenmuch overrated. Philosophers have, for instance,calculated that the lungs of a man of ordinarysize expel, in the course of twenty-four hours,eleven ounces of carbon ; a quantity more thanequal to that contained in six pounds of beef.* Ifcarbon be indeed thrown off from the lungsso copiously ; it must be produced within thebody. It is difficult to account for the quantityof carbon thrown off, even on the lowest estimate.We are, therefore, necessarily obliged to conclude,that more solid matter is every day expelledfrom the body by the lungs, than in anyother manner. Hence the probability of theopinion formerly noticed, that the matters takenup by the absorbents, and by the veins, entersuccessively into the formation of various partsof the animal frame ; instead of being removed,immediately after their absorption, as at presentAccording to an elaborate analysis, by Berzelius, the .muscle of an animal contains 77 per cent, of water, and 23 percent,of other matters. Supposing, what is near the truth, that22 of these 23 parts consist of albumen, and that this albumencontains half its weight of carbon ; which in round numbers is a" ,sufficiently near approximation ; it follows, that 100 parts of the 'jjjjmuscular fibre of animals, contain about 1 1 parts of carbon ;so that 11 ounces of carbon must represent 100 ounces of beef;that is, upwards of six pounds, as stated in the text.SECRETION. 527is generally supposed. For it seems hardly possibleto reconcile, with the quantity of food, thegreat quantity of carbon that is expelled from thelungs alone ; much less, what must be expelledif all the matter taken up by the absorbents belikewise considered excrementitious.4. Of Secretion. — From the blood, are formed,by means of peculiar apparatus, all those numerousproducts termed Secretions; not only sounlike each other, but so unlike the fluid fromwhich they are originally separated. Some ofthese secreted products appear to be little else, \/than a separation of certain matters already existingin the blood. Other secretions have noresemblance to any ingredient of the blood :consequently, in the glandular structure, bywhich these secretions, so dissimilar to the blood,are formed, the blood must undergo some essentialchange. In the present state of our information,however, we must content ourselves with alimited insight into the nature and the causesof secretory action. We see that secreted productsare of two kinds ; that some of the mattersseparated by animal bodies are evidently thrownoff, on account of their noxious qualities; are, in,£**t, excretions; which could not be retainedwithout proving fatal to the life of the animalfrom which they are detached : while othersagain, are as obviously intended for further CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.sects, and for the performance of various subordinateactions in the living system ; are in fact,secretions; properly so called. But as we havestated, we are still perfectly unacquainted withthe intimate nature of these changes ; thoughit is probable that a careful examination of thephenomena, would throw much light on theirgeneral character ; and display evidence of themost consummate design.5. Spontaneous decay of Organized Bodies. —It remains finally to close this work with a fewobservations on the spontaneous, and inevitabledecay, of all those things that are produced byorganization; after they have been removed fromthe influence of the organic agents, by whichthe combination of their constituent principleswas effected.The organized beings that inhabit this globe,however numerous, have a very small relation tothe magnitude of the globe, and seem to occupyits surface only. We have seen that the elementsforming the structure of these beings, arenot only combined in different proportions, butthat they appear, in many instances, to undergofurther decomposition into ultimate forms ofmatter, which, out of a living body do not, andperhaps, in the present constitution of the universe,cannot, exist in an isolated state. Owingto this diversity in the composition of organizedDECAY OF ORGANIZED BODIES. 529beings from that of inorganic matter, and to othercauses which will readily occur to the reader,organized beings and their laws, are in continualopposition to the general laws, by which inorganicmatter is governed. To counteract, therefore,these opposite laws, and to maintain the existenceof organized beings, require the unremittingefforts of the organic agency. But atlength these efforts are exhausted ; the contestceases ; when the general laws of inorganic natureprevail, and speedily reduce, to their originalstate of existence, the atoms which had been incarceratedin the living frame.The spontaneous decay of organized beingsis usually termed the putrefactive process ; andsome substances are much more prone thanothers, to undergo that change. As might beexpected ; those substances whose constitutionis most simple, as the oils, and bodies of alike nature, are also the most permanent ;while substances more compounded, especiallythose which include azote, are exceedinglyliable to putrescent change. For such changesa certain degree of heat and of moisture appearto be necessary : since in a temperature belowthe freezing point of water, or in a perfectlydry state of the atmosphere, even animal substancesmay be preserved unchanged, during anylength of time. The phenomena attending thedissolution of different kinds of organized mate.M M¥W530 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.tears are of course different ; but in every instance,the tendency is toward the formation of compoundsmore simple than the matter decomposed; that is to say, of compounds whose existence,out of a living body, is not incompatiblewith the present state of the globe. Thosematters which, in a warm and damp air, seemfirst to be loosened from organic combination,are those foreign bodies we formerly mentioned,as existing, in every part of the structure oforganized beings, in some unknown but activeself-repulsive state. Hence, during putrescentaction, arises the foundation of sulphuretted andphosphorescent hydrogen, and of other undefinedcompounds of the same elements : and thesegaseous compounds, chiefly, produce the very offensiveodour of putrefaction. At the same time,there are formed, carburetted hydrogen, oil, aceticacid, ammonia, and last of all, carbonic acid gasand water ; while the azote is extricated in agaseous condition. Finally, both vegetable andanimal matters, but vegetable matters more especially,are reduced to the state of mould. Themould from vegetable matters, consists principallyof carbon, in combination with a littleoxygen or hydrogen : the mould from animalproducts, consists of similar matters, mixedwith a little azote, and the usual saline ingredientsof organized substances. In this form ofmould, the remains of vegetables and of animals,RECAPITULATION AND REFLECTIONS. 531as was before stated, constitute the food ofplants ; by which they are again organized, andthus go through the same series of changes.We may here pause for a moment, and, onaccount of the general reader, briefly recapitulatethe most striking facts, that have been detailedin the present, and in the preceding chapters.In the first place, the mechanical arrangementsfor reducing the food of animals to the properdegree of comminution, are wonderfully varied,according to the peculiar qualities of that food.In the graminivorous and granivorous tribes,for example, the teeth are literally instrumentsfor grinding or triturating herbaceous matters,and seeds. In carnivorous animals, such a structurewould be useless : the teeth, therefore, aresuited only for cutting, or tearing. In gnawinganimals, the teeth present a totally different structure,but at the same time are admirably fittedto the habits of the animal. Occasionally, asin the fowl tribe of birds, the grinding apparatusis placed, not in the mouth, but in thestomach itself; this organ being, as it were,expressly contrived for trituration ; while someof the functions it performs in other animals,are transferred to contiguous parts.The structure and mechanism of the stomach,and of the alimentary canal, then claim ourparticular attention. In carnivorous animals,y532 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.whose food requires comparatively little assimilation,the alimentary canal is short, andof a simple structure. On the other hand, invegetable feeders, that canal is long and complicated; but perfectly adapted for maceratingtheir food, and for extracting from it, everythingthat can be converted into nourishment.Nor is there an adherence to any model, butthe whole is throughout varied ; as if in orderto demonstrate the power and the wisdom ofHim, by whom they were contrived. Thus thealimentary canals of the cow, and of the horse,are formed on entirely different models ; thoughthe food of both animals be nearly the same.We proceed in the next place, to the considerationof the chemical changes, which thefood undergoes in the stomach and duodenum.In these changes we discover arrangements notless wonderful, indeed more wonderful, than inthose of structure and of mechanism. The varietyof forms, assumed by bodies having the sameessential composition, produces a latitude, inthe choice of diet, which is almost infinite : atthe same time, the organs being endowed withthe power to discriminate all these differences,and to act on the ultimate principles of bodies ;elaborate, from all these various forms of matter,the same uniform resulting chyle. The powerby which the stomach is enabled to effectthese astonishing changes, is the power whichRECAPITULATION AND REFLECTIONS. 533it possesses, of associating the different alimentarysubstances with water ; the power, in short,of dissolving, or digesting them. This dissolvingpower seems to be exerted through theagency of chlorine, derived from the commonsalt in the blood ; at least, chlorine is always VWpresent in the stomach, during the act of thesolution of the food ; though the precise modein which it operates, is still unknown. Contemporaneouslywith the act of solution of thefood, such essential changes take place in itscomposition, as are requisite for perfecting thefuture chyle.The stomach having accomplished its office,the digested mass enters the duodenum ; wherethe series of changes is continued in a mannerequally wonderful. In the duodenum, the di \jfrested mass is brought in contact with thebiliary and the pancreatic fluids. The alkaliof the bile unites with the acid, with whichthe food had been mingled during its digestionin the stomach ; the excrementitiousparts, both of the food, and of the bile, areseparated or precipitated ; while at the sametime, the proper chylous principles are eliminated,in a condition appropriate for their absorptionby the lacteals.There are two divisions of those minute tubes,that compose what is termed the absorbentsystem of animals ; — the lacteals — and the CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.serpents properly so called. The ultimate ramificationsof the lacteals, originate from the internalsurface of the alimentary canal, wherethey take up the digested, and partly assimilated,aliment, or chyle. The ultimate ramificationsof the proper absorbents, originate from all partsof the body ; and are enabled to take up, bysome peculiar process, every component of thebody, solid as well as fluid, in the same manneras the chyle is taken up by the lacteals.The fluid obtained from the lacteals, and thatobtained from the proper absorbents, are bothalike albuminous. The albumen of the chyle, aswe have formerly shewn, is produced in the stomachand duodenum, while the food is undergoingthe process of digestion. But whence isthe albumen derived, that is found in the properabsorbents? The animal body we know to becomposed of a great variety of matters, amongwhich gelatine predominates. Now, since albumenonly is found in the absorbents, it follows,that before the gelatine of the body is takenup by the absorbents, it is re-converted intoalbumen : in other words, the absorbed gelatineundergoes a process, entirely analogous to thatwhich gelatine, and other matters, undergo inthe stomach and duodenum, during the process ofdigestion. Hence, the digestive process, insteadof being confined to the stomach and duodenum,is actually carried on without intermission, inall parts of a living animal body.RECAPITULATION AND REFLECTIONS. 535The two kinds of fluid albumen derived fromthese two sources; that is to say, the crudechyle in the lacteals, and the highly animalizedlymph in the absorbents, are at length commingled; and form one uniform fluid of anintermediate character, adapted for becoming apart of the general mass of the blood. The characterhowever of this fluid, when it becomespart of the blood, though albuminous, is still veryweak ; that is to say, the fluid consists of albumen,holding a large proportion of water in astate of essential combination. By a beautifularrangement, as soon as this weak albuminousfluid is mingled with the blood, it is hurriedthrough the lungs ; where it undergoes a remarkablechange. In the lungs, the water, which is inessential union with the weak albuminous matterof the chyle, is separated and expelled alongwith the carbonic acid gas, which is continuallyescaping from these organs; and at the sametime, the weak and delicate albuminous matter ofthe chyle, is converted into the strong and firmalbuminous matter of the blood. We are thusbrought to consider the process of respiration.The blood, in its course through the lungs, emitscarbonic acid gas, and assumes a florid arterialcolour. At the same time, according to the principlesof gaseous diffusion, the blood absorbs, inthe lungs, a portion of oxygen from the air of theatmosphere. The oxygen thus absorbed, remainsin some peculiar state of union with the5.}(> CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.blood, (Query, as oxygenated water, or someanalogous compound ?) till the blood reaches theultimate terminations of the arteries. In theseminute tubes the oxygen changes its mode ofunion ; it combines with a portion of carbon, andis converted into carbonic acid ; which carbonmust be derived from the albuminous principlesof the blood. Two distinct alterations take placeduring the union of the carbon with the oxygen :a portion of the albumen contained in the bloodis supposed to be reduced to the state of gelatine; which gelatine is appropriated toward therenovation of those textures whose compositionis chiefly gelatinous : at the same time, thecarbonic acid which had been formed from thereduced albumen, unites with the blood, communicatesto that fluid its dark venous colour,and is transferred to the lungs; where it isexpelled from the system, along with a portion ofaqueous vapour, derived principally from theweak albumen of the chyle; as formerly explained.The blood is the source, not only of all theconstituent principles of animal bodies, butlikewise of all the various secretions; many ofwhich differ altogether, in their properties, fromthose of the primary fluids, and perform secondaryoffices, of great importance in theanimal economy. Other products separatedfrom the blood, are purely excretions; as, forRECAPITULATION AND REFLECTIONS. 537instance, the carbonic acid gas from the lungs ;which could not be retained in the animal systemwithout destroying life.Finally, the life of the animal becoming extinct,the essential properties of the matter ofwhich it is composed, resume their natural action,and speedily restore the elements to theiroriginal condition.Such is a summary of those operations ofliving bodies, which, in the present and in thepreceding chapters, we have endeavoured toillustrate ; and though our insight into thoseoperations be very imperfect, it is amply sufficientto satisfy us, of the infinite wisdom bywhich they are directed ; and that the unknown,must be far more wonderful than what has beendisclosed. Most of the facts on which we havedwelt, are of a character so obvious, that theyrequire only to be understood, in order to beadmitted among the proofs of the great argumentof design ; at least, by all, but those whoaffect to deny that argument. We thereforeleave to the reader, the application of facts, soobviously demonstrative of design ; and proceedto offer a few remarks on certain general arrangementsof organized and living beings,relatively to those of inorganic matter.First. In considering the economy of organizedbeings, one of the circumstances most calculatedto arrest our attention, is the extraordi-538 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.nary skill manifested in the disposal of thevarious parts of the organized system, withregard to each other. As an instance, on thegreat scale, may be noticed, the mutual relationand dependance of plants and animals. Thus,as we formerly pointed out, carbonic acid gasconstitutes the chief food of plants ; and wenow see, that nearly the whole of the superfluouscarbon produced by the operations of the animalsystem, is actually thrown off in the form of carbonicacid. Plants, therefore, on the one hand,supply the chief nourishment to animals ; whilethat gaseous matter which is separated by theanimal economy, and which if retained withinanimals, would to them be fatal, constitutes, onthe other hand, the chief food of plants. Norin these two respects only, are the two greatsystems of organization mutually dependent ;for unless plants consumed the carbonic acidgas which is formed by animals; this deleteriouscompound would probably accumulate inthe atmosphere, so as to destroy animal life ;while it is doubtful, whether the present races ofvegetables coidd exist, if carbonic acid gas werenot formed by animals. Again, the generalscheme of Providence, for the nourishment ofanimals, claims our especial notice. Animalshave not only been destined to prey on eachother: but all created beings are the food ofthose progressively higher than themselves,RECAPITULATION AND REFLECTIONS. 539in the scale of organization. By this wisearrangement, the labour of the assimilatingpower has been greatly diminished ; and by thesame means, that accumulation of dead animalremains, which soon would be overwhelming, isentirely prevented. Even in the fabric of individualanimals, and in the operations carriedon within them, the same wise purposes ofmutual relation and dependance are observable.Thus, whether we contemplate the repeated employmentof the same materials ; or the variousimportant ends, in many instances accomplishedby the same process ; we discover, throughout,the utmost abridgement of labour ; so that thegreatest possible effect, is every where produced,by the simplest possible means.Secondly. The general subserviency, of themechanical arrangements of the frame of organizedbeings, to the chemical operations that arecarried on within them, is of still greater interestand importance, than even those arrangementshave been shown to be. We may view an organizedbeing as a piece of intricate machinery,adapted to the physical, and the chemical propertiesof matter. The adaptation of thismachinery to the physical properties of matter,belongs to another department. Our attentionis directed solely to the chemical adaptations.The performance of the chemical changeswithin organized beings, through the interposedCHEMISTRY OP ORGANIZATION.siphon of mechanical arrangements, as has beenstated in a former part of this work, establishes,beyond a doubt, that these chemical changeshave a real existence. Thus, when we witnesssuch a display of elaborate arrangements, asare exhibited in the mechanism of the digestiveorgans, and of the circulating system ; the purposeof which arrangements is merely to producea few chemical changes in the food, and inthe blood ; it is evident that the chemical changesso produced, must be at least as real, as themechanical structure, by means of which theyare effected. Hence the adaptations of mechanicalarrangements, in the structure oforganized beings, to the pre-existing chemicalproperties of matter, affords an evidence ofdesign, not less impressive than unequivocal.The most determined sceptic cannot assert thatthere is any necessary relation, or indeed anyrelation whatever, between the mechanical arrangements,and the chemical properties towhich they administer. There is no reasonwhy the chemical changes of organization,should result from the mechanical arrangements,by which they are accomplished : neitheris there the slightest reason, why the mechanicalarrangements in the formation of organizedbeings, should lead to the chemical changes ofwhich they are the instruments. From whatcause, then, arose the association of the chemicalRECAPITULATION AND REFLECTIONS. 541changes with the mechanical arrangements?How were the chemical operations of digestionand of respiration brought into union with themechanical apparatus of digestion, and with thecirculating system ? The co-existence of thingsso entirely dissimilar, and having no kind ofmutual relation, can be explained only on thesupposition that a will exists somewhere; and alsoa power to execute that will. The existence isthus unavoidably acknowledged of a Being, whoknowing every pre-existing chemical propertyof matter, and willing to direct these propertiesto a specific object, has contrived for that purposean apparatus admirably fitted to attainHis object. Such is the explanation — the onlypossible explanation, of the subserviency ofmechanism to chemistry, in the processes oforganic life. And what is this explanation,but our argument of design, in terms that seemabsolutely irresistible ?Thirdly. That perpetual renovation and decayto which all organized beings are liable, may beconsidered as a part only of the great round ofchanges, which we witness in every thing thathas been created. The world itself, as we haveseen, appears to have been, at intervals, subjectedto changes involving even the fundamentallaws by which it is governed. Nothing,therefore, belonging to the world, can reasonablybe expected to be permanent. Had there beento542 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.even an approach to such permanence, the beautifuladaptations of organized beings to the preestablishedlaws of inanimate matter, and allthe other wonderful arrangements we havedescribed, could not have been manifested asthey now are. Besides, to the changes weourselves undergo, we are indebted for thegreater part of the enjoyments of our life.If none died, none could be born ; andthe present arrangements of human societycould have no existence. There would be noneof the pleasing relations of parent and offspring; none of the agreeable variety of childhood,of youth, of maturity, and of age, experiencedby every individual ; which, with allthe other numerous relations of society, incidentalto the persons of different individuals,contribute so largely to human happiness.Were man exempt from change ; whether therest of the world were supposed to be progressive,as it is ; or whether it were stationary, asregards him ; the same uniform and dull monotonywould prevail, the same want of motive.In short, with our present constitution and feelings,perpetuity and uniformity would be physicallyand morally impossible.But why, it has a thousand times been asked,why has the world been so constituted ? Whythis unceasing round of change? Whence itsorigin? What its object? — Such questions, theCONCLUSION. 543Great Author of the universe alone can answer.But as within those narrow limits by which ourobservations are bounded, wherever we can traceHis designs, we see that His works are neverwithout an object ; we cannot doubt that in determiningtheir perpetual change, there is no lessan object; though it be above our comprehension.By placing immaterial and intelligentbeings, for a time, in personal connection withmatter, He has indeed communicated to thema knowledge of those properties of matterwhich so strikingly display His wisdom andpower; and this may have been one of Hisobjects : — but to speculate further on points soutterly beyond our capacity, would be presumptuous: for who can " know the mind of God, orwho hath been His counsellor?"We have thus given a brief outline of whathas been denominated the Chemistry of organization; in other words, an account of thosechanges and combinations which, through theoperation and the agencies of inorganic matter,organic agents are capable of effecting. Theinformation it has been in our power to give,w544 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.though imperfect, we have shown to be amplysufficient, not only to demonstrate the astonishingwisdom, and foresight, with which organizedbeings, in as far as we can understand them,have been contrived and formed ; but the infinitelyhigher perfection of both these attributes,requisite to impart to organization that vitality,the nature of which so entirely surpasses ourconception.We shall now close this volume with a fewobservations on the future progress of chemistry ;on the means by which this science may beapplied to physiological research ; and on thetendency of physical knowledge in general.Chemistry, as we pointed out in the introductionto this treatise, forms the connectinglink between those branches of human knowledgewhich are founded on quantity, andthose which are derived solely from experience.All our experimental knowledge that is notchemical ; for instance, all that physiologywhich relates to the phenomena of life, is whollyremoved from the logic of quantity, and dependsentirely on observation. Now so far as the logicof quantity is applicable, so far are we certain ofour conclusions, as certain at least as we are ofour own existence, or that we see and hear. Butwhen this logic cannot be applied, our conclusionsare no longer such as must be — no longerfollow from our premises as a necessary cones545quench ; but are only, for the most part, suchas may be; that is to say, have no more thanthat degree of probability which arises from theevidence we have of the truth of the phenomenaor events, forming our premises.In all knowledge depending on mere observationor experiment, what we know, is grounded onour own observation and experience, or on theobservation and experience of others. What weourselves observe, we too often observe very imperfectly; or do not understand, when observed.But phenomena or events, the knowledge ofwhich we are obliged to receive at second hand,on the testimony of others ; and which may havebeen observed through the distorted medium ofignorance or of prejudice — may even have beenwilfully misrepresented — of these we have a stillless assurance. If a phenomenon or event hashappened only once, and be therefore historical ;we are under the necessity of acquiescing in itstruth, or of estimating its probability, accordingto the rules of evidence. If the phenomenon orevent be of frequent occurrence, or if its naturebe such, that it is capable of being brought underour own observation ; in order to remove our uncertainty,we endeavour to observe it ourselves ;in short, we make an experiment. Such is themethod we pursue, in obtaining all that knowledgewhich is the result of mere observation.The different events succeed one another, butp. N No4(J CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.we know not wherefore ; we see not their mutualconnexion. We believe that an event will,probably, follow another event ; because the oneevent has always followed the other, or becauseof some other probability ; but we cannot discoverthat necessary connexion between the twoevents, which so irresistibly leads us to determinateconclusions, where we can apply the laws ofquantity.The foregoing remarks may be viewed asacontinuation of those offered in the introductionto this volume, and chiefly relate tothe progress of chemistry. Chemistry beinga science of observation, we can form butavery imperfect conception of its futureprogress ; because, we cannot, by reasoning,anticipate the discovery of those chemicalfacts which are yet concealed. The progressthat chemistry, within these few years, hasmade, is truly astonishing ; and when a morerigorous mode of observation shall be adoptedin short, when chemistry shall be broughtmore under the control of the laws of quantity— a control that will be exercised, at leastindirectly — it is impossible to foretell the degreeof perfection which chemistry, as a science,may attain. But, for many years yet to come,the progress of chemistry must depend solelyon experiment ; and its cultivators must be satisfiedwith the comparatively humble office, ofCONCLUSION. 547discovering the actual chemical changes, whichbodies effect on each other.Since, then, in knowledge derived from observation,an acquaintance with what exists, andwith ivhat is done, is indispensable ; to obtaina clear, accurate, and unequivocal conception ofthese things, is the first duty of every observer,and of every experimentalist. Nor is there anyobserver, or experimentalist, however unpretending,who may not add to the stock of ascertainedfacts ; so varied and inexhaustible are the storesof nature. Another duty of every one who engagesin observation or experiment, is to becomethe faithful historian of what he witnesses ; tonarrate the event or phenomenon in plain andintelligible language, employing only terms ofa definite meaning ; so as to convey to othersa just notion of what he has seen. We saya just notion ; in the greater number of instances,a perfect notion is impossible ; becausewhat is seen, cannot be expressed by language.But to give a just notion ; that is to say, a notionwhich, though incomplete, has no foreign or falsegloss, is within the power of every observer ; andto give such a notion of the facts he narrates,ought to be his chief study. One testimony ofso faithful a witness is often invaluable, and wortha thousand vague and inaccurate observations;which are only calculated to bewilder, or to mislead; and thus are worse than useless.548 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.The next rule which an interpreter of natureshould bear in mind, is not to attempt toomuch at first ; but in order to establish a surefoundation for his succeeding labours, he oughtto be content with obvious and unexceptionablefacts; and so to arrange these facts, as to lead toothers. To elicit novel and prominent facts, isthe lot of few ; and any one may happen to beso successful. But all, as before stated, mayinvestigate truth ; and thus contribute more orless towards the advancement of knowledge.Moreover the humblest contributors may restassured, that they are imperceptibly raising astructure, which will sooner or later include theconspicuous labours of their more fortunatecoadjutors; in which structure, these labourswill indeed still appear conspicuous; thoughtheir importance will be diminished as the fabricis extended around them.The remarks just made, have especial referenceto the application of chemistry to physiology.The cautious and judicious applicationof chemistry to physiology has already effectedmuch, and is capable of effecting still more.Indeed it is hardly possible to say, how far chemistrymay extend physiological knowledge.But chemistry, in its present state, in order tobe made really useful, must be applied in amanner the most guarded and sparing — must,indeed, be rigidly confined to the ascertainmentCONCLUSION. 549of ivhat the living principle does; and how iloperates on inorganic principles. With the living,the animate properties of organized bodies,chemistry has not the smallest alliance ; andprobably will never, in any degree, elucidatethese properties. The phenomena of life, arenot, even remotely, analogous to any thing weknow in chemistry, as exhibited among inorganicagents. The great error of chemists,therefore, has been their attempting to applythat science to explain phenomena, for theexplanation of which, chemistry, as we havesaid, is totally valueless. Such perversion ofthe reasoning powers, has too much prevailedamong physiologists in all ages. In the earlierages, heat was considered the principle of life.In later times, electricity has been discovered ;and to electricity, the same functions have beenascribed. Life, according to other philosophers,is motion. But the progress of science has dispelledall these illusions : the origin of the obscureand evanescent principle of life, must besoughtelsewhere. By heat, for example, manywonderful things may be accomplished ; butheat will not act of itself. The powers of electricityare still more wonderful than those ofheat : but electricity, we know to be governed,in its mode of action, by certain laws, and that itgives no sign of intelligence. In the same manner,life, as we are acquainted with it, cannot550 CHEMISTRY OF ORGANIZATION.exist without motion ; but motion can exist withoutlife. Life and motion, consequently, are notsynonymous terms ; nor can we conceive theexistence of motion, without a mover. In short,the living principle, as already pointed out, issomething different from, and superadded to thecommon agencies of matter ; over which, to acertain extent, it has a control. Thus, thephenomena exhibited by the mysterious agencyof life, are strictly comparable only with one another; and have no relation to any inorganic phenomena.But the desire of the Physiologist to ascribeto the agencies of inorganic matter, those operationscarried on within living bodies, is merelya display of that innate propensity of the humanmind, which leads us to seek after First Causes.The conceptions of the physiologist regarding theprinciple of life are the same, therefore, as theconceptions of mankind in all ages regarding theGreat First Cause — the Deity himself. The pooruntutored savage " sees God in every cloud, andhears him in the wind." The complacent philosophersmiles at the credulity of the savage, andperhaps deifies " the laws of nature !" Both arealike ignorant ; nor is the imagined SupremeBeing of the untaught savage, in any degree,more absurd, than the imagined Pantheism ofthe philosopher. The winds we know canbe referred to other causes, to which theyCONCLUSION. 551are immediately owing : so with the progress ofknowledge, the " laws of nature," have beenfound to merge, and will continue to be found tomerge, into other laws, still more general ; thusproving that these laws are, all alike, mere delegatedagencies. Hence the tendency of knowledge,and of its due application, is to abstractthe attention from inferior things, and to fix themind on the source of all knowledge and of allpower — the Great First Cause ; who existsand acts throughout the universe ; whom wecan approach only, by studying His works ;and whose works, an eternity, will be inadequateto explore.APPENDIXCONTAININGADDITIONAL NOTES AND EMENDATIONS.Page 17. " Forces of Gravitation." — Many objections have beenoffered to the term vis inertia adopted by Newton. Indeed, tospeak of mere inertia, or inactivity, as a force, is obviously absurd.We have always agreed with those who think that the term inertiahas been unfortunately chosen ; since inertia expresses onlyone quality, as it were, of that which is attracted, or which reacts,in nature. But, we fully acquiesce in the opinion, thatwhatever resists attraction or reacts, is as appropriately nameda force, in a certain sense of that term, as that which attractsor acts ; and such resistance is, in all instances, virtually consideredas a force by the mathematician, however he may chooseto designate it.Page 34. — We fear the terms chemical and cohesive axes arenot quite legitimate. We have employed these and other familiarmodes of expression, such as "forces of gravitation," " polarizingforces," &c. above alluded to, either on account of thegeneral reader, for whom this work is principally intended, or forthe sake of analogy.Page 50. — Elementary form of electrical energies, &c.Throughout this work, as just observed, we have adhered asP. o o5o4 APPENDIX.much as possible to the common language of chemistry. We jconceive, however, that chemical, and the allied, phenomenaadmit of being expressed in terms of hypotheses, of which thechief are the following : —1. That every portion of matter attracts, and is attracted by,every other portion of matter, according to laws which have obtaineduniversal assent.2. That all matter, as it is known to us, exists in the conditionof molecules; which molecules we consider to be virtuallyspheres or spheroids.3. That all the spherical or spheroidal molecules, when unimpeded,revolve on their axes, with velocities, which in moleculeshaving the same weight, are, under similar circumstances, fixedand definite ; but which velocities, in molecules of differentweights, increase, according to a law which need not be herespecified, as the weights of the molecules diminish.4. That the molecules of the imponderable matters, light andheat, are vastly less than those of any ponderable substance ;hence, that the velocities of the molecules composing theseimponderable matters, are inconceivably rapid: further, thatthe substance of these molecules is either fluid or elastic, sothat they become more or less oblate, in proportion to the intensityof their motion.5. That the imponderable molecules of light and heat obey thesame laws by which ponderable matters are governed ; but thatthese imponderable molecules are capable of pervading and operatingwithin ponderable molecules, whose motions they influenceby the intensity of their own motion ; and that the moleculesof imponderable matters thus appear in the character ofagents.Page 79, note. — The term " homogeneous" light is a misprint :we mean the unaltered light of the sun. Light and heat, andindeed all self-repulsive fluids may be supposed to possess twokinds of self repulsive power : that which is common to themas fluids ; and that which depends upon the action of individualAPPENDIX. .)■).>molecules of such fluids when in certain positions, and whichpositions, these molecules are naturally inclined to assume undercertain circumstances, particularly when in motion. Hence themarshalling of the individual molecules of light, supposed in thisnote, probably do not exist, at least so as to become apparent, tillthe light approaches, or passes through some ponderable medium.These phenomena of light, may perhaps, be rendered more intelligible,by what appears to happen with respect to gaseousbodies. The rapidity of the motion of gaseous bodies, throughany permeable medium, increases as their specific gravitydiminishes. Thus the force with which, the lightest of thesebodies, hydrogen, struggles to escape through any porous matter,is almost incredible ; according to Mr. Graham's experiments,sufficient to raise a column of water from 20 to 30 inches. Thisrapidity of motion seems only explicable on the supposition, thatthe individual molecules of the gas, in their passage through narrowcanals, are guarded from external and lateral influence ; and arethus enabled to assume that position which is natural to them,and in which their mutual self-repulsion is the greatest possible.Hence, a single row of self-repulsive molecules of a gas (or otherself-repulsive fluid) passing through the minute apertures of aporous vessel into a vacuum, or what is analogous, into anothergas having different self-repulsive powers, may be compared to arow of bullets urged by an elastic fluid, in quick successionthrough a gun barrel : but with this difference, that the gaseousmolecules propel each other ; instead of being, like the bullets,propelled by a foreign agency. The explanation now offered ofthe passage of the molecules of a gas through a narrow canal, orthrough any porous matter, may, as we have said, be applied, notonly to the passage of light and heat through various media ;but also to the passage of liquids through various bodies, by theprocesses which have been termed endosmose and exosmose. Dothese forces operate also in capillary attraction ?Page 213.— TABLE OF TEMPERATURES, (fromPosition.MeanIsothermalNames of Places.TemperatureZones.LatitudeLongitude.Heightof the YearNorth.in Feet.o"T-lNain57° 8'61°20'w26-42°O*Enontekies .68 3020 47 e26-96ogHospice de St. )Goddard . $46 308 23 e30-38oNorth Cape . .25 50 e32-00*Leo65 325 26 e35-08ao*Meo63 5020 16 e33-26*St. Petersburg .59 5630 19 e38-84Drontheim . .63 2410 22 e39-92Moscow . . .55 4537 32 e40-10oI— iAbo60 2722 18 e40-28*Psal59 5117 38 e42-08*Stockholm59 2018 3e42-26Quebec . .46 4771 10 w41-74Christiana . .59 5510 48 e42-80o"O*ConventofPeys- 1orenburg . j47 4710 34 e42-98o♦Jo*Copenhagen .55 4112 35 e45-68Kendal . . .54 172 46 w46-22gMalouine Islands51 2559 59 w46-94iS*Prague . .50 514 24 e49-46■aGottingen . .51 329 53 e46-94oNZurich . . .47 228 32 e47-84"3*Edinburgh55 513 10 w47-84Warsaw . . .51 1421 2e48-56o*Coire46 509 30 e48-92'11Dublin . . .53 216 19 w49-10BerneI 46 57 26 e49-28*Geneva46 126 8e49-28*Manheim . .49 298 28 e50-18Viennaj 48 1216 22 e50-54(*) At the Places thus distinguished, the Temperatureshe ENCYCLOPEDIA METROPOLITAN. ARTICLE METEOROLOGY).Distribution of Heat in the different Seasons.Maximum and Minimum.Mean Temp,of Winter.Mean Temp,of Spring.Mean Temp,of Summer.Mean Temp,of Autumn.Mean Temp.of WarmestMonth.Mean Temp.of ColdestMonth.-0-60°+ 0-6818-3223-7211-8412-9217-0610-7820-8423-90°24-9826-4229-6627-1433-8038-1235-2444-0638-3048-38°54-8644-9643-3457-7454-8662-0661-2467-1061-8833-44°27-3231-8232-0835-9633-4438-6640-1038-3040-6451-80°59-5446-2246-5861-5262-6065-6664-9470-52-11-28°-0-58+15-0822-107-7011-488-6019-586-0824-9825-5214-1828-7828-5830-7430-8639-5631-4630-3829-6638-6628-7632-3639-2032-0034-7038-8032-7239-3838-3038-8439-0242-0841-1845-1446-5847-6644-2448-2046-4047-4850-0047-3048-9247-6649-6451-2660-2661-8868-0062-6058-4662-6056-8453-0668-9064-7664-0458-2869-0863-3259-5466-5664-9467-1069-2642-8043-1646-0441-1842-9848-3846-2248-4650-1848-7448-9248-5649-4650-3650-0049-8250-0049-8250-5462-4264-0473-4056-7459-3665-6658-1055-7666-3865-6659-3670-3464-5861-1667-2866-5668-7270-5222-4622-8213-8128-4130-2027-1434-8837-4029-6626-7838-3027-1429-4835-4230-5634-1633-4426-60given are theresult of atleast 8000 observationsTABLE OF TEMPERATURESIsothermalZones.Names of Places.Position.Mean Temperatureof theYear.Latitude.Longitude.Heightin Feet.*Clement45° 46'3° 5'e50-00°*Buda47 2919 1 E51-08o*j Cambridge, (I*Paris . .r.so42 2548 5071 3w2 20 e50-3651-08*London51 305w50-36Dunkirk .51 22 22 e50-54COAmsterdam52 224 50 e51-62Brussels50 504 22 e51-80*Franeker52 366 22 e51-80eoPhiladelphia39 5675 16 w53-42NNew York40 4073 58 w53-78*Cincinnati39 682 40 w53-78O)St. Malo .48 392 1 w54-14oNantes47 131 32 w54-68»-tPekin . .39 54116 27 e54-86*Milan1 45 289 11 E55-76Bordeaux44 5034 w56-48tu oMarseilles43 175 22 e59-00fl Coo<oN 2"3 £"Montpellierl*Rome43 361 41 533 52 e12 27 e59-3660-44E ITSToulon| 43 75 50 e62-06•5 6« si— i ^j Nangasacki*Natchez .j 32 45j 31 28129 55 e90 30 w60-8064-761 § £§ £ &*Funchal . . .I 32 3716 56 w68-54IsothtZones68° tcAlgiers . . .| 36 48i3 1 E69-98**Cairo . . .30 231 18 e72-32a 2 .*Vera Cruz19 1196 1 w77-72| 3 *-*Savannah . .I 23 1082 13 w78-081-1 n:*Guiana . . . 1 10 2765 15 w81-86(*) At the Places thus distinguished, the Temperatures(continued).Distribution of Heatin Different Seasons.iMaximum and Minimum.Mean Temp.Mean Temp.Mean Temp.Mean Temp.Mean Temp.Mean Temp,of Coldestof \\ inter.of Spring.of Summer.of Autumn.Month.Month.34-52°50-54°64-40°51-26°66-20°28-04°33-9851-0870-5252-3471-6027-7833-9847-6670-7049-8272-8629-8438-6649-2865-3036-1439-5648-5663-1450-1864-4037-7638-4848-5664-0450-9037-7536-8651-6265.8451-6266-9235-4236-6853-2466-2051-0867-2835-6036-6851-0867-2854-3269-0832-9032-1851-4473-9456-4877-0032-7229-8451-2679-1654-5080-7825-3432-9072-8654-8674-3030-2042-2652-1666-0255-7666-9241-7440-4654-5068-5455-5870-5239-0226-4256-3082-5854-3284-3824-6236-3256-12'73-0456-8474-6636-1442-0856-4870-8856-3073-0441-0045-5057-5672 5060-0874-6644-4244-0656-6675-7460-9878-0842-0845-8657-7475-2062-7877-0042-2648-3860-8075-0264-4046.4039-3857-5682-9464-2286-9037-4048-5665-4879-1666-0279-7046-9464-4065-8472-5072-3275-5664-0461-5265-6680-2472-5082-7660-0858-4673-5885-1071-4285-8256-1271-9677-9081-5078-6281-8671-0671-2478-9883-3078-9883-8469-9880-2483-6682-0480-2484-3879-16given are the result of at least 8000 observations.tMm— -rOR to the POLES/hi-.,,/ /i, .,/'•/■ .,/■ . • w /*- Aft.*/**in-itt'i.y* a,„ „/ /a«- <^i, AM *«•-* mffi* rt iflhM// tttmtsutftmi wfJHmi •>* /.* !,,?*< ,*, BWdu^Ammt th £4/1**0,- /,I.' //*. /»■/ .»«*• /*/»;.,/-.,/ /,,, i, .,,!,**$ ***** /y. •/•■** ,S.;.AbM^maAPPENDIX. 561Page 214. — Explanation of the Map. — The accompanyingMap, in which are traced the different i s thermal lines, is takenfrom the article Meteorology in the Encyclopaedia Metropolitan.The general character of these isothermal lines, which arefounded, for the most part, on the data in the preceding tables, is,that in Europe they are convex, and in Asia and America concave,towards the Pole ; and that they gradually become less andless, convex and concave, as we approach the Equator.Page 265. — On opening the fold of the Map, we see, on theleft hand side, a section of a mountain at the Equator, extendingto the limits of perpetual snow in that region. The right handside is supposed to represent the Earth's surface from the Equatorto beyond the Arctic circle. At the parallel of latitude ofBen Nevis, a single mountain is sketched, with the view of indicating,that though the top of Ben Nevis rises considerably abovethe limits of perpetual snow, according to theoretical laws deducedfrom the height of perpetual snow at the Equator; yet,that in reality, the top of Ben Nevis, the highest mountain inGreat Britain, is under that limit.Page 280, Note. — We have stated that the diffusion of thesame air, and of the same vapour at different temperatures, areinferences only from the supposed general law of the diffusionof gaseous bodies ; and have alluded to the existence of modificationsof that general law. To those who feel an interest insuch enquiries, the following additional remarks may be not unacceptable,as pointing out the grounds from which we infer suchdiffusion of the same air and vapour ; and the modifications, towhich we have no doubt, it will be found to be liable.Let us suppose a flexible air-tight bag to be furnished with astop-cock ; and to be filled with hydrogen gas, under exactlythe same pressure, and having the same temperature as the surroundingatmosphere. Let us now suppose the stop-cock to beopened. Immediately, the hydrogen in the bag, and the exterioratmospheric air, will begin to commingle, with a force and ve-P. P P5G2 APPENDIX.velocity proportional to the quantity of the gas diffused ; and whichquantity varies inversely as the square roots of the specific gravitiesof hydrogen gas, and of atmospheric air ; that is to say, thevolume of atmospheric air diffused inwards, being supposed to beequal to 1, the volume of hydrogen diffused outwards, will beequal to 3-8 nearly. The diffusion of hydrogen and atmosphericair of the same temperature, and under the same pressure, is aninstance of the simplest form of gaseous diffusion ; and is, webelieve, the only form of diffusion, which has been experimentallyinvestigated. The phenomena attending the diffusion of thesetwo bodies show, that, all other circumstances being supposed tobe alike, the diffusion of gases is influenced solely by the differenceof their specific gravities.We have stated the case of the diffusion of two gaseous bodieshaving the same temperature. Their temperature however, mayvary within any limits ; and though the law of diffusion may bemodified, diffusion will continue to take place except at those temperaturesat which the specific gravities of the two gases becomeequal, at which temperatures there will be no tendency to diffusion); provided difference of specific gravity alone be the causeof diffusion. But if the diffusion of different gases at differenttemperatures be admitted, it seems to follow, that different portionsof the same gaseous body under the same pressure, buthaving different temperatures, and consequently different specificgravities, will likewise have a tendency to diffusion.The case we shall next suppose is dissimilar to the two foregoingcases, but is deducible from the same premises; it is thecase of the diffusion of the same vapour, as of the vapour ofwater, which may be illustrated in the following manner :Let us suppose our apparatus to contain atmospheric air,having the temperature of 1 00°, and saturated with water ; whilethe exterior atmospheric air is at the temperature of 60°, and islikewise saturated with water ; and that the pressure on the airconfined in the bag, is the same as the external pressure. Wesuppose the presence of air in the apparatus, in order thatit may be able to sustain the atmospheric pressure ; for, as wei.APPENDIX. 563formerly stated, vapour alone, at ordinary temperatures, exertselastic forces very different from, and far inferior to the elasticforce of air at these temperatures. Such being supposed tobe the state of the air contained in our apparatus, what will happenon the opening of the stop-cock ? The air within the bagwill have the same tendency to diffusion, as the contents of thebag supposed in the last case ; but the vapour with which theair is associated will have an opposite tendency. The warmervapour within the apparatus, instead of being, like the warmerair, lighter ; will have a greater specific gravity than the coldervapour associated with the external air. Consequently, theinward tendency to diffusion, that is to say, the tendency of thecolder vapour without the apparatus, to diffuse itself among themolecules of the warmer vapour within will be greater than theoutward diffusive tendency of the vapour in the apparatus.Such will be the opposing diffusive tendencies of warm vapourand of warm air in a state of commixture ; and if the air wereabsent, the diffusive tendency of vapour alone would have asimilar diffusive tendency to that which it has, when mixed withair ; though that tendency would, of course, be not exactly thesame as when modified by the influence of the air. The vapourwithin, and the vapour without the apparatus, would each exertthe elastic forces peculiar to their respective temperatures asvapour.There would, however, be a striking difference betweenthe phenomena attending the diffusion of vapour, (whethermixed or unmixed with air), and that of air itself at differenttemperatures. Two portions of air of different temperatureswould cease to have any diffusive tendencies as soon as theirtemperatures became uniform. The temperature of two portionsof vapour becoming uniform, would, of course, produce, in thesame manner, a cessation of their diffusive tendencies ; but thecircumstances accompanying that cessation would be altogetherdifferent. The colder vapour without the apparatus, being thelighter, would move with accelerated velocity into, or toward, theheavier warm vapour within the apparatus ; while that warm504 APPENDIX.vapour in moving outward, would be instantly condensed ; andthus its diffusive powers would be annihilated. On these groundswe advanced the opinion, that probably , there may, under certaincircumstances, exist in the atmosphere, a tendency to diffusionfrom above downwards ; the vapour in the higher regions ofthe atmosphere, being relatively lighter than the vapour below.The observations that have been offered in! this note, regardthe only circumstance which is yet known to cause a difference inthe diffusive tendency of gaseous bodies, namely, the difference oftheir specific gravities. If there be other causes of such difference; and it is almost certain, that there is one other cause ; theeffects produced by these causes may be very different. Thedifference in the diffusive power of the same gaseous body, is notperhaps, under any circumstances, very remarkable ; but therewill probably be found to be a much greater difference in thediffusive power of vapours ; though it is not easy to form even aconjecture as to the extent of that difference. In the presentstate of uncertainty therefore on those points we have thought itright to speak of a tendency to diffusion, rather than of diffusion,as a thing actually existing. The diffusive powers of elastic fluidsare at present very little understood or appreciated. They constitute,however, as we have said, one of the most interesting andimportant subjects in physics, and would amply repay whoeverwould take the trouble to investigate them.Page 372. — The table follows, illustrating the distribution ofplants over the globe, to which we have referred in the text.It has been copied immediately from Lindley's Introduction toBotany.