INSECTTRANSFORMATIONS.LONDON:CHARLES KNIGHT, PALL MALL EAST;Hangman, Trees, ORME, BROWN, & GREEN, PATERNOSTER ROW JOLIVER & BOYD, EDINBURGH; T. ATKINSON, GLASGOW;Waken, DUBLIN ; Miller, LIVERPOOL; & BAINES & CO., LEEDS,MDCCCXXX.^ > : 'LONDON:PRINTED BY ^ylLLTAM CLOWI-:S,Stamford Street.CONTENTS.SECTION I,— EGGS OF INSECTS.CHAPTER I.— Introductory.All insects come from eggsCurious experiment of RicherVirgil's receipt for making a swarra of beesOrigin of these ancient errors .Bees in Sampson's lion accounted forFancies of Robinet and DarwinTheory of spontaneous generationPopular errors respecting blightDr. Good's account of i/i'^Af .No insect eggs afloat in the airSpecific gravity of insect eggs . .Theoretical accounts of honey-dew .Accounted for by experimentsInstantaneous appearance of insectsThe " worm i' the bud" traced to its eggJnsectiferous windsSupposed showers of frogs, snails, &c. .Diffusion of the seeds of plantsInsects jet out their eggs from fearOrigin of mosses on wallsOrigin of mould in the heart of an appleCHAPTER II.Physiology of insects' eggsTheory of colours meant for concealment .Disproved in the case of the eggs of birdsIllustrated from insect eggsCause of the colours in eggs .Structure of insects' eggs. . . ,Eggs of ants, spiders, and glow-worms .Form of insect eggsCause of the oval form in birds' eggsSculpture of the eggs of insects . .Curious appendages to eggs .Eggs with foot-stalksNumber of insect eggs, and their fecundityother animals .compared witha3Pageib.ib.VICONTENTS.'CHAPTER III.Maternal care of insects respecting their eggsInstanced in a carpenter bee (Ckrlostutna)Ichneumon compared to the cuckooProceedings of a solitary bee (Halicfus) .Stratagems of a solitary wasp (Cerccris)Ovipositor of an ichneumon pimple)Experiments of Reaumur . . .Common mistakes of NaturalistsParasite of the cabbage caterpillar (J'onti(i)Egg parasitesParasites of the aphides . * .Singular parasite of the cork-roach .Rare parasites of bees and waspsTact of insects in discovering food for their youngSometimes select exotic plantsInstanced in a leaf-miner (nephritis f)Solitary and gregarious caterpillarsLife-boat of eggs constructed by the gnat .Experiments upon it . . . .Infallibility of instinct questioned . .Mistakes of instinctCHAPTER IV.Hybernation of Insects' eggsProceedings of the gypsey moth compared to the eider duckSingular groups of eggs .Protection of eggs from heat . .Anal tweezers of moths .Eggs in spiral groupsArched form of the lackey moth's eggsHybernation of the eggs of aphidesSingular protection of the eggs of cocciCoccus of the hawthornShell-formed coccus of the currant .Hybernation of spiders' eggsCurious spiders' nestsEggs of the vapourer moth on its cocoonEffects of cold on insects' eggs .Observations of John-hunterInsects not killed by severe frostsCHAPTER V.Hatching of insect eggsStructure of the eggs of birds .Insects do not hatch their eggs .Anomalous instance of the earwigEarwigs cannot get into the brainPartial hatching by spidersExperiments upon the wolf spider by Swammerdam andBonnet .Eggs hatched before they are laidNovo-viviparous insectsCoil of larvas in the body of a blow-flyAphides sometimes produce eggs, sometimes youngCare taken of these eggs by ants .CONTENTS.EllCoco-viviparous flies (^HippohoscidcB)Effects of heat upon eggsManagement of silk-worms' eggs . .Etfectsof light on eggs .Some insect eggs increase in size •Growth of the eggs of antsDevelopment of the eggs of spiders .Spiders live long without food .Insects probably gnaw through their egg-shellsValves of insect eggs .Period of hatching influenced by temperatureImageib.SECTION II.— Larvae.CHAPTER VI.Structure of caterpillars, grubs, and maggots, .Meanings of these terms .Supposed transmutation of plants into animals .Observations of Under upon this .Remarks of Bory St. VincentSupposed formative power of the blood ,Embryo butterfly in the caterpillar .Experiments to shew thisDissections of the buds of plantsDifference of plants from insects . .Internal structure of caterpillarsBreathing-tubes and formation of their bloodColours of caterpillars not intended for concealmentImitative forms of caterpillarsWalking-leaf insectCaterpillars in form of branches .Conspicuously coloured caterpillars .Butterflies supposed to be coloured like flowers .Singular forms of caterpillarsForms of water-grubs .Breathing organs in water larvaeWater worms (^Nais) may be mistaken for larvae .Syringe for respiration in a water larvaCurious mask of the same larvaDust mask of the wolf bag '^Reduvius)CHAPTER VII.Growth, moulting, strength, defence, and hybernation of larvaeProgressive increase of the silk-worm .Compared with the growth of buds .Process of moulting or casting the skin .Accidents interrupt this process.Reds, a disorder similar to renal gravel.Position of the hairs in moultingCasting of the interior lining of the stomach, &cMounting of birds .Cast skins sometimes devouredMis-statement of Goldsmith .Contrivances for escape from confinementMuscular strength of insects128Note, ib.129ib.viii CONTENTS.PageFleas made to draw miniature coaches 180Numerous muscles of the cossus . 182Its wonderful strength. . . . . • • • 184Mis-statements respecting the strength of insects . . 185Means of escape by spinning . 186Defensive hairs and spines of caterpillars 187Excrementitious covering of some larvae 190Origin of the froth on plants called cuckoo-spit . . . 191Winter covering of caterpillars 192Fat a probable defence against cold 195CHAPTER VIII.Voracity of caterpillars, grubs, and maggots . . . 196Increase of weight in the silk-worm in thirty days . . 197Remarkable change in the capacity of the stomach . . . 198Instances of human voracity , 201Jaws or mandibles of larvae .••• 202Caterpillars , . . ib.Blight caused by an oak-leaf-roller 203Ravages of the buff-tip , . 204Encamping caterpillars of the ermine moths . . . 205Experiments with these • . 206Extraordinary ravages of the brown-tail moth . 208Strange enactment of the Parliament of Paris. . 209Cause of the abundance of caterpillars in particular years . 210Alarm caused in France by the gamma moth, . , . 211Calculation of their fecundity 212Cabbage caterpillars prefer weeds 213Disappearance of the black-veined white butterfly . . 214Ravages of the caterpillar of the gooseberry saw-fly . , 215Similar ravages committed on other trees 216Slug worm of North America 217Turnip fly erroneously fancied to come across the sea to Norfolk 218Effects of ^gerise on currant and poplar trees . . . 220Destruction of grain by Fuplocami and Tinea . . . 221Bee hives injured by Gallariae 222Caterpillar which feeds on chocolate . 224CHAPTER IX.Voracity of grubs • . . , , 225Grub of the cockchafer or may-bug . 226Account of its transformation, &c. 2•2^Methods of destroying 228Wire worm the grub of Hemirhipus . 229Probable mistake respecting the destruction of wheat « . 231Pea beetle of North America .•,, 233Corn weevil. . 234Ideal worm, the grub of Tenehrio monitor . . . . ib.Tabby moth caterpillar devours butter and fat . . . 236Intestinal worms . ^.ib.Mistakes of Linnaeus, Dr. Barry, and Dr. J. P. Frank , . 237Experiment of M.Deslonchamps . 238Extraordinary case of Alary Jordan, by Dr. Pickells . . 239Authenticity of this case proved. . 241Fruit grubs 242Nut weevil and its transformations . . , ■ . . ib,CONTENTS.IXApple-bird-weevil .Voracity of CalosomaRayed galleries of a bark-grubRavages of locusts .Their swarms in Southern AfricaThe Italian locust .Migrations in Palestine and EuropeCHAPTER X.Voracity of maggotsMaggots of crane flies popularly called the grubRemarkable ovipositor .Destruction of herbage on Blockheadi^imilardevastations in Poitou and WildernessWheat fly, described by Mr. Shires .Additional particulars by Mr. Gorrie .Observations of Kirby . . , .Mistake of Mr. WarwickHessian fly, as described by Mr. Sav. .Cheese-hopper the maggot of Piophila . .wonderful structure of this maggot .Its transformation into a fly .Origin of the house fly (Musca domestica) .Mistakes of Ray and ReaumurVoracity of the maggots of blow flies .■ Instance of man devoured by them. . .Popular mistake respecting lady-birds .Their transformations traced to the eg. .Aphides checked by these and by SyrphidaeSECTION III.— PUP/E.Pageib.ib.CHAPTER XI.Mechanism of suspending chrysalidesProceedings of larvae upon their approaching changeIn what manner some caterpillars suspend themselvesTheir attempts sometimes unsuccessfulOrgan for holding fast . . . .Suspensory cincture of other caterpillars .Method of forming this by the swallow-tail .Parchment-like pupa case of flies {Muscidcp')Flask-shaped pupae of Syrphidae . .Transformations of a Tipulidan gnat .Mode by which the nymph is suspended .Hooked aquatic pupa {Hydrocampa ?) .CHAPTER XII.Form and structure of pupaeThe term metamorphosis objected to . . . .Harvey's fancies about transmutation . . .Similar fancies of Goedart exposed by Swammerdam .Structure of the pupa of rise chameleon flyPupa of the lappit moth ,Chrysalis and transformations of the peacock butterflyOrigin of philosophic errors .Changes produced on pupae by evaporation . .ib.CONTENTS.PageObjections to the theory of evaporation, . * 298Respiratory organs of pupae « • 300Experiments upon the breathing of pupae 301"Valves of the spiracles 302Breathing apparatus in the pupae of aquatic crane flies and gnats 304Plumed apparatus of the blood-worm 305CHAPTER XIIITransformation of pupae into perfect insectsTheory of transpiration by means of beatObjections to this theory , .Experiments by ReaumurChrysalides hatched under a henForcing of butterflies winter .Retarding the evolution of butterflies by coldExperiments on pupae led to the varnishing of eggsIllustrations of torpidity in animals and plants .Various periods of disclosure in the same broodSupposed final cause of thisFixed time of the day for some insects to be evolvedRemarkable evolution of the gnatStill more remarkable instance of the blood worm.Netted doors in the pupa cases of caddis-fliesBellows apparatus in the pupa of the blow-flyContrivance in the pupae of wood-feeders .Singularity in the locust mothIngenious contrivance in a small leaf-rollerMistake of Bonnet with respect to the teazle-moth.Pupa cases opened by extraneous assistanceObservations on this by the younger Huber .Experiment by Dr. J. R. JohnsonDe Geer's observations contrary to those of SwammerdamRemarkable circumstance in the hive bee .ib.ib.SECTION IV. PERFECT INSECTS.CHAPTER XIV.Expansion of the body and wings in insects newly transformed . 333Structure of birds to contain air . ib.Expansion in the fly of the ant-lion 334The mandibles prove it carnivorous . : » . . 335Transformations of dragon-flies 336Folded wings of some two-winged flies 338Malpighi's account of the transformations of the silk worm . 339Impulsion of fluids into the wings . 341Kirby's account of the expansion of the swallow tailed butterfly 342Swammerdam's account of the wings of the bee . . 343Air tubes in insects' wings . 344Nervures in the wings of plumed moths 345Perfect insects do not increase in size . 347Imperfect insects from fallen chrysalides 349Discharges from newly-evolved insects 350Supposed showers of blood accounted for . . 351CONTENTS.XITheories devised to account for crimson-snow .Curious fact explaining this, by Mr. T. NicholsonDoes not explain the red snow of the Alps ,PageCHAPTER XV.Peculiar motions of insectsMotion indispensable to life . , ,Anecdote of a water-measurerMode of combing themselves used by spidersOscillatory motions of some tipulidae . ,Vibratory motions of syrphi on the wing .Similar motions of hawks, red-breast, &c. .Experiment on Scioptera vibrateIllustrated by the wag-tail, &c. . . ,Gnat dances in winterOpinion of Wordsworth and others . ,Similar aerial dances of rooks .Night-gambols of Corethrce ? on a bookCircular movements of a summer flySportive movements not necessarily social .Account of the whirlwig, by Kirby and by KnappRemarkable structure of its eyes .Battles of butterflies .Choral assemblies of ephemeral . . ,Account of these by Reaumur . .Sports of ants .Gymnastics of ants, according to Huber .ib.ib.ib.ib.CHAPTER XVI.Peculiar locomotion of insects . 379Examples from quadrupeds 4 . . ib.Singular movements of some plant-bugs . . • . 380Sailing of the whirlwig beetle 381Walking on water by spiders, &c. 382Walking through water by aquatic mites 383Oblique pace of midges . 384Insect with its legs on its back 385Rapid galloping of the strawberry mite 386Slow movements of the oil-beetles . . . . • 387Supposed sponges in the foot of the fly 388Correct notions of Derham and White, proved by Sir E. Home 389Apparatus in the feet of flies 390Leaping muscles of the flea 392Leaping of grasshoppers and springtide . * 393Springing of spiders on their prey . 394Flight of insects 395Mechanism of insects' wings and their muscles, according toM. Chabrier 396Flying of spiders without wings • 397CHAPTER XVII.Rest of insects . . . .Night insects rest in the dayib.XllCONTENTS.Day movements of other insects .Insects have no brain nor spinal cordWant also a proper heart as well as blood .Supposed pulse in insectsNo circulationAlleged discovery of an insect circulation, by Dr. CarusHow the circulation is affected in the sleep of manThe same effects cannot take plate in insectsSleep of senses not equally profound . .Torpidity of insects in winterHybernation of ants . , . . ,Anecdotes from RulerHybernation of beesDiscrepancies of opinion among' naturalists .Hybernation of the hearth cricket . •Passelb.ib.ib,dogib.•413'414INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.SECTION L— EGGS OP INSECTS.Chapter I,All Insects come from Eggs as Plants do from Seeds. — Vulgar .errorsof Insects being generated by Putrefaction and B lighting Winds disprovedby experiment.It was universally believed by the ancient philosophers,that maggots, flies, and other insects weregenerated from putrefying substances. This opinioncontinues to be held by uninformed persons amongourselves ; — though it would be equally correct tomaintain, that a flight of vultures had been generatedby the dead carcass which they may be seen devouring,or a flock of sheep from the grass-field in which theygraze. Another opinion, perhaps still more generallydiffused, is that caterpillars, aphides, and other gardeninsects which destroy the leaves of plants, are generated,propagated, or, at least, spread about, by certainwinds or states of the air, mysteriously and indefinitelytermed blight. The latter belief is, probably,not so easy of immediate refutation as the former ; —but, as we shall endeavour to shew, it seems to us tobe equally erroneous.The small size of insects renders it somewhat easyto pass off fanciful opinions regarding them, since itis difficult for common observers to detect mistakes ;B2 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.but similar notions have been entertained by writersoF no mean reputation, respecting even the largeranimals. The celebrated Kircher, for example, oneof the most learned men of the seventeenth century,goes so far as to give the following singular recipefor the manufacture of snakes : —"Take some snakes," says he, "of whatever kindyou want, roast them, and cut them in small pieces,and sow those pieces in an oleaginous soil ; then,from day to day, sprinkle them lightly with waterfrom a watering-pot, taking care that the piece ofground be exposed to the spring sun, and in eightdays you will see the earth strewn with little worms,which, being nourished with milk diluted withwater, will gradually increase in size till they takethe form of perfect serpents. This," he subjoinswith great simplicity, "I learned from having foundin the country the carcase of a serpent covered withworms, some small, others larger, and others againthat had evidently taken the form of serpents. Itwas still more marvellous to remark, that amongthese little snakes, and mixed as it were with them,Vt'ere certain flies, which I should take to be engenderedfrom that substance which constituted thealiment of the snakes,"Kircher's more shrewd and less fanciful correspondent,Redii, determined to prove this singularrecipe before he trusted to the authority of his friend."Moved," he says, "by the authentic testimony ofthis most learned writer, I have frequently tried theexperiment, but I could never witness the generationof those blessed snakelets made to hand."But though Redii could not, in this way, produce abrood of snakes, his experiments furnished anabundant progeny of maggots, — the same, inquestKircher, Mind. Subterran. lib. xii.f Redii, General. Indecorum, edit. Amstel. 1686.GENERATION OF INSECTS. Stionably, that the imagination of Kircher had magnifiedinto young snakes, — which, beings confined inacovered box, were in a short time transformed intoflies, at first of a dull ash colour, wrinkled, unfinished,and their wings not yet unfolded, — as isalways the case with winged insects just escapedfrom their pupa case. In less than an hour, however,they " unfolded their wings and changed intoa vivid green, marvellously brilliant " — most probablythe green flesh-fly {{Musca CcBsar. Linn.)It is a common opinion in this country, particularlyin the north, that if a horse's hair be put intothe water of a spring or a ditch, it will be in processof time transformed, first into a hair-worm, andafterwards into an eel. The deception, as in theinstance of Kircher's snakes, arises from the closeresemblance between a hair and the hair-worm(^Gordiiis aquatic, Linn), and between this anda vous: eel. This fabled transformation of hair,which we have heard maintained even by severalpersons of good education, is physically impossibleand absurd.The method laid down by Virgil in his Georgicfor generating a swarm of bees is precisely of thesame description as the snake recipe of Kircher ; andthough the " Episode of Aristaeus recovering hisbees " has been pronounced to be " perhaps thefinest piece of poetry in the world," we must bepermitted to say that it is quite fabulous and unphilosophical.The passage runs thus : —Oft from putrid gore of cattle slainBees have been bred. * * * 7\. narrow place,And for that use contracted, first they chouse.Then more contract it, in a nurrovier room,"Wall'd round, and cover'd with a low built roof,And add four windows, of a slanting lightFrom the four winds. A bullock then is sought,His horns just beading in their second year;b2INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.Him, much reluctant, with overpowering once.They bind ; his mouth and nostrils stop, and allThe avenues of respiration close ;And buffet him to death : his hide no woundReceives; his batter'd entrails burst within.Thus spent they leave him ; and beneath his sidesLay shreds of boughs, fresh lavender and thyme.This, when soft zephyr's breeze first curls the wave.And prattling swallows hang their nests on high.Meanwhile the juices in the tender bonesHeated ferment ; and, wondrous to behold,Small animals, in clusters, thick are seen,Short of their legs at first: on filmy wings,Humming, at length they rise ; and more and moreFan the thin air; 'till, numberless as dropsPour'd down in rain from summer clouds, they fly.Traps's Virgil, Georg. iv. 369.Columella, a Roman writer on rural affairs, afterdirecting; in what manner honey is to be taken froma hive by killing the bees, says, that if the dead beesbe kept till spring;, and then exposed to the sunamong the ashes of the fig-tree, properly pulverised,they may be restored to life.These fancies have evidently originated from mistakingcertain species of flies {Syrphi, Boinhylii.,&c.) for bees, which, indeed, they much resemble ingeneral appearance ; though they have only twowings, and short antennae, while all bees haveyb7<!rwings, and long antennae. Neither the flies nor theComparative figures of a bee (a) and a syrphus (h).bees are produced by putrefaction ; — but as the fliesare found about animal bodies in a state of decomposition,the ancients hell into an error which accurateobservation alone could explode. ThemaggotsofGENERATION OF INSECTS. 5blow-flies, as Swammerdam remarks, so oftenfound in the carcasses of animals in summer, " somewhatresemble those produced by the eggs ofbees. However ridiculous," he adds, " the opinionmust appear, many great men have not beenashamed to adopt and defend it. The industriousGoedart has ventured to ascribe the origin ofbees to certain dunghill worms*, and the learnedDe Mei joins with him in this opinion ; thoughneither of them had any observation to ground theirbelief upon, but that of the external resemblancebetween bees and certain kinds offices (Syrphidt^)produced from those worms. The mistake of suchauthors should teach us," he continues, "to usegreat caution in our determinations concerningthings which we have not thoroughly examined,or at least to describe them with all the circumstancesobservable in them. Therefore, althoughthis opinion of bees issuing from the carcasses ofsome other animals by the power of putrefaction,or by a transposition of parts, be altogether absurd,it has had, notwithstanding, many followers, whomust have in a manner shut their eyes in order toembrace it. But whoever will attentively considerhow many requisites there are for the due hatchingof the bee's eg, and for its subsistence in the grubstate, cannot be at a loss for a clue to deliver himselfout of that labyrinth of idle fancies and unsupportedfables, which, entangled with one another like aGordian knot, have even to this day obscured thebeautiful simplicity of this part of natural history."Redii was by no means satisfied with the first resultsof his experiments upon the flesh of snakes, for severalThe maggots of Eristalis tenax, Fabr. E. apifor'mis, Meigen,and other Syrpkidce, well known in common sewers by theirlong tails, like those of rats.f Stammered. Book of Nature, i. 228.b36 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.species of flies were produced, giving; some countenanceto the opinion of Aristotle, Pliny, Mouifet,and others, that different flesh engenders differentflies, inheriting the disposition of the animal they arebred from. He accordingly tried almost everyspecies of flesh, fish, and fowl, both raw and cooked,and soon discovered (as he could not fail to do) thatthe same maggots and flies were produced indiscriminatelyin all. This ultimately led him toascertain that no maggots are ever generated exceptfrom eggs laid by the parent flies: for when hecarefully covered up pieces of meat with silk orpaper sealed down with wax, no maggots wereseen ; but the parent flies, attracted by the smell ofthe covered meat, not unfrequently laid their eggson the outside of the paper or silk, the maggotshatched from these dying, of course, for want ofnourishment.With respect to bees, it becomes even more absurdto refer their generation to putrefaction, when weconsider that they uniformly manifest a peculiarantipathy to dead carcasses. This was remarked solong ago as the time of Aristotle and of Pliny * ;and Varro asserts that bees never alight upon anunclean place, nor upon any thing which emits anunpleasant smell. This is strikingly exemplified intheir carrying out of the hive the bodies of theircompanions who chance to die there ; and in theircovering over with propolis the bodies of snails,mice, and other small animals which they cannotremove J.These facts, which are unquestionable, may atfirst view appear to contradict the Scripture historyAristotle, Hist. Animal, ix. 40. Pliny says, "Omnes camevescuntur, contra quasi apes, queen nullus corpus attingunt,"t Hui*h on Bees, p. 100.;f Insect Architecture, p. 109.GENERATION OF INSECTS. 7ofSamRon, who, leaving; killed a young lion in thevineyards of Timnath, " after a time turned aside tosee the carcass of the lion : and behold a swarm ofbees and honey in the carcass*" It only requiresus, however, to examine the facts, to shew thatthis does not disagree with the preceding* statement.Chart, in his Sacred Zoology, tells us that theword rendered "carcass" literally signifies skeleton;and the Syriac version still more strongly rendersit a dried body (corpus exsiccatum). Chart furthercontends, that the phrase "after a time" is oneof the commonest Hebraisms for a year. But whenwe consider the rapid desiccation caused by the summersuns of Palestine, this extension of time will beunnecessary ; for travellers tell us that the bodies ofdead camels become quite parched there in a fewdays. We have the testimony of Herodotus, that aswarm of bees built their cells and made honey inthe dried carcass of a man placed above the gate ofAthamanta. Romanus also tells us of a swarm ofbees found in the tomb of the celebrated Hippocrates.I have been told'' says Redii, " by Albergotto, aman of profound erudition, that he had seen a swarmin the cranium of a horse. Bees," he adds, " notonly do not live upon dead bodies, but they will noteven come near them, as I have often proved by experiment."" It is probable," says Swammerdam,*' that the not rightly understanding Samson's adventureof the lion gave rise to the popular opinionof bees springing from dead lions, oxen, and horses."Kirby and Spence seem disposed to consider Samson'sbees, as we have done those of Virgil, to be fliesresembling bees ; but the " honey " which Samsontook in his hands and went on eating-is fatal tosuch an exposition.The ancients had another fancy respecting theJudges, xiv. 8.8 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.propagation of bees, equally absurd, though muchmore poetical. Virgil tells us that,From herbs and fragrant flowers, with their mouthsThey cull their young. Georg. iv.Aristotle* had long before stated, and De Monfortin modern times repeated the assertion t, that theolive, the cerinthus, and some other plants, have theproperty of generating young bees from their purestjuices. We may well say, with Acanthus, that"they make shipwreck of their wisdom, who adoptwithout judgement the opinions of their ancestors,and allow themselves to be led by others like a flockof sheep |." Modern naturalists, being accustomedto minute accuracy in their observations, can bothdisprove and readily explain most of those erroneousfancies, by tracing the causes which led, and maystill lead, inaccurate observers into such mistakes.It would have been well if such unfounded fancieshad rested here; but philosophical theorists, both ofancient and modern times, have promulgated dreamsmuch more extravagant. The ancients taught thatthe newly-formed earth (hatched as some said froman ^^^^ clothed itself vvith a green down like thaton young birds, and soon after men began to sproutup from the ground as we now see mushrooms do.The refined Athenians were so firmly convinced oftheir having originally sprung up in this manner,that they called themselves "Earth-born" (),and wore golden tree-hoppers {Cicadce) intheir hair, erroneously supposing these insects tohave a common origin with themselves §. LucretiusHist. Animal. V. 22.\ Le Portrait de la Mouche a Miel. Liege, 1646.j Divin. Instit. ii. 7 ; in Redii's motto. Shepherds on the continentlead their sheep, as those of Israel did. See Menageries,vol. i. p. 81.§ The Cicadae do not deposit their eggs in the earth, but ontrees, cc. See Insect Architecture, chap. vii.GENERATION OF INSECTS. 9affirms, that even in his time, when the earth wassupposed to be growing too old to be reproductive,many animals were concreted out of mud byshowers and sunshine."But the ancients, it would appear, had theshrewdness seldom to venture upon illustrations oftheir philosophical romances by particular examples.This was reserved for the more reckless theory-buildersof our own times. We find Robinet, forexample, asserting that, as it was nature's chiefobject to make man, she began her " apprentissage,"as he calls it, by forming minerals resembling thesingle organs of the human body, such as the brainin the fossil called Brain-stone meandering cerebri-forms,Parkinson). Darwin, again, taking thehint from Epicurus, dreams that animals arose froma single filament or threaded of matter, which, byits extorts to procure nourishment, lengthened outparts of its body into arms and other members.For example, after this filament had improved itselfinto an oyster, and been by chance left dry by theebbing of the tide, its efforts to reach the wateragain expanded the parts nearest to the sea into armsand legs. If it tried to rise from its native rocks,the efforts produced wings, and it became an insect,which in due course of time improved itself by freshefforts till it became a bird, the more perfect membersbeing always hereditarily transmitted to the progeny.Time different forms of the bills of birds, whetherhooked, broad, or long, were, he says, graduallyacquired by the perpetual endeavours of the creaturesto supply their wants. The long-legged nunc etiam existent animals terris,Iinbiibus et calico solis concreta vapors.De Nat. Er. v. 795.f Robinet, Consist. Philosophiques de la Gradation Naturelledes Formes de I'Etre. Paris, 1768.10 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.fowl (Grallatores^ Vigors) in this way acquiredlength of legs sufficient to elevate their bodies abovethe water in which they waded. "A proboscis," hesays, "of admirable structure has thus been acquiredby the bee, the moth, and the humming-bird, forthe purpose of plundering; the nectaries of flowers."Lamarck, an eminent French naturalist, recentlydeceased, adopted the same visions; and, among otherillustrations of a similar cast, he tells us that thegiraffe acquired its long neck by its efforts to browseon the high branches of trees, which, after the lapse ofa few thousand years, it successfully accomplished.Theories like the preceding all originate in the endeavoursof human ingenuity to trace the operationsof nature farther than ascertained facts will warrant;and the necessary blanks in such a system, whichpresupposes much that cannot be explained, arefilled up by the imagination. This inability totrace the origin of minute plants and insects ledto the doctrine of what is called spontaneous orequivocal generation, of which the fancies abovementionedare some of the prominent branches.The experiments of Redii on the hatching of insectsfrom eggs, which were published at Florence in1668, first brought discredit upon this doctrine,though it had always a few eminent disciples. Atpresent it is maintained by a considerable numberof distinguished naturalists, such as LumenCuvier, Bory de St. Vincent, R. Brown,&c. " The notion of spontaneous generation,"says Bory, "is at first revolting to a rational mind,but it is, notwithstanding, demonstrable by themicroscope. The fact is averred : Miller has seenit, I have seen it, and twenty other observers haveseen it : the Pannonia exhibit it every instant f.'Darwin's Zoonomia, sect, xxxix. 3d edit. London, ISUl.J Diet. Classique d' Hist. Nat., Art. Microscopical, p. .541,GENERATION OF INSECTS. 11These pannonia he elsewhere describes as probablynothing' more than "animated scions of Zoocarpie"(propagates animes des Zoocarpes)*. It wouldbe unprofitable to go into any lengthened discussionupon this mysterious subject; and we havegreat doubts whether the ocular demonstration by themicroscope would succeed except in the hands of adisciple of the school. Even with naturalists, whosebusiness it is to deal with facts, the reason is oftenwonderfully influenced by the imagination.But the question immediately before us happilydoes not involve these recondite discussions ; forif even pannonia and other animalcules wereproved beyond a doubt to originate in the play ofchemical affinities or galvanic actions — ia morerefined process, it must be confessed, than Kircher schopped snakes), it would not atiect our doctrine thatall insects are hatched from eggs : for no naturalistof the present day classes such animalcules amonginsects. Leaving animalcules and zoophytes, therefore,out of the question, we have only to examinesuch branches of the theory of spontaneous generationas seem to involve the propagation of genuineinsects, — like the fancies about putrefaction whichwe have seen refuted.The notion that small insects, such as aphidesand the leaf-rolling caterpillars, are spread about, orrather generated, by what is termed hight (possiblyfrom the Belgic hlinkan, to strike with lightning),is almost universally believed even by the mostintelligent, if they have not particularly studied thehabits of insects. Mr. Main, of Chelsea, an ingeniousand well-informed gardener and naturalist, describesthis as an "easterly wind, attended by a blue mist.The latter is called a blight, and many peopleimagine that the aphides are wafted through theDiet. Class., Art. Pandorinees,12 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.air by this same mist*" "The farmer," saysKeith, " supposes these insects are wafted to himon the east wind, while they are only generated inthe extravasated juices as forming a proper nidus fortheir eggs." A more detailed account, however,is given by the late Dr. Mason Good, and as hespeaks in part from personal observation, and wasnot only one of the most learned men of his time,but an excellent general naturalist, his testimonymerits every attention : —That the atmosphere'' says Dr. Good, *' isfreighted with myriads of insect eggs that elude oursenses, and that such eggs, when they meet with aproper bed, are hatched in a few hours into a perfectform, is clear to any one who has attended to therapid and wonderful effects of v/hat, in common language,is called a blight upon plantations and gardens.I have seen, as probably many who read thiswork have also, a hop-ground completely overrunand desolated by the aphifi tumuli, or hop greenhouse,within twelve hours after a honey-dew (whichis a peculiar haze or mist loaded with poisonousmiasm) has slowly swept through the plantation,and stimulated the leaves of the hop to the morbidsecretion of a saccharine and viscid juice, which,while it destroys the young shoots by exhaustion,renders them a favourite resort for this insect, and acherishing nidus for myriads of little dots that are itseggs. The latter are hatched within eight and fortyhours after their deposit, and succeeded by hosts ofother eggs of the same kind ; or, if the blight takeplace in an early part of the autumn, by hosts of theyoung insects produced viviparous ; for, in differentseasons of the year, the aphis breeds both ways.Now it is highly probable that there are minuteLoudon's Mag. of Nat. Hist. i. 180.f Keith's Physiological Botany, ii. degenerationOF INSECTS. 13ec:g's, or oviila, of innumerable kinds of animalculesfloating by myriads of myriads through the atmosphere,so diminutive as to bear no larger proportionto the eg'gs of the aphis than these bear to those ofthe wren or the hedge-sparrows ; protected at thesame time from destruction, by the filmy integumentthat surrounds them, till they can meet with a propernest for their reception, and a proper stimulatingpower to quicken them into life; and which, withrespect to many of them, are only found obvious to thesenses in different descriptions of animal fluids."It appears to us that it can be nothing more thanafancy, which is quite unsupported by evidence, tosay that the eggs of anie species of animalcules orinsects float about in the atmosphere ; for, independentof their weight, (every known species beinggreatly heavier than air,) the parent insects of everyspecies whose history has been accurately investigatedmanifest the utmost anxiety to deposit theireggs upon or near the appropriate food of the young.To commit them to the winds would be a completedereliction of this invariable law of insect economy.But admitting for a moment this hypothesis, that theeggs of insects are diffused through the atmosphere,the circumstance must be accompanied with twoconditions, — the eggs must either be dropped by theparents while on the wing, or be carried otf by windsfrom the terrestrial substances upon which they mayhave been deposited.On the supposition that the eggs are dropped by themother insects while on the wing, we must also admit(for there is no avoiding it) that they continue tofloat about, unhatched, from the end of the summertill the commencement of spring, at which time onlythe broods make their appearance. Yet when weGood's Study of Medicine; v. i p, 339, 3rd edition; London,1829.14 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.consider the rains, snows, and winds, to which theymust be exposed for six or nine months, we thinkthe hardiest theorist would scarcely maintain that asingle eg<r could out-weather these vicissitudes, andcontinue to float in the air. It may not be out ofplace to remark, that the female aphides, which depositEggs in autumn, have no wings.Again, on the supposition that the eggs are depositedon plants, trees, or other objects, it is stillmore unlikely that they could be carried into the air ;for, on exclusion, they are, with very few exceptions *,enveloped in an adhesive cement which glues themto the spot on which they are deposited. Wheneggs are deposited singly, this cement usually envelopeseach with a thin coating, as in the instance ofthe admirable butterfly {{Vanessa Atlanta) ; butwhen they are placed in a group the cement issometimes spread over the whole, as in the instanceof the white satin moth {Leucoma slices, Stephens).This cement is evidently intended byNature (who seldom accommodates her plans toour theories) to prevent the eggs from being carriedfrom the place selected by the mother insect for theirdeposition. Those eggs, therefore, which are placedon the outside of substances, have this provisionfor their secure attachment to the locality chosen bythe instinct of the mother. But, on the contrary,the principle does not always hold in the case of thosedeposited in nests and excavations, and particularly asto those of ants and termites. The working ants, indeed,carry the eggs from the top to the bottom oftheir galleries, according as the weather is favourableor unfavourable for hatching. The labourers of thewhite ants {Termites'), again, attend their queen withthe utmost care when she is laying ; for as she cannotthen move about, they are under the necessityLatreille, Hist. Geiier.; xiv.; p. 342.GENERATION OF INSECTS, 15of carrying off the e^g;s, as they are laid, to thenurseries. The extraordinary labour which this requiresin the community may be understood, when,according to Smeathman, she lays 60 eggs in aminute, which will amount to 86,400 in a day, and31,536,000 in a year. The exceptions now mentioned,however, do not in the least invalidate ourgeneral position.Cell of a queen of the Termites bellicosi, broken open in front;the labourers surrounding the queen and carrying ofl' her eggs.Another no less remarkable circumstance is thegreat weight, or specific gravity, of the eggs of insects.From numerous experiments we may ventureto say that those of all the species which we havetried sink rapidly in water the moment they arethrown into it, from the egg of the drinker moth(Odone.stis Patagonia, Germar), which is nearly aslarge as a hemp-seed, to that of the rose-plant louse{Ap/iis roscc), which is so small as to be barely visibleto the naked eye. Some eggs of the gipsey moth{Hypogymria dispar, Stephens), indeed, floated inwater, because they were covered with down. It iswell known, as we shall presently shew, that the diffusionof many of the seeds of plants is accomplishedby the winged down with which they are clothed ;c 216 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.but the down upon the eg-g's of insects does notconduce to this end. Whether insect eggs be nakedor clothed with down, they are invariably, as far astheir history has been investigated, deposited close toor upon substances capable of affording food to theyoung dien hatched. In making' experiments uponthe specific gravity of eggs, it should be rememberedthat no infertile or un impregnated egg will sink;for having some hundreds of these laid by differentspecies of insects reared in our cabinet,we found, upon trial, that they uniformly floated,while those which v>'e knew to be impregnatedas uniformly sunk. A female, for example, of therose-leaf roller {Lozotcenia Roscaia, Stephens)was reared by us, in solitude, under an invertedwine-glass, upon the side of which she glued aj)ateli of eggs, of course, impregnated: these, upontrial, all floated in water. But eggs of the samespecies taken from the outside of a pane of glassclose to a rose-tree, all sunk in water ; and it is to befairly presumed, as the parent of the latter was in astate of freedom, that these were impregnated. Wefound the same distinction, indeed, to hold in theeggs of the drinker moth, the gypsey moth, andnumerous other insects*.Dr. Good's account of " honey-dew," which hedescribes as " a peculiar haze or mist loaded with apoisonous miasm," that stimulates *' the leaves of thehop to the morbid secretion of a saccharine and viscidjuice" — appears to us unsupported by facts. Linnaeus,on the contrary, who was not wedded to themeteorological theory of a miasmatous haze, ascribesthe honey-dew on the hop leaves to the caterpillar ofthe ghost moth (Hepiahif; Tumuli) attacking the roots.Dr. Withering, favouring this account, recommendscovering the roots with stones as a preventive ; forJ. R. f Quoted by Keith, Phys. Bot., ii. 143.GENERATION OF INSECTS. 1*7the caterpillars, he avers, never attack wild hopswhich o;rovv in stony places, because they cannotset at the roots*. It appears to us, however, thatthere can be little doubt that the sweet syrupycoating', called honey-dew, found on the leaves ofthe hop, is nothings more than the excrement ofthe insect {Aphis humitli) whose propagation wearediscussing*. " The honey-dew," says Loudon,mostly" (we believe always) "occurs after the cropshave been attacked by these insects" t- SirJ.E.Smith, who admits this to be the common cause ofhoney-dew, contends that what is found on the leavesof the beech is an exception ; but he adduces noevidence at all satisfactory in proof of its beingcaused by unfavourable winds j ; while the undoubtedfact of its being the excrement of aphides in so manyother instances § weighs strongly against him.A novel theory of honey-dew has just been publishedby Mr, John Murray who ascribes it to anelectric change in the air. " Last summer," hesays, " we investigated the phenomenon with greatcare : the weather had been parched and sultryfor some weeks previous, and the honey-dew prevailedto such an extent, that the leaves of the currant,raspberry, &c., in the gardens, literally distilledfrom their tips a clear limpid honey-dew, excretedfrom the plant ; for the phenomenon was observableon those plants that were entirely free from aphides,and so copious was it, where these insects werefound, that had their numbers been centuple theycould not certainly have been the source of the supply.The question with me, however, was set at restby applying a lens, having previously washed andBotan. Arrangement, ii,, 440, 3d ed.t Encycl. of Agriculture, p. 865, s, 5444.:|: introduction to Botany, p. 189.§ See Linn. Trans, vol. vi. and Willdenow, Prince. of Botany p. 343.c318 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.dried the leaf by a spondee, for in this case the immediatelyexcreted globules became apparent."Ill all observations upon insects, and the otherminute parts of creation, it is often exceedingly difficultto distinguish between a cause and an erect.The question of the formation of honey-dew appearsto us particularly liable to erroneous conclusions ;and we therefore venture to mention a few circumstanceswhich seem irreconcilable with Mr. Murray'singenious theory. The hop fly (Aphis lunnuli),we think, neither does, nor (for want of appropriate organs)can, feed on the honey-dew; and if it did, thisfeeding would prove rather beneficial than otherwise tothe plant, by clearing it from the leaves whose respiratoryfunctions it obstructs. So har from feeding ondiseased plants, an aphis only selects the youngestand most healthy shoots, into the tender juicy partsof which it thrusts its beak {/iausteUu?n)y which insome species is much longer than the body, and nomore fitted for lapping honey-dew than the bill ofsop's crane was for eating out of a shallow plate.In the experiment, tried by Mr. Murray, of wipinga leaf, might not the leaf have been previouslywounded, perhaps, by the beak of some aphis, andhence the exudation of sap, not honey-dew? andmay not the circumstance of his finding the honey-dewon leaves where there were no aphides beaccounted for on the principle that the aphides hadabandoned, as they always do, the parts coveredwith their ejecta, unless these fell from insects onsome over-hanging branch ? It is justly remarkedby M. Sauvages, that they are careful to eject thehoney-dew to a distance from where they may befeeding t. We have now in our study a plant ofthe Chinese chrysanthemum (Anthems ArtemisiaTreatise on Atmospherical Electricity, p. 14", Lond. 1830.f Trans. Soc. Roy. de Montpellier.GENERATION OF INSECTS. ]9folia, Wilds), the young' shoots of which haveswarmed with aphides all the winter, and the leavesbelow are covered with honey-dews We tried theexperiment of wiping it off from a leaf, but no morewas formed when it was protected by a piece ofwriting-paper from the aphides above ; while thewriting-paper became sprinkled all over with it in afew hours. By means of a lens, also, we have actuallyseen the aphides ejecting" the honey-dew*.The almost instantaneous appearance of thesedestructive insects in great timbers at the sametime, is taken notice of with wonder by almost everywriter. This circumstance, it must be confessed,gives considerable plausibility to the notion of theirbeing brought by winds, — for whence, v»e may beasked, could they otherwise come? Simply, wereply, from the eggs deposited the preceding autumn,which, having all been laid at the same time, and exposedto the same degrees of temperature, are ofcourse all simultaneously hatched. In the case ofthe aphides, also, the fecundity is almost incalculable.Reaumur proved by experiment, that one aphis maybethe progenitor of 5,904,900,000 descendants duringits life; and Latreille says, a female duringthe summer montis usually produces about twenty-hivea day. Reaumur further supposes, that inone year there may be twenty generations. Weourselves have counted more than a thousandaphides on a single leaf of the hop ; and in seasonswhen they are abundant — when every hop-leafis peopled with a similar swarm — the number ofeo-o-s laid in autumn must be, to use the words ofGood, " myriads of myriads.' The preservationand hatching of these eggs in the ensuing springmust, it is obvious, depend on the weather and otherJar.INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.accidental circumstances, seldom appreciable by ourmost minute observations *.The history of other insects, erroneously referred toblighting* winds, is more easily traced, from theirbeing of a larger size than the aphides. The caterpillar,for example, o^ Lozotcenia Roscuia, mentionedbefore, which rolls the leaf of the rose-tree, is one ofthis kind. It is well known as furnishing the commonpoetical comparison of " a worm i' the bud." Earlyin autumn the mother insect deposits an irregularlyoval-patch of yellowish eggs, covered with a cementTwo groups of eggs of the Rose-leaf roller (Ly^otoniO /?(jsa«a)on a pane of glass.J. R.GENERATION OF INSECTS. 21of the same colour, sometimes upon the branches ofthe rose-tree, but more frequently, as we have observed,upon some smooth object contiguous. Forseveral successive seasons, we have found more thanone group of these eg'gs upon the glass panes, aswell as the frame-work, of a window, beneath whicha' rose-tree has been trained. At present (January1830) there are two of these groups on one pane,and three on the frame-work ; and as each containsabout fifty eggs, should they all be hatched, twoor three hundred caterpillars would at once be letloose, and, streaming down simultaneously uponthe rose-tree beneath, would soon devour the greaternumber of its buds. As this window faces the east,the sudden appearance of the insects would makeit appear not plausible that they had been swepthither by an easterly wind.We found, during the same winter, an extraordinarynumber of similar groups of the eggs of aleaf-roller {Lozot(^nia Riband?) on the branches ofthe gooseberry and red-currant, in a garden at Lee.On some small trees, from two to ten groups of eggswere discovered ; and as each group consisted offrom thirty to fifty, a caterpillar might have beenhatched for every bud. After the severity of theseason was over, wee had the piece of bark cut offon which these eggs were attached ; and though theyhad been exposed on the bare branches to the intensefrosts of 1829-30, they were hatched in a few daysafter being brought into our study. As the currant-treeswere not then come into leaf, we had no foodto supply them with, and they refused the leaves ofall other plants which we offered to them. Had theybeen permitted to remain on the trees till they werehatched, they would probably have not left a singleleaf endeavoured. For this spring, at least, thesecurrant bushes will be safe from their attacks, and of22 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.course will set at defiance the supposed blightingwinds, which no doubt will, as usual, be accused ofpeopling the adjacent gardens with caterpillars. Itmay be well to remark, that these caterpillars, whenhatched, are scarcely so thick as a thread of sewingsilk, and being of a greenish colour, they are notreadily found on the leaves, the opening buds ofwhich they gnaw to the very core*.It does not seem to have ever occurred to thosewho thus speak of insect-bearing winds, that they getrid of no difficulty by the supposition ; for where, wemay ask, is the east or any other wind to take upthe insects or ecrgs which it is said to drift along?The equally sudden disappearance of insects all atonce, which is also ]popularly attributed to winds,arises from their having arrived at maturity, andfulfilled the designs of Providence, by depositingtheir eggs for the ensuing season, when they all die,some in a few hours, though others survive forseveral days, but rarely for weeks.The sudden and simultaneous appearance of greatnumbers of frogs, snails, and other land animals, hasgiven rise to the extravagant opinion that they havefallen in a shower from the clouds; and some goodlytheories have been devised to account for the probableascent of frog-spawn, and the eggs of snails,into the atmosphere by whirlwinds, 'i've impossibilityof this, in consequence of their specific gravity,is of course left out of consideration by the theorists.Our distinguished naturalist, Ray, when riding oneafternoon in Berkshire, was much surprised at seeingan immense multitude of frogs crossing his path, andon looking into the adjacent fields he found that twoor three acres of ground were nearly covered withthem. They were all proceeding in the same directiontowards some woods and ditches ; and he tracedJar.GENERATION OF INSECTS. 23them back to the side of a very large pond, which, inspawning' time, he was informed, swarmed withcountless numbers of frogs. He naturally concluded,therefore, that, instead of having been precipitatedfrom the clouds, they had been bred in the pond, fromwhich they had been invited a short time before, by arefreshing shower, to go in quest of food *. Theirgreat numbers will appear less marvellous, when weconsider that a single frog spawns, as De Mont-ballardinforms us, about 1300 eggs t- Were it not,indeed, for their numerous enemies, and their notbeing fit to propagate till they are three years old,the country would soon be overrun with thesereptiles. We have more than once seen a similarlegion of hair-worms {Gord'u aquatic, Linn.) in agarden at Lee, in Kent, every plant and spot ofground literally swarming with them. Their numbers,however, were easily accounted for, as a streamat the bottom of the garden abounds with them, and,like frogs, they appear to be amphibious |.The errors of theory, as well as the mistakes ofobservers, swayed (unconsciously perhaps) by theinfluence of their theoretical opinions, may all betraced, we think, to the propensity of human natureto discover resemblances in things, which are afterwardsmagnified into close affinity, or even intoidentity. We are indebted to one of our best livingentomologists, Mr. W. Mac Lay, for clearly pointingout the broad distinction between analogy andaffinity. The supposed floating of the eggs of insectsin the air thus appears to have originated in drawingan analogy from the seeds of plants ; though, fromthe facts we have stated, so far from there being anyRay's Wisdom of God in the Creation, p. 156.f Diet. Classique d'Hist. Nat., vii., p. 49'). X J- 1^-§ Horae Entomological, or Essays on Annulose Animals, svo,London, 1819-21.24 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.analog-y, there is no difference more marked thanin this very point — that the eg-g-s of insects are, inmostcases, fixed by a glue at the moment of excision,while the seeds of plants are uniformlydisposable and free. The fertile seeds of plants,it is true, are heavy enough to sink in water, andconsequently as much unfitted for floating in theair as the eggs of insects ; but the contrivances tocounteract this exemplify some of the most beautifulprovisions of nature. The diffusion of the seeds ofthistles, groundsel, dandelion, &c., by means offeathery down, attracts the notice of the most incurious.Another contrivance of nature for effecting thesame purpose is not only curious in itself, but bearsupon our present subject as illustrating an affinitywhich it may be supposed to have with the ovipositing* of certain insects.The seeds of the various species of violets arecontained in a capsule of a single cell, or document,consisting, however, of three valves. To the innerpart of each of these valves a seed is attached, andit remains so for some time after the valves, in theprocess of ripening, have separated and stood open.The influence of the sun's heat causes the sides ofeach valve to shrink and collapse ; and in this statethe edges press firmly upon the seed ; which, it mayberemarked, is not only extremely smooth, polished,and shining, but regularly egg-shaped. Thus, whenthe collapsing edge of the valve slides graduallyand forcibly down over the sloping part of the seed,it is thrown with a jerk to a considerable distance.There is another part of the contrivance of nature forthe same purpose, in the violaceae, worthy of remark.Before the seed is ripe, the capsule hangs in a droopingposition, with the persisting calyx spread over itlike an umbrella, to guard it from the rain and dews,which would retard the process of ripening ; but noDISPERSION OF SEEDS. 23sooner is the ripening completed, than the capsulebecomes almost upright, with the calyx for a support.This position appears to be intended by nature to givemore effect to the valvular mechanism for scatteringthe seeds, as the capsule thus gains a higher elevation(in some cases more than an inch) from whichto project them. Some ripe capsules of a fine varietyof heart's-ease viola tricolor), which I placed in ashallow pasteboard box, in a drawer, were found tohave projected their seeds to the distance of two feet.From the elevation of a capsule, therefore, at the topof a tall plant, these seeds might be projected twiceor thrice that distance ^.We may mention, as another very curious illustrationof the power in plants of discharging their seeds,the remarkable instance of a minute fungous {Sph(Bro-holes stellatus, Rode). This plant has the propertyof ejecting its seeds with great force and rapidity,and vv^ith a loud cracking noise ; and yet it is nobigger than a pin's heads.The circumstance alluded to as analogous in insectsto this admirable contrivance, occurs in theforcible discharge of the eggs of some species to adistance. The ghost moth {Hepialus tumuli),for example, ejects its minute black eggs with somuch rapidity, that De Geer describes them as runningfrom the oviduct ; and they are sometimesforcibly thrown out like pellets from a pop-gun %•A friend of mine," says Kirby, " who had observedwith attention the proceedings of a common crane-fly{Tipula), assured me, that several females whichhe caught projected their eggs to the distance ofmore than ten inches §." Another instance is men.R. in Mag. of Nat. Hist., i. 380.f For a minute account of this singular plant; see Greville'sScottish Cryptogamic Flora, No.xxxii.X De Geer, Mem. des Insectes, iv., 494,^ Kirby and spence, Intr. iii. 6G.DINSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.tiojied by the Abbe Preux, of a foiir-wiriged fly,called by him, Moche balistc, which, when caught,jets out its eggs at intervals, as if by the jerk of aspring*.The apparent analogy, however, between these ina,Plants of SpJitprobolus, natural size. B, magnified view.C, sectional view, with the seed just previous, to projection. D,the seed in the act of projection. Ea plant immediately afterprojection ; a, the seed ; i b, -d line indicating its course.Diet. Classiqued'Hist. Nat., Art. MoucHEs Balistes. Thewords are " Insecte a quatre ailes, qui lance ses seul's a diversesreprises, et comme par un ressort, lorsque le saisit."DISPERSION OF SEEDS. 27sects and the plants which discharge their seeds,will disappear, when we consider that the scatteringof the seeds is, in the plants, a regular and constantprocess of nature ; whereas the insects onlyjet out their eggs from fear when caught. Thepower of throwing their eggs to a distance, indeed,could be of no possible use to insects, because theypossess the more efficient power of locomotion.The facts which we have thus stated with regardto the seeds of plants being diffused by the meansof winged down, or by the more remarkable capacityof being projected, differ, as we have shewn, in someimportant circumstances from the nearly similararrangement of Nature in the economy of insects.They constitute affinities, but not analogies. On theother hand, the more universal law of the continuanceof insect life by every new generation beinghatched from eggs, may be illustrated by an analogy,which is observed even in the most minute instances,in the generation of plants from seeds.The diffusion of the seeds of an extensive orderof plants (Cri/pfogamice, LiiKy:., Acotyledo?ies, Fuss.,Ce/bflareSy De Candle) being so universal, andthe seeds (^sponiles) themselves being so minute asto elude common observation, the ]phenomena thencearising have, like the sudden appearance of newlyhatched insects, given some colour to the doctrine ofspontaneous generation. Eve may see this exemplifiedevery day on brick walls recently built, even ifthey be covered with a smooth coat of cement. Thefirst indication of vegetable life on such a wall, particularlyin parts exposed to the trickling down ofrain water, is that of a green silky-looking substance,having somewhat the appearance of a coat of greenpaint. Mr. Drummond, of the Cork Botanic Garden,by accurately watching the progress of this greenmatter, which had been unsuccessfully investigatedD 228 INSECT Transformations.by Priestley, Ingenious, and Ellis, and had beenmistaken by Linnceiis for a crop of byssi, ascertainedbeyond question that it always consisted ofthe minute buds of common mosses, such as the wallscrew moss {Tortvla morals) and the commonhair-hood moss (Polytrichum communes. AtGlasgow, we have repeatedly remarked, that on thewalls of houses, built with freestone raised from aquarry more than a hundred feet under the surfaceof the soil, the whole exterior would, in the courseof one month, appear as green as if painted, withthese innumerable germinating mosses t-The germination of mosses on walls appears toarise from the seeds spondee) being carried into theair. This process is facilitated by their extrememinuteness and their comparative lightness, for theydo not sink in water like the seeds of phenogamousplants and the eggs of insects, as appears from theirgerminating on the surface of stagnant water asfrequently as on walls. In low situations, the modein which the seeds of cryptogamic plants are diffusedis well exemplified in the puff-ball (Ly coper doit),which, when ripe, explodes its sparkles in the formof a smoke-like cloud. Mosses again, which growon trees and walls, if they do not thus explode theirsparkles, must drop them into the air ; and, as theychiefly ripen early in spring, the winds which thenprevail will scatter them to considerable distances.But we only state this as a highly probable inferencefrom Drummond's discovery : to detect these all butinvisible seeds floating in the atmosphere, and tracethem in their passage from the parent plant to the wallor tree where they begin to germinate, we think ishardly possible.If the doctrine be sound, that every plant arisesfrom seed, we must either believe that innumerableLinn. Trans. f J. R.DISPERSION OF SEEDS. 2^mosses are wafted to the walls tbroiig;h the air, oradopt the hypothesis that they have existed for centuriesin the interior of the rocks of the quarry. Thatit is not impossible the seeds may have existed in therocks several curious facts would lead us to believe.Some seeds, for example, retain the power of germinatingfor an indefinite length of time ; since thewheat usually wrapt up with Egyptian mummies willoften germinate and grow, as well as if it had beengathered the preceding harvest. It also bears uponthis subject, that when a piece of ground, which hasnever been tilled, is turned up by the spade or theplough, it immediately becomes covered with a crop ofannuals, not one of which may grow within manymiles of the spot; and a number of them, such ashedge mustard {Sisymbriwri officinale) and chickweed{Alsinc, media), whose seeds are not winged.It is no less worthy of remark that all these annualswill again disappear as soon as the grass is sufferedto spread over the spot which has been dug up. It ismentioned by Mr. James Jennings, in Time's Telescopefor 1823, that the co\isi'ooi(Ti(ssilago warfare)is usually the first plant which appears in England insuch cases — a circumstance by no means remarkable,as the seeds of this plant are winged with down, andextremely light.A still more minute family of cryptogamic plants,and consequently more difficult to trace, is well knownby the popular name of mould or moodiness (^Mu-comines, Line.) This, Adolph Brongniart justlyremarks, is, in one of its groups, nearly allied to thepuff-balls {Lycoperda), whose mode of diffusing theirseeds we have just described. When mould isexamined by the microscope it is seen to resemblethese ; and sometimes various fungi are, whenmature, filled with a blackish dust, supposed to betheseed. Michele, of Florence, an eminent botanist,D 3INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.resolved to try whether this supposed seed wouldgrow if sown on vegetable substances, and foundthat it did so. On his experiments being repeatedat Bologna, however, it was discovered that the mouldgrew equally well where none of the black powderhad been sown ; but Spallanzani, by more accurateattention, confirmed the conclusion of Michele. Hecollected a great quantity of the dust, and, taking atimber of pieces of moistened bread, apples, pears,gourds, &c., sowed some thickly, others sparingly,and others not at all. The result was, that on theunsown substances the mould did appear, but severaldays later, and then greatly less in quantity, than onthe sown substances ; while of these two, the piecesthickly sown had more than double the quantity ofthe pieces thinly sown, though, when it came upthick, it did not grow so tall.Microscopic views of apple and pear mou. A A, Part of ashrivelled apple, covered with mould on the inside, a a a a, severalof the individual mould plants highly magnified, b, abranched one. c d, seed-vessels, one bursting and scattering itsseed, c,? one mushroom shaped. /, a portion of pear mould,of a branched form.We were much struck last autumn (1829), uponcutting an apple asunder, to find in the seed-cells aDISPERSION OF SEEDS, 31copious growth of the mould with the slender stemsand globular heads fig-used by Spallanzani. Mouldupon an apple is not indeed wonderful ; but the onein question was not only large, but apparently soundthroughout. Whence, then, came the seeds of thismould in the very core of the apple ? We have alsomet with mould of a different species, resembling thegreen mould on the rind of oranges {Acrosporiumjfasciculatiim, Greville), even on the kernels of nuts,when there was no opening save the minute poresin the shell. Through these pores, then, afterbeing stripped ofthehuskthat covered them, the seedof this nut-mould must have entered. This, however,will not account for the mould in the apple ;the seed of which, we think, must have been introducedwhile it was in embryo, in some such way asthe seeds of the sub cortical fungi so abundant ondead leaves and branches of trees. This againmay be illustrated by the curious facts respecting-substancesfound in the interior wood of trees. SirJohn Clark, for example, tells us that the horns ofa large deer were discovered in the heart of an oak inWhitfield Park, Cumberland, fixed in the timberwith large iron cramps, with which, of course, ithad at first been fastened on the outside *. Theeminent naturalist, Adamson, on visiting CapeVerd, was struck with the venerable aspect of a treefifty feet in circumference; and recollecting havingread in some old voyages that an inscription hadbeen made upon such a tree, he was induced tosearch for this by cutting into the wood, and, marvellousto say, he actually found it under 300 layersof woods! De Candle, one of the greatest livingbotanists, remarked " a frost-bitten part in thewood of a tree, cut down in 1800, in the forest ofPhil. Trans. vol. xli.,p.448.J Adamson, Voyages a Senegal.32 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.IFontainebleau. This beings covered with 91 layers ■of wood, indicated that the accident occurred in1709, so remarkable for a severe frost." With thesefacts before us, Ave think the introduction of the seedof the mould into the centre of the apple by nomeans so unaccountable as at first view it appeared.Be this as it may, we tried, with the seed gatheredfrom this apple-mould, similar experiments to thoseof Spallanzani, with results precisely similar to his;and being' in this way able at pleasure to producemould of the same species by sowing, we are entitledto conclude that all mould arises from seed, otherwisenature must produce the same effect from dissimilarcauses, which is contrary to the first principlesof sound philosophy t.Con. on Veg. Physiol., i. 59. f J. R.Chapter IT.Physiology of Insects' Eggs. — Their Colour, Structure, Shape, Size, .and Number.It was a notion of Darwin's, (much more ingeniousand plausible than his metamorphoses ofshell-fish into birds,) that the variety in the coloursof eg'gs, as well as the colours of many animals, isadapted to the purposes of concealment from theirnatural enemies. Thus, he says, the snake, the wildcat,and the leopard, are so coloured as to resembledark leaves and their lighter interstices ; birds resemblethe colour of the brown ground or thegreen hedges which they frequent ; while mothsand butterflies are coloured like the flowers whichthey rob of their honey*. By following up thiscurious theory, Glover, a German naturalist t, hasremarked, that those birds whose eggs are of abright or conspicuous colour instinctively concealtheir nests in the hollows of trees, never quit themexcept during the night, or sit immediately after theyhave laid one or two eggs. On the other hand, in thecase of birds who build an exposed nest, the coloursof the eggs are less attractive. Amongst birds whoseeggs are perfectly white — the most conspicuous ofall colours, — he instances the kingfisher {Alcedo),which builds in a hole in a river's bank; thewoodpecker (Picus), which builds in the hole ofa tree ; and the swallow hirundo domestica), whoseZoonomia, Sect. 39, p. 248, 3d.ed.; and Botan. Garden noteon Rubia.f Verdant. der Gesellsch. Naturforsch. Fronde. Berlin,1824.34 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.nest has a very small opening;: while owls andhawks, which scarcely quit their nests in the day,and pii>:eons, which only lay one or two eggs and sitimmediately after, have also white eggs. The bright-blue,or bright-green eg, again, belongs to birdswhich build in holes, as the starling (Stuns vulgarisor which construct their nests of green moss, or placethem in the midst of grass, but always well covered.Almost all singing birds, he alleges, lay eggs of adull or dark ground, and variously speckled; andthey for the most part build open nests with materialssimilar in colour to the eggs, so that no evidentcontrast is presented which might lead totheir discovery and destruction. We may addfrom Darwin the examples of the hedge-sparrowacceptor inGdularis)^ whose eggs are greenish blue,as are those of magpies and crows, which are seenfrom beneath in wicker nests, between the eye andthe blue of the firmament*.As this theory is but indirectly connected withour subject, we cannot here spare room to examineit; but we may remark, that it appears to us muchmore beautiful and ingenious than true : for wecould enumerate more instances in which the principlefails than holds good. Glover's instancesalso are far from accurate ; for though the kingfisherfor example, hides her shining white eggs inahole, yet that will not conceal them from thepiercingly of their chief enemy, the water rat, which,like all burrowing animals, can see with the leastpossible light. Many birds, also, which lay bright-colouredeggs, make open nests ; the thrush, for example,whose clear-blue eggs, with a few blackblotches, are far from being concealed by the plasteringof clay and cow-dung upon which they are deposited.The green-finch {Fri/igilla coloris, Tempalio St. Pierre; Studies of Nature, ii., 393 ; Note.COLOURS OF EGGS. 35mince), a£rain, which builds an open nest of greenmoss, lined with horsehair, black or white as it canbe had, lays clear white eggs with red spots, preciselylike those of the common wren and the willowwren (Sylvia Trechilus), which build covered nestswith a small side-entrance ; while the house-sparrow(Friugilla domestica) lays eggs of a dull, dirtygreen, streaked with dull black, and always builds inholes or under cover. These objections will renderit unnecessary for us to follow Darwin into hisfanciful account of the origin of the colour of eggs,which he ascribes to the colour of the objects amongstwhich the mother bird chiefly lives acting upon theshell through the medium of the nerves of the eye ;for, if this were correct, we should have the greenfinchand the red breast, instead of their white eggs,laving blue ones like the hedge-sparrow and the fire-tail.Upon a partial view of the subject, we might bringmany facts to support the theory from the colour ofthe eggs of insects. Time nettle bitter flies, for example,the small tortoise shell vanessa Article),the peacock {V. To), and the admirable {V. Atlanta),all lay eiigs of a green colour, precisely similar intint to the plant to which they are attached. On thecontrary, the eggs of the miller moth (Apate/a Le-poring,Steps), which are deposited on the greybark of the willow, are light purple ; another beautifulgeometric moth geometry illuiiaria), which Sepp^calls Hercideaje, lays its light pink eggs in the fissuresof the bark of the elm ; the puss moth (Cenira villa)lays shining brown eggs on the green leaf of the poplar; and the garden white butterfly portia Bras.sicce)lays a group of yellow ones on a green cabbage or colewortleaf, but not of so bright a yellow as those ofthe seven-spot ladybird {Coccuiella Septempunctaid) ,Sepp, der Wondered Gods, Tab. 35.56 INSECT TRANSFORMATION'S.patches of which may be found on many sorts ofleaves during" the summer months.The immediate origin of colour in the eggs of insectsis in some cases the inclosed yolk shining-throughthe transparent shell ; but in others, theshell is not uniformly transparent, but ringed, banded,or dotted with opacities of various colours. In theeggs of the drinker moth (Odo7iestis potatoria), forexample, there are two circular rings of a greencolour, from the green yolk appearing through theshell ; while the rest of the shell is white and opaque,as we have proved by dissection*. Certain ruddyspots on the white eggs of the small rhinocerosbeetle {Orycies nasicornis, Milliner) were discoveredby Swammerdam to be the red mandibles and spiraclesof the unhatched grub seen through the shell;and the white ground, we infer, was similarly causedby the body of the grubs. This, however, cannotbe the origin of the bright red spots on the beautifulyellow egg of the brimstone moth {Rumia crasDuponchel), which may, perhaps, have asimilar origin to those of birds.With respect to the egg's of birds, it has been remarkedby Mr. Knapp, that in those " of one hue,the colouring matter resides in the calcareous part ;but where there are markings, these are rather extraneousto it than mixed with it. The leg-ant bluethat distinguishes the eggs of the fire-tail sylviaj)hcenicurus. Lath), and of the hedge-sparrow,though corroded away, is not destroyed by muriaticacid. The blue calcareous coating of the thrush'segg is consumed ; but the dark spots, like themarking's on the eggs of the yellow-hammer, house-sparrow,magpie, &c., still preserve their stations onJar.f Swammerdam, Book of Nature, i. 13-1 Journal of a Naturalist, p. 230.SHELLS OF EGGS. 37the film, thoiig-h loosened and rendered mucilaginousby this rough process. Though this calcareous matteris partly taken up during incubation, the markingsupon these eggs remain little injured even tothe last , and are almost as strongly defined as whenthe eggs are first laid. These circumstances seemto imply, that the colouring matter on the shells ofeggs does not contribute to the various hues of theplumage ; but, it is reasonable to conclude, are designedto answer some particular object not obviousto us : for though the marks are so variable, yet theshadings and sporting of one species never wanderso as to become exactly figured like those of anotherfamily, but preserve year after year a certain characteristicfiguring."Most of these remarks will apply to the colours ofthe eggs of insects : but though we can in most instancestrace no connexion between the colours ofeggs and the perfect insect, there is a striking exceptionin the egg of the brimstone moth mentionedabove, which corresponds exactly in colour with thewings of the moth, though the caterpillar is of a dullbrown.The eggs of insects, like those of birds, have ashell enclosing the germ of the caterpillar with apeculiar matter for its nourishment, like the whiteand yolk of a bird's egg, provided for the nourishmentof the contained chick. These several parts,however, are very different in substance from theeggs of birds. The shell of the bird's egg is brittle,opake, chiefly composed of chalk carbonate oflime), and lined with a very thin tough membrane ;while in the egg of an insect the shell is not brittle,is transparent, contains no lime (for it is not perceptiblyacted upon by diluted sulphuric acid), andno lining membrane can be detected. It appears,indeed, very similar to the transparent portion of a3^ INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.goose-quill in the egg's of the drinker and othermoths which we have dissected * ; but in the eggswhich are deposited in moist places, and in those ofspiders, it is extremely thin f. The eggs of saw-flies,ants, &c., which grow larger, as we shall afterwardsshow, during the process of hatching, must possessan expansible shell to allow of their enlargement.The yolk and white in the eggs of birds areseparated from each other by a very fine membranousbag in which each is contained ; but in theeggs of insects, what answers to the yolk consistsof distinct minute globules, which float in thewhite, if we may call it so, for it does not, as wehave ascertained, coagulate in boiling water. Theeggs of the gypsey moth {Hypogy?n?ia dispar), whichwe boiled, still continued partly fluid, though thebrown matter answering to the yolk was considerablythickened. The portion which does not thicken byboiling most probably forms the first internal fluidsof the caterpillar, answering to the blood of quadrupeds.The point where the caterpillar originates,answering to the scar {Cicatriculd) in the eggs ofbirds, — we can readily distinguish even by the nakedeye in the larger species of eggs, as it lies alwaysimmediately under the shell *. " Having directed,"says the younger Huber, " my close attention to theeggs of ants, I remarked that they were of differentsizes, shades, and forms. The smallest were white,opaque, and cylindrical; the largest, transparent,and slightly arched at both ends ; while those ofa middle size were semi-transparent. On holdingthem up to the light I observed a sort of white oblongcloud ; in some, a transparent point might beremarked at the superior extremity ; in others, aclear zone above and underneath the little cloud. Thelargest presented a single opaque and whitish pointJ. R. f Kirby and Spence, Intr. 86.GERM OF EGGS. 39in their interior. There were some whose wholebody was so remarkably clear as to allow of myvery distinctly observing the rings. On fixing attentionmore closely upon the latter, I observed the eggopen, and the larva appear in its place. Havingcompared these eggs with those just laid, I constantlyfound the latter of a milky whiteness, completelyopaque, and smaller by one-half, so that Ihad no reason to doubt of the eggs of ants receivinga very considerable increase in size ; that in elongatingthey become transparent, but do not at thistime disclose the form of the grub, which is alwaysarched."The germ in the egg of the garden spider (Epeiradiadem) is described by the accurate Heroldt, asappearing to the eye in form of a minute white pointimmediately under the shell, and in the centre of thecircumference. On examining this point more narrowly,it is found to be of a lenticular shape, andcomposed of innumerable whitish granulations of aglobular form, differing only from the globules of theyolk in being smaller and more opaque, as may beseen by squeezing out the contents of a spider's egginto a watch-glass. The most singular circumstanceobserved by Heroldt was, that in some species ofspiders an egg appeared to have a considerablenumber dispersed upon different points of the surface ;but all these ultimately united into a single germ f.The eggs of the glow-worm (Laiii'pyris noctua),as we ascertained from those deposited by one whichwe found in 1829, at Rudesheim, on the Rhine, aregolden yellow, somewhat resembling cherry-treegum, while the internal substance is similar in con.P. Huber on Ants, p. 68.f Heroldt, Exercit. de General. Aranearum in Ovo, and hisEnters. Ubi" die Building der Wizbellosen There im Ie.E 240 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.distance to the wax of the ears, and in form ofgranules which are even externally apparent *.We are accustomed to consider the form of eggsso nearly regular, that the epithet " egg-shaped" isfrequently applied to other things, and is well understood; but the eggs of insects, though most commonlyround, are seldom, like those of birds,smaller at one end than at the other, while they oftenexhibit forms never seen in the eggs of birds, — suchas cylindric, flat, depressed, compressed, prismatic,angular, square, boat-shaped f, &c. These varietiesof form are justly referred by Kirby and Spence tothe " manifold wisdom" (ToXvTroiKiXos aocpid) + of theCreator ; but we have some hesitation in admittingtheir limitation of this to his " will to varyforms, and so to glorify his wisdom and power independentlyof other considerations §," and think itwould be more truly philosophic to confess our ignorancewhere we cannot explain what is above our comprehension.Paley, indeed, says, such facts " might induceus to believe that variety itself, distinct from everyother consideration, was a motive in the mind of theCreator, or with the agents of his will ;" but he immediatelyadds, " to this great variety in organized life theDeity has given, or perhaps there arises out of it, acorresponding variety of animal appetites, and didall animals covet the same element, retreat, or food,it is evident how much fewer could be supplied andaccommodated, than what at present live convenientlytogether, and find a plentiful subsistence ||." Thelatter remark, we think, completely destroys theformer, and it will lead us to what appears to beJ. R.+ Demerit, Consider. Generates, p. 49 ; and Insect Architecturep. 19.+ Ephes. iii. 10. § Intrude ill. p. 95.II Natural Theology, p. 3 45, 14th ed.FORMS OF EGGS.the true cause of the varied forms of the eg-gs ofinsects.Eggs of a butterfly and of a moth, maguihed.The cause of the eggs of birds being' nearly thesame in shape, arises, we should say, from the similarforms of the animals themselves ; while insects being-muchmore varied in shape, require correspondingvarieties in the forms of their eggs. The ostrich,the eagle, and the wren, for example, differ muchmore in size than in their general form ; but theearwig, the garden spider, butterflies, beetles, andgrasshoppers, differ much more in form than in size,and consequently require eggs of varying forms tocontain their progeny. We confess, however, thatwe cannot always trace the mathematical causes ofthese diversities of form in the eggs of insects ; forthough there prevails a general resemblance in thosefamilies and groups the most nearly allied, yet inothers, even the species of the same genus exhibitdifferences which cannot be thus accounted for. Intwo species of Vanessa, for instance, the small andthe great tortoiseshell butterflies, which differ inlittle but size, the eg of the small is cylindric witheight prominent ribs, while that of the great isshaped liked a Florence flask, and quite smooth anduniform *.The ribbing of the eggs of the small tortoiseshellSepp, der Wondered Gods, Tab. ii. and viii.e3INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.butterfly {{Vanessa iirticce), which is also found onthose of most of the species, leads us to remark thatinsect eg-gs are frequently sculptured in a very beautifulmanner, far out-rivalling" in elegance of designand delicacy of workmanship the engravings whichwe sometimes see on eggs brought from India andChina. Some of them, when seen through a microscope,remind us of the fine crustaceous shells called sea-eggs,— a resemblance which is well exemplified in theGgg of the angle-shades moth {Phlogophora meti-ci/losaj Stephens), as compared with the Cli/jjeasterof Parkinson.a, magnified egg of the angle-slides moth {Phlugupkora meticu-lost) ; b, sea-egg QClypeaster), natural size.These changeling appear to correspond in mostcases with the rings of the caterpillar to be hatchedfrom the egg ; but the design of the other sculptureson these eggs has not yet been discovered by theinvestigations of naturalists, and may, probably, foreverelude human penetration. But though wecannot tell why an insect's egg is so tastefully carved,we can admire the minute delicacy and extraordinaryregularity of the markings. The egg of the meadowbrown butterfly {Hijjparchia Justitia) is crowned atthe upper end with sculptured work in the form oftiles or slates, as if to defend it from injury, whileothers are covered with a sort of net-work of extremelyminute six-sided meshes.FORMS OF EGGS.a, the ee:^ of the meadow brown-butterfly, magnified; b, egg ofthe brimstone-moth (Rumia Cratagata), magnified.The design of the appendages to some sort ofeg'gs is much more apparent, and affords us someadmirable illustrations of prospective contrivance.The eggs of the ephemera, for example, are smoothand oblong, resembling carrara comfits, a formwhich Svvammerdam proved to be admirably adaptedfor diffusing them through the water, where, he says,they are dropt by the mother insect. For this purposehe placed " a few of them on the point of aknife, and letting them fall gently into water, theyimmediately separated of themselves in a very curiousmanner ^." The same accurate observer describes avery remarkable appendage in the eg of the waterscorpion {Nepa cinerea, Linn), an insect by nomeans rare in Britain. This egg is furnished witha coronet of seven bristles disposed like the downon the seed of the blessed thistle, {Cejitaureabenedict, Willdenow) ; and before they are depositedthese bristles closely embrace the egg nextto them in the ovary like a sort of sheath, as if achain of thistle-seeds were formed, by placing eachsuccessively in the bosom of the down of the onenext to it. As the mother insect deposits these eggsin the stems of aquatic plants, the bristles, which arepartly left on the outside, are probably intended toSwamiiit Book of Nature, i, 104.INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.prevent the aperture from being closed up by therapid growth of the plant.Reaumur gives an interesting description of asimilar egg deposited by a common dung-fly, of ayellowish-orange colour, (Scatophaga stercoraria^Meigen). These eggs are furnished at the upperend with two divergent pegs, which prevent themfrom sinking into the dung where they are placed bythe parent, while they are permitted to enter sufficientlyfar to preserve them moist. Both circumstancesare indispensable to their hatching ; forwhen Reaumur took them out of the dung, theyshrivelled up in a few hours, and when he immersedthem farther than the two pegs, they were suffocated,and could not afterwards be hatched *.a. Dung-fly {Scatophaga Stercoraria) ; h c, front and sideviews of its eggs magnitied j d d d, 'd number of these eggsdeposited in cow-dung.Before we began to study the habits of insects, wefound upon a lilac-twig, in the neighbourhood ofLondon, a singular production, which we took for avery delicate fungus, and supposing it not to becommon, we carefully preserved the specimens ; butwe have since learned, with no little surprise, thatthese are the eggs of the lace winged fly, {Chrysopareticulated Leach). Reaumur says that severalnaturalists have described them as fungi, which isnot to be wondered at ; for they consist of a smalloval greenish-white head, similar to the apple-mould,Reaumur, iv. 379.POSITION OF EGGS.with a white transparent stem, more than aninch high, not thicker than a human hair, but muchmore stiff and rigid. About a dozen of these eggsare deposited in a single and sometimes in a doubleline, upon the leaves and branches of elder or othertrees and plants abounding with aphides, upon whichthe shrubs feed when hatched. The footstalks ofthese eggs are formed by the mother-fly attaching adrop of gluten to the branch, and drawing it out(as a spider does its line) to the requisite lengthbefore the egg is deposited on its summit. As sheuses her body for a measure, the footstalks are byconsequence all nearly of equal length. It is evidentlythe design of these footstalks to place the eggsout of the reach of the grubs of lady-birds {Coc-cinellce) and of aphidivorous flies (^Syrphi), whichTwig of lilac, bearing the eggs of the lace-winged fly (Chrysopareticulated, Leach). The fly is seen resting on the lowest leaf.46 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.frequent the same situations and might devour them.The footstalks are so smooth and slender that thesegrubs could not climb them, as we have proved byexperiment *.The ichneumon fly (Option luteum), whose larvaefeed upon the caterpillar of the puss-moth, alsodeposits eggs with a footstalk ; and what is mostsingular, these larvae, after they are hatched, duringthe first stage of their existence, continue attachedto the shells of their eggs. It is not till the pusshas formed her cocoon that they devour her, and spintheir own cocoons under its covert-theeggs of insects do not seem to hold anyregular proportion, so far as regards size, with theirparent insects ; for some large moths lay very smalleggs, while others of a small size lay eggs considerablylarger. Kirby and Spence think it probablethat eggs which produce females are generally largerthan male eggs ; with the exception of the hive-bee,in which the reverse takes place. Huber, as wehave seen above, found the eggs of ants of differentsizes, from which he was led to discover that theyincrease in size after being deposited.It has been remarked, that animals of prey are lessprolific than those which live on vegetable food ;and a similar principle appears to hold to a certainextent amongst insects, the most prolific familiesbelonging, with few exceptions, to those which devourvegetable or animal substances beginning to decayand putrefy.Thus it is that the eagle lays only two eggs,while the wren lays eight, and the pheasant twenty-four;and in the same way the dragon-flies (Libelling,Mac Lay), do not lay above two dozen eggs,the lace-winged flies {HemerobidcB) still fewer, andthe noontide fly {Mesembrina Meridian, Meigen)J. R. f See Insect Architecture; pp. VJb — 325; 6.FECUNDITY OP INSECTS AND FISHES. 47only deposits two eggs ; while a single plant-louse{Aphis), as we mentioned before from Reaumur,may be the living progenitor of 5,904,900,000 descendants,and the queen of the warrior white ants(Termes hellicosus, Ssieath.m.), produces 31,536,000eggs in one year.We may illustrate this subject by an extract exemplifyingthe proportionate fecundity of the animal kingdomin general. " Compared with the rest of animatednature," says Dalyell, " infusion animalculeare surely the most numerous : next are worms, insects,or fishes ; amphibia and serpents, birds, quadrupeds; and last is man. The human female producesonly one at a time, that after a considerable intervalfrom birth, and but few during her whole existence.Many quadrupeds are subject to similar laws ; someare more fertile, and their fecundity is little, if at all,inferior to that of certain birds, for they will produceten or twenty at once. Several birds will breed frequentlyin a year, and have more than a single tggat a time. How prodigious is the difference, on descendingto fishes, amphibia, reptiles, insects, andworms ! Yet among them the numbers cannot bemore different. According to naturalists, a scorpionwill produce sixty-five young ; a common fly will lay144 eggs ; a leech, 150; and a spider, 170. I haveseen a hydrachna produce 600 eggs, and a femalemoth 1100. A tortoise, it is said, will lay 1000 eggs,and a frog 1100. A gall insect has laid 5000 eggs ; ashrimp, 6000 ; and 10,000 have been found in theovary, or what is supposed to be that part, of anascarides. One naturalist found above 12,000 eggsin a lobster, and another above 21,000. An insectvery similar to an ant (Matilda?) has produced80,000 in a single day ; and Leeuwenhoeck seemsto compute four millions in a crab. Many fishes,and those which in some countries seldom occur.48 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.produce incredible numbers of eggs. Above 36,000have been counted in a herring ; 38,000 in a smelt ;1,000,000 in a sole; 1,130,000 in a roach ; 3,000,000in a species of sturgeon ; 342,000 in a carp ;383,000 in a tench ; 546,000 in a mackerel ; 992,000in a perch ; and 1,357,000 in a flounder. But of allfishes hitherto discovered, the cod seems the mostfertile. One naturalist computes that it producesmore than 3,686,000 eggs ; another 9,000,000 ; anda third 9,444,000. Here, then, are eleven fishes,which probably, in the course of one season, willproduce above thirteen millions of eggs ; which is anumber so astonishing and immense, that, withoutdemonstration, we could never believe it true."The fecundity of insects is no less remarkable thanthat of fishes. In some instances, particularly inthose already mentioned, the numbers produced fromthe eggs of a single female, far exceed the progenyof any other class of animals. It is this extraordinaryfecundity which, under favourable circumstances,produces countless swarms of insects thatgive origin to the opinion of their being spontaneouslygenerated by putrefaction, or brought insome mysterious way by blighting winds. Thenumerous accidents, however, to which insects areexposed from the deposition of the egg till their finaltransformation, tend to keep their numbers frombecoming excessive, or to reduce them when theyare at any time more than commonly numerous.Introdd. Observe. to Spallanzani, xiv.Chapter III.fraternal Care of Insects in depositing their Eggs. — Solitary Bees. —Wasps. — Ichneumon. — Moths. — Butterflies. — Gnats. — Mistakes of Instinct.Lord Kames, in his ' Gentleman Farmer mentionsthe singular fact that the female sheep, weeksbefore yeaning, selects some sheltered spot whereshe may drop her lamb with the most comfort andsecurity ; and when forcibly prevented from going*there, she manifests the utmost uneasiness. Butthis instance of prospectively providing for a futureprogeny is exemplified much more strikingly in mostinsects, in consequence of the great difference oftheir economy compared with that of other animals.The sheep and other mammalian quadrupeds suckletheir young, and watch over them with the mostaffectionate care during the earlier and more helplessstage of their existence. This, on the contrary,is only found in a few cases among insects, such asthe social bees, wasps, and ants ; for the greaternumber of species never live to see their descendants.The numerous families, indeed, of moths,butterflies, and other winged insects, seldom livemore than a few days after they have depositedtheir eggs, though some other species probably livemany months. The latter, however, are only exceptionsto the general rule, that insects, after depositingtheir eggs, very soon die. The wisdom ofProvidence, therefore, has endowed female insectswith the most wonderful acuteness and skill in anticipatingthe wants of their young, when they escapeF50 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.from the egg, and have no mother to direct or providefor them.We have numerous beautiful instances of this inthe solitary bees and wasps, which perform indefatigablelabours in hewing out nests in wood andstone, and building structures of clay, leaves, cotton,and other materials, as we have elsewhere detailedat length*. But we recently met with an example ofthis, which we shall briefly notice. A small solitarybee, {Chelostoma Jiorisomne f) not so large as thedomestic fly, and more slender in the body, insteadof digging into the ground like its congeners t,bores a hole in a tree about the diameter of a wheatstraw, and, when empty, resembling externally thetimber holes of the furniture beetle (Anohiiim pertinax),for which, indeed, we at first mistook them,till we were undeceived by seeing the little bees goingin and out. When the work is completed, however,the hole can only be detected by a practised eye, forit is neatly covered with a substance, the nature ofwhich remains to be discovered. It is a grey semitransparentmembrane, somewhat resembling theslime of a snail when dried ; but whether it is secretedby the bee like wax, or gathered from plants likepropolis, we cannot tell. As we had a whole colonyof these little wood-boring bees in the stump of agrowing poplar at Lee, we cut out several of theperforations, in order to examine the interior. Thesewe found more than an inch deep, and filled to thebrim with a thin whitish honey ; but, like those ofthe larger carpenter bees of a different genus (Xylo-copy), they were divided by several partitions of thesame membranous material.The circumstance, however, which induces us togive these details here, relates to the eggs depositedSee Insect Architecture, pp. 24 — 64, &c. f Ibid. p. 43.EGGS OF THE SOLITARY BEE. 51in these singular perforations. It is obvious,if the egg's were laid in the midst of the liquidhoney, that they would either be prevented fromhatching, or the grub would be suffocated in the firststage of its existence. Every chamber of thelittle nest is so full of honey, that it is difficult todivine how this is to be avoided, and it was onlyafter repeated and anxious researches that we founda solution of the difficulty. It is this : the mother-bee,when she has filled a chamber with honey, gluesa single egg, a hair's breadth or two above its surface,and at a similar minute distance she stretchesthe membranous partition, leaving between this andthe surface of the honey just sufficient space, and nomore, for the newly hatched grab to crawl all round.On opening one of these perforations after the grubhad been some time hatched, we found it keepingaloof from the honey, and resting on the uppermargin, from which it seemed to have stretched itshead when feeding to the centre, instead of eating atthe circumference. The honey was also then becomethicker in consistence, and, in consequence ofwhat had been consumed, formed a hollow cup *.Reaumur describes the nest of a bee of thesame family andrea cineraria, Fabr.), which isfound in the neighbourhood of London, and differsfrom the preceding in making perforations, not intrees, but in the ground, and lining these with themembranaceous substance that composes the partitionsand the outer covering. He takes no notice,however, of the prospective ingenuity with whichthe egg is placed above the surface of the fluidhoney.The various species of nests thus prepared by theparent insects for depositing their eggs, are notmerely intended for holding provisions and shelf.R-f-Reaumurj Mem.; vol. vi, p. 131.F 252 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.tearing the young o^rub from the inclemency of theweather, or from being preyed upon by birds. Thereare more insidious and no less destructive enemiesthan these to guard against. This we shall immediatelyshow from the economy of others families ofthe same order, whose proceedings also strictlyillustrate the subject of maternal care. In popularworks on natural history the insects alluded to areindiscriminately caWed Ichneumon, a name signifyingPrayers, and first given by Aristotle to wasps. Butrecently this term has been considerably restricted,and therefore does not properly apply to manyinsects whose economy resembles the true ichneumon.It is the practice, then, of a very great numberof insects, of different orders and families, to takeadvantage of the labours of other insects in providingfor their progeny, in the same way as thecommon cuckoo and the cow-bunting of America{Emberiza pectoris, Wilson) lay their eggs in thenests of other birds. The venerable Dr. Jenner wasthe first to publish*, what had long been known toour peasants, that the young cuckoo, when hatched,soon ejects from the nest into which it has beensurreptitiously introduced the eggs or young of itsfoster parent ; but the insects under notice act stillmore ungratefully. They do not, indeed, live uponthe honey or other provision stored up by thebuilder of the nest for the use of her own young,since, being all carnivorous, this is not to their taste ;but they permit the rightful owner of the food tofeast and fatten on it, that they may make of him amore substantial repast. The great numbers of differentspecies of insects which are reared in this singularmanner would appear almost incredible to onewho had not studied their economy ; but it cannotfail to meet the young entomologist at the veryPhil. Trans, for 1738, p. 219.PRECAUTIONS OF INSECTS. 53outset of his studies ; for it is scarcely possible for manybroods of insects to be reared without observing it.The insidious proceedings of these cuckoo insects,as we may not inappropriately call them, giverise to remarkable displays of ingenuity on the partof the mothers whose progeny is exposed to theirfelonious designs. It is the usual practice of thesolitary bees and wasps to leave the whole task ofconstructing and provisioning the nest to the female,the male, like an American Indian, takingno part in those domestic concerns. In this case,though she is seldom absent from the spot formore than two or three minutes at a time, someprying Crisis or Machine often glides into herdomicile, and finds time to deposit its egg andto escape before her return. Other solitary bees exhibitboth more civilization and more cunning ; forthe male assists, at least, in watching and guardingthe nest, if he does not lend a hand in its construction.The proceedings of one of these solitary bees{Halictus fulvocinctus, Steps), indigenous in thevicinity of London, has frequently fallen under ourobservation. It constructs a gallery, having on theoutside only a single perpendicular passage, butbranching out into seven or eight, at the bottom ofeach of which is placed a globule of pollen kneadedup with honey about the size of a pea, where an eggis deposited. Walckenaer, who observed these insectswith great care, remarks, that they only workduring the night in making their galleries ; andour observations so far agree with his, that though wehave observed some dozens of their nests, we neversaw them at work in the day. Instead of this,either the male or the female always remains at theentrance of the nest (which its head exactly fills)ready to give no friendly reception to any enemythat may venture to intrude. We have often seen,f354 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.indeed, the ruby-tail fly (Crisis ignite), on approaching'this vigilant sentinel, fly off in all haste,with evident fear of the consequences. But, asWalckenaer justly remarks, should the partner ofits cares return from a foraging excursion, and taketwo or three circular flights around the entrance toannounce its arrival, the sentinel bee immediatelymakes way by withdrawing into the interior. Shouldthe sentinel bee be absent through any cause fromits post, and the forage enter without announcingits arrival, it is immediately driven back and punishedfor so unpardonable a breach of etiquette*.Another circumstance worthy of notice in themanners of these bees {Halicti) is, that they flydirectly into the entrance of their nests without everalighting upon any contiguous object, a circumstancewhich is attributed by Walckenaer to theirfear of enemies, numbers of which are always lurkingabout with evil intent. More than one speciesof spider and several sorts of wasps lie in wait tomake prey of them, besides those we have mentionedas being on the alert to introduce their eggsinto their nest. But their most formidable enemy isa solitary wasp {Cerceris ornate), numbers ofwhich make their nests in the very midst of theircolonies. The wasps surround the interior marginof their holes with a rampart of sand, agglutinatedwith a whitish mortar, and well polished. The galleryis five inches deep, somewhat in the form of an S,in which the female lays her eggs, with a store ofprovisions for her future young, consisting of theliving bodies of her bee neighbours, the \)00y Halicti.It is only on fine days, between eleven and fouro'clock, that the mother wasp engages in the chaseof the bees, and may be seen flying with the mostlively ardour around their nests. When an unfortu-Walk. Mem. des Abeilles Solid. Paris, 1817.INSECTS OF PREY. 55nate bee ventures at this time to approach its home,the wasp pounces upon it as a hawk would pounceupon a sparrow, seizes it by the back of the neck,carries it to the ground, and placing it by the side ofa small stone or clod of earth, she turns it round uponits back. Then standing upon its belly in an attitudeof conscious triumph, she darts her sting into thelower part of its head, in such a manner as to stupidit, but not to kill it outright. As soon as she has inthis manner laid in a sufficient store of half-deadbees, she closes up the entrance *.Several species of this family of wasps {Cercerisaurita, Latr., and C. quadrifasciata, Bos) areof essential service to agriculturists by provisioningtheir nests with destructive weevils {Cnrcidiojiidce),so injurious to orchards and nurseries t- Otherfamilies of this order in a similar way provide fortheir progeny a supply of living insects of differentspecies, of which interesting accounts have beengiven by more than one naturalist + .The insects, however, of these marauding tribesare not permitted to carry on their depredations ontheir more peaceful neighbours with impunity ; fornature has provided other races of animals to makeprey of them. We do not allude merely to birdsand reptiles, which devour as many of those carnivorouswasps as they can catch ; for there is also anumerous tribe of insects who have the address tofoil them at their own weapons. All the carefulstratagems of the mason wasp {Odyneriisrmirarins,Latr.), in rearing her turreted outworks to defendher premises while she excavates her galleries §,often prove ineffectual in guarding against the insi-Walk. ; Latreille, Annales du Museum, torn, xiv, ; andEos, Ann. de I'A^ric, vol, liii.f Bos, Ann. de I'Agric.j vol. liii.X See Insect Architecture, pp. 26 — 33. § Ibid., pp. 30 — 32.55 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.pious intrusion of a common ichneumon fly pimpleinanifestatory Gravenhorst), easily known by its beingblack, with the legs red. This ichneumon sometimespays a visit to the nest of the wasp before it iscompleted, for Reaumur has seen one peep into theentrance and then start back as if afraid of itsdepth ; but, for the most part, she waits patiently tillthe wasp, having laid in a store of caterpillars forthe young one, closes up the doorway with a barricadeof kneaded clay. It is this very barricadewhich the ichneumon determines to assail in order tofind a nest ready prepared and stocked with provisionsfor her own progeny. With this design shemakes use of her ovipositor, which is as admirablyadapted to the purpose as those of the saw-flies orthe tree-hoppers {Cicadce).The ovipositor of all the true ichneumons (Ich-neumonidce) is similarly constructed, consisting of aborer enclosed in a sheath, which opens through itswhole length like the legs of a pair of compasses. Itis longer or shorter, and stronger or more slender,according to the substances which it may be necessaryto penetrate when the eggs are deposited. Thedescription, therefore, of the ovipositor of the onejust alluded to (P. manifestation) will be sufficient togive the reader a distinct notion of the others.Being intended to penetrate into the deep holes dugby mason wasps, the ovipositor of this insect isnearly three inches long, and, as it is not concealedin the body like those of gall flies, it appears Uke atail formed of a long black bristle. On examiningthis a little more narrowly, we find that whatappears to be a single bristle is in reality three, twoside ones forming a sheath, and the middle one aborer or brad-awl for piercing the clay barricade ofthe mason wasp's nest. The termination of theborer is not, however, smooth, like that of a brad-ichneumon.awl, but toothed like a saw, only the teeth, seven oreight, are not oblique, but perpendicular, a structurebetter fitted for acting upon clay, as the teeth willnot become so readily clcg'gTd, and the instrumentwill be more easily retracted. The figures will makethis more perspicuous than the best description.fl, the Pimple manifestation ; b. its ovipositor opened outwards ;c c c c, magnitied view of its ovipositor ; d, the toothed point ofthe borer.In order to study the economy of the masonwasps {Odyneri) more effectually, Reaumur madean artificial vespiary of sand and mortar upon awall, which at the same time gave him an excellentopportunity of observing the manoeuvres of the ichneumon." I perceived," he tells us, " one of theseichneumons, at the instant it alighted on the spotunder which so many of the little green caterpillarshad been stored up by the wasps. Its long tail,which it carried horizontally, appeared to form butone bristle, though it was really composed of three ;and though it carried it on a line with its body, itsoon showed me that it was capable both of raisingand lowering it, as well as of bending it in variousdirections, and in different proportions to its length.It moved its ovipositor so as to bring it into a bentposition under its body, protruding it even beyondits own head ; taking care to direct it into the barrierINSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.cadoednest of the mason wasp. But although theinsect appeared not to be disturbed by my observations,yet I was unable to perceive whether thetoothed portion of the borer was pushed beyond thesides of the sheath. What I did see, however, convincedme that the instrument was worked in amanner well adapted to make its way through themortar; for she turned it half round alternatelyfrom right to left and from left to right, as a carpenterwould his brad-awl, and employed altogethermore than a quarter of an hour before she succeededin penetrating to a sufficient depth."Ichneumon flies ovipositing, a a, an ichneumon fly, 6 6, itsovipositor, c, an ichneumon, which has just bored throuo-h'theclosed substance of a sand wasp's nest at c. into which her ovipositor,d, descends to the coil of caterpillars at /, where theegg is laid,Reaumur, Mem. vi. p. 304.PARASITE EGGS. 59Another parasite pimple strohileUfB, Fabr.) isarmed with a long ovipositor, with which it depositsits e2:a:s in larvae that burrow in the fruit-cones ofthe fir.The intrusion of these parasite eggs into the nestsof insects is often an exceedingly puzzling circumstanceto naturalists, in their earlier researches ; andsometimes even deceives those of considerable experienceand acuteness into the supposition that theinsects ultimately produced are in reality those ofthe original builder of the nest. These deceptionsfrequently occur in the numerous species of vegetablegalls, originating chiefly in the economy of abeautiful family of insects {ChalcididcB, Westwood).When the gall-fly cynics) has deposited its eggs onthe bud or the leaf of a plant in such a manner as toinsure their being surrounded with a thick coating ofvegetable substance, they are not on that account securefrom the insects just alluded to ; for the Chalcis,armed by nature with an instrument for the purpose,can penetrate in any direction the largest oak-appleor bedeguar of the rose*. The most obvious distinctionbetween these parasites and the true gall-flies,is, that in the latter the ovipositor is partly concealed,while in the former it is altogether external, like theichneumons in the preceding figure ; but this distinctionis of course wanting in the male insects. Itwas the observation of different species of insects,produced in this manner from the same sort of gall,which betrayed the illustrious Redii into the fancifulnotion of their being generated by a vegetative andsensitive soul in the plant itself, to which also heattributed the generation of the grubs found in nuts,cherries, and other fruits. "There is nothing," asReaumur justly remarks, '* more fitted to humiliatethe best reasoners, and to inspire them with aSee Insect Architecture, pp. 375 — 384.go INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.well-founded distrust of novel opinions, than to seea man like Redii, who had declared open waragainst popular prejudices, and successfully combatedmany of them, thus adopting a notionso improbable, or (to use a stronger term) sopitiable." It was Redii's countryman, Malpighi,who first discovered the genuine history of gall-flies ;but when we consider that from the bedeo-uar o:all ofthe rose alone no less than three different species ofinsects may proceed, two of which calliope ,3.udEurytoma stigma, Stephens) are parasites,Redii had some cause for being puzzled toexplain the phenomena.Two other distinguished naturalists, Goedart andRay, found no less difficulty in accounting for theprogeny of ichneumons issuing from the caterpillarsand chrysalides of butterflies. Ray, indeed, lived toascertain the fact ; but he was at one time inclined tobelieve, with Goedart, that when, from any defector weakness, Nature could not bring a caterpillar toa butterfly, in order that her aim might not be entirelydefeated, she stopped short, and formed theminto insects of a smaller size, and less perfect structuret- M. Goedart even persuaded himself, saysReaumur sarcastically, that he had observed the caterpillarinteresting itself for its infant progeny, byweaving for them an envelope of silk. It was alsofancied that what was wanting in size in the parasiteflies, when compared with the expected butterfly,was made up in their greater numbers % ; with asmuch probability, says Reaumur, as that a cat wouldkitten a number of mice. The simple facts which weshall now state, will point out the origin of thesestrange mistakes.•13'Reaumur, Tvlem. iii., p. 476.t Ray, Hist. Ins., Pies. xv., and Cant. 137.\ Goedart, quoted by Reaumur, vol. ii,, p. 415.PARASITE INSECTS. 61It must have occurred to the least attentive observersof the very common cabbage caterpillarportia Brassicce), that when it ceases to feed, andleaves its native cabbage to creep up walls andpalings, it is often transformed into a group of littleballs of silk, of a fine texture and a beautiful canaryyellow colour ; from each of which there issues, inprocess of time, a small four-winged fly (Micro-masterglomeratus, Spinosa), of a black colour, exceptthe legs, which are yellow. By breeding theseflies in a state of confinement, and introducing themto some cabbage caterpillars, their proceedings in depositingtheir eggs may be observed. We have morethan once seen one of these little flies select a caterpillar,and perch upon its back, holding her ovipositorready brandished to plunge between the rings whichshe seems to prefer. When she has thus begunlaying her eggs, she does not readily take alarm ;but, as Reaumur justly remarks, will permit an observerto approach her with a magnifying glass of avery short focus. Having deposited one egg, shewithdraws her ovipositor, and again plunges it withanother egg into a different part of the body of thecaterpillar, till she has laid in all about thirty eggs.It is not a little remarkable, that the poor caterpillar,whose body is thus pierced with so many wounds,seems to bear it very patiently, and does not turnupon the fly, as he would be certain to do uponanother caterpillar should it venture to pinch him ;a circumstance by no means unusual. Sometimes,indeed, he gives a slight jerk, but the fly does notappear to be at all incommoded by the intimationthat her presence is disagreeable.The eggs, it may be remarked, are thrust sufficientlydeep to prevent their being thrown off whenthe caterpillar casts its skin ; and, being in due timehatched, the grubs feed in concert on the livingbody of the caterpillar. The most wonderful circum6^INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.stance, indeed, of the whole phenomenon, is the instinctwith which the o^rubs are evidently suited toavoid devouring any vital part, so that they maynot kill the caterpillar, as in that case it would beuseless to them for food. When full grown, theyeven eat their way through the skin of the caterpillarwithout killing it ; though it generally dies inafew days without moving far from the place wherethe grubs have spun their group of silken cocoonsin which to pass the vdnter.Generation ot Iclinciinions. a a. the caterpillar oi Portia Bras-six.h, the eggs of that butterfly glued to a leaf, c, Micrometerglomerutus, magnified, d d d, a. magnified view of a dissectedcaterpillar, in whose body a number of ichneumon caterpillarshave been hatched, e, silk cocoons spun by the ichneumons./, grubs spinning cocoons, g, grubs eating their way out of thecaterpillar.PARASITE INSECTS. 63But it is not only in the nests of bees and wasps,or in the bodies of caterpillars, that these providentmothers contrive to deposit their eggs; for many ofthem are so very minute, as to find in the eggs themselvesof larger insects a sufficient magazine of foodfor their progeny ; and accordingly, piercing the shellwith their ovipositor, they thrust their own into theperforation. The most common instance of thiswhich we have remarked, occurs in the eggs ofspiders ; patches of which may be found almosteverywhere under the cross bars of palings, and thecopings and corners of walls. Though spiders, for themost part, not only cover their eggs with a thickenvelope of silk, but also remain near to protect themfrom enemies, yet a small four-winged fly {Cryptus,Fabr,), and, if we are not mistaken, two-winged flies(Muscidce, Leach), also, outbrave the danger of beingcaught and immolated by the mother spider, andintroduce their Qsig-s either into or montrose oftheir powerful enemy. These spider's eggs aresubsequently feasted upon by the progeny of theflies, — a very natural reprisal for the ravages committedby this carnivorous race upon the whole generationof their fellows. That the mother flies actuallypierce the eggs of other insects was observed beforethe year 1730, by the accurate Vallisnieri, who says,I have seen with my own eyes a certain kind ofwild flies deposit their eggs upon other eggs, andbore and pierce others with an ovipositor (aureus),by means of which they have introduced the e^g *."Count Zinanni, another Italian naturalist, told Reaumur,that, his attention being attracted by a smallichneumon fluttering about the eggs of butterflies,he soon observed it alight and fix upon one of theseeggs ; and, without being incommoded by his observingher proceedings through a strong magnifier,Vallisnieri, Letter, 80.G 264 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.she bent her ovipositor, and plunged it into theegg'. She performed the same operation upon manyother eggs, which he carefully put under cover ; andin about three weeks had from them a brood of fliesof the same species with the one whose remarkableproceedings he had watched*.A writer in the Magazine of Natural History(Jan. 1S30), gives an account of a numerous broodof a very minute species of ichneumon, supposed to beane^g parasite {Platygaster ovulonim ? Stephens),which was produced from the caterpillars of the largewhite cabbage butterfly (Portia BrassiccB). Havingenclosed a number of these in a wire cage, fiveor six of them soon left off feeding, and crawledabout the cage. " June 30," he proceeds, " I foundthem resting on large clusters of minute cocoons ofan ovate form, the taro-est not exceeding two lines inlength, and about the thickness of a caraway-seed.Each was enveloped with a fine yellowsilk, resembling that of the common silkwormbombyx Mori). On these clusters the caterpillarsremained the whole day without moving. Freshleaves were given to the rest ; but in the course ofthe day they all left off feeding, crawled about thecage, but underwent no other change. Early nextday, I found they had, with the exception of two orthree, all ejected the parasitical progeny they hadbeen impregnated with ; and, like the precedingcaterpillars, continued resting on the clusters theyhad formed : the remaining three followed the exampleof the others ; and the last operation of thesedevoted caterpillars was to envelope each cluster inaveil formed of the most delicate webs." It isnot a little interesting to remark, that this circumstancecorroborates the statement before given fromReaumur^Mem. vol. vi. p. 297.f Loudon's Mag. Nat. Hist. iii.51.PARASITE INSECTS. 65Goedart, and disbelieved by Reaumur and subsequentnaturalists : but we think it so very extraordinary,that we are much inclined to think theobserver (T. H. of Clapham) has unwittingly falleninto mistake. " Some of them," he continues, " executedthe task; but the greater part were too feebleto complete it ; and in the course of three daysmore they became motionless, and gradually, oneafter another, fell shrivelled and exhausted to thebottom of the cage." Some of the clusters containedupwards of a hundred cocoons, and others not morethan sixty. By July 12, the perfect flies madetheir appearance by opening a sort of lid at the endof each cocoon. The flies seem to differ little,except in size, from the common ichneumon of thesame caterpillar (Micrometer glomeratus) ; but, supposingthem to be in the first instance egg parasites,they must have been deposited among, not in theeggs of the butterfly.The minuteness of some of these parasite insectsmay be partly conceived from the fact mentioned byBonnet, — that the egg of a butterfly, not bigger thanapin's head, is sufficient to nourish several of them ;for out of twenty such eggs of butterflies, a prodigiousnumber (june quantity prodigieiise) wereevolved *. Few species of the plant-lice {Aphides)are a great deal larger than the butterfly's eggs describedby Bonnet; yet these also have a parasiticalenemy {Microgaster Aphidum, Spinosa), whichplunges its eggs in their bodies ; but the larvae,when hatched, are by no means safe, being liableto the attacks of another fly of the same family{Gelis agilis, Thunder), as Dr. Burton informsusf.Bonnet, Oeuvres, svo. ii. 344. Kirby, referring to this passage,assigns, by mistake, only two to each egg. Introdd. i. 342.f Trash. ofLiun. iii. 48.G 366 INSECT Transformations.It is not common, however, for the ichneumonflies to deposit their eggs in the bodies of perfectinsects, as in most cases they prefer the eggs, larvae,or pupae; but instances are on record of their grubshaving been found in the former. The troublesomecock-roach galatia) is selected by a parasite fly(Jeanie ape?idigaster, Fabr.), as remarkable informas it is rare in occurrence, in Britain at least.It has been found in the vicinity of London ; but,were it abundant, it might tend to reduce the numbersof these black beeves, as they are incorrectlytermed, the pests of the kitchen.Magnified view of a parasite fly (Evnnia apendiijaster).An insect parasite, still more singular in form,and of still rarer occurrence, was discovered byKirby, above thirty years ago, on the black bronzebee andrea nigrocenea, Stephens). " I had previously,"he remarks, " more than once observedupon other species something that I took to be a kindof ^c«n^5, which appeared to be immoveable fixedjust at the inosculations of the dorsal segments of theabdomen. At length, finding three or four upon aspecimen of this bee, I determined not to lose theopportunity of taking one off to examine and describe; but what was my astonishment, when, uponmy attempting to disengage it with a pin, I drewforth from the body of the bee a white fleshy larva,PARASITE INSECTS. 67a quarter of an inch in length, the head of which Ihad mistaken for an acarus ! (bee-louse). After Ihad examined one specimen, I attempted to extracta second ; and the reader may imagine how greatlymy astonishment was increased, when, after I haddrawn it out but a little way, I saw its skin burst,and a head as black as ink, with large staring eyesand antennae, consisting of two branches, break forth,and move itself briskly from side to side. It lookedlike a little imp of darkness just emerged from theinfernal regions. My eagerness to set free from itsconfinement this extraordinary animal may be easilyconjectured. Indeed I was impatient to becomebetter acquainted with so singular a creature. Whenit was completely disengaged, and 1 had secured itfrom making its escape, I set myself to examine it asaccurately as possible ; and I found, after a carefulinquiry, that I had got a nondescript, whose veryclass seemed dubious." Of the manner in whichthis singular insect (^Stylops) introduced its eggsinto the body of a bee nothing is yet known, and itsrarity puts it out of the reach of the most eagerobservers. Several species of the same genus havesince been found near London, and an allied genus(Xenos) has since been discovered parasite in waspsby Professor Peck, in America.Bee Parasite. {Stj/lops Melittce, Kirby,)De Geer was one day much surprised to observea small white grub sucking the body of a youngspider {Epeira diadema), having attached itselfMonogr. Ap,Angl. ii. 113.68 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.firmly to the abdomen. Having put it into a glass,he remarked a few days afterwards, that the spiderhad spun the outline of a vertical web, had stretchedthreads from the top to the bottom, and from oneside to the other of the glass, together with the raysof a net, but without the circular threads. The mostsingular circumstance was, that the parasite grubwas suspended in the centre of this web, where itspun its cocoon, while the exhausted spider hadfallen dead to the bottom of the glass*.These examples will suffice to prove the anxiouscare of the mother insects in depositing their eggswhere their progeny may find abundance of food.The tact with which they discover this is one of thosemysteries of nature which are apparently beyondthe penetration of man ever to discover; for it isseldom that the mother insect herself feeds upon thesame, or similar substances, as her larvae, and yetshe is well aware of what is appropriate for them.The ichneumon flies, whose history we have justbeen sketching, eat little, except, perhaps, a smallquantity of honey from the nectary of a flower,and yet they know that their progeny must befed by living insects; the butterflies and moths,whose scanty repast also consists solely of the honeyof flowers, never make a provision of this for theircaterpillars, but deposit their eggs on plants andtrees where their young may eat abundantly ofleaves or other parts " after their kind." In makingthese selections, each species exhibits some peculiaritywell worthy of observation. Some confinethemselves to one particular sort of plant, and neverselect any other ; some make choice indifferently oftwo or three sorts ; while others take a wider range,and fix upon plants of very different qualities. Toexemplify this, we might mention some thousands ofDe Geer, Memoires, volsci, p, 863.LOCALITIES OF VARIOUS SPECIES. 69instances, but it will be sufficient to say, that we neverfind the egi^s of the small tortoiseshell butterfly(Vanessa urticce) on any plant but the nettle ; itscongener, the painted lady (Cynthia cardui,Stephens), though it prefers the spear thistle, issometimes found on the nettle, as is the comma(Vanessa C. Album), though it seems to prefer thehop ; while we have found the eggs of the lackeymoth (Clisiocampa neustria) on almost every bushand tree, from the sweetbread to the oak, in woods,hedges, orchards, and gardens, without any apparentpreference beyond the accident of the mother mothalighting on a particular branch. In the same wayalmost all those which deposit their eggs on saladplants, such as the great tiger (Arctic Casa, Stephens),will as readily select the nettle as the lettuceor dandelion *.It is worthy of remark that our native insects frequentlymake choice of exotic plants, by means ofthe instinctive tact which enables them to discoversuch as suit their purpose. The death's-head hawkmoth (Acherontia Atropos), for example, is nowusually found on the potatoes and the jasmine, butprevious to the introduction of these into Britain, itprobably confined itself to the bitter sweet (Solatiumdulcamara). We have known the moth taken inAyrshire, where this plant is abundant. An instancein point has just occurred to us in one of the minuteleaf-miners. Upon the leaf of an exotic plant(Cineraria cruelty) kept in a garden-pot in ourstudy, we were not a little surprised to observe thetortuous windings of a miner, considerably differentin the outline from any we had before examined.Though it was so late as December, also, the grubseemed very active, and would sometimes mine nearlyhalf an inch of the leaf in the course of the day. It^ J. R.:INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.was transformed within the leaf, in a few days, intoa pupa, and being; put under a bell-glass, a small two-wingedfly (Nephritis Serratulce ? ) made its appearancein about a fortnight. In some garden-pots, inanother room of the same house, were exotic plantsof the American groundsel {Senecio elegajis), theleaves of which were crowded with miners, whosepaths, however, were so very different as to indicatea different species; but upon their transformationinto perfect insects, they turned out exactly the same.They proved, indeed, to be the same with the leaf-minersof the swine-thistle (^So?ichus oleraceus)^Leaf-mining: maggots, a, the fly (Nephritis Serratulcpf)J, mined leaf of sow-thistle (6'onc/iMS oleraceus). c, mined leafof Senecio cleans, d d, mined leaf of Cineraria cruelty.LOCALITIES OF VARIOUS SPECIES. 71numerous specimens of which we collected in theimmediate vicinity ; but the flies of these, from theirprevious exposure to the cold out of doors, did notappear till a month later. It is worthy of remark,that the two exotic plants are of the same naturalfamily composite) ; yet, notwithstanding the similarityof the common groundsel {Senccio vulgaris) tothe American, not one leaf of the former was foundmined, though it is an abundant native plant*.It is no less remarkable, that the mother insectsof the larvae which live solitary and those whichlive in society take care to deposit their eggs withregard to the respective destinations of their progeny.In our earlier studies we remember being muchinterested with Harris's description of the admirablebutterfly {{Vanessa Atlanta), flitting rapidly andstealthily from field to field, and depositing only asingle es-cr on a sins-le nettle in each, as if she wereafraid of overstocking one place and leaving othersuninhabited by her descendants t- Our subsequentobservation of the manners of the insect itself has ledus to doubt the accuracy of Harris ; for we think itwill hold as a pretty general principle, that the mothersof solitary caterpillars, for the most part, depositseveral eggs on the same plant, often at no greatdistance, and sometimes on the same leaf. No classof caterpillars could well be considered more solitarythan those of the hawk moths (Sphmgidce, Leach),yet we have found from two to three eggs of thatof the poplar hawk (Smerijithiis Populi) upon thesame leaf, and a similar number of the eggs of thepuss moth, the larva of which is also solitary, on oneleaf J; whileofthe admirable butterfly above alludedto, we found, in 1825, as many as from three to sixon every plant in a small patch of about a dozenJ. R. f See Harris's Aurelian, vi. fol. Lond. 1778.^ See Insect Architecture, p.] 92.72 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.nettles, in Copenhagen-fields, Islington. A similardeposition of eggs is made by several of the mothersof the subsidiary caterpillars which live in the woodof trees. Of this we had a good example in theclear under-wing egeria asllifor7nis'),aho\ea. scoreof the small black eggs of which we found depositedin a scattered manner on the trunk of a single poplarat Lee *.The most singular disposal of eggs with whichwe are acquainted in the economy of insects, is exemplifiedin the common gnat (^Culex pipes, Linn).It is admirably described by Reaumur, though itseems first to have been discovered by Langallo,who mentions it in a letter addressed to Redii, printedat Florence in 1679; and by Alloa, who actuallysaw the eggs laid, and afterwards sketched a figureof them. Those who wish to witness this singularoperation, must repair before five or six o'clock in themorning to a pond or a bucket of stagnant waterfrequented by gnats ; when Reaumur went later inthe day he was always disappointed.The facts of this disposal of her eggs by the commongnat, are sufficiently curious to excite attentionto them ; and, therefore, it is not easily to be understoodhow the following erroneous and fancifulaccount originated. " The manner," says Goldsmith," in which the insect lays its eggs is particularlycurious ; after having laid the proper number onthe surface of the water, it surrounds them with akind of unctuous matter, which prevents them fromsinking, but at the same time fastens them with athread to the bottom to prevent their floating away,at the mercy of every breeze, from a place the warmthof which is proper for their production, to any otherwherethe water may be too cold, or the animals, itsenemies, too numerous. Thus the insects, in theirJ. R.RAFT OF EGGS OF THE GNAT. 73e^g" state, resemble a buoy which is fixed by ananchor. As they come to maturity, they sunk deeper,and at last, when they leave the egg as worms, creepto the bottom*.'^ This fable, which was first mentionedby Piny, is repeated verbatim by Bing-ley t.The impossibility of a gnat spinning a thread, andplunging into the water to fix it at the bottom, neverstruck these writers.We are the more anxious to expose these erroneousaccounts, from a persuasion that a taste for naturalhistory has been more injured by numerous similarstatements, which could not be verified by a student,in many popular works, than by the driest skeletondescriptions of those who have merely pursued NaturalHistory as a science of names.The problem of the gnat is to construct a boat-shapedraft, which will float, of eggs heavy enough tosink in water if dropped into it one by one. Theeggs are nearly of the pyramidal form of a pocketgunpowder-flask, rather pointed at the upper andbroad at the under end, with a projection like themouth of a bottle. The first operation of the mothergnat is to fix herself by the four fore-legs to the sideof a bucket, or upon a floating leaf, with her bodylevel with and resting upon the surface of the water,excepting the last ring of the tail, which is a littleraised ; she then crosses her two hind legs in form ofan X, the inner opening of which is intended to formthe scaffolding of her structure. She accordinglybrings the inner cano-le of her crossed legs close to theraised part of her body and places in it an egg, covered,as is usual among insects, with a glutinous fluid. Oneach side of this egg she places another, all whichadhere firmly together by means of their glue, andform a triangular figure thus * * , which is the sternGoldsmith, Animated Nature, vi.337.f Bingley, Animal Biography, iii, 439, 3d ed.HHINSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.df the raft. She proceeds in the same manner to adde^gg after e^g in a vertical (not a horizontal) position,carefully regulating the shape by her crossed legs ; andas her raft increases in magnitude, she pushes thewhole gradually to a greater distance, and when shehas about half-finished she crosses her legs andplaces them parallel, the angle being no longer necessaryfor shaping the boat. Each raft consists offrom two hundred and fifty to three hundred andfifty eggs, which, when all laid, float on the watersecure from sinking, and are finally abandoned bythe mother. They are hatched in a few days, thegrubs issuing from the lower end ; but the boat, nowcomposed of the empty shells, continues to float till itis destroyed by the weather*.Gnats forming their egg boats, a, represents the commencementof the boat of eggs ; b, the boat about two-thirds completed ; c,the perfect boat resting on the surface of the water.Kirby justly describes this little vessel as resemblinga London wherry, being sharp and higher, as sailorssay,ybreand aft, convex below and concave above, andalways floating on its keel. " The most violent agitationof the water," he adds, "cannot sink it, and what ismore extraordinary, and a property still a desideratumin our life-boats, though hollow, it never becomesE^Aumui; Mem. iv. p. 621*East OF EGGS OF THE GNAT. 7^filled with water, even though exposed. To put thisto the test, I placed half a dozen of these boats uponthe surface of a tumbler half-full of water : I thenpoured upon them a stream of that element from themouth of a quart bottle held a foot above them. Yetafter this treatment, which was so rough as actuallyto project one out of the glass, I found them floatingas before upon their bottoms, and not a drop of waterwithin their ca^dty*." We have repeatedly pushedthem to the bottom of a glass of water ; but theyalways came up immediately to the surface apparentlyunsettled.Magnified view of the boat of gnats' eggs. 'We have contented ourselves with giving hereonly a few examples of the maternal care which isdisplayed by insects in depositing their eggs, thoughwe could have filled the volume with similar details.The instincts which are thus displayed are of themost interesting description ; and they cannot fail toimpress the most careless observer with a deep reverenceof that providential wisdom by which they areimplanted in these small and feeble creatures for themaintenance of their race. But it is not essential, inorder to produce this reverence, to exaggerate the circumstancesunder which these remarkable peculiaritiesare displayed. The infallibility of the instinct of insectsin such cases is, in most books of natural history,maintained to be without exception. " Led byan instinct," say Kirby and Spence, " far more un-intro.iii. p. 32.h276 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.erring' than the practised eye of the botanist, she recognizesthe plant the moment she approaches it *."And again, they talk of " the unerring foresight withwhich the female deposits her eggs in the preciseplace where the larvae when excluded are sure to findsuitable food f." This unconditional position requires,however, to be considerably modified to make it correspondwith the facts. The experiment we gave fromRedii in our first chapter, in which the carnivorousflies laid their eggs on the silk and paper coveringtainted meat, will occur to every reader as one strikingexception ; and we can mention several others stillmore marked. When Dr. Arnold discovered thatmost singular parasitic plant, the krubut, of Sumatra,(Raffles Arnold, Brown,) which consists of aflower only, without leaf or stem, and of the extraordinarydiameter of three feet, he perceived a swarmof flies hovering over the nectary, and apparentlylaying their eggs in its substance, mistaking it mostprobably for carrion, as it smelt like tainted beef |.A similar mistake is committed in our own country,when the common blow-fly {{Musca vomitoria) laysits eggs in the foetid funguses {Phalli, Avarice, &c.),apparently under the notion that these are genuinecarrion §. This may be more particularly observedon the singular class of plants, shapeless, which areso common in our hot-houses : whole families ofmaggots are constantly born to starve in their foetidflowers.These are instances of the mistakes of instinct incircumstances where it depends upon the informationof the senses ; and similar mistakes frequently occurwhere the higher powers of human rationality aredeceived by analogous phenomena. The fine nuttyflavour of cherry laurel water and of prussic acidIntrodd. i. p. 340. f Ibid. iii. p. 65.J R. Brown, Linn. Trans, vol. xiii. § Nellie, Philos, of Nat. Hist,MISTAKES OF Insects. ftwould be certain to deceive the inexperienced ; andMajestie's servant actually fell an immediate victimto her desire of tasting the prussic acid whichshe found in his laboratory. This would be consideredperhaps a mistake arising from the artificialhabits acquired in society, by those who maintainthat animals, guided by instinct, never mistake poisonfor food. But we may add another curious instanceor two of similar mistakes in the inferior races.The common earth-worm {Lmnbricus terrestrial)is instinctively afraid of moles ; and no sooner doesit hear any subterranean noise, or feel any shaking ofthe ground, similar to those indicative of the approachingmovements of its enemy, than it makes aspeedy escape to the surface. Every boy knows howto take advantage of this to procure fish-baits, bythrusting a spade or a stake into the ground, andmoving it backwards and forwards, to imitate theadvance of a mole burrowing in search of prey.The worm, unable from its instinct to discriminatebetween its subterranean enemy and the spade, dartsinto day-light, and is instantly captured for the boy'sbait-bag. The lapwing {Vanellus cristatus,ME\ER)yit is stated by Dr. Anderson in his ' Bee,' is awareof this instinctive fear in the earth-worm of subterraneanconcussions or noises ; and when it cannotfind sufficiency of slugs *, &c. above ground,it pats with its feet, till the earth-worms, mistakingit for an advancing mole, come forth to be feastedupon.It is well known that, whenever a hawk appears,he is immediately surrounded by a host of smallbirds, particularly swallows, which dart at him andtease him, for the purpose, as may be supposed, ofdistracting his attention, on the principle that''Nourriture; — insectes, assignees, vers, et petits limafons."Temminck, Manuel ornithologist;, p. 552, 2d. edit.H 378 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.wealth makes wit waver.' Be this as it may, thecuckoo, which bears a strong resemblance to ahawk when on the wing, is certain to be accompaniedby a similar retinue of small birds whereverit flies. In the north this is so commonly observed,that the cuckoo is popularly believed to be alwaysattended by a titling or puppet (Aiitlms pratejisis,Bechstein), which, it is further imagined, has beenits stepmother and nurse from the egg : this, indeed,is the bird whose nest the cuckoo most frequentlyselects to deposit the eggs which she so strangelyand unnaturally abandons ; though it is more probablethat it is not on this account, but because sheappears to be a hawk, that the puppet and other smallbirds persecute her.Linnaeus records in his ' Lachesis Japonica,'that at Cornea there is a meadow, or bog, full ofwater-hemlock {Cicuta virosa), which annuallydestroys from fifty to a hundred head of cattle. Itseems that they eat most of it in spring, when firstturned into the pasture, partly from their eagernessfor fresh pasture, and partly from their long fastingand greediness, the herbage being then short. Besides,from the immersion of the hemlock underwater,it may not have the proper scent to deterthem. A similar destruction of cattle from the samecause occurs in the wide meadows of Linings*.J. R., in Mag. of Nat. Hist.; i. 374.Chapter IV.Hybernation of Insect Eggs. — Ingenuity of Moths.— Singularities of RochelleInsects and of Spiders, — Experiments of Spallanzani and JohnHunter,The assertion of Paley that " the human animal is theonly one which can clothe itself," though it accordswith what is known of quadrupeds, birds, and fishes,by no means holds good in the insect world, inwhich it may be disproved by the most superficialobservers. Men, indeed, proceed by means of reasoningand experiment to the discovery of such materialsas are best fitted for protecting their bodiesagainst the vicissitudes of temperature, and otherchanges of weather; while insects are taught by theGovernor of the Universe to select instinctively thebest materials for their clothing. This is exemplifiedin a very remarkable manner in the coverings madeby different families for protecting their eggs, as weshall now describe.The maternal affection of the eider duck anasmollissima, Linn.) has frequently been celebrated bynaturalists, from her stripping the down from her ownbreast to form her nest, a circumstance which is alsoexemplified in the common rabbit ; but both of theseanimals are outrivalled by more than one moth : —for the latter, not contented with a nest made of theirown down, take pains to cover with it each individualegg. The provision which nature has made for thispurpose is worthy of attention. The female, for example,of the gypsey moth {Hypogymna dispar) hasthe hinder parts of her body thickly clothed with aNatural Theology, p. 230. 11th edit.f See " Insect Architecture' chaps, x.; xii., &c.80 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS,soft down of a hair-brown colour, which is wantingin the male, evidently because to him it would be ofno use. As a covering for her own body, it can beof but small service, since she emerges from herpupa-case during the hot days of August, and doesnot usually live more than a week or a fortnight. Itschief or sole purpose, therefore, is to furnish a coveringfor her eggs.When about to lay, the mother gypsey moth placesherself on the trunk of an oak or an elm, invariablywith her head downwards, the reason of which positionwill be immediately explained. Without the aidof her legs, which are too short to be used Hkethose of the gnat by way of rule and compass, shecontrives to place her eggs in the form of an invertedcone. She first makes a little bed of this down, intowhich she thrusts the egg intended for the point ofher cone ; and this egg, being covered with adhesivegluten, attaches around it all the hairs of the downwith which it comes in contact, and also sticks to thebark of the tree from its being pushed home. Proceedingin the same manner, she continues for severalhours adding to the mass ; but she does not ingeneral finish the operation in less than two days,indulging in occasional rests when fatigued with herlabour. At intervals, also, she takes care to protectthe eggs placed in the cone with an exterior coveringof the same down. There is one part of these operationsnot a little remarkable. In the bed which shefirst makes for the eggs, the hairs of the down eitherpoint at right angles to the bark of the tree, or atleast are tossed down with little regularity ; but inthe external coping, which is designed to keep out thewinter rains, the hairs are carefully placed in a sloping-direction,like the tiles on a house, or the pile ofa well brushed hat, pointing downwards towards thebase of the cone. The latter is usually concave, be-ingenuityOF MOTHS.cause, when the moth takes her occasional rests, shenever moves from the spot, but remains with her tailthrust in amongst the eg;^s. We have given thesedetails from observations made in the Pare at Brussels,in August, 1829* ; and our entomological readerswill perceive, that though they do not disagree with thefacts observed by the accurate Reaumur, we haveadded several particulars not mentioned by him t-In order to preserve some specimens of the gypseymoth, which abounds in the Netherlands, but is rarein most parts of Britain, we inclosed two or three inchip boxes. Upon opening these, a short time afterwards,we found that one of the moths had depositeda patch of eggs ; but, instead of the conical form whichthe insect would have chosen had sheen at liberty, shehad disposed them in the form of a wheel, of which herbody was the radius. This, of comes, was not so much tobe wondered at, as it no doubt arose from her want ofspace to proceed in the usual manner ; but we deem itworthy of notice that this wheel, which was about aquarter of an inch broad in the rim, was sloped witha, female gypsey moth, one-third the natural size, just finishingher group of 'eggs, b, female gypsey moth, with its bodycovered with down, c, circle of eggs covered with hair, and o,conical mound of eggs covered with hair, laid by gypsey mothsin confinement.J. R.f Reaumur, Mem. ii., 101.82 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS,the greatest regularity, after the manner of a candleshade, and the down tiled upon it all round. Anotherof our prisoners, though precisely in the same circumstancesas to space, instead of forming a wheel, piledup her eggs in form of a circular mound ; but as thenumber of her eggs was not a sixth part of those of theother, (probably from her having deposited part beforewe caught her,) this may have induced her to varythe shape of the group. Like the others, however, theregular slope and tiling of the down was carefullypreserved *. We have now (April, 1830) a numerousbrood of caterpillars from these very eggs.The eggs, which are thus deposited with so muchcare, are destined to abide all the pitiless pelting ofthe storms of winter ; for, although they are laid iuAugust, they are not hatched till the elm comes intoleaf in the following spring. The covering of down,accordingly, from the manner in which it is tiled andbrushed smooth by the mother moth, not only protectsthem from wet, but from severe cold, being one of thebest non-conductors of heat. The experiments ofmodern chemical philosophers have proved beyond adoubt, that the warmest material for clothing is notwhat imparts most heat to the body, but what bestprevents the escape of the heat generated there. Thefeeling of cold, therefore, does not, as might be supposed,arise from anything positively cold, but solelyfrom a deficiency of heat. On putting the hand, forexample, on a piece of ice, the feeling of cold doesnot arise from cold given out by the ice to the hand,but from the heat which the ice takes from the hand,which heat can be actually traced in the water formedby the melting of the ice. But when the hand is laidupon wool, feathers, or down, these do not feel cold,because they do not carry off the heat of the skin sorapidly as the ice.Jar.PROTECTION OP EGGS.It may appear a little paradoxical, though the doctrineis sound, to assert that down and similar materialsare nearly as well calculated for protecting ananimal from excessive outward heat as from severecold. This, however, has been long well known as afact to the Neapolitan peasantry, who convey snowfrom Mount Vesuvius to Naples in the summer for thepurposes of luxury : they preserve it from melting bycovering it with chaff and wool. It may not be outof place to remark that instances of this occur amonginsects, precisely similar to what we have just detailedrespecting the gypsey moth. The brown-tail and thegolden-tail moths (Porthesia aurifliia, and P. Chry-sorrhcBa, Stephens), whose caterpillars spin themselvesa warm nest before the setting-in of the winter colds*,seem no less careful to protect their eggs from thesummer heats of July and August, at which time theyare deposited. The down with which they are furnishedfor this purpose grows upon the tail of thefemale moth, in form of a thick tuft or brush, of ashining silky gloss, and of a different colour from theshort hair on the body. It may be remarked thatmoths have only a mouth tube for sucking honey, andFemales of the brown and gold-tailed moths, showing the bunchof down on the tails.See '' Insect Architecture' p. 329— 331,84 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.no mandibles or jaws *, like bees, wasps, and beetles,for performing any mechanical labour ; but the mothsin question have an organ admirably contrived forcovering their eggs with down. This consists of anextensile instrument, situated in the tail, not unlikethe points of a pair of sugar-tongs, and intended toperform the part of tweezers in pulling off the down,and placing it upon the eggs. Having reared numerousbroods of the moths alluded to, we can testifyto the minute accuracy of Reaumur in detailingtheir proceedings. He remarks, that though themother moth is exceedingly sluggish (lourde) in hergeneral movements, she employs her tweezers withsurprising quickness, on all sides, first, to pull off apinch of down, and spread it out, and then to place theegg upon it, and cover it neatly over, and smooth thedown in the proper direction. The nature of the instrumentwill be better understood by the followingfigures.Tweezers of the brown and gold-tailed moths, magnified.Reaumur has figured the deposition of the eggsof an insect, the species of which is not ascertained, senthim by a physician of Lucan, which are covered, likethe preceding, with down, but are arranged in anelegant spiral form, as if a lady would wind one ofthe ends of her fur tippet spirally round a branch.Saving, however, has displayed much acumen in shewinghow the suckers of moths, &c., are analogous to mandibles. — Memoiresmr lea Anim. sans Ferteb,SPIRAL FORM OF EGGS. 83These egg's were extremely small, and the down veryfine, like the short fur of the beaver, and of a prettysquirrel-grey colour. The eggs were oblong, andplaced on end, at right angles to the branch ; as wasalso their downy envelope, which differed in this respectfrom the imbricated and smoothly brushedcoping of the moths above described. There is nothingof this kind, says Reaumur, which we oughtto consider it difficult for an insect to execute, whenwe are acquainted with the admirable instrumentswith which nature has furnished them *.Spiral group of eggs of an unknown moth.The spiral form of eggs deposited upon a branchmay, in particular years, be seen in almost everyorchard and every hedge, being the method followedby the lackey moth {CUsiocampa neustria, Stephens)and its congeners. The precise manner inwhich the mother lackey proceeds has not, so far aswe know, been witnessed by any naturalist ; andthough Reaumur reared a great number on purposeto discover it, all his efforts proved unsuccessful.An examination, however, of the arrangement of theeggs themselves, shews that they are placed in amanner excellently adapted to secure their adhesionto the branch, and to prevent their sustaining injury.The eg is somewhat of the form of a funnel-shapedwine-glass — broader at top than at bottom t ; and itReaumur, Mem.ii. 107.t See two of these eggs figured ia " Insect Architecture,"p. 19.INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.is worthy of remark, that this is the precise form of thearch-stones of a bridge. They are, in fact, built togetherin the arched form. This, together with thestrong cement employed in uniting them, rendersit difficult to crush them, though considerable forcebe used for that purpose ; and this even when they areslipped off the branch, round which they are set likepearls on a bracelet, which is the name given themby the French peasantry. The cement, also, is sohard, that when pressed it resists the nail, though itmay be pierced with the point of a sharp knife ; andnot being soluble in water, " nor in any other liquid,"says Swammerdam, " which I have tried," the heaviestrain dashes upon the eggs without injury.Eggs of the lackey moth, wound spirally round a twig of hawthorn; natural size, and magnified.It may be a question with some, when they comparethese naked eggs of the lackey moth, exposed ona bare branch, with the warm downy covering; of thoseof the gypsey moth, how the former are protectedfrom the colds of winter. This is a question whichprevious researches cannot fully answer, but one circumstanceis obvious — the lackey's eggs are manydegrees harder than those of the g>psey, which maybeeasily crushed. Probably also, this may be connectedwith their electrical state 5 and that has alwaysLiberation OF EGGS. 87an intimate connection with heat in animated bodies.The Having" principle, to which we shall by and byeadvert, must also be taken into account.In consequence of the minuteness of insect eggs,notwithstanding the researches of enthusiastic entomologists,we are still unacquainted with by far thegreater number. The hybernation of eggs is, therefore,a subject upon which little is known. In theegg state insect life is, perhaps, less liable to accidents,than in a more advanced stage of existence ;and it is most probable that the greater number remainunhatched during the cold season. Differentmodes of depositing eggs are resorted to by differentspecies of the same genus, as may be exemplified inthe plant lice {Aphides). It was observed by DeGeer, that those of the birch and the blackthorn{Aphis Ali, and A. Prune) covered each egg individuallywith a white cottony down, detached from theirbodies by means of their hind legs, and placed by thesame means over the effffs*. But the greater numberof this family lay their eggs in an exposed situation,upon the plants where the young, when hatched, mayfind food. Thus Kirby found the small black eggs ofa large species on the buds of birch-trees ; and wehave just discovered (Jan. 1830) a numerous depositof the eggs of the magpie plant-louse {Aphis Sam-huc)on an elder tree, where the insect was abundantthe preceding summer t- These eggs are exceedinglyminutest easily observed on account of their shiningblack colour. They are placed in an irregular patchupon a part of the trunk from which the bark hasbeen stripped off, and are entirely unprotected.The cochenille insects {CoccidcE Leach), so calledfrom one of the species furnishing the well-knownvaluable dye-stuff, protect their eggs in a still moreDe Geer, Mem. sur les Insectes, iii. 48, 51. f J. K.I 288 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS. ' 'remarkable manner. The mother deposits her eggsunder her body, which becomes glued to the spot ; shethen dies, and her body becomes a covering for theeggs. Jn this state the insects appear on the barkof trees like small warts, some species in the form ofa boat, some kidney-shaped, and others globular ;and, before their history was understood, they werewith some plausibility supposed to be vegetable galls,whence they were termed Gall Insects by the French.Though the mother insect is seldom larger than apeppercorn, the number of eggs which she laysamounts to several thousands, and in fact fills thegreater portion of her body. Those which are foundon our green-house plants, and which are the pestof the grape-vines in the neighbourhood of London,both in and out of doors, secrete a sort of whitesilky gum, very like gossamer, as the first bed oftheir eggs. Reaumur could not discover that themother insect was furnished with any organ similarto those of spiders and caterpillars for spinning thisgossamer; and in an allied genus {Dorthesia), Kirbyand Spence talk of it as " wire-drawn through numerouspores in certain oval plates in the skin."Having minutely observed, during several successivesummers, some thousands of the female cocci foundon vines in the open air, we have satisfied ourselvesthat this cottony matter is precisely similar to thegluten which envelopes the eggs of most insects ;and that it is neither spun like the threads of caterpillars,or the webs of spiders, nor wire-drawnthrough numerous pores, — but is simply excludedalong with the eggs. We may remark, also, that thecovering formed by the body of the mother coccusprevents this substance from drying, as the webs ofspiders do ; and, consequently, it can at any time beIntrodd. iii., p. 183.EGGS OF THE COCCI.drawn out into extended threads, by detaching a fewof the ef^G:s from the mass.Eggs of the Coccus covered with down, and with the bodiesof the mothers,An account, which appears to us altogether apocryphal,has been given of the migrations of thespecies which produces the cochenille {Coccus CactULinn). From the females remaining' stationary,it is said, their numerous progeny would not findsufficient nutriment on their native tree; and theyare, at the same time, so delicate, that they could nottravel along the ground from one plant to another ;Magnified cochenille insects, {Coccus cacti), fl, Male, b, Female.I 390 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS,but nature, it is alleged, provides for them admirablemeans of emigration, since, at the period of theirbirth, a multitude of spiders fasten their nets to theleaves of the nopal, and along these, which servethem for bridges, the young cocci emigrate to theadjacent trees *. We have little doubt that this storyhas originated in the inaccurate observations of somefanciful traveller, who mistook the threads accidentallydrawn out from the mass of eggs, for those of aspider.The gossamer envelope, however, which we havejust described as covering the eggs of the coccus thatis common on our British vines, is not intended as adefence against the cold of winter; for this specieshybernates, according to Reaumur, in the larva state,though we have frequently searched for these larvaein vain during winter, on vines where they swarmedin myriads during summer. But the British speciesof coccus of the hawthorn, &c., on account of whichwe introduced the subject here, assuredly hybernatesin the egg state ; and may be seen at the off-goingsof the branches in an oval form, like that of aminute wood-louse {Onisciis), of a silvery greycolour, differing, indeed, but little from the tint ofthe bark. On raising up with the point of a penknifewhat appeared to be the body of the insect, wefound that it was hard, dry, and dead, — the mereskin, in a word, of the mother coccus, while underneathwas a multitude of eggs of a deep orangecolour. It is worthy of notice, also, that there is,then, no envelope of gossamer, though there is mixedup with the eggs a small quantity of a greyish whitepowder, which, we are inclined to conjecture, maybethe dried remains of it ; and, the more so, thatReaumur figures the gossamer as abundant in thecoccus of the hawthorn. Unfortunately he has notSt. Pierre, Studies of Nature, vol.i.EGGS OF THE COCCI.mentioned at what season he procured these, andwe have no means of ascertaining whether our speciesis the same with his*.a b c. Eggs of the hawthorn coccus, covered by the body of thedead mother, d, one of these inagiiiiied. e, a section, shewingthe eggs within.We have found the eg-gs just mentioned mostabundant on the hawthorn in the hedges aroundLondon; but as the size, the colours, and the formsof the crust are very different, there can be no doubtof there being different species even on the sametree. " In July, 18f 2," says Kirby, " I saw a miserably ravaged by a species of coccusvery much resembling the coccus of the vine. Theeggs were of a beautiful pink, and enveloped in alarge mass of cotton-like web, which could be drawnout to a considerable length f." From the manner inwhich this justly popular author speaks, it would appearhe had not elsewhere met with this coccus ; butJ. R. t Intr. i. 197.92 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.it is by no means of rare occurrence, and may be foundon most currant-bushes, and often on hawthorns, &c.around London. The envelope of the eggs is of achestnut-brown colour.A much more singular species occurs in companywith the preceding, and abounds on the currant-bushesat Lee. From their resemblance to the formof one of the valves of a mussel-shell, Reaumurnamed this species en couple {Coccus conchiformis,Gmelin). He says, it imposed upon him for severalyears, as he supposed it to be the cocoon of someminute insect about to go into the pupa state ; but hewas undeceived by finding them full of eggs. Wewere more disposed, at first, to look upon them as asub cortical fungus (such as Cucurbitaria BerberidisyGrew. or Cryptosphceria Pteridis, Sowers), for,during the winter, when we first observed them, theyappeared exactly like a little slip of the bark elevatedby the growth of a fungus below it. Then they wereso crowded on some branches, that not a hair's breadthof the bark remained uncovered. When, however, wefound these minute bark-like scales full of eggs, wewere inclined to conjecture that they had been depositedby saw-flies cutting into the bark ; but this wasinstantly disproved by removing them, and finding thebark below sound and uncut. Reaumur put thematter beyond dispute by actually hatching theeggs, when insects were produced similar to othercocci. But our species, found on the currant-bush,seems to differ from his of the elm, not in form andcolour, but in habit, being gregarious, while his wassubsidiary *.During the severe frost of 1829-30, we observedseveral small birds, such as the long-tailed titmouseparus caucasus), and the gold-crested wren {Regu-Jar.DEPOSITIONS OF EGGS. 93Im cristatus, Ray), busily pecking the eggs of thecocci in the hedges *.The resemblance of these singular insects to thewood-louse {Onisciis), which is not properly an insect,but a crustaceous animal, may be traced fartherthan mere external appearance ; for the body of themothers in the latter, also becomes a covering: forthe egg, though she does not die immediately afterlaying as the coccus does, but carries her eggsunder her breast in small four-valved cells.One of the most easily discovered depositions ofeggs during the winter months are those made byvarious species of spiders, particularly that of thelarge garden-spider {Epeira drachms), which maybefound in the angles of walls, in form of a ball,about the size of a cherry, of beautiful yellow silk,and much stronger than the common materials ofthe same spider's geometric web. This substanceReaumur endeavoured to bring into use as a substitutefor silk ; but he was unsuccessful in procuring it inquantity, owing to the ferocious habits of the spiders,which devoured one another when he reared themgregariously. As the eggs of spiders have usually athin soft shell, a thick warm envelope of silk is, nodoubt, essential to their weathering the colds ofwinter, notwithstanding the sheltered corners wherethey are usually placed. Some species weave theselittle silken nests in a very elegant form. We possessone of the pyriform shape of a balloon, the textureof which is close and netted with diagonal meshes.One, somewhat in form of a drinking-glass, is figuredin Loudon's Magazine of Natural History, as havingbeen found near Wandsworth, attached to the stemof a rush growing in water.There was a deposition of eggs at the bottom, therest of the space being vacant. De Geer describesJ. R.INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.similar spiders' nests attached to the stems of grass * ;and we once found a large one of an elongatedshape, and composed of very white silk, on a spike ofgrass at Compton-Basset, Wiltshire t-Spiders' nests.The vapourer borgia antiqua, Ochsenh.), a commonmoth, takes advantage of the warm silken envelopeof the pupa-case, from which she has escaped afew days before, to form a bed for her eggs. In ourearlier studies of insect economy we were inclined toascribe to accident the deposition of the eggs in thisparticular situation, but we have found so manyinstances of it as to reject the explanation. also observes, that " this custom of fasteningthe eggs to the web in a constant method, andby the immutable law of nature, is so peculiarto this species of insects, that I have never observedit in any other kind whatsoever. Thisfemale," he subjoins, "like a most prudent housewife,never leaves her habitation, but is alwaysfixing her eggs to the surface of the web outof which she has herself crept, thus affording abeautiful instance of industrious housewifery." OneDe Geer, Mem., vol. vii. pp. 227—9. f J. R.:j: Swammerdam, pt. ii. page 7.DEPOSITIONS OP EGGS.9Sreason for this is, that the female of this mothhaving' only the rudiments of wings, a peculiarityremarkable in several other moths, she cannot shiftso readily about. But whatever may be the realcause, there can be no doubt that the web serves tokeep the eggs warm during winter; for though theyare placed on the outside of the web, the whole isusually under some projection of a wall or arm of atree, and the non-conducting property of the silk,both with regard to heat and electricity, must be ofgreat benefit to the eggs in preserving them in anequable temperature, and of course promoting theirearly hatching.VapourerMoth (Oj-^j/j'a antiqua), vr^aie aud female, the latterwithout wings ; with the eggs laid upon the silken cocoon fromwhich the mother has issued.We cannot better conclude these imperfect sketchesof the hybernation of insect eggs, than by an accountof the ingenious experiments made bySpallanzani and John Hunter, by exposing severalspecies of these to great degrees of cold as wellas of heat. It results from these experiments thatintense cold," to use the words of Spallanzani,*' does not destroy the eggs of insects. The year1709, when Fahrenheit's thermometer fell to 1°,is celebrated for its rigour and its fatal effects onplants and animals. Who can believe, exclaimsBoerhaave, that the severity of this winter did notdestroy the eggs of insects, especially those exposedto its influence in the open fields, on the naked96 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.earth, or on the branches of trees ? Yet, when thespring had tempered the air, these eggs produced asthey usually did after the mildest winters. Since thatperiod there have been winters more severe. InFrance, during December, 178S, the thermometerfell considerably lower, and in several other temperateEuropean climates.I have exposed eggs to a more rigorous trialthan the winter of 1709. Those of several insects,and among others the silk-worm, moth, and elmbutterfly {{Vanessa polyc/iloros?) were inclosed in aglass vessel and buried five hours in a mixture of iceand sal gem frock salt) ; the thermometer fell 6°below zero. In the middle of the following spring,however, caterpillars came from all the eggs, andat the same time as from those that had suffered nocold. In the following year, I submitted them to anexperiment still more hazardous. A mixture of iceand sal gem with the fuming spirit of nitre nitrateof Ammonia), reduced the thermometer 22° belowzero, that is 23*^ lower than the cold of 1709.They were not injured, as I had evident proofby their being hatched.Combining all these facts, we conclude that coldis less noxious to germs and eggs, than to animalculeand insects. Germs in general can support 2°below zero ; whereas of animalcule some die at thefreezing point, and some at about 20°. The eggsof many insects continue fertile after being subjectedto a temperature of 22° below zero, while insectsthemselves die at 16° and 14°. This I have ascertainedin the eo-o-s of the silk-worm moth and of theelm butterfly ; and although there are caterpillarsand chrysalides able to resist great cold, I have uniformlyfound it to be in a less degree than what canbe resisted by their eggs. What can be the cause ofso great a difference? Insects killed at 16^ and 14°EFFECTS OF COLD UPON EGGS. 97are so penetrated and frozen by the cold, that theirmembers do not yield to the pressure of th finder,and seem perfect ice under the knife. This doesnot happen to eggs, though subjected to cold ofmuch greater intensity. Their contents remain fluid,even at the greatest cold, as may be seen by crushingthem with the nail. Perhaps this is derived fromconstituent spirituous or oleaginous parts, or fromsome principle adapted to abate the power of cold*.If eggs do not freeze, it is probable the includedembryos do not freeze. Is there anything wonderful,therefore, that they then survive cold whichis fatal to them when produced ? Probably for thesame reason (and I see no objection that can apply),animalcule, concentrated in the germ, can support adegree of cold they are incapable of when developed."As the temperature of freezing still retains aportion of heat, why, it may be asked, should it notdeveloped the germs of the most minute animalcule?Had we never seen any eggs hatched but those ofbirds, which require 104°, we should have concludedthat all others require the same. A little initiationinto the study of minute animals teaches how manykinds produce at a temperature infinitely less. Suchare the eggs of butterflies and many other insects, offrogs, lizards, tortoises, down to some, as those oftoads, which I have seen produce at 45'\ If theseeggs hatch at 59^ less than is required by those ofbirds, what repugnance will there be to suppose thatat 13° less, or the freezing point, the eggs of otheranimals may be hatched ? I\'or should it surprise meto be told of animals whose eggs would produce atmuch greater cold, after knowing that there are plants,beings so similar to animals, and many of them,In plain language, Spallanzaiii did not knowuhat to make ofthe fact.K98 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.which amidst the rigours of winter flourish and fruc-tify*."It is remarked by John Hunter that an egg willfreeze by a great degree of cold ; at the same timethere seems to be a living principle which enables it tosupport cold without destruction, and when once thatprinciple is destroyed, cold more easily operates. Anegg was thus frozen by the cold of zero ; after thawingand again exposing it to the same degree of cold,it froze seven minutes and a half sooner. A new-laidegg took an hour to freeze in 15° and 17°, but whenthawed, it froze at 25° in half the timothyprinciple of vitality, therefore, whatever may bethecause, is evidently less easily destroyed in the eggstate than in the perfect animal ; and therefore theinference that a rigorous winter promises a diminutionof insects in the summer succeeding commonly proveserroneous. On the contrary, recorded facts prove thatthey are sometimes even more abundant than usualafter severe frosts. During the present spring of1830, accordingly, notwithstanding the severe frostsof the preceding winter, we have observed a muchgreater number of insects, even of the smaller andmore delicate kinds (Aleyrodes, Corethra, Ahicita^&c.) as well as of larvae, both those just hatched, andthose which have lived through the winter, than lastyear, when the frost was not so severe. We wereparticularly struck with the larvae of some smalltipula (Boletophila?), which we found in abundancein Birch Wood, Kent, feeding on a fungus {Boletuscommentaries. Fries), and which were so beautifullytransparent and soft, that we could not understandhow they had escaped being frozen. It is not alittle remarkable, in connexion with this, that theSpallanzani's Tracts, trans. by Dalyell; vol. i. p. ^Z,j- Hunter on the Animal Economy.EFFECTS OF COLD UPON INSECTS. 99migratory birds seem to have been aware of thisabundance of insects by their appearing earlier thanusual. We saw a pair of nightingales at G reenhitheon the 21st of March, and a number of swallows thesame week at Lee, — which is two or three weeks beforetheir average time*.J. R.k2Chapter V.Hatching of Insect Eggs.The contents of an egg principally consist ofnutriment adapted to the different parts of thegerm which it contains — the yolk for nourishingthe soft parts ; the white, for the blood and otherfluids ; and the shell, for the bones. In the case ofinsects, as well as of birds, fishes, and reptiles, theembryo is placed in the most advantageous positionfor partaking of the repast, — namely, in a particularcorner where it may breathe fresh air alwayscommunicated to the chamber of the egg by ventilatorpassages in the shell ; if these be shut up,by covering the egg with grease, varnish, or chalk,it is suffocated and dies. In the case of birds,according to Malpighi and the older physiologists*,the rudiment of the chick, while still a minute point, islodged on the film that envelopes the yolk, near thecentre of the egg ; and, — as the floating wick of amariner's lamp is constantly preserved upon a levelwith the surface by the mobility of the slings and theweight of the oil-vessel tending downwards, howeverthe ship move, — there is an ingenious naturalmechanism, which prevents the embryo chick frombeing upset when the egg is stirred. The yolk issustained by two membranous ribbons, visible at theaperture of the egg, and fastening it on each side tothe common membrane glued to the shell. Thesesuspensory bands being fixed above the centre of the♦Malpighi, de Ovo incubation; Leeuwenhoeck, Exist. pays.xl. ; and Harvey, in Willoughby's Ornithol. c. iii.HATCHING OF EGGS. 101yolk, of course the more weighty part always descends,in every position of the egg', as far as theywill permit, and the chick being thence preventedfrom sliding" down, nourishes itself in security.We cannot, on account of their minuteness, ascertainwhether there is any similar mechanical contrivancein the eggs of insects; but we have in severalinstances distinctly observed the speck where theembryo insect was placed just within the shell ofthe eg-o'. In order to stimulate it to feast andfatten on the good things stored up in his egg-shellchamber, it appears that a certain degree of heatis indispensably requisite; for cold, though it doesnot usually, as we have'seen, kill the embryo, almostalways renders it torpid. But the stimulus ofheat produces activity in the living principle, causesthe embryo to devour all the nutritive contents of theegg, and thence to increase proportionably in size.It is worthy of remark, however, that the stimulus oflight, contrary to that of heat, acts unfavourably uponthe hatching of eggs. Both of these positions maybeillustrated by numerous facts and experiments.Most birds, so far as has been ascertained, supplythe heat necessary for hatching their eggs by sittingconstantly upon them during a certain number ofdays ; but reptiles, such as the crocodile, bury theireggs in the warm sand upon the banks of rivers.Insects, again, seldom, if ever, sit upon their eggs, asbirds do, in order to hatch them. This, indeed,would be impossible, as the greater number of insectsdie in a few days after depositing their eggs, the continuationof the species being apparently their onlybusiness in their last or perfect stage ; since, as theythen generally cease to feed, they cannot possibly livelong.A few instances, however, have been observed,of insects performing something very similar to theK 3102 INSECT Transformations.incubation of birds, though we have the high authorityof Fabricius, that " insects never sit upon their eggs *."Upon the incontestable statements of two distinguishedobservers of insects, Frisch and DeGeer, the female of the common earwig {Forjiadaaurimilaria, Linn.) sits upon her eggs. Thiscircumstance, however, seems to have escaped thenotice of other naturalists, though her attentions toher young: ones is often witnessed. De Geer discovereda female earwig in the beginning of Aprilunder some stones, and brooding over a number ofeggs, of whose safety she appeared to be not a littlejealous. In order to study her proceedings the better,he placed her in a nurse-box filled with fresh earth,and scattered the eggs in it at random. She was notlong, however, in collection them with all care intoone spot, carrying them one by one in her mandibles,and placing herself over them. She never left themfor a moment, sitting as assiduously as a bird doeswhile hatching. In about five or six weeks the grubsvere hatched, and were then of a whitish colour J.At another time, in the beginning of June, DeGeer found under a stone a female earwig accompaniedwith a numerous brood of young, to all appearancenewly hatched, and nestling under their motherlikechickens under a hen. These he likewise placedin a nurse-box with fresh earth; but instead of burrowinginto the mould, as he had expected, they crowdedunder the bosom and between the legs of their mother,who remained quiet and evidently pleased, sufferingthem to continue there for an hour or more ata time. He fed both this brood and the one firstmentioned with bits of ripe apple; and perceived thatFabricius, Philosoph. Entomb. Xxvi.f Insects in Deutschlajid, 4lo. 1766.X De Geer, Mem., vol. iii. p. 548,HATCHING OF EGGS.they grew from day to day, and cast their skins, ascaterpillars do, more than once. The mother did notlive lon£^, probably in consequence of confinementand her progeny devoured nearly the whole of herbody, as they also did the bodies of their brethren,when any of these chanced to die. We may remark,in passing, that it is an unfounded popular prejudicethat earwigs get into the brain by creeping into theear ; for though, from being night insects, and dislikingexposure to the light, they may, by chance,attempt to take shelter in the ear, the disagreeableodour of the wax will soon drive them out: at allevents they could never get farther than the drum,which completely shuts the passage to the brain.We have known, indeed, a small beetle, get into theear; but it did no further injury than produce astrange tingling sensation by crawling about thedrum, and soon made its exit*. A little red insect(the harvest-bug?) sometimes gets into the ear inbed, and produces wonderful commotion, but no realinjury.Drum of the ear, shewing that there is no passage through it tothe brain,Kirby and Spence are inclined to infer that a treebug {Acantlioaoma grisea, Stephens) may also sit» Jar.104 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS. ,upon its eggs*, because De Geer found a mother ofthis species surrounded with a brood of thirty or fortyyoung ones following her as chickens follow a hen.She never leaves her family; but as soon as shemoves, all the young ones closely follow, and assemblearound her in a cluster wherever she makesa halt. De Geer once cut a branch of birch, uponwhich a family of these bugs had assembled, and themother shewed every symptom of fear and distress.Had she not had a family to protect, she would havetaken immediate flight ; but instead of this, she keptbeating her wings rapidly and incessantly, and neverstirred from her young. But even all this, affectionatelymaternal as it must be considered, is farfrom authorizing the conclusion that she sits uponher eggs ; though it is certain she must remain nearthem till they are hatched, unless she belong tothose mentioned by Busch as novo-viviparous f.One of the most common instances of somethingsimilar to birds hatching their eggs occurs in severalspecies of spiders, which may be seen sitting nearor upon the silken bag in which they have inclosedtheir eggs. Many of these mothers, however, diebefore their young are hatched, — all of them, perhaps,when the eggs are laid late in autumn. Duringthe winter of 1829-30, we watched a considerablenumber of the geometric spiders peirce) broodingover their eggs for several weeks ; bat though theweather before Christmas was little more than anaverage degree of coldness, every one of them died,some living a longer time, and others a shorter:. Butthis is not the case with a very common wanderingspider called by Dr. Lister the wolf (Lycosa saccatayLa.tr.), and first observed, we believe, by the celebratedHarvey §. " In order," says Swammerdam, " to♦ Intro, i. 358, and iii. 101.f Schneider, Europiiische Schmetterlinge, i. 206. J Jar.^ Harvey De Generation.HATCHING OF EGGS. 105hatch her eggs the better, she carries them about asit were in a case, with wonderful solicitude and affection; insomuch, that when the skin forming this case,which hangs to the hinder part of her body, is byany accident broken off, the Httle insect seeks afterit with as much earnestness and industry as a hen forher lost chickens, and when found fastens it againto its place with the greatest marks of joy *."Bonnet has given a more detailed account ofthe manners of this spider, which, though no lessfierce and ferocious in aspect than her congeners,manifests an extraordinary change of mien whenforcibly deprived of her eggs. Then she instantlyappears tame, stops to look around her, and beginsto walk at a slow pace, and search on every side forwhat she has lost, nor will she even fly when onethreatens to seize her. But should the experimenter,moved with compassion, restore her bag of eggs, shecatches it up with all haste, and darts away in a moment; or, when left undisturbed, will leisurely attachit again to her body.With a view'* continues Bonnet, " to putthis singular attachment to a novel test, I one daythrew a spider with her eggs into the pit-fall of anant-lion (Myrmelion formicariurri) t- The spider endeavouredto escape, and was eagerly remounting theside of the pit, when I again tumbled her to thebottom, and the ant-lion, more nimble than the firsttime, seized the bag of eggs with its mandibles, andattempted to drag it under the sand. The spider, onthe other hand, made the most strenuous efforts tokeep her hold, and struggled hard to defeat the aimof the concealed depredator; but the gum whichfastened her bag, not being calculated to withstandsuch violence, at length gave way, and the ant-HonBook of Nature, pt. i. p. 24.f See Insect Architecture, p. 209.106 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.was about to carry off the prize in triumph. Thespider, however, instantly regained it with her mandibles,and redoubled her endeavours to snatch thebag from her enemy ; but her efforts were vain, forthe ant-lion, being the stronger, succeeded in draggingit under the sand. The unfortunate mother, nowrobbed of her eggs, might have at least saved herown life, as she could easily have escaped out of thepit-fall ; but, wonderful to tell, she chose rather tobe buried alive along with her eggs. As the sandconcealed from my view what was passing below, Ilaid hold of the spider, leaving the bag in the powerof the ant-hon. But the affectionate mother, deprivedof her bag, would not quit the spot where shehad lost them, though I repeatedly pushed her witha twig. Life itself seemed to have become a burdento her since all her hopes and pleasures were gone forever'.That some portion of heat may be communicatedto the eggs of the spider, which are thus carried soassiduously under her body, is highly probable ; andit is also, no doubt, advantageous to the young, whenhatched, to have the assistance of their mother to openthe bag for them, as was remarked by De Geerf;without which," say Kirby and Spence, " theycould never escape J." But that neither of these areindispensable conditions we have ascertained by repeatedexperiments. We have taken a considerablenumber of these egg-bags from their mothers, andput them under inveii^d vine-glasses and into pillboxes,and in every instance the young have beenduly hatched, and made their way without assistanceout of the bag. In all these experiments, the youngspiders joined in concert in making a web across theirprison; a circumstance at variance with the assertion,Bonnet, (Euvres, vol. ii. p. 435.t DeGeer,Mem. vol.vii. p. 194. $ Introdd. i. p. 361.HATCHING OF EGGS. 107copied from Lister into most subsequent works onnatural history, that this species never spins a web.They might not indeed have done so if they had beenleft at liberty*.A spider of the same species, which Bonnet keptunder an inverted glass, at first was so exceedinglyattached to her bag of eggs, that he could not beather away from it after it was detached. *' By andbye," he continues, " I observed with surprise thatshe had abandoned and kept aloof from the very bagwhich she had previously defended with so much courageand address ; and I marvelled still more to seeher run away from it when I placed it near her. Iremarked at the same time that she had become lessagile, seemingly in consequence of sickness. Bymore close observation, I discovered that several ofthe young ones were hatched, and their numbersincreased by degrees, while all ran towards theirmother and climbed upon her body. Some placedthemselves on her back, some on her head, and someon her limbs, so that she was literally covered withthem, and appeared to bend under the weight, not somuch from being over-loaded, as from her feeble condition; and indeed she soon afterwards died. Theyoung spiders remained in a group upon the bodyof their mother, which they did not abandon for sometime,and for the purpose, as I was half inclined(pardon the odious supposition) to think, of suckingthe juices of her body."In order to prove whether a spider of this speciescould distinguish her own effort-bas: from that of astranger, we interchanged the bags of two individuals,which we had put under inverted wine-glasses ; butboth manifested great uneasiness, and would nottouch the strange bags. We then introduced one ofthe mothers into the glass containing her eggs andViri f Bonnet, CEuvres^vol. ii. p. 440,108 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.the other spider ; but even then she did not take tothem, which we attributed to the presence of the other,as all spiders nourish mutual enmity. Upon removingthe stranger, however, she shewed the same indifferenceto her eggs as before, and we concludedthat, after having lost sight of them for a short time,she was no longer able to recognize them*.A more extraordinary method of hatching eggsoccurs in several insects, thence termed ovo-vivipa-rous, which retain the eggs within their bodies till theyare hatched ; and in this way they appear, like largeranimals, to produce young instead of eggs. We donot here allude to the cochenille insects formerly mentioned; for though these cover their eggs with theirbodies, it is after they are laid and imbedded in gossamer.Neither can these singular insects be properlysaid to sit upon their eggs, inasmuch as the motheralways dies when she has finished laying.The suffer {Blennius ovG-viviparus, Lacepede),a British sea-fish, common under stones at low-watermark, affords an instance of this singular mode of theeggs being hatched in the body of the mother; and itis remarkable that when the young are ready toappear, she leaves her usual haunts on the coast, andgoes farther out to sea, that they may be out of thereach of their natural enemies f. Our common viper{Coluber beaus, Linn.) is also novo-viviparous, as areseveral other reptiles ; though it is an exception to thegeneral rule in this class. We caught a female of thenimble lizard lacerta agilis, Linn.) on a heathnear Sorn, Ayrshire, in July, and kept it for some timeunder a glass, where it produced six young ones ; butinconsequence of improper food, or of confinement,they all soon died. This heard is said to be sometimesoviparous. The observations also of the elderJ. R. f LacepC'de, Poissons, ii. p. 497. J J. R.Novo-VIVIPAROUS INSECTS. 109naturalists with respect to the scorpion's being* ovo-viviparous, have been recently verified by LeonDufour*, a living French naturalist, distinguished foracuteness and accuracy.In the case of insects, it was first discovered byRedii, the father of experimental entomology, that,though the greater number of flies lay eggs, somealso bring forth their young alive ; and he was thenceled to put the question, whether such flies, under differentcircumstances of temperature, do not sometimesproduce young, and at other times deposit eo^gsf.He might as well, says Reaumur, have asked whether,in certain circumstances, a hen, instead of lacing-eggs,should bring forth chickens. The fact, on the contrary,has been ascertained by Reaumur, and recentlyconfirmed by Dufour i, that the ovo-vi\iparous insectsare furnished with an abdominal pouch, in which theeggs are deposited by the mother previous to theirbeing hatched. In this respect they afford a strikinganalogy with the kangaroo, the opossum, and othermarsupial quadrupeds, which are furnished with asimilar pouch for protecting their young in the firststage of their existence. One of our most commonflies exemplifies this.It may not have occurred to many of our readersthat there are more sorts than one of the large fliesusually ca. ed blow-flies and flesh flies. One of these,distinguished by its brilliant shining green colour andblack legs (Musca Caesar, Linn), we have advertedto in recounting the experiments of Redii; another,frequently called the blue-bottle (Musca vomitoria,Linn), is easily distinguished by the abdomen being;of a shining blue, the shoulders black, and the foreheadfox-coloured. The insect, however, to which we wish tocall attention at present, though nearly the size of theNouv. Diet, d' Hist. Nat., xxx.426.f Redii, Experience inferno alia Gen.degl' Insects, to. 1668.1 Annalists Sciences Naturelles. § Page 3.LnoINSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.blue-bottle, rather longer and more slender, and black,with lighter stripes on the shoulders, is not blue in theabdomen, but greyish black, and all over chequeredwith squares of a lighter colour. This chequered blowflysarcophagi carrara, Meigen) does not evenbelong to the same genus as the preceding, and differsfi'om it in the remarkable circumstance of hatchingits eggs in an abdominal pouch, and instead of eggsdepositing maggots upon dead carcasses. The eggsof all the flesh flies are in sultry weather hatched withgreat rapidity ; but in the case of the chequered blow-fly,nature has provided the means of still more rapid destructionfor removing the offensive parts of carcasses.The arrangement of the numerous minute larvae inthe pouch is very remarkable, and resembles the coilof a watch-spring, or a roll of ribbon. Reaumurhad the patience and perseverance to uncoil this multitudinousassemblage of flies in embryo, and found itabout two inches and a half in length, though thebody of the mother-fly herself was only about one,the chequered blow-fly. B, the abdomen of the chequeredblow-fly, opened and magnified, shewing the coil of young laisse.C, the coil of larvae partly unwound.Novo-VIVIPAROUS INSECTS.Illthird of an inch, and he computed that there wereabout 20,000 young in the coil*. When this extraordinaryfecundity is considered, we need not wonderat the countless swarms which appear as if by magicupon a joint of meat during hot weather.Like most female insects, the mother-fly dies in afew days after giving birth to her numerous brood ;but, unlike the oviparous flies, she seems to take aconsiderable time to deposit the whole. It would beimpossible indeed for her pouch to contain the larvaeif they were all hatched at the same time ; and thereforeit has been so ordered by Providence that theyshould arrive at maturity in succession. From theearly death of the mother, Reaumur conjectured thatthey did not scruple to eat their way through herbowels ; but he disproved his supposition by a mostdecisive experiment. He took a fly which had alreadydeposited a few larvae, and closed the natural openingof the pouch with sealing-ava, so that it was impossibleany more could make their exit there. The motherlived several days longer than she would havedone, had she been left at liberty to produce heryoung ; but not one of them attempted to force apassage, after being shut up for ten days.Another large grey fly with brick-red eyes (speciesA, arose grey blow-fly, with the abdomen opened, shewing theyoung iii'Ht;gnt>. B, breathing apparatus ot the maggot of alarge grey blow-fly.-i; Reaumur, Mem. iv. 417.L 2112 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.not ascertained) was discovered by Reaumur to benovo-viviparous ; but the embryo flies were not arrangedin the pouch in the same spiral form as thepreceding, but longitudinally. These did not appearto be quite so numerous ; and they had a peculiarbreathing apparatus, which, when shut, as it could beatpleasure, appeared in the form of a crown.Amongst several other novo-viviparous flies discoveredby Reaumur, there was a very minute tipulidan gnat(species not ascertained) with a jet-black body, whitewings, and beaded antennae, not larger than the headof an ordinary pin, which was bred in great numbersfrom some cows' dung put into one of his nurse-boxesfor another purpose. He justly remarks upon thiscircumstance, that " the minute and the grand arenothing, or rather are the same, to the Author ofnature.'The numerous genus Aphis presents the singularanomaly of producing eggs in the autumn and livingyoung during summer, and, as Curtis tells us, evenduring winter in green-houses. De Geer, however,ascertained that it was not the same individual aphideswhich at one season produced young and at anothereggs, but different generations. By a series of verycareful and troublesome experiments Bonnet alsoascertained the curious fact, that in three months ninegenerations of these insects may be produced in succession,though the males be rigorously excluded fromthe nurse-boxes where the females are isolated. Infact all the aphides produced in spring from the eggslaid in autumn appear to be females; and no males areproduced till the end of summer, a short time beforethe eggs are deposited for winter. Among both malesand females are some with and some without wings, —the nature of which distinction does not appear to beyet ascertained.De Geer, Mem. des Insectes, iii. 70.EGGS OF APHIDES. 113Bonnet, however, whose opinion is entitled toconsiderable authority, seems to think that the eggs ofaphides which are destined to sun ive the winter arevery different from other eggs; and he supposes that theinsect, in a state nearly perfect, quits the body of itsmother in that covering which shelters it from the coldin winter, and that it is not, as other germs are in theegg, surrounded by food, by means of which it is developedand supported. It is nothing more, he conjectures,than an asylum of which the aphides appearingat another season have no need ; and it is torthis reason that some are produced naked and othersenveloped in a covering. If this be correct, the mothersare not then tmly oviparous, even in autumn,when they deposit these pseudo-eggs ; since their youngare almost as perfect as they ever will be, in the asylumin which they are naturally placed at birth. Itwas in vain that Bonnet endeavoured to preserveeggs of this sort in his chamber till spring, in consequence,he imagines, of the want of a certain degree ofmoisture which they would have had out of doors. Wehave been more successful, through the precaution ofnot taking the eggs from their native tree till February,and in 1830 we had a brood of several hundredsproduced of the oak aphis {Aphis Quercvs)^.The failure on the part of Bonnet leads us to remark,with the younger Huber, that ants are moreskilful in this respect than naturalists, and anxiouslynurse, during winter, the eggs of aphides, which theycollect with great care in the autumn. The interestingnarrative of the discovery of this we shall give inRuler's own words.One day in November," says he, " anxious toknow if the yellow ants (Formica cava) began tobury themselves in their subterranean chambers, I destroyed,with care, one of their habitations, story byJ. R. .L 3114 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.story. I had not advanced far in this attempt, whenI discovered an apartment containing an assemblageof little eggs, which were for the most part of thecolour of ebony. Several ants surrounded and appearedto take great care of them, and endeavoured,as quickly as possible, to convey them from my sight.I seized upon this chamber, its inhabitants, and thetreasure it contained.The ants did not abandon these eggs to maketheir escape ; a stronger instinct retained them : theyhastened to conceal them under the small dwellingwhich I held in my hand, and when I reached home,I drew them from it, to observe them more attentively.Viewed with a microscope, they appeared nearly ofthe form of ants' eggs, but their colour was entirelydifferent ; the greater part were black ; others were ofa cloudy yellow. I found them in several ant-hills,and obtained them of different degrees in shade ; theywere not all black and yellow ; some were brown, of aslight and also of a brilliant red and white ; otherswere of a colour less distinct, as straw colour, greyish,and I remarked that they were not the same colour atboth extremities.To observe them more closely, I placed them in thecorner of a box faced with glass ; they were collectedin a heap like the eggs of ants; their guardians seemedto value them highly ; after having visited them, theyplaced one part in the earth, but I witnessed the attentionthey bestowed upon the rest ; they approachedthem, slightly separating their mandibles ; passed theirtongue between each, extended them, then walked alternatelyover them, depositing, I believe, a liquidsubstance as they proceeded. They appeared to treatthem exactly as if they were eggs of their ownspecies ; they touched them with their antennae, andfrequently carried them in their mouths ; they did notquit these eggs a single instant ; they took themCARE BY ANTS OF EGGS OF APHIDES. HoUp, turned them, and after having' surveyed themwith affectionate regard, conveyed them with extremetenderness to the Httle chamber of earth I had placedat their disposal. They were not, however, the eggsof ants ; we know that these are extremely white, becomingtransparent as they increase in age, but neveracquire a colour essentially different. I was, for along time, unacquainted with the origin of those ofwhich I have just spoken, and by chance discoveredthey contained little aphides ; but it was not these individualeggs I saw them quit ; it was other eggswhich were a little larger, found in the nests of yellowants, and of a particular species. On opening an anthill,I discovered several chambers containing a greatnumber of brown eggs, of which the ants were extremelyjealous, carrying them with the utmost expeditionto the bottom of the nest, disputing and contendingfor them with a zeal which left me no doubtof the strong attachment with which they regardthem.Desirous of conciliating their interests, as well asmy own, I took the ants and their treasure, and placedthem in such a manner that I might easily observethem. These eggs were never abandoned. The antstook the same care of them as the former. The followingday I saw one of these eggs open, and anaphis fully formed, having a large trunk, quit it. Iknev/ it to be a puceron of the oak : the others weredisclosed a few days after, and the greater number inmy presence. They set immediately about suckingthe juice from some branches of the tree I gave them,and the ants now found, within their reach, a recompensefor their care and attention. The ant-hill whencethese eggs had been taken was situated at the foot ofan oak, which readily accounts for their existence inthat place. I discovered them in the spring ; the puceronswhich quitted them were very large for insects116 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.just born, but they had not yet obtained their fullsize."It is not, however, the aphides themselves who selectthe snug winter retreat of an ant-hill, or who knowhow to secure the careful nursing; of the ants. Allthis is the sole concern of the latter, to secure for themselvesa supply of the honey-dew, as it is erroneouslycalled, secreted by the aphides in spring. The ants,it may be proper to remark, take similar care of theirown eg;g^s (as well as of their cocoons, popularly supposedto be their eo;o;s), as was remarked by Sir E.King, in the reign of Charles II. He informs us thatthey diligently gather together in a heap their trueeggs, which are small and white like the granules oflump sugar, and upon these eggs they lie in multitudes," I suppose," says Derham, " by way of incubationt-" " I have observed," adds Sir E. King,in summer, that in the morning they bring up thoseof their young called ant-eggs cocoons) towards thetop of the bank, so that you may, from ten o'clock tillfive or six in the afternoon, find them near the top, —for the most part on the south side. But towardsseven or eight at night, if it be cool, or likely to rain,you may dig a foot deep before you can find them J."An interesting family of two-winged flies (,Leach) resemble the aphides in somepoints of their economy, though in others they aresingularly peculiar. Reaumur discovered, what hasbeen recently confirmed by Dufour and others, thatthe mothers not only hatch their eggs within the body,but retain them there till they are changed into chrysalides.Reaumur gives a lively narrative of hisdiscovery, and the solicitude of his servants to find himfemale flies ready to deposit what he at first took forM. P. Huber on Ants, p. 245.t Derham, Phys. Theol. ii. 207. lllh ed.X Phil. Trans. No. xxiii.Novo-VIVIPAROUS FLIES.es!;gs. He was so anxious to hatch those supposedeggs that he carried them in his pocket by day andtook them to bed with him at night, (as Bonnetafterwards did with the eggs of aphides,) for severalweeks successively ; but instead of grubs, as he hadexpected, perfect flies were evolved exactly similar totheir parents. He calls them spider flies, from theirresemblance to spiders .;; and in some parts of Francethe species which infests horses (Hippobosca equina')is called the Spaniard or Breton : in England it istoo well known under the name of the forest fly.Spider flies (Ilippoboscldce, Leach.)We have the more willingly introduced this subjecthere, that another fly criteria Hlrundinis,Offers), of the same family, has the instinct to depositits egg-like cocoons in the warm feathery nest ofswallows, where they have all the necessary heatwhich Reaumur, in his experiments, was so carefulto maintain. In return for the warmth which theyoung has thus received, the perfect fly, during itsbrief existence, lives by sucking the blood of the swallows,as the one first mentioned sucks the blood ofhorses, horned cattle, and, it is also said, of man.118 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.The effect of heat upon the eggs of insects has beencarried much farther than in the experiments justalluded to of Reaumur and Bonnet *. Spallanzani wasdesirous of ascertaining what degree of heat the eggsof insects and other animals, as well as the seeds ofplants, would bear when compared with their larvae;and he found that below 93*^ Fahr. silk-worms didnot appear affected, but at 95°, and still more at 97°,they became restless, while at 99° they ceased to move,and all died at 108°. The eggs of these, on theother hand, long resisted the influence of heat. At80° they were the most productive ; at 99° many stillappeared, but with considerable diminution, and asthe heat was increased their fertility decreased, till at144° not one was fertile. The eggs and caterpillarsof the elm butterfly {Vanesfta polychloros?) perfectlycorresponded with those of the silk-worm. In the caseof the eggs of the blow-fly (Musca voinitorid) a greatmany produced maggots at 124*^ ; but at 135° and138° very few, and all were sterile at 140°. Themaggots produced from these eggs became restless at88°, and endeavoured to escape, and as this heat wasincreased they became proportionably more agitatedtill it arose to 108°, when they all perished. Fullgrownmaggots of the same kind all died at 108°;but when changed into flies they died when the heatwas so low as 99° ; though their pupse were productiveat 104° and 106^ but not at lll°t.If these experiments may, as we believe they mayberelied on, we have some reason to doubt that " theeggs of the mi f sea vomitoria^ our common blow-fly,are often," as Dr. Good affirms, " deposited in theheat of summer upon putrescent meat, and broiledwith such meat over a gridiron in the form of steaks, inaheat not merely of 212°, but of three or four times212° ; and yet, instead of being hereby destroyed, weSee Insect Architecture, p. 24.f Spallanzanij Tracts by Dalyell, vol. i. p.35.EFFECTS OF HEAT UPON EGGS. 119sometimes find them quickened by this very exposureinto their larva or grub state." It would have beenwell if some more accurate authority had been given forso miraculous a fact than this general statement : theappearance of maggots on broiled meat, from which theinference is apparently made, seems rather to indicatethat eggs, or more probably novo-viviparous larvae, hadbeen deposited there, not before, but after the broiling.One certain result of all such experiments is, thateggs are more capable of withstanding heat than theanimals producing them; and from similar experimentsthe same law appears to hold with the seedsof plants, which also withstand more heat thaneggs. Water increases the destructive influence ofheat. The causes upon which these curious factsdepend do not appear to be well understood. It iscertain, however, that the life of an animal in the legs;is feeble, or at least lethargic, in comparison with thatof the animal produced ; and that animals, when in astate of very feeble animation, resist external injurieswith more impunity than when very vivacious.We once saw a very delicate young girl, emaciatedwith scrofula, have her leg amputated without evenheaving a sigh; while a robust Irish labourer, whounderwent the same operation immediately after her,roared like a bull.Experiments prove that the fluids of eggs, and consequentlyof their germs, are more abundant than invegetable seeds ; and this excess of fluid may tend todestroy the germ more readily, from heat expandingthe fluids, and thus putting them in motion : for thenthey must strike violently against the tender parts of thegerms, and rupture and destroy them. Hence seedsexposed to heat are killed at lower degrees in water,than if dry, in the same way as ice will melt soonerin warm water than in air of equal temperature t-Good's Book of Nature, vol. i. p. 221. 1st edit,f Spallanzani, Tracts by Dalyell, toI. i. p. 43.120 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.In the practical management of the eggs of the silkwormCount Dandolo directs the temperature of thestove-room to be 64° when they are first put in.The third day the temperature should be raised to66° ; the fourth day to 68^ ; the fifth day to 71° ; thesixth day to 73°; the seventh day to 75°; theeighth day to 77°; the ninth day to 80°; the tenth,eleventh, and twelfth days to 82° When the temperatureof the stove-room is raised to 75°, it is advantageousto have two dishes, in which water may bepoured, so as to offer a surface of nearly four inchesdiameter. In four days there will have taken placean evaporation of nearly twelve ounces of water ; thevapour, which rises very slowly, moderates the drynesswhich might occur in the stove-house, particularlyduring a northerly wind : very dry air is notfavourable to the development of the silk-worms."Damp or stagnant air, or sudden changes of temperature,either high or low, are exceedingly injurious tothe hatching of eggs.From some very curious experiments of ,it appears that exposure to light is by no meansfavourable to the hatching of eggs. This ingeniousnaturalist inclosed a number of eggs in glass vessels,admitting the light to one series and excluding itfrom another, similar in every other particular. Theresult was, that few or none of the eggs exposed tolight were hatched, while those in the dark werealmost all fertile. He arrived at the same results inhis experiments upon vegetable seeds t- Kirby andSpence justly remark, that these curious facts mayaccount for so many insects fastening their eggs to theunder sides of leaves, and may be the final cause ofthe opaque horny texture of those exposed in full day J.Among the singular circumstances in which insectsdiffer from the larger animals, we may reckon thatlecount Dandolo, on Silk-Worms, Eng. trans., p. 55.f Philosophical Mag. vol. ix. p. 244. I Introduce, iii. p. 77.INCREASE IN SIZE OF EGGS.of the ejvii's of some increasing in size during: the processof iiatchinc^. The fact appears to have first beennoticed by the celebrated Valhsnieri in his observationson saw flies {Tenthredinidce, Leach*. Otherinstances were subsequently discovered by Reaumur,De Geer, Derham, Rusel, and the youngerHuber. " It ouo-ht not," says Reaumur, speaking ofgall flies (CfjjupidcB, Westwood), "to be passed insilence, that the egg which I found in the gall appearedto me considerably larger than the eggs of the samespecies when they proceed from the body of the fly,or even when they are taken from the mother flynear the time of their being laid. The whole ofthose I took from the mother flies which 1 killed wereGeneration of a water mite {Hydrachna ahstergens).a a, the water scorpion, in whose body the mite lines her eggs.h b, a magnified view of one of its claws, c, a tooth-like processfor restraining the motion of the joint, rf, the water-mite, c, agreatly magnified view of one of its eggs. /, the hook by whichit is inserted into the body of the scorpion.See Insect Architecture; pp. 157-8.M122 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.remarkably small ; and I thence inferred that the es:would have, and indeed had, increased in the gall* "Rosell made a similar observation on the red eggsof a water-mite {Hydrachna abstergens) ; and he wasinduced to suppose (justly, as we think) that, as theyare deposited upon the bodies of water-scorpions(Nepidce, Leach), they derive their means of increasefrom themes I^e Geer remarked that thewater-scorpions, when much infested with them, becamegradually weakened as the eggs increased insize X-Huber the younger, in the course of his experiments,discovered that the eggs of ants, from beingsmall and opaque, became comparatively large andtransparent. *' To be convinced of the truth of this,"he says, " I viewed those eggs with the microscope.I also measured them, and having separated themfrom each other, found the longest to be those onlyin which the grubs where hatched in my presence.If I removed them from the workers, betbre theyattained their full length and transparency, theydried up, and the grubs never quitted them."Huber is inclined to attribute this remarkable increaseand transparency to the humidity imparted tothem by the working ants who so assiduously passthem through their mouths. " For," he adds, "if theybe not surrounded with a Quid, or preserved from theinfluence of the external air, their pellicle, moistenedevery instant by the workers, may preserve a certaindegree of suppleness and expansibility, accordingto the development of the included grub."The most minute observations, however, of thiskind, which have hitherto been published, were madeReaumur, Mem. vol.iii.p. 479.f Rdsel, Insecteti. vol. iii. p. 152.'I De Geer, Mem. des Insectes, vol. vii. p. 145,§ M, P. Huber on Arts, p. 72.DEVELOPMENT OF EGGS. 123by Heroldt on the eg'i^s of the garden spider (Epeiradiadem), to which we formerly alluded. He dividesthe process of hatching into twelve periods, accordingto the progress of development. This progress is notmeasured by time, as has been done in experimentingon the eggs of birds. The germ, or cicatrice, whichis composed of minute granules, when placed in adue temperature, begins to expand towards the extremityof the e<^s,-> till it takes the form of a comet,whose nucleus is the centre of the germ, and whosetail consists of transparent globules. On continuingto expand, or rather to disperse its granules, theyappear to be decomposed into imperceptible molecules,producing a sort of translucent cloud, through whichthe globules of the yolk may be distinguished. Theplace which the germ previously occupied appears asasingle transparent point. The cloudy matternext accumulates round the centre of the germ,assumes a pearly aspect, and becomes solid andopaque. This is the rudiment of the embryo spider,the outline of whose head and body becomes apparent,occupying a little more than a fourth of the legs:.At first this embryo appears homogeneous, but by andbye four little arches are seen, which are the rudimentsof the legs, and at the same time the outlinesof the mandibles are formed. The whole seems toderive nourishment from the yolk, in which it is rootedas a parasite plant upon a tree. When the embryospider is near its exclusion, it completely fills the interiorof the e^^'^y the shell of which moulds itself closelyaround the body, and it looks like the nymph of abeetle*. When sufficiently developed, it makes a rentin the shell, as was first observed by De Geer, oppositethe breast, through which it pushes its head, andsuccessively disengages its body ; but the shell stillenvelopes the legs and feet, and it is not without aHeroldt, Exercit. de Genera. Aranearum in Ovo.M 2124 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.great deal of trouble, by alternately stretching out andcontracting them, that it succeeds in rending this, andsets itself at liberty*. Even then the young spider canneither spin a web nor catch prey ; for it is still envelopedin an extremely delicate membrane, which itdoes not moult unless the weather is favourable andfines.b C dHatching of the e.afg: of the garden spider (Epeira diadema). a,natural size, b, legs; magnified, the cicatrice (a white spots in thefront. C, the germ enlarged ; a, the head, and b, the body of theembryo, d, the embryo spider ready to cast oft its first skin.The latter circumstance will enable us to explainsome experiments made by Redii, who kept spidersnewly hatched for many months without food |. In theexperiments made by us upon the eggs of the wolf spider{Lycosa saccatd), we more than once kept the youngin boxes, where they were forgotten and without food ;and we uniformly found that they remained lively andwell so long as they did not cast their embryo skin;but when they did moult, they could not long survivethe want of sustenance §.In the eggs of moths, the embryo, previous to exclusion,may be seen through the shell, snugly coiled=.= De Geer, Mem. vii., p. 196.f Diet. Classique d'Hist. Nat. xii. 141.% Redii, Experience 99. J. R.CONSTRUCTION OF EGGS.up in a inst, as is distinctly shewn in many of thebeautiful and accurate figures of Sepp*.a, egg of the privet hawk moth (Sp/n'^j? /./paf??-?) magnified,shewing the inclosed embryo. 6, the caterpillar, when grown.In the case of the eggs" of birds, the chick, whenfully developed, breaks the shell with its bill, thepoint of which is then furnished with a hard scale. Thisis evidently contrived by providential wisdom for thisvery purpose, for it drops off in a few days after thechick is excluded. It is probable that the larvae ofmany insects which are furnished with strong* mandiblesgnaw their way through the egg-shell ; but weknow that there are others which, like the spider,rupture their envelope, since the edges appear raggedand irregular. Others, again, seem to have an openingpro iced for them, in a door, which only requiresthem to push it open. This is the case with the louse(Pediciihis hiimanns), and with the bird-louse(^Nir7nns), found on the neck feathers of the goldenpheasant. A still more ingenious contrivance wasdiscovered by the Rev. R. Sheppard, in the eg of afield bug {Pentatomay Latr.), which is not only murderWondered Gods, passim.M 3INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.a b cDoors in effijs for the escape of tip larvae,rt, egg of the louse (Peniculus humanise). o, egg of the pentagon.c, shell of a moth's egg found upon the dew-berry, all magnified.wished with a convex lid, but with a lever of a hornytexture, and in the form of a cross-bow, for opening it,the handle being fixed to the lower part of the egj;^ by amembrane, and the bow part to the lid*. On theleaf of a dew-berry (Rubus cassius) we found abeautifully ribbed egg of some moth, which, havingbeen brought into our study in January, 1830, washatched by the warmth, and exhibited an openingsimilar to the elastic cocoon of the emperor-moth ; eachof the ribs having expanded to allow of the escape ofthe caterpillar.The period at which the eggs of insects are hatchedafter deposition depends mainly upon temperature ;for by keeping them in an ice-house in summer, thehatching may be retarded t, as it may be hastened(witness the instance in the preceding paragraph) byheat in winter ; but there are many other circumstancesunknown to us which often hasten or retardthe process. The eggs of the blow-fly {{Musca victoria)are said to hatch within two hours |, while thoseof several moths, and numerous other insects, remainunhatched for six or nine months; perhaps, in somecases, even for one or more years It is worthy of re-kirbyand Spence, iii. 104. f Reaumur; Mem.+ Nouv. Diet. d'Hist. Nat. xii. 5(i4.PERIODS OF HATCHING. 127mark, however, that the periods of hatching correspondin a striking' manner with the leafing of trees,and the appearance of other materials fitted for the foodof the young. We observed a good example of thisin the spring of 1829. A lackey moth had depositedduring autumn a spiral ring of her eggs on the branchof a sweet-briar planted in a garden-pot out of doors.We removed this into our study during the winter.Here the warmth caused the tree to bud, and at thesame time hatched the lackeys about a month soonerthan those out of doors. Owing to the same cause, severalcolonies of the caterpillars of the brown-tail mothrevived from their torpidity, and came forth from theirwinter nests before the hawthorns were in leaf, a circumstancewhich would not have happened to themout of doors*. Kirby and Spence give an instanceprecisely similar, of the eggs of an aphis found onthe birch, and hatched in-doors a full month beforethose in the open airs.It is a remarkable circumstance, long observed bycollectors, that the male broods of insects appearearlier than the female broods ; and it would appearfrom the following fact, that there is a similar retardationin the hatching of female eggs. " Upon theleaf of a poplar tree were found three eg-gs of thepuss moth crura vi/u/la), two of which were hatchedabout two weeks before the other. The first weremales, the last a female. As they were on thesame leaf, and presumed, therefore, to have beenlaid by the same parent, at the same time, the differenceof hatching could not have arisen from differenceof weather, exposure, &c. |" In the case of thelackeys on the sweet-briar above-mentioned, somewere hatched several days before others, but whetherthese were of different sexes we did not ascertain.J. R. f Kirby and Spence, Intr. ii. 434.I J. Rennicj InMag. of Nat. Hist., vol.i. p. 373.SECTION II.— Larvae *Chapter VI.Structure of Caterpillars, Grubs, and Maggots.It is reported by Boerhaave, in his life of Swimmersthat when the Grand Duke of Tuscany wasvisiting the curiosities of Holland, in 1668, he foundnothing more worthy of his admiration than the naturalist'saccount of the structure of caterpillars , — forSwammerdam, by the skilful management of instrumentsof wonderful delicacy and fineness, shewedthe prince in what manner the future butterfly liesneatly folded up in the caterpillar, like a flower inthe unexpanded bud. He was, indeed, so struckwith this and other wonders of the insect world, disclosedto him by the great naturalist, that he madehim a princely offer to induce him to reside at hiscourt ; but Swammerdam, from feelings of independence,modestly declined to accept it, preferring tocontinue his delightful studies at home. The factswhich thus struck the Duke with admiration, we shallnow endeavour, with the aid of Swammerdam, totrace. But, before we proceed, it may not be out ofplace to advert to some very novel views which haveIt may be proper to repeat here, that an insect, when hatchedfrom the egg, is called by naturalists larva ; and in popular language,a caterpillar or grub, if furnished with feet, ad a maggot,worm, or gentle, if without feet.ANIMAL AND VEGETABLE TRANSMUTATIONS. 129been recently started by continental naturalists, whomaintain that vegetables are actually converted intoanimals, and these again into vegetables.It must be obvious, we think, from the details wehave already given, that the doctrine of transmutation.,so far as regards insects, is equally absurd andimpossible with the pretended alchemical transmutationof lead and other inferior metals into gold and silver;which doctrine was, indeed, supported upon the supposedfact of insects being thus transmuted *. But visionaryas either of these may appear, they have bothbeen supported by men of talent and distinguished reputation.It does not, perhaps, at first sight seem moreimpossible, that water should be transmuted intodiamonds, or brass into gold, than that an e^^ shoulddisclose a chick or a caterpillar, or that a caterpillarshould change into a butterfly or a beetle ; but byadhering rigidly to facts, and rejecting as rigidly allfancies and analogies, how plausible soever they mayappear, we are certain that the latter changes are ofcommon occurrence, whereas the former are contraryto all experience, and to the best experiments. Wesay the best; because observations, if not experiments,have been made for the express purpose of provingsuch improbable transmutations.I have shewn to a great number of persons,"says Professor Agardh, " the changeable crow-silk(Conferva mirabilis. Roth ; Drajxirnaldia m.Born St. V.) in its state of a plant, the 3d of August,change by the 5th into molecules endowed with loco-mobility,reunite by the 6th into simple articulations,and reconstituted by the 10th into the primitive formof the plant t." Previous to this (in 1814) ProfessorNees von Esenbeck, of Bonn, published similar observerTheodore Cayenne, Exist. Dedicate ad Theatrum Insect.Mouffetii.f Agardh, Diss.deMetamorph. Alarm. 1820.130 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS,nations, in which he remarks, that " as the phenomenain question appear to contradict certain principlesadmitted into the reigning systems, we often preferrather to deny the conclusions of candid and experiencedobservers, than to receive what has hithertobeen regarded as untenable by generally admitted authority.In this situation are placed all observationsupon the transition or metamorphosis of vegetable life(characterised by immobility) into animal life (characterisedby mobility) ; — the moment when a being,arrived at the period of its existence, continues itself,as it were, by a new creation, and the animated embryodeveloped itself into a motionless vegetable."Agardh, in his account of another allied family{OcillatoricB), has even given figures, first of theplant, and then of the animalcules into which itsfilaments are converted, which induced Bory St.Vincent to remark sarcastically, that " all natureappears, to the Professor of Lund, to be nothing butconserve travestied."Passing over what has been published on thisstrange doctrine by Voucher, Girod-Chantrans,Treviranus, Cams, and others, we shall only stop tomention the more recent observations of FrancisUnfrer. The plant he selected was the Confervadilatata /3 of Roth. " Within the space of one hour,"says he, " I succeeded in tracing, not only the diminutionof vitality and death of the animalcules, butalso the subsequent development of the dead animalsinto germinating plants, in such a manner as toestablish the truth of the fact." He adds with greatsimplicity, " I could scarcely believe my own eyes."Like Agardh, he has given figures of these miraclein '•' Annales des Sciences Naturelles" for 1828.\ Agardh, Icunes Al, dined. illo.+ Diet. Classique d'Hist. Nat.,x. 469.§ Annales des Sciences Nat., 1828.ANIMAL AND VEGETABLE TRANSMUTATIONS. 131loss changes, which our readers may be curious tosee.1S> presupposedanimal and vegetable metamorphoses.Since the only proof of these plants being transmuted(as is alleged) into animals, appears to betheir acquiring motion, and, as linger says,swimming freely about;" we think we should beequally entitled to infer that camphor is animatedbecause it moves spontaneously when thrown intoWater. This property in camphor has not hithertobeen satisfactorily explained; and it would undoubtedlybe better to leave the phenomena described by ouradvocates for transmutation likewise unexplained,than to leap at once to their startling conclusions.*' We might as well," says Bory St. Vincent,astonish the world with the discovery of a fig-treetransmuted into a mulberry tree, because theBroiissonetia, when young, has the leaves of the one,and when old of the other ; and by such a system ofobserving we shall end in looking upon the oak andthe mistletoe as the same plant : the wand of Circecould not produce more astounding consequencesNees von Esenbeck.132 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.than the microscope does in the hands of suchobservers *."It is apparently a branch of the same untenabletheory, which maintains that the fluid termed byHeroldt the blood of caterpillars is the only originalportion of them, which, being endowed with a formativepower f, produces an envelope for itself of mucousnet-work crete mucosuiii), and this again, by means ofa similar power, is successively transmuted into thecaterpillar, the pupa, and the perfect insect |; in somesimilar way, we suppose, to the formative power displayedby water, when, during frost, it shoots intocrystals of ice. But the framers of such theories seemto forget that living blood is a very different thingfrom inanimate water, and the growth and nutritionof animals from the chemical formation of crystals.Kirby and Spence very justly remark, that Heroldt'sformative power is only an apology for ignorance, andthat his denying the existence of what he cannot trace,is no proof of his doctrine, but of his mistake in supposingthe first appearance of the organs of the butterflyin his microscope to be literally their firstexistence. To suppose the blood, we may also remark,endowed with the power of creating insects, gets ridof no difficulty and explains no phenomenon, while itis altogether a gratuitous assumption, unprovedand improbable. " Admirable discovery," exclaimsVires ; " as if you should affirm that a stone fallsbecause it falls" We think it is St. Pierre whoremarks, that Nature seldom permits philosophers topeep to the bottom of her basket; and we have alreadyDiet. Class, d' Hist. Nat. x. 468.f The German term is " Bildende Kraft," i.e. I'll formairxx,or Nisus formative.:{: Heroldt, quoted by Kirby and Spence, iii. 83.§ Quoted by Kii by and Spence.EMBRYO BUTTERFLIES.recorded many instances, besides the one under consideration,of their strange mistakes in guessing atwhat they cannot fathom. We prefer followingSvvammerdam, Reaumur, and Bonnet, in recordingwhat can be actually seen on examining the structureof caterpillars.In a chapter of Swammerdam's Book of Nature,quaintly headed " An animal in an animal, or thebutterfly hidden in the caterpillar," we find the followingdetails respecting the caterpillar of the largecabbage butterfly (Portia brace). The Egg ofthis insect is of a yellow colour, flask shaped, andmarked with fifteen ribs, converging towards thesmaller end, and extending a little beyond it. TheEgg of the large cabbage butterfly {Pvntia brassiccs), magnified.caterpillar, but too well known from its ravages, hassixteen feet, a yellow line along the back, and anotheron each side, the rest of the body being bluish grey,spotted with black; and the whole surface sprinkledwith thin, short, whitish hairs*.In order," continues Swammerdam, " to discoverplainly that a butterfly is inclosed and hidden in theRay, Cat. Cantab,, quoted by Swammerdam. See fig. a,page 62.N134 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.skin of this caterpillar, the following operation mustbe used. One must kill a full-grown cater-pillar, tie athread to its body, and dip it for a minute or two intoboiling water. The outer skin will, after this, easilyseparate, because the fluids, between the two skins,are by this means rarefied and dilated, and thereforethey break and detach both the vessels and the fibreswherewith they were united together. By this meansthe outer skin of the caterpillar, being separated, maybeeasily drawn off from the butterfly which is containedand folded up in it. This done, it is clearly and distinctlyseen, that, within this skin of the caterpillar, aperfect and real butterfly was hidden, and thereforethe skin of the caterpillar must be considered only asan outer garment, containing in it parts belonging tothe nature of a butterfly, which have grown under itsdefence by slow degrees, in like manner as other sensitivebodies increase by accretion.But as these limbs of the butterfly which lie underthe skin of the caterpillar cannot, without great difficulty,be discovered in the full-grown caterpillar, unlessby a person accustomed to such experiments, — becausethey are then very soft, tender, and small, and aremoreover complicated or folded together, and inclosedin some membranaceous coverings, — it is, therefore,necessary to defer the operation just now proposed,until the several parts of the butterfly become somewhatmore conspicuous than at first, and are moreincreased and swelled under the skin by the force ofthe intimated blood and aqueous humour. This isknown to be the case when the caterpillar ceases to eat,and its skin on each side of the thorax, near under thehead, is then observed to be more and more elevatedby the increasing and swelling limbs, and shews theappearance of two pairs of prominent tubercles *."Swammerdani, Book of Nature, ii. 26.EMBRYO BUTTERFLIES.Embryo butterflies (Notice Brassicee), as they appear in thebodies of caterpillars. The wings, antennae, and trunks in thefigures are spread out to shew them.By similar dissections, Malpighi both actually discoveredthe moth in the body of a silk worm, and alsothe eggs of it * ; and Reaumur made a similar discoveryin the caterpillar of the gypsey moth {Hyjjogymnadispar) f-Female of the perfect cabbage butterfly iPuntia brassicee).In order to harden the parts of the incipient butterflythat are soft, Swammerdam immersed the caterpillarin a phial filled with equal parts of vinegar and spiritof wine for sixteen hours, when he found it wouldMalpighi de Boyce, 29.f Reaumur, Mem. L 359.N 2136 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.better bear handling. It may be necessary to remark,that though all the parts of the butterfly are in thismanner discoverable in the caterpillar, they are onlyin the bud, if we may use the expression, and appear tobe out of proportion from beino;so closely folded up andunexpanded. The whole, indeed, bears so much analogyto the embryo of a plant in the seed, or the rudi-ba, greatly magnified view of a section of the bud of the laburnum.It exhibits the nascent flowers, arranged in regular order,previously to their bursting into perfect existence, b, section ofa bean seed, c, seed-leaves, root, and the first true leaf of thebeech.CONSTRUCTION OF THE CATERPILLAR. 137merits of a leaf or of a flower in the bud, that Svvam-merdam has given figures of the parallel developmentsof larvae and Of a carnation. His selection of thisflower was not perhaps the most happy ; but our readersmay readily obtain examples by carefully dividing theunexpanded buds of the rose, the lilac, the horse-chesnut,the American walnut, or beans, and otherlaro;e seeds after they have been planted in moistearth, but not left long enough to shoot into a plant.The preceding figures will illustrate this better thandescription. Dr. Grew proved in this manner thatflowers which blow in spring are formed in the precedingyear * ; and Du Camel, on dissecting, inJanuary, the bud of a pear-tree, found under anenvelope of about thirty leaf scales eight or tenembryo flowers resembling rose-buds studded withhairs t-The butter-fly and the flower-bud, however, differ remarkablyin the manner in which they are nourished, —the latter receiving sap from the enveloping leaf scales,the former taking food into the stomach through themouth of the caterpillar. The stomach, indeed, of theinclosed butterfly is so capacious, that it fills thegreater portion of its body ; and requires the cater-pillarto occupy almost its whole time in eating in order tosatisfy its cravings. When the food is digested in thestomach of the insect, it passes, as in the larger animals,into the small intestines | ; but it is not, as in them,collected by innumerable Httle vessels which afterwardsrun into one, (as brooks unite to form a river,) and gotothe lungs to be exposed to the air, supplied bybreathing, in order to be there oxygenated and formedinto red blood. Insects, on the contrary, do notGrew. Phys. Veg., ii. 60.f Du Camel, Physique des Arbres, iii., 1.X See " Insect Architecture" p. 309, D, Demand this vol. p. 198.N 3138 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.breathe by the mouth, and are not furnished withlunji^s ; for though good air is no less essential to theirnutrition and existence, it is brought to act on the digestedfood in a different manner. In caterpillars, andin most perfect insects, the air is respired by — usually eighteen in number — placed alongthe sides *, the mouths of which may be seen moving,as the air passes in and out, from ten to thirty timesin a minute. When these are covered with oil, or anyother matter preventing the entrance of the air, theinsect, being unable to breathe, is suffocated and dies,as was observed two thousand years ago by Aristotle t •The breathing-tubes all run into what may be called awind-pipe, one of which lies along each side of theinsect; and these two wind-pipes send off innumerablesmall branches with air to the vessels containing thedigested food, supplying it with oxygen for the purposesof nourishment. A fluid is thus prepared analogousto the blood of the larger animals, and storedup in a large dorsal vessel ; but this is not at all likea heart, for though it has been observed to beat, itsmotions do not seem to be constant or regular, andno blood-vessels go off from it. The fluid analogousto blood may perhaps pass through this singular reservoir,as water does through blotting paper ; but asyet this process has not been accurately investigated.A more distinct notion, however, of the process ofinsect breathing may be obtained from Swimmerssketch of the interior of the water-grub of aMay-fly (Ephemera).It is further conjectured that the portion of theblood not immediately wanted for nourishing the organsalready formed, goes to form a mass of thickishmucilage, contained in floating membranes of a white,Insect Arch. p. 308. f Aristotle, Hist. Animal., viii. 27.WATER GRUB OF A May-fly.Dissection of the waterp^nib of a may thy ephemera). Theback is laid open, and the nerves, intestines, and respiratoryapparatus exhibited, a rt a a a a, six clusters of short tubes,opening: on both sides, through which the creature breathes: theair contained in the water, passing through these, enters t^vo•vvind-pipes, b b b b, running from head to tail, and circulatesthrough every part of the body. The eight tins, and a portion ofthe tail bristles have been omitted, to give the rest of the figureon a larger scale. The central white lines are the nerves.140 INSECT Transformations.yellow, or green colour, and apparently analogous tofat in the larger animals *. This furnishes, as is furthersupposed, a store of nutriment for promotingthe growth of the butterfly f-This brief sketch will serve to t^ive the reader a tolerablenotion of the internal structure of caterpillars,and the manner in which their food is elaborated intonutriment ; but when we know that Lyonnet wrote aarise quarto volume on the structure of a single caterpillar,and that Malpig-hi, Heroldt, Ramdohr, Sirensand marcel de Serres, are little less voluminous,it will be understood that we give it merely as asketch which v.e could easily have extended, had itappeared, as it does not, to be suitable to our plan. Itwill prove more interesting, we think, to pass now tothe external structure and appearance.It will be obvious from what we have said respectingthe colours of eggs, that we are not inclinedto adopt in all its extent the theory of manynaturalists, which maintains the peculiar colours andforms of animals to be given them by nature for thepurpose of concealment from their enemies. As inthe instance of caterpillars this theory meets us againin full force, we shall mention a few facts which appearnot only to be at variance with it, but shew, wethink, that the facts of the theorists may stand asappropriately for exceptions as for a general rule.Since caterpillars form the staple food of soft billedbirds and of the young of most hard-billed birds, notto mention the parasite grubs of ichneumon flies whichdestroy great numbers, nature has provided an immenseabundance of them beyond what is requisitefor continuing the race. Were it maintained, therefore,that they were all by design so formed andcoloured as to deceive the eyes of birds and ichneu-Lyonnet. Anat. de la Chenille, 106.f Reaumur, Mem. 1. 145.COLOURS AND FORMS OF Insects. l4lmons, the purpose of their superabundant productionwould be frustrated. We have no doubt, indeed, thatinsectivorous animals can instinctively detect theirprey, in all the usual modes of concealment, asacutely as the practised eye of a naturalist, who canwith ease perceive what escapes the observation of theinexperienced. When a woodpecker is taught by natureto detect a wood boring caterpillar, by the barksounding hollow when tapped with his bill, and whenan ichneumon fly can detect a chrysalis closely rolledup in a leaf ^', we should be strongly inclined to doubtthat colour or form could afford very effectual concealmentfrom enemies, though we readily grant thatmany probable instances of this have been adduced.Of these instances it may be well to give a few examples.The caterpillar of a nocturnal moth (Noctua algtB,Fabr.) is said to assume the colour of the lichensupon which it feeds, being grey when it feeds on agrey one {Pannelia saxatilis, Ache), and always yellowwhen it feeds on a yellow one (Etruria juni-perina, AcH.t) ; the change of colour being (it isalleged) intended by Providence to conceal it fromits enemies, as it becomes difficult to distinguish itfrom the lichens. The caterpillar of the coronet moth{Acronyda Ligiistri, Ochsenheim.), which feedsupon the privet, is so exactly of the colour of the undersideof the leaf, to which it usually clings during"the day, that a person may have the leaf in his handwithout discovering the caterpillar | ; a circumstanceexplained upon the same principle. This, indeed, isno uncommon circumstance, as many caterpillarsvery nearly resemble the colour of the leaves uponwhich they feed ; and the wonder rather is, that soSee " Insect Architecture," p. 1 74-5,•]• Fabr. Vorlesunj^. in Kirby and Spence, ii.220,\l Brain, Insects, in ibid. p. 221.INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.many others should not be similarly coloured, whenwe consider that their stomachs occupy the greaterportion of their bodies, and are generally gorged withfood. It would be no difficult matter, therefore, toenumerate several hundred examples of caterpillarsresembling in colour the substances upon which theyfeed. It strikes us as more singular to find a o-reatmany which, though they feed on green leaves, resemblein colour the grey or brown bark of thebranches where they usually rest when not feeding.Caterpillars of the Clifden nonpareil feeding on the grey poplar.A marked instance of this occurs in the caterpillar ofone of our largest and most beautiful moths, the Chiddennonpareil {Catocala framing, Shrank), whichfeeds on the ash and the poplar, and is so similar toa stripe of brown lichen dotted with black, that itwould not be readily discovered by any person but anaturalist*.J. R.COLOURS AND FORMS OF INSECTS. 143Caterpillars of the Clifden nonpareil in a more advanced stage of growth.Of the extraordinary tropical insects popularlytermed Walking-leaves, belonging to several ordersand families {Locuata, Mantis, Plasma, &c.), thewing-eases, not only in colour, but in texture, andeven in veining, are so exactly like leaves, from thefresh green of those newly expanded to the fadedbrown of those withered and fallen, that botaniststhemselves might be deceived if they were detachedfrom the insects and exhibited as real leaves. Amongthe locusts of Fabricius {Pterojihylla, Kirby) alone,we find the various species with wing-cases resemblingin this manner the leaves of the laurel, themyrtle, the citron, the lily, the sage, the olive, the camellia,thyme, art grass.The Spectres {Phasmaice, Ltchtenstein), on theother hand, resemble the smaller branches of treeswith their spray ; and so minutely detailed is this mimicrythat the very snags and knobs, as Kirby andSpence remark, are accurately imitated. Those whoare curious in such matters may readily find similarinstances in some of our native caterpillars, by nomeans uncommon. In the latter part of summer, forexample, by beating the bushes of a hawthorn hedgewhile an umbrella is held under, the caterpillar of thebrimstone moth {Rumia Cratcegata ? Duponchet)may often be found, appearing, as it stalks along theINSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.Walking-leaf insect phyllis sonata, Dumerii.), magnified.whalebone of the umbrella, like a self-moving witheredbranch, the skin beings wrinkled and furrowed likethe bark, while the bulgin<i:s of the rings and a notchedprotuberance on the back add much to the resemblance.COLOURS AND FORMS OF INSECTS.Transformations of the 'brimstone moth (Rumia Cratcpgata).a, the caterpillar in its resting position. &,tlie moth, c, the eggs.d, the young caterpillar.We found during' last summer, on an elder, at Lee,several specimens of a similar walking-branch caterpillar,that of the swallow-tail moth (OurapteryxSamhucaria, Leach), not so common as the preceding,but equally remarkable ; for the ringed bulgingon the body are precisely like those of an elder branch,while the longitudinal stripes are like the cracks inthe bark. It is likewise worthy of remark that thesecaterpillars, when not feeding, rest upon their pro-legs,with their body stretched out at various anglesfrom the branch, their only support being a thread of*J. R.INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.silk, from which the head hang-s, in order that they mayalways be ready to drop down in safety, by extendingthis thread, on the sudden approach of enemies. Asthey feed chiefly in the night, they may be seen continuingin this stiff and singular attitude for a wholeday without moving, " So that, doubtless," sayKirby and Spence, " the sparrows and other birdsare frequently deceived by this manoeuvre, and thusbaulked of their prey. Rosell's gardener, mistakingone of these caterpillars for a dead twig, started backin great alarm, when upon attempting to break it hefound it was a having animal." We are wellCaterpillars of the swallow-tailed moth, resembling the twigs onwhich they rest.lot. Ui 236 j Kdsel; Insects; i. v. 27.COLOURS AND FORMS OF INSECTS. 147persuaded, however, that neither a bird, an ichneumon,nor a naturalist, would have been apt to fall into sucha mistake.This family of caterpillars geometric, Stephens)have been by collectors not inappropriately namedsurveyors, loopers, and geometers, from their peculiarmanner of moving", which may readily be conceivedby those who have not seen them, when we mentionthat at the commencement of each step their bodiespresent a pretty exact figure of the Greek letter Q.In this position, laying hold with their hinder process,they stretch out their heads to the full extent of theirbody, lading hold with their fore legs while they bringforward their body into the O form again.Such are among the most prominent examples adducedby naturalists who advocate the theory thatthese resemblances to inanimate objects are intendedto conceal insects from their enemies*. We shallnow give a few instances which have suggestedthemselves as no less corroborative of the oppositedoctrine. The first which occurs to us is one of thesurveyor caterpillars, whose movements we have justbeen describing, found very commonly on the currant,the gooseberry, and the black thorn, and calledby collectors the magpie (^Abraxas Grossulariata,Leach). This caterpillar is very conspicuous frombeing spotted, somewhat like the perfect insect, withblack upon a bright yellow ground, and contrastingstrongly both with the deep green of the leaves uponwhich it feeds, and the dark-coloured bark uponwhich it usually rests. The caterpillars of the waterbetony moth {Cucullia Scrophularife, Huber),and of the burnet moth (^Euclidia Glyphica^ ),are similarly marked with deep black on ayellow ground, which must render them very conspicuous.The caterpillars of the small tortoiseshellSee Kirby and Spence; Intr. ii. 219-237.o 2148 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.butterfly (Vanessa Article), are, we admit, very similarin colour to the nettles they are found on ; but wecannot, surely, say the same of the dark black onesof the peacock (F. Id), also nettle feeders, particularlyas these are not only large, but keep tog-ether innumerouscompanies ; which also applies to the caterpillarof the Camberwell beauty (F. Antiojjd), aswell as to the conspicuous caterpillar of the buff tip(Pygmra bucephalus, Ochsenh.), so very destructivein certain years to beeches, oaks, limes, filberts, andother trees*. Some of those just mentioned, indeed,-are provided, as we shall afterwards see, with bettermeans of defence than their colours ; but if peculiarcolours be given by nature for the purpose of concealment,as in the instance of the caterpillars of thesmall tortoiseshell, why are these studded with thornsin the same way as the conspicuous caterpillars of thepeacock and the Camberwell beauty ? In this, asin many other instances, the theory evidently provestoo much.To the examples which we have here given ofconspicuous caterpillars, we could easily add somehundreds more ; but thinking these sufficient, wemay be permitted, by way of farther illustration, toallude to the instances remarkable in perfect insects.Kirby and Spence mention a different kind of imitationof form and colour, which they think " affords s^beautiful instance of the wisdom of Providence inadapting means to their end." One of those two-wingedflies (VoluceU(B, Geoffrey), which bear aconsiderable resemblance to humble bees, lives duringthe larva state in the hives of the latter ; and it isinferred, that as the flies " strikingly resemble thosebees in shape, clothing, and colour, the Author ofnature has provided that they may enter these nests^ All these caterpillars are figured in this volume : see contentsof the engravings,COLOURS AND FORMS Insects. 149and deposit their eggs undiscovered;" for " didthey venture themselves amongst the humble bees inaless kindred form, their lives would probably paythe forfeit of their presumption *."A two winged fly (Columella plumage, Meigen).We do not conceive that any dissent from thisdoctrine has a tendency to weaken or destroy thesmallest link in the beautiful chain of causes whichleads us upwards to the admirable superintendenceof the great First Cause; and, therefore, we statethat, in the case before us, our justly eminent authorssurely forgot, that bees well know strange individualsof their own species, and beat them off when theyattempt to plunder their hives ; and these robber beesare not only like but identical with themselves inshape, clothing, and colour. Indeed, when it is consideredthat in the designs of Providence, as evidencedby the economy of nature, the nourishment of thestronger species of carnivorous animals is as muchregarded as the means which the weaker have ofescaping from them, such general rules cannot be butof very limited application.Danvin, as we formerly mentioned, maintainedthat butterflies resembled the colours of the flowerswhich they frequent ; and many of them may begranted to do so without leading us to adopt the*Intr. ii.223.o3150 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS,inference of the theorists that they are thus colouredto conceal them from their enemies. Were this, indeed,the true cause of these colours, the butterfliesought to remain stationary on the flowers, withoutsporting about in the sunshine, as if on purpose toshow the birds and the dragon flies that they areliving; insects, and not inanimate flowers. In theinstance of many moths which fly by twilight, this isno less obvious; for instead of being of dark duskycolours, which would have effectually concealed themfrom the bats and the fern-owls, they are frequentlywhite, or at least of such light colours as show well inthe dusk. There is but small need of enumeratingexamples of this, and it will be sufficient to name thewhite-ghost moth {Hepialus Hiirmdi), which mayoften be seen, where hops or burdocks grow, hoveringon the wing for hours together; the satin moth(Leucoma Slices, Stephens), which floats about theair like an animated flake of snow-white down, orflits conspicuously from tree to tree among the higherbranches of a row of poplars; and the magpie moth{Abraxas grossulariata), usually abundant in everygarden, though liberally sprinkled with black spots,has enough of white to distinguish it in its heavy,hindering flight, even when th e last rays of thetwilight are disappearing. That these are not strainedexamples of insects so colon-ed as to be conspicuousto their enemies, will farther be obvious from a commoncontrivance of schoolboys to catch bats. Theychalk the seed-heads of burdocks in such a manneras to resemble the white moths alluded to ; andthrowing these up where a bat is observed flying, hefails not to dart upon the supposed moth, and thebur adhering to his wings, brings him down to paythe penalty of his mistake*.If we leave colouring out of consideration, andJ. R.COLOURS AND FORMS OF INSECTS. 151look merely at the forms of caterpillars, we think itmust be apparent to the most indifferent observer,that, though they have often a rather ungainly,repulsive, and sometimes a formidable aspect, yetthis renders them in numerous instances very conspicuous.The forms, also, we may remark, which appeardisagreeable or threatening to us, may not seem soto birds and ichneumons which make them their prey.One of the most singular of these forms of caterpillarsoccurs in that of the pebble moth {NotodoniaZiczac, Stephens), the form being such that it isnot easy for one unacquainted with it to tell which isthe head and which the tail. The puss (centre )is another whose form and attitudes cannot failto attract the notice of the most indifferent observer.Dr. Shaw, in his Zoological Lectures, quotes from acountry newspaper a most ludicrous account of this*' monster," as it is there called, having a head like alion, jaws like a shark, a horn like a unicorn, andtwo tremendous stings in its tail. The gross exaggerationof this description will be obvious from thefollowing accurate figures ; yet how formidable soeverthis caterpillar may appear to us (even Rosell, theentomologist, was afraid of it at first), we know thatno one is more readily pounced upon by at least twospecies of ichneumons, which seem, therefore, not tobe afraid to deposit their eggs in its body t ; and it isno doubt often made prey of by birds, at least in itsyoung state ; for when full grown, being about as thickas a man's thumb, it may prove rather too bulky amorsel +.Our readers may like to see, by way of contrastto the exaggerated account quoted by Shaw, theexcellent description of the puss caterpillar givenby old Isaac Walton. " The very colours of caterpil-Figured in Insect Architecture; p. 172.t See ibid.; pp. 195 and 325-6. | J. R.INSECT Transformations.lars," says he, " as one has observed, are elegant andbeautiful. I shall, for a taste of the rest, describeone of them; which I will, some time the nextmonth, shew you feeding' on a willow tree ; and youshall find him punctually to answer this very description:his lips and mouth somewhat yellow; his eyesTransformations of the puss moth (Crura Vincula). a, theegg. 66 6, young larvae, c, full-grown larva, d, the pupa, e, themoth.COLOURS AND FORMS OF INSECTS.black as jet; his forehead purple; his feet and hinderparts green; his tail two-forked and black; thewhole body stained with a kind of red spots, whichrun along the neck and shoulder-blade, not unlike theform of St. Andrew's cross, or the letter X made thuscrosswise, and a white line drawn down his back tohis tail; all which add much beauty to his wholebody. And it is to me observable, that at a fixed agethis caterpillar gives over to eat, and towards wintercomes to be covered over with a strange shell or crust,called an aurelian* ; and so lives a kind of dead lifewithout eating all the winter. And as others ofseveral kinds turn to be several kinds of flies andvermin the spring following; so this caterpillar thenturns to be a painted butterflycaterpillar, called by collectors the lobster{Siauropus Pagi, Germans), which is rarelymet with, has not only very long legs, a circumstanceuncommon among caterpillars, but assumesan attitude similar to the puss just figured, thoughthe shape of the creature renders it much morestrange. This caterpillar was known to Buffet,and is indifferently figured by him, as well as byLobster caterpillar (^Stauropus Pagi, German.)See Insect Architecture, p. 194.f Walton's Angler, chapel154 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.Alain and Donovan; but Rusel's figure, which wehere copy, is more accurate.Looking" at these very singular forms of caterpillars,we could not anticipate, without previous knowledge,that all of them produced insects of nearly thesame shape, though differing considerably in sizeand colour. It is not a little remarkable, also,that the colours of caterpillars, with a few exceptions,such as the magpie moth (Abraxas grossula-rata), are very different indeed from the insects intowhich they are transformed. Plain and inconspicuouscaterpillars will sometimes give splendidly colouredinsects, as in the case of the Vanessa butterflies; while finely marked caterpillars will giveplain insects, as the one whose gaudy stripes of sky-blue,scarlet, and black, has obtained it the appropriatename of the lackey (CUsiocampa 7ieustria,Curtis), though the moth is of a dull brownishyellow. Two of our finest native insects, however,the swallow-tailed butterfly and the emperor-moth,are produced from beautifully coloured caterpillars ;but neither the colours nor the markings of thesehave any resemblance.A more extraordinary difference, however, betweenthe first and the last state of insect life occurs in thecase of those insects whose larvae are aquatic. Oneof our commonest families of insects, the gnats (Cu-licence,Latr.), whose ingenious mode of constructinga floating raft of eggs we have already described,affords a very striking illustration of our position. Whenthese eggs are hatched, the grubs appear ; but theydo not, as is said by older naturalists, " make themselveslittle lodgments of glue, which they fasten tosome solid body at the very bottom of the water, unlessthey meet with chalk, whose softness permits them toburrow into its substance." On the contrary, theySpectacle de la Nature, i. 123,ORGANS FOR BREATHING IN WATER-GRUBS. 155usually swim near the surface of the water, with theirheads downwards and their tails in the air, for a purposewhich will presently be obvious. These grubs,called scurrs in the north, may be met with in abundanceduring the summer in ditches or in water-butts*,appearing like minute, whitish, semi-transparentshrimps or fishes, when their bodies are a littlebent, as they frequently are.Aquatic grubs of gnats in a glass vessel of water.The organs for breathing, which are very remarkablein the grub of the gnat, are not situated along thesides, as in caterpillars, but in the tail. A tube forthe purpose of respiration goes off from the terminalring of the body at an angle. Its main buoys, also,are its tail and its breathing-tube, both of which end inasort of funnel, composed of hairs, in form of a star,anointed with oil, so as to repel water. Swimmersremarks that when, by handing it too roughly,this oil is removed, the grub " can no longer suspenditself on the surface of the water ; I have, on theseoccasions, observed it put its tail in its mouth, andafterwards draw it back, as a water-fowl vdll drawits feathers through its bill to prepare them for resist-seeInsect Architecture, p. 20^ bottom figure, on the right.INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.iii' water." The air, which enters throup^li severalopenings in the breathing-tube, passes onwards totwo lateral wind-pipes, very similar to those of caterpillars,as above described. When it wishes to descendto the bottom of the water, it folds up the hairs of thefunnel, but by means of its oil retains at their ends aglobule of air ; and when it wishes to re-ascend, ithas only to open its hair funnel again.Larva of the common gnat (Cule.vplpiens?) floating in water,greatly magnified, a a, the body and head of the larva, h, therespiratory apparatus, situated in the tail, c, the larva, not magnified.A similar but more elegant apparatus for the samepurpose occurs in the water-grub of a two-wingedfly, which Goedart called the chameleon fly (Stationschameleon, Meigen)., because he found it couldlive nine months without food. The terminal ring ofthis grub is extended to a considerable length, andfringed at the end with a beautiful star-like funnel ofthirty feathered hairs. Whether the creature oils these,Biblia; Naturae, i. 154.dtlGANS FOR breathing IN WATER-GRUBS. 157like the 2:rub of the gnat, we know not, ])iit theyperfectly repel water ; and at the point where theinsect hangs suspended, a small dimple may beobserved on the surface. "When it wishes to dive tothe bottom, it has the power of bringing the ends ofthe hairs together, without diminishing the capacity ofthe funnel below ; and a globule of air, for the purposeof breathing under water, is thus enclosed andcarried down, appearing, as Swammerdam says, likea brilliant pearl or polished silver. " As for mypart," he adds, " I dare boldly affirm, that the incomprehensiblegreatness of the Deity manifests itself inthese mysterious operations in a particular manner,and atlbrds us an opportunity of examining, as itwere, with our senses, the divine nature."Buoy-like structure in the tail of a water-pub of a two-winged fly(^Stratiomys Chameleon).Swammerdam; part ii, 51,INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.The preceding grub may occasionally be found inshallow ditches, and about the edges of ponds, insummer ; but a remarkable larva, with a very differentapparatus for breathing, is much more commonin similar situations, and also in the open drains fromdunghills, &c. The latter is the maggot of a two-winged,bee-like fly theophilus pendulum, Meigen),and from its shape is appropriately termed rat-tailedby Reaumur. The tail is the part of the grub whichmost merits attention, being formed somewhat afterthe telescopic model of the ovipositor of the breeze flies*,a o cTelescopic-tailed water larvae, a, a glass vessel of water containingthe larvae, natural size, b, magnified view of the tailwith the breathing-tube partially contracted, c, a still more enlargedview of the tail.See Insect Architecture, p. 403,ORGANS FOR BREATHING IN WATER-GRUBS. 159but consisting only of two tubes, the outer one servingas a sheath, within which the inner one can beretracted at pleasure. Both of these are composed offibrous rings ; and are so very extensile, that Reaumurhas seen them pushed out to twelve times the lengthof the body of the maggot. The contrivance by whichthe inner tube is pushed out is no less simple thaningenious. It is furnished at the base with twoflexible pipes, coiled up, when it is sheathed, intoseveral folds, and communicating \\ith the doublewind-pipe trachea) in the body. When it wishesto extend this breathing-tube, therefore, it inflates, bymeans of air from the wind-pipe, the flexible pipes,and in this way pushes them outward, and with themthe breathing-tube, to the extent required. Thebreathing-tube itself is vei'y slender, but terminatessimilarly to those of the grub of the chameleon fly, infive bristles. This breathing apparatus is admirablyadapted to the economy of these maggots ; as fromtheir seeking their food amongst ooze and mud, theywould often be exposed to suffocation, which theirextensile tube effectually prevents.mmWater worms fais). a a a, half-concealed in the sand.b b b, their sand-tubes exposed.p2160 INSECT Transformations.It may not be improper to guard our youngerreaders against mistaking for these telescopic-tailedlarvae, an animal, found in the same situations, whichhas a considerable general resemblance to them,though it is not even an insect, but a water worm(IVa?s),upon which Bonnet made numerous curious experiments.The nais may be easily known by its beingreddish, while the maggot is of a dirty white colour.It appears to be the nais, or some similar freshwaterworm, which medical men, unacquainted withnatural history, have supposed to get into the humanstomach through the medium of water, as we shallpresently notice.A no less singular structure for respiration than thatjust described, occurs in the aquatic larvae of thedragon-flies (Libellulidce, Leach), which differ soremarkably from the perfect insects in the beauty ofcolour and elegance of form that has procured forthem the gallant appellation of damsels (demoiselles)in France. This title agrees as badly with theirhabits as the popular English name of horse-singers,since they have no apparatus for stinging; " and sofar,"says Reaumur, " from seeking an innocent nutrimentin the pulp of fruits, or the nectar of flowers,they are more like amazons than damsels, hoveringin the air only to pounce upon other insects, whichthey crush with their powerful mandibles. Shouldthey quit the margin of a pond or the banks of arivulet, where they may be seen hawking about inmultitudes, it is only to pursue and seize the moth orthe butterfly, that has fled for shelter to the bushes."Though these larvae are furnished with six feet,they not only move very little, but do not use themfor walking so much as for capturing their prey.Their motion is effected by a very peculiar method.When one of these larvae is procured from the bottomof a pond or the pool of a brook, let it be put into a largeSTRUCTURE OF LART^. 161saucer with water, with some of the dead leaves or sticksit previously employed as a covering* ; these will soonbe seen floating towards the tail, and afterwards repelled,as a floating feather will be by a stick of sealing-wax,or a bit of amber, when electrically excited. Whenthe insect has been kept out of the water for a shorttime, the desire, or necessity, of respiration is increased,and when again put into the water, the pumping isrepeated with unusual force and frequency. If it beheldin the hand, head downwards, and some dropsof water be let fall on its tail, it instantly sucks it in,and the dimensions of its body become visibly augmented; but it collapses again when the water is expelled,which is effected by the same apparatus.While in the water, if a solution of cochineal, saffron,indigo, or any other coloured fluid, be let down,with great care, by means of a glass tube, just overthe tail of the insect, it will soon be seen to eject astream of the coloured solution to the distance ^ofseveral inches. Or the same may be seen by removingit suddenly out of a coloured fluid into limpidwater; when the coloured jet stream will be still moreconspicuous. The most extraordinary circumstancerespecting this jet is, that it propels the creaturethrough the water in consequence of its being resistedby the stationary mass of the fluid behind it, and acontrary current being thence produced by this singularpumping. As the insect, between every stroke ofthe internal piston, is obliged to draw in a fresh supplyof water, an interval consequently occurs betweenthe strokes, during which it will sometimes elevate itstail above water and squirt out a small stream likethat from a little syringe.This wonderful apparatus serves several purposes ;for, besides aiding the insect to move, the reverberatorycurrent brings small water insects within its reach :it is also it would appear, partly appropriated top3INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.respiration, like the gills of fish, though there areseveral other spiracles in other parts of the body communicatingwith the large convoluted windpipes.The anal apparatus is surrounded with five hard,moveable, triangular pieces, all fringed with hairs,which it can open or shut at pleasure. The largestof these pieces is placed above, while the two smalleststand at the sides, and two of the middle size below.When they are shut close they form a blunt cone *.a, grub of a dragon fly ; J 6, the body laid open and magnified,to show the windpipes ; c, the pumping apparatus shut ; d, thegame open ; e, head of the insect.It may not be out of place to take notice here ofanother singular structure in the same species of larvae,which is probably unmatched in the insect world.In the larvae of most insects the under-lip is smalland conspicuous, but in those of the dragon-flies,De Geer, U, 666, and Reaumur, vi. 393, &c.STRUCTURE OF Larva. 163*' it is," to follow the excellent description of Kirbyand Spence, "by far the largest organ of the mouth,which, when closed, it entirely conceals, and it notonly retains but actually seizes the animal's prey, bymeans of a very singular pair of jaws with which it isfurnished. Conceive your under-lip (to have recourse,like Reaumur on another occasion, to such a comparison)to be horny^instead of fleshy, and to be elongatedperpendicularly downwards, so as to \vrap overyour chin, and extend to its bottom, — that this elongationis there expanded into a triangular convex plate,attached to it by a joint, so as to bend upwardsagain and fold over the face as high as the nose, concealingnot only the chin and the first-mentionedelongation, but the mouth and part of the cheeks :conceive, moreover, that to the end of this last-mentoned plate are fixed two other convex ones, so broadas to cover the whole nose and temples, — that these canopen at pleasure transversely like a pair of jaws, so asto expose the nose and mouth, and that their inneredges where they meet are cut into numerous sharpteeth, or spines, or armed with one or more longshai-p claws ; — you will then have as accurate anidea as my powers of description can give of thestrange conformation of the under-lip in the larvae ofLibelling, which conceals the mouth and face preciselyas I have supposed a similar construction ofyour lip would do yours. You will, probably, admitthat your own visage would present an appearancenot very engaging while concealed by such a mask;but it would strike still more awe into the spectators,were they to see you first open the two upper jawplates, which would project fi"om each temple like theblinders of a horse ; and next, having, by means ofthe joint at your chin, let down the whole apparatusand uncovered your face, employ them in seizing anyINSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.food that presented itself, and conveying it to yourmouth. Yet this procedure is that adopted by thelarvae of the dragon-fly provided with this strangeorgan. While it is at rest, it applies close to andcovers the face. When the insects would make useof it, they unfold it like an arm, catch the prey atwhich they aim by means of the mandibuliform plates,and then partly refold it so as to hold the prey to themouth in a convenient position for the operation of thetwo pairs of jaws with which they are provided. Reaumuronce found one of them thus holding and devouringa large tadpole ; a sufficient proof that S wam-merdam was greatly deceived in imagining earth to bethefood of animals so tremendously armed and fittedfor carnivorous purposes. In the larvae of Libelhtla^Fabr., it is so exactly resembling a mask, that if entomologistsever went to masquerades, they could notmore effectually relieve the insipidity of such amuse-themask of the dragon-fly grab, in four different states ofopening and shutting.ments and attract the attention of the demoiselles thanby appearing at the supper table with a mask of thisconstruction, and serving themselves by its assistance.It would be difficult, to be sure, by mechanism, toSTRUCTURE OF Larvae. 165supply the place of the muscles with which in the insectit is amply provided ; but Merlin, or his successor,has surmounted greater obstacles''^."The larvae of the dragon-fly do not, however,trust to this mask alone for surprising their prey, butsteal upon it, as De Geer observes, as a cat doesupon a bird, very slowly, and as if they counted theirsteps ; and then, by suddenly unmasking, seize it bysurprise: so artful are they that insects, and evensmall fishes, find it difficult to elude their attacks t-The larva of a very singular insect {Reditvius personages,Faer.), which preys upon the bed bugcimex lechdarius), not being furnished with a mask,is at the pains to construct one, composed of dust,particles of sand, fragments of wool or silk, and similarmatter, which makes it assume so very grotesque afigure, that the animal would at first be taken for oneof the ugliest spiders. Its awkward motions add notalittle to the effect of its odd appearance. It can, indeed,if it 60 chooses, move with considerable speed;but for the purposes of successful hunting, it endeavoursto assume the aspect of an inanimate substance,and hitches along in the most leisurely manner possible.It only moves one leg at a time, and having setone foot forward, it pauses a little before it brings upthe contiguous one, proceeding in the same way withits other legs. It is no less carefully cautious inmoving its antenna?, striking, as it were, first withone, and then, after a short pause, with the other.By means of a camel's hair pencil, or a feather, it iseasy to unmask the insect, for, when touched, itusually abandons its covering.Introdd. to Went. lii. 126. t De Geer; ii. 674,Chapter VII.Growth, Mounting, Strength, Defence, and Hybernation of Larvae.From the facts being' commonly known, we are notsurprised, that an ostrich, nine feet high and 150 lbs.weight, should be produced from an egg about thesize of a cocoa-nut, or that " a grain of mustard-seedthe least of all seeds — when it is grown," shouldbecome " a tree (^Phytolacca dioica?), so that thebirds of the air come and lodge in the branchesthereof." But when similar facts are recorded bynaturalists respecting insects, general readers are aptto wonder, because they are less familiar with thesedetails, than with the economy of trees springing fromseeds and birds being produced from eggs. When werepeat, after Lyonnet, that the caterpillar of the goat-moth(Cossus ligniperda, Fabr.) becomes 72,000 timesheavier than when newly hatched f, we do not stateanything more striking and admirable than that anembryo of small dimensions should become an elephant,or that an acorn should produce a lofty andmagnificent oak. The facts respecting the growth ofinsects have an adventitious interest, because, in consequenceof the minuteness of the objects to whichthey relate, they are less familiar to popular observation.In the instance of the silk-worm, the progressof growth has been accurately ascertained by scientificcultivators. It appears that a single caterpillar,weighing when first hatched only the hundredth partof a grain, consumes in thirty days above an ounce ofleaves, — that is to say, it devours in vegetable sub-seeIrby and Mangle's Travels, letter v.f Traite Anat. de la Chenille, p. 11.GROWTH OF SILK-WORMS. 167stance about 60,000 times its primitive weight. Inwarmer climates, silk-worms consume a rather lessquantity of leaves, because these are perhaps morenutritive ; but, in that case, the silk produced is notso delicate and fine. The following statements arethe result of experiments made by Count Dandolo : —Progressive increase of silk-worms in weight.GRAINS.A hundred worms just hatched weigh about . 1After the first nothing . . .15After the second moulting , . .94After the third moulting . . . 400After the fourth moulting . . . 1628On attaining their greatest size and weight . 9500They have, therefore, in thirty days increased 9500times their primitive weight.Progressive increase of $ilk-thorns in length.LINES.A silk-worm just hatched measures about . 1After the first moulting . . .4After the second moulting . . .6After the third moulting . . .12After the fourth moulting . . .20After the fifth moulting it may reach . , 40The length of the silk-worm, therefore, increasesabout forty times in twenty-eight days*.By recalling to memory the comparisons of theeggs of insects with the seeds of plants, and of caterpillarswith buds, which ought to be taken (if wemay trust Swammerdam) literally rather thanpoetically, we shall arrive at more distinct notions ofthe manner in which the growth and chang-es oflarvae are accomplished. The buds of plants arecomposed of successive leaves closely embosomedwithin each other's foldings, the outer one beinggenerally hard and corneous, from the exposure ofits vessels to the colds of winter, while the innerCount Dandolo on Silk-worms, p. 326, Eng. Trans.168 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.leaves, being" thence protected, remain Soft andpulpy. But as soon as the inner leaves receivean accession of sap, which rises from the rootson the return of spring, their vessels swelland their nervures expand; while the outer leaf, fromits vessels being shrunk and partly obliterated,undergoes little change besides being pushed outand sometimes entirely thrown off by the growth ofthe inner leaves, which it had previously enclosed.It may be remarked, also, that this outer envelope ofa bud is not united with the inner leaves by anyinterlacing of their substance or of their vessels,though in some cases there is an adhesive glutenwhich partly binds them together ; but this is neverso strong as to prevent the expansion of the leaves.On comparing one of the bud envelopes thus thrownoff, we can scarcely persuade ourselves that so smalla coverings could ever have contained the larffespreading leaves which have burst from them.A caterpillar corresponds in several circumstanceswith the leaf bud. The outer skin encloses asuccession of several other skins, each becoming moredelicate, soft, and indistinct than the one exterior toit,but gradually, like the expanding leaves, growing-moresubstantial and firm as it receives a supply ofnutriment. The chief mechanical difference betweenthe leaves folded up in the bud and the successivecaterpillars enveloped within the skin of onenewly hatched, is that the leaves in the bud receiveall their nourishment through their foot-stalks fromthe root of the tree, whereas the caterpillar is nourishedfrom within by the food digested in its stomach.The superfluous nourishment, usually in considerablequantity, and called the fat of the caterpillar, appearsto He between the successive skins, in a similar wayto the adhesive gluten in the leaf bud. But as thefirst inner skin expands and increases in consistence,MOULTING OF CATERPILLARS. Ift9the fat w'liich lies between it and the outer skinseems to be absorbed into the body of the caterpillar,and of course swelling it out; while its abstractionfrom the interior of the outer skin renders thismuch more dry, separates it from the inner skin,and disposes it to harden and shrivel.The absorption of the fat also produces the remarkableconsequence of gorging all the channels ofnutrition, so that there is no longer any demandupon the stomach for fresh supplies of food ; andhunger (which we imagine is caused either by thewant of the accustomed pressure of food on theterminal nerves in the stomach, or of the irritation ofthe absorbents when they are left empty) is nolonger felt. The caterpillar accordingly ceases toeat, and having no incentive to action remains motionless.The outer skin, in the meanwhile, beingdeprived of its internal moisture by the absorption ofthe fat, goes on to harden and shrink, while all theinternal organs become enlarged by the nutritive fat.The expansion, therefore, of the body of the caterpillaron the one hand, and the shrinking of the oldskin on the other, produce a mutual struggle, which,from the continued operation of the causes, must, itis obvious, be soon brought to a termination.The skin, from losing its internal moisture, losesalso a portion of its colour, and becomes obscureand dull ; and the caterpillar, from being girt andsqueezed by its pressure, begins to turn and twistitself in various directions, to rid itself if possible ofthe inconvenience. By continuing these movements,the creature succeeds at length in rending the oldskin at its weakest part, which is usually on theback, just behind the head ; and in a few minutes,using its body as a wedge, it may he seen issuingthrough the breach*. The old skin is thus abandonedReaumur, Mem. i. 185,Q170 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.like a worn shirt ; and the caterpillar appears in anentire new dress, the tints of which are fresher andbrighter, and the colours and markings often considerablydifferent from the former. The insect,also, in consequence of the quantity of fat which hasgone to augment its several parts, becomes all atonce so much enlarged in size, that we can with difficultyconceive how it could have been contained inthe old skin, out of which it has just crept. Thecast skin is frequently so very perfect that it mightalmost be supposed to be the caterpillar itself, particularlyin those which are hairy, as this contributesto conceal the shrivelling.That the above account of the process of casting theskin is correct, appears both from the careful dissectionswhich have been made by Swammerdam, Lyonnet,and Ramdohr, and also from the diseases incidentto caterpillars from deficiency of food or of pure air.It is a circumstance of common occurrence to thosewho are in the habit of breeding insects, that whenthey are not supplied with a sufficient quantity offood, their bodies do not increase enough in thicknessto rupture the old skin ; yet this becomes in duetime hard and shrivelled from the absorption of thefat, though the insect, from its inability to breakthrough, remains imprisoned. It might be supposed,that if plenty of food were at this momentsupplied, it would subsequently acquire sufficient bulkand strength to rupture and escape from the old skin ;but this is impossible, as we have repeatedly foundto our great disappointment. In the instance ofthe caterpillar of the moth, called by collectors theglory of Kent {Endromis versicolora, Stephens),which we found on a lime-tree at Lee, and wereanxious to rear, fresh food was neglected to begiven to it a short time before its third moult ; andfrom that time it refused to eat, and soon died. ByMOULTING OF CATERPILLARS. 171minute examination we found that it was impossiblefor it to eat, as all its organs were in a state offorward preparation for throwing off their exteriorcoat, — the old skin, in fact, covering them as a glovedoes the hand, and the new head lying distinctlyfarther back than the old. Neither the old mandiblestherefore, which were become dry and stiff,nor the new ones, which were encased in these,could bite the leaves ; and even if this had beenaccomplished, the entrance to the gullet was obstructedby the shrivelling of the old skin there,and deglutition could not have taken place. Thepoor caterpillar was in consequence starved to deathin the midst of abundance of food, which it couldneither chew nor swallow. Had it been skilfullyassisted (as it was not) to get rid of the encumbranceof its old skin, we doubt not that it mightultimately have recovered*. Reaumur mentions thevery singular circumstance of a caterpillar of thesix-spot burnet moth {Anthrocera FilipendulcByStephens) having actually, before its last moult, bitoff portions of its old skin, which it first raised upand afterwards detached and tossed away. He didnot, however, ascertain whether this was anaccidental manoeuvre, or the usual process of thisspecies of caterpillar t ; though the first, we think, isthe more probable.The disorder called the iced's by the breeders of silkworms,shows itself in red-coloured stains and blotchesupon the skin ; while the caterpillars seem cramped,stupefied, and suffocated, their rings dry up, and theylook exactly like mummies. Count Dandolo refers thisand most other diseases of silk worms to chemicalagency. The great quantity of vegetable fooddevoured by caterpillars must be liable during hotweather to fermentation, if it be not digestedJ,R. f Reaumur, Mem. ii. 75.Q 2172 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.soon after it is swallowed, — a process which oftenterminates in the production of an acid ; and asacids have a tendency to redden vegetable colours,the red blotches are plausibly ascribed to thatcause. This conjecture, which originated withCount Dandolo, has been proved to be the fact byProfessor Brug-natelli ; who made the very unexpecteddiscovery that the red matter contains uric acidcombined with ammonia, and consequently that thedisorder is similar in its proximate cause to what iscalled the red gravel {Lithia realms jB, Good) inman.This acid, then, from its excess in diseasedcaterpillars, impedes the process of nutrition, andprevents the animal from acquiring sufficientstrength to throw off the old skin when the time forthis arrives.It appears, also, from the experiments of CountDandolo, that though caterpillars can live longer inair deprived of oxygen, or otherwise contaminated,than warm-blooded animals, yet they do not thrive,and are very liable to diseases, when they have notaccess to fresh air. In other words, the food whichhas been digested cannot without oxygen be convertedinto the fluid analogous to blood ; and in suchcases, as we have repeatedly witnessed, instead ofbeing appropriated to nourishment, it is thrown intothe intestines, producing diarrhoea, or scour, as it istermed by the cultivators of the silk-worm. In thiscase the inner skin never acquires sufficient consistence,nor can the old one ever become dry enough tobe cast.One of the most singular circumstances respectingthe moult of caterpillars, is the manner in which thehairs are disposed in the new skin before moulting.These are not, like the feet and other organs, sheathedin the hairs of the old skin, but smoothly foldeddown in separate tufts ; and if the old skin beMOULTING OF CATERPILLARS.mremoved a short time before it would be naturallycast, these tufts may be seen in a moist state, verysimilar to small wetted camel' s-hair pencils lyingMounting of ca caterpillars. a a, caterpillar'' magnified ; 6 h,the same when it has just cast its skin, the hairs still moist ;c, the same, natural size; d e f g, tufts of its hairs magnified ;h, leg and foot magnified ; i, the caterpillar wedging throughthe old skin ; k k, hairy caterpillar of the sycamore.q3174 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.close to the inner skin, — those on the fore part of thebody laid towards the head, and from the fourth ring;backwards in a contrary direction.Swammerdam, Reaumur, and other naturalists,repeatedly tried the experiment of cutting ois thehair Iron caterpillars about to moult, without in theleast affecting' the hairs on the new skin ; but when afoot or any other member is accidentally mutilated, itis also wanting in the mounted caterpillar, factswhich strongly corroborate the details we have givenabove.It is a still more singular circumstance, ascertainedby Swammerdam, De Geer, Lyonnet, andBonnet, that caterpillars and grubs not only casttheir external skins, but also that which lines theirbreathing-tubes and intestines. " Some days," saysBonnet, " before the change, the caterpillar voidsalong with its excrements the membrane which investsthe interior of its stomach and intestines. Ihave also remarked, that during the moult, packets ofthe tracheal vessels may be seen attached to the castskin, and thrown off along with it." De Geer hasdistinctly seen white fibres proceeding from the interiorspiracles of a butterfly remain attached to thepupa-case. He conjectures that these fibres consistof the delicate membrane which lines the wind-pipes ;and that they are mounted like the lining of the stomachof a lobster, or of a caterpillar. Lyonnet, insome measure, confirms this conjecture*.In his admirable description of the rhinoceros-beetle{Oryctes naslcornis), Swammerdam says ofthe grub : " Nothing in all nature is, in my opinion, amore wonderful sight, than the change of skin inthese and other the like grubs. This matter, therefore,deserves the greatest consideration, and is worthyto be called a specimen of Nature's miracles. ForBonnet Oeuvres, vol. viii. pp.303-3U.MOULTING OF GRUBS.^75it is not the external skin only that these penis cast,like serpents ; but the throat and a part of the stomach,and even the inward surface of the great gut,change their skin at the same time. Yet this is notthe whole of these wonders ; for at the same timesome hundreds of breathing-pipes within the body ofthe grub cast also each its delicate and tender skin.These several skins are afterwards collected intoeighteen thicker, and, as it were, compounded ropes,nine on each side of the body, which, when the skinis cast, slip gently and by degrees from within thebody through the eighteen apertures or orifices of thetubes before described, having their tops or endsdirected upwards towards the head. Two otherbranches, also, of the breathing-pipes, that aresmaller and have no point of respiration, cast a skinlikewise. If any one separates the cast little ropes orcongeries of breathing-pipes with a fine needle, heExuviae and pulmonary vessels of the rhinoceros beetle (Ort/ctesnnsicornis^. A, magnified view of a pulmonary branch andvesicle; a a, pulmonary branch, composed of a membranoussheath and cartilaginous rings; b, vesicle. B, larva; c c, ninereddish breathing-holes. C, exuviae, or cast skin of the larva;dd d d, skins of the pulmonary tubes.176 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.will very distinctly see their several branches andramifications, and also their ringed structure."The caterpillars of moths and butterflies generallycast their skins five times ; but some cast them sevenand even ten times, as in the case, according toCuvier, of the great tiger-moth marcia Casa, Stephens).By the breeders of silk-worms this naturalprocess is ranked among their maladies ; and not altogetherwithout reason, as it frequently proves fatal,from causes to which we have already alluded.For several hours, often for a whole day, after castingthe skin, the caterpillar continues sluggish andmoves little ; and as the vessels are still replete withthe fat previously absorbed, there is no stimulus forit to eat. , But as soon as this supply is exhausted,it commences again to eat voraciously, in order tosupply another store of fat for its succeeding moult.The moulting of caterpillars, it may be remarked,bears but a slight resemblance to the casting ofthe feathers in birds, and the hair in quadrupeds.Birds generally cast their feathers once, and manytwice, a-year, namely, in autumn and in spring;and quadrupeds in a similar way cast their hair. Butinboth these cases the process is gradual, andresembles that of shedding the milk-teeth when thejaw enlarges. All of these changes, however, produceconsiderable derangements in the animals ; andthey are seldom accomplished without disorderinghealth, and sometimes endangering life. The greatdifference between the changes in insects and theother classes of animals evidently arises from thedifference of their internal structure. It must beobvious to all, for example, that the human bodywears. As old age advances the bones waste awayand become smaller, the muscles and skin shrink andSwammerdam, Bib. Nat. vol. i. p. 135.f Temminckj Manuel d'Oruithol. Intr.MOULTING OF GRUBS. 177grow dry and shrivelled, and the stature grows shorterand more diminutive. Even in youth similar changesare in progress, a system of absorbent vessels beingprovided for removing worn materials from all partsof the body, and carrying at least one portion of thesealong with the blood into the lungs, whence it goesoff in minute particles with the breath. No similarprocess of removing worn materials has, so far as weknow, been discovered in caterpillars; and it is, indeed,improbable, as the successive changes of theskin accomplish all that is wanted in this respect. Thatthe worn materials, however, of the cast skins arenot altogether useless, appears from the singularcircumstance of the new-clothed caterpillar oftendevouring them, as that of the hawthorn-butterfly(piers Cratcegi, Stephens) does the shell of theegg it has just been hatched from*. It may beremarked, that it is chiefly the larger caterpillars ofthe puss and some of the hawk-moths which havebeen observed to eat their skins ; none of the spinousor hairy ones seem to relish this strange sort offood. In the case of the warty-efl triton palest is ^Flem), which frequently casts its outer skin, we haveobserved that it is frequently eaten by the animalitself.The grubs of some two-winged flies {Mnscidce)^and of wasps, bees, ants, and ichneumon flies, donot change their skins like the larvae we have justbeen considering ; but spiders and other allied tribes(^Arach?iidce)y though they exhibit no other appearanceof larvae, moult frequently during their growth.Goldsmith, amongst other curious mis-statementsrespecting a house-spider which he himself observed,asserts that it "lived three years, every year itchanged its skin, and got a new set of legs : Ihave sometimes plucked otF a limb, which grewBonnet, Oeuvres, vol. ii. p. 18, f J. R,INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.again in two or three days." The fact is, thatfew spiders live one year, much less three ; and alltheir changes of skin are gone through in a fewmonths, and their acquiring new legs for mutilatedones takes some weeks. It is probable, indeed, thatGoldsmith never thought of ascertaining the identityof this spider ; if the whole story be not a merefancy, like his assertion that spiders, " when theywalk upon such bodies as are perfectly smooth, aslooking-glass or polished marble, squeeze a littlesponge which grows near the extremity of theirclaws, and thus diffusing a glutinous substance,adhere to the surface till they make a secondstep *." Neither spiders nor any insects withwhich we are acquainted can thus produce gumfrom their feet to aid them in walking upon glass.Goat moth caterpillar (^Cossus Ugniperdd) escaping from adrinking glass, by spinning a ladder of silken ropes.Animated Nature, pt. vi. ch. iii. See also Insect Architecture,pp. 367-8.MUSCULAR STRENGTH OF INSECTS. 179though the house-fly can walk thus by causing avacuum between its feet and the glass, as we shallsubsequently describe at length. But the spider andall caterpillars can only climb in such cases by constructinga ladder of ropes, as is represented byRosell in the instance of the goat moth caterpillar.One of these caterpillars, which we possessed*,made its escape in a manner much more unexpected,if not so ingenious, by means of its great muscularpower, in which, it is not a little singular, thatinsects, as Baron Haller remarks, appear to excel inproportion to their diminutiveness. Of this we havea remarkable example in the common flea, whichcan draw seventy or eighty times its own weight f.The muscular strength of this agile creature enablesit not only to resist the ordinary pressure of thefingers in our endeavours to crush it, but to takeleaps to the distance of two hundred times its ownlength ; which will appear more surprising when weconsider that a man, to equal the agility of a flea,should be able to leap between three and four hundredyards. The flea, however, is excelled in leapingby the cuckoo-spit frog-hopper (Tettigonia samaria,Olivier), which will sometimes leap two orthree yards, that is, more than 250 times its ownlength I; as if (to continue the comparison) a manof ordinary stature should vault through the airto the distance of a quarter of a mile. The minuteobservation by which such unexpected facts are discoveredhas in all ages been a fertile source of ridiculefor the wits, from the time when Aristophanesin his Clouds introduced Socrates measuring theleap of a flea §, up to Peter Pindar's lampoon onSee Insect Architecture, p. 189.-J- Haller, Physiol., vol. ix. p. 2.J De Geer, Mem., vol. iii. p. 178.§ Aristophanes, Nsi^jXa/, *, /3.180 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.Sir Joseph Banks and the emperor-butterfly. Toall such flippant wit we have merely to retort thequestion of the Abbe de la Pluche, " if the Deitythought insects worthy of his divine skill in formingthem, ought we to consider them beneath ournotice?"Buffet, in his Theatre of Insects, mentions thatan English mechanic, named Mark, to shew his skill,constructed a chain of gold as long as his finger,which, together with a lock and key, were draggedalong by a flea ; and he had heard of another fleawhich could draw a golden chariot, to which it washarnessed. Bingley tells us that Mr. Boverich, awatchmaker in the Strand, exhibited some years agoa little ivory chaise with four wheels, and all itsproper apparatus, and the figure of a man sitting onthe box, all of which were drawn by a single flea.The same mechanic afterwards constructed a minutelandau, which opened and shut by springs, withthe figures of six horses harnessed to it, and of acoachman on the box, a dog between his legs, fourpersons inside, two footmen behind it, and a postilionriding on one of the fore horses, which were alleasily dragged along by a single flea J . Goldsmithremarks upon these displays of musicianstrength, that the feats of Samson would not, to acommunity of fleas, appear to be at all miraculous §.Latreille tells us a no less marvellous story ofanother flea, which dragged a silver cannon twenty-fourtimes its own weight, mounted on wheels, anddid not manifest any alarm when this was chargedwith gunpowder and fired off ||. Professor Bradley,of Cambridge, also mentions a remarkable instanceof insect strength in a stag-beetle {Lucanus Corvus)Spectacle de la Nature, i. 3. f Page 275.J Animal Biography, iii. 468. § Animated Nature, iv. 178.II Nouv, Diet. d'Hist. Nat. xxviii. 249.MUSCULAR STRENGTH OF INSECTS. 181which he saw carrying a wand a foot and a half long,and half an inch thick, and even flying with it to thedistance of several yards*.It has been remarked, with reference to these factsof comparative size and strength, that a cock-chaferis six times stronger than a horse ; and Linnaeusobserves, that if an elephant were as strong inproportion as a stag-beetle, it would be able totear up rocks and level mountains. The muscularpower of fish, however, seems to bear a near comparisonwith that of insects. " I have seen," says SirGilbert Blame, " the sword of a sword-fish stickingin a plank which it had penetrated from side to side ;and when it is considered that the animal was thenmoving through a medium even a thousand timesmore dense than that through which a bird cleavesits course at different heights of the atmosphere, andthat this was performed in the same direction withthe ship, what a conception do we form of this displayof muscular strength t-" It should, however,be observed, that the muscular power of the swordfishis principally shewn in the rate of swimming, bywhich the animal overtakes the ships, and thus acquiresthe momentum which determines the forceof the blow. We may understand the proximatecause of the strength of insects, when we lookat the prodigious timber of their muscles — thefleshy belts or ribbons by whose means all animalmotions are performed. The number of these instrumentsof motion in the human body is reckonedabout 529 ; but in the caterpillar of the goat-moth,Lyonnet counted more than seven times as many :in the head, 228 ; in the body, 1647 ; and aroundthe intestines, 2186 ; which, after deducting 20,Bradley, Phil. Account, p. 184.•)■ Sir Gilbert Blame, Select Miss. p. 281.RINSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.Magnified view of the principal dorsal n.usdes of the upper half of theCosbus, from Lyonnet.MUSCULAR STRENGTH OF INSECTS. 183common to the head and gullet, gives a total of4061 *.Any lady," says Kirby and Spence, " fond ofgoing to be tempted with an exhibition of fine lace,would experience an unexpected gratification couldshe be brought to examine the muscles of a caterpillarunder the microscope: with wonder and delight shewould survey the innumerable muscular threads thatin various directions envelope the gullet, stomach,and lower intestines of one of those little animals ; —some running longitudinally, others transversely,others crossing each other obliquely, so as to formapattern of rhomboids or squares ; others, again,surrounding the intestine like so many rings, andalmost all exhibiting the appearance of being woven,and resembling fine lace, — one pattern ornamentingone organ ; another, a second ; and another, athird t."We put the caterpillar of the goat-moth, to which wehave before alluded, under a bell glass, which weighednearly half a pound, and of course more than tentimes the weight of the insect ; yet it raised it upwith the utmost ease. We then placed over theglass the largest book which we had at hand —Loudon's Encyclopaedia of Gardening," consistingof about 1500 pages of strong paper, and weighingfour pounds ; but this did not succeed in preventingthe escape of the animal, which raised the glass,though loaded with the book, nearly a hundredtimes its own weight, and made good its exit J.The multiplicity of its muscles above enumerated,two hundred and thirty-six of which are situated inthe legs alone, will enable us to understand how thisextraordinary feat was performed. Even this powerof muscle, however, would doubtless have been un-bonnet,Traite Atiat. de la Clienille, pp. 188, 584.f Intr. iv. 186. % J. K.r2INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.availing in raising the loaded glass, except in connexionwith two favourable circumstances underwhich the experiment was performed, and which arenecessary to be borne in mind to render the operationperfectly credible : — 1st, that the wedge-likeform of the caterpillar's head, in connexion with thepeculiar shape of the glass, enabled it to lift it ; —and 2d, that, one side of the glass resting on thetable, the insect only bore half the weight of the glassand book.Caterpillar of Cossus escaping; from under a loaded glass.A peculiar toughness of external covering sometimessupplies the place of this muscular power incaterpillars. A singular instance occurs in thehistory of a common downy two-winged fly, withgrey shoulders and a brown abdomen, peristalticttnax, Fabr.). The grub, which is rat-tailed, livesin muddy pools, with the water of which it has sometimesbeen taken up by paper-makers, and, thoughsubjected to the immense pressure of their ma-muscularSTRENGTH OF INSECTS. 186cheery, it has survived in a miraculous manner.Such is the account originally given by Linnaeus*.A recent compiler, mistaking Kirby and Spence's veryapt comparison of this grub to a London porternicknamed Leather-coat-Jack, from his being able tosuffer carriages to drive over him without receivingany injury, forthwith fancies the porter to beanother insect, called leather-coat-jack," whichwill bear heavy carriage wheels to pass overit with impunity." Since the grub in questionis rather soft, it must be the tough texture of theskin which preserves it, as in the similar instance ofthe caterpillar (figured at page 125) of the privethawk-moth (Sphinx Ligiisiri), which Bonnetsqueezed under water till it was as flat and empty asthe finger of a glove, yet within an hour it becameplump and lively as if nothing had happened t-The instances, however, which we have just recordedare peculiar rather than general, for caterpillarsare for the most part very easily bruised andotherwise injured. Those which are large and heavy,therefore, such as the caterpillars of the hawk-moths(Springtide), have the power of attaching themselvesvery firmly to the spots where they feed and rest bymeans of the numerous hooks of their pro-legs J, sothat it is almost impossible to detach them from thebranch to which they are clinging ; and hence collectorsalways cut the branch itself All of themhave the means of breaking their fall by spinning acable of silk, which they uniformly do when accidentallyforced to quit their situation. Their methodof climbing up this cable again is worthy of observation,for it differs considerably from the manoeuvreof spiders, under the same circumstances ; as must beFauna Suecica, 1799.f Bonnet, Oeuvres, vol. ii. p. 124.t See Insect Architecture , p. 307, right-band figure.r3INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.obvious when we consider that the spinners of thespider is placed near its tail, while that of the caterpillaris in its mouth. The spider accordingly dropshead downwards*, but when it wishes to remountthe line, it turns round, and raising its head, itstretches its long triple-clawed legs t up the line,which it bundles up while it ascends. The caterpillar,on the other hand, having very short legs, withonly one smooth claw |, would make but slow progressin this manner, which it does not attempt ; butbending its head downwards till it can grasp theMethods used by spiders and caterpillars for ascending theirthreads. The caterpillars are those of the emperor-moth{Saturnia Pecunia).Insect Archie., page 336. f Ibid., p. 367.X Ibid., p. 307, left-hand figure.MEANS OF DEFENCE OF CATERPILLARS. 187cord with its hinder pair of feet, and then raising: itshead to the perpendicular position again, it thuseffects one step, and proceeds in the same mannertill it reaches the top.Other caterpillars, when they are disturbed, employadifferent method of breaking their fall withoutspinning a thread, taking advantage, for this purpose,of the long hairs which cover their body. Thosewho have seen a hedge-hog {Erinaceus Europe's),when attacked by a dog, roll itself up into a pricklyball, will readily conceive the manoeuvre of the caterpillarsto which we allude, it being precisely similar..^'M^XrvVliAi \a, Caterpillar of the tiger-moth QJrctia Casa). b, the samerolled v-p for defence, c, grub of the museum-beetles d, thesame magnified, e, tail of the same, magnified, f,g, its hairsmagnified.iSS INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.Should one of those hairy caterpillars, when feedingnear the top of a plant, be disturbed or alarmed, itinstantly coils itself up into a ball and drops amongthe grass. Here it is not only difficult to discover,but equally so to lay hold of it ; for the pliancy andsmoothness of the hair causes it to slip through thefingers as readily almost as quicksilver. The grubof the museum beetle {A iithr en us Museums Fabr.),the pest of our cabinets, affords another example ofthe same circumstance, being covered with tufts ofdiverging hairs which cause it to glide throughthe fingers as if they had been oiled. The six longtufts at the tail, which it can erect at pleasure, arecomposed of hairs, which rise from a bulb of theform of a halberd, and are curiously jointed withcones through their whole extent. The bead woodlousearmadillo vulgaris, Cuvier), though notfurnished with hairs, rolls itself up into a round ball,trusting to the fine polish of its back for escape, andto its hardness for defence. " One of our maid-servants,"says Swammerdam, " once found a numberof these wood-lice in the garden contracted intoround balls, and thinking she had found a kind ofcoral beads, she began to put them one after anotheron a thread ; it soon happened that the little creatures,being obliged to throw off the mask, resumedtheir motions : on seeing which, she was so greatlyastonished, that she flung down both them and thethread in great haste, crying out, and runningaway *."The hairs with which the caterpillars of some ofour finest native butterflies are furnished, are somewhatof the nature of bristles or thorns, being hard,inflexible, and sharply pointed. This is the case withthe caterpillars of all the fan-winged butterflies{VanesseB). We have alluded to that of the ,pt, i. p. 174.MEANS OF DEFENCE OF CATERPILLARS. 189cock's eye, which must he conspicuous to birds fromits dark black colour, prettily dotted with white, aidedbesides by the gregarious habit of feeding in acolony of several dozens together; but if a thrush orasparrow pounces upon one of them, the formidablespines must present an obstacle somewhat unexpected,perhaps, to the making of a comfortablemeal. The ass, indeed, seems to relish the piquantstimulus of the thorns or thistles, and sheep, goats,and deer will browse on the still sharper leaves ofholly*; but we think none of our soft-billed birdswould venture on a thorny caterpillar. MadameMerian says " that the spines of the caterpillar ofUrania Leihis are as hard as iron wires." Abbottells us that many American caterpillars sting like aThorny hairs of caterpillars. a a a, spiny caterpillar, fromAladanie Valerian. 6 6, Vanessa lo. c, spines magnified.Withering, Bot. Arrangement. Note on Ilex aquifolium,f Merian, Insect. Surinanij xxix.190 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS,nettle, and blister the skin when touched ; which isalso partly exemplified in that of our own gipsy moth(Hypogymna dispar)^ the slender hairs of whichirritate and inflame the skin. The spines, in some ofthe caterpillars alluded to, are like smooth thorns orprickles ; but on others, they are beset, or featheredwith shorter spines.It is probably for some purpose of defence or concealmentthat the larvae of several insects form a singularcovering for themselves of their own excrements,which they pile up for that purpose upon their backs.This material, as Kirby has observed, is not always sooffensive as might be supposed, being in some instancescassia maculata et Imatidium Leayanutn)formed into fine branching filaments, like lichens ordried fucus*. Others, however, which Reaumuraptly terms Hottentots, do not appear quite so cleanly.One of these, rather uncommon, was observed,many years ago, by VaUisnieri, which he calls thecantharides of the hly {Crioceris mercier, Leach),and may be found in May on Solomon-seal, andother hideous plants, which it devours and rendersunsightly. Under its singular canopy, it has noresemblance to an insect, but looks Hke an oblongball of chewed grass stuck on the lily. The beetlewhich is produced from the grub is of a fine brownishscarlet, and elegantly sculptured with minute dots.Another species, more abundant, similar in manners,and less than half the size of the preceding(C. cyaneUa, Panzer), is of a fine blue colour, withsimilar cuttings. The grub of the green tortoise-beetle(Cassida equestrian, Fabr.), usually found onburdocks, is furnished with a more ingenious mechanismfor this purpose, consisting of a fork in itstail, which it can depress or elevate, so as to carry itsstrange canopy higher or lower, at pleasure. LikeLinn, Trans, iii. 10.MEANS OF DEFENCE OF CATERPILLARS. 191the two preceding' insects, this grub is also most unexpectedlytransformed into a very pretty green beetle,of, the form of a tortoise, the wing-cases of whichproject all round as a covering for the legs.A, Cassida eqiiestris. B, its grub magnified to shew its analforks. C, the same with its canopy of excrements.The larva of the golden-eyed fly (Chrysopa perla.Leach), whose very singular eggs we formerly mentioned,covers itself with the fragments of the aphideswhich it has devoured, — a moving sepulchre of drybones*.A very familiar instance of this mode of defenceoccurs in the larva of the cuckoo-spit frog-hopper{Tettigonia spvrnaria, Olivier), so frequently seenin summer on willows, rose-trees, lychnis, grass, andother plants. This creature is of an exceedingly softstructure ; and it is probably, therefore, as a protectionfrom the sun, that it throws up all around it the littletuft of white froth, called, from a popular mistake,cuckoo-spit. The perfect insect is covered with hardwing-cases, of a brown colour, with a white spot andpale double band.It wcnid aj: sear that the hair, which we have describedabove as covering the bodies of seme caterpillars,is partly intended by nature to defend themIrcm cold during the winter. Ie truth of thisReaumur, iii, 380 &c.INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.a. The spit frog-hopper (Tettigonia samaria) flying, b, frothcovering the grub of the same.amounts almost to demonstration, from a circumstancediscovered respecting' ants by the younger Huber.The larvae of some ants," says he, " pass thewinter heaped up in the lowermost floor of theirdwelling. I have found, at this period, very smalllarvae in the nests inhabited by the yellow ant (FormicaJiava)^ the field ant (F. cceapiiain ?), and someother species. Those that are to pass the winter inthis state are covered with hair, which is not the caseinsummer ; affording another proof of that Providenceat which naturalists are struck at every step."The same growth of a warmer clothing for thewinter is well known to occur among quadrupeds,particularly those which inhabit the higher northernattitudes.Upon the same principle, a number of the caterpillarswhich are hatched late in autumn, and aredestined to live over winter, are provided with awarm clothing of hair or down. This is the caseeven with most of those which construct for them.P. Huber on Ants, p. 82.f See MenagerieS; vol. i,, p. 50.MEANS OF DEFENCE OF CATERPILLARS. 193selves a snug; nest of silk, such as the caterpillars ofthe brown-tail moth (Porthesia auri/Iua), and thoseof the mallow butterfly (Hesperia malice). But thereare others which are provided with no extraneouscovering', farther than the occasional shelter theymay obtain by crawling under withered leaves, thecopings of walls, or the bend of a branch. Amongthese some are thickly covered with hair, of whichwe have an instance in the caterpillar of the greattiger moth (Arctic casa, Stephens), whose mode ofrolling itself up into a ball we have already described ;but a more remarkable example occurs in the caterpillarof the drinker moth {Odonesiis potatoria,Germans), whose very feet are covered with fineshaggy down. It is this, no doubt, which preservesit from becoming torpid during winter ; and as itfeeds on grass, it can always procure food duringthe severest weather. When a fine sunny day chancesto break in upon the gloom of winter, this prettyinsect may be often seen stretched at its full lengthon a low twig, or the withered stem of a nettle,basking in the sunshine with apparent delight. Wekept one of them in our study during the winter of1827-8 ; and it continued to feed sparingly till February,when, owing to neglect, it unfortunately died *.There are several other caterpillars, however,which live during the winter, in a no less exposedmanner, without being provided with any covering ofhair ; though some of these, we may remark, do notcontinue to feed, but become wholly or partially torpid,such as the caterpillar of the magpie moth(Abraxas grossulariata). Of this species we haveobserved numbers, about as thick as a crow-quill,remaining in the same position for weeks together, andnever moving, except when some very considerablechange of temperature, either colder or hotter, tookplace. They do not seem to select the warmest places*J.R. ,s194 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.within their choice, being usually found on an exposedcurrant branch, or under the upper cross-bar of apaling". We observed one, during several months ofthe winter of 18:28-9, stationary under the lintel of adoor, where a continual current of air must have renderedit exceedingly cold. We have endeavouredto rouse some of these from their semi-torpidity bykeeping them in a warm room ; but though theywould make a few lethargic and unwilling movements,none of them would eat, and the changealways proved fatal*.We might be led from this instance to concludethat caterpillars, not covered with hair, become torpidduring winter; but such general conclusionsa, Young caterpillar of the drinker, b, the samp full grown.c, smooth caterpillar of the angle shades, d, the moth of thesame,J.B.Liberation OF CATERPILLARS. 195from particular facts seldom accord with actualnature, and ought never to be indulged in by naturalistswho study accuracy. Another caterpillar, notuncommon in gardens, on the hollyhock and otherplants, would at once disprove such an inference :we allude to that of the angle shades {Phlogophorameticidosa, Ochsenheimer). This caterpillar, whichis exceedingly smooth, and is remarkable for changingin its last moult from a clear green to a yellowishbrown, we have found during the whole winter inthe folds of the fresh leaves of hillocks, cabbagessavoys, &c., quite lively, and feeding in openweather by no means sparingly. Its defence fromcold may perhaps consist in a superabundant supplyof fat, which we may infer that it possesses from thesoft flabby aspect. It is this circumstance which seemsto protect whales from the polar cold ; as well asbears during their torpidity.Some caterpillars seem to have no less power ofresisting severe cold than eggs ; as authentic instancesare recorded of their revival after being frozenstiff, — a circumstance also reported of some serpentsin North America *. Dr. Lister in this way revivedcaterpillars frozen so hard as to chink like stoneswhen thrown into a glass t ; and Mr. Stickney exposedsome grubs of a common crane-fly {Tipvlaoleracca, Linn.) to a severe frost, till they were congealedinto masses of ice, yet several of them survivedJ. Reaumur, however, was unsuccessful insimilar experiments on the gregarious moth of thefir {Ciietliocampa Pityocampa, Stephens), so celebratedamong the ancients as a poison §; for none ofthem survived a cold of 2" below zero, Fahr., bywhich they were frozen to ice||.John Hunter, Sobs, on Anim.Econ. p. 99.f Goedart. Iti.-ect. p. 79. j Kirby and Suenc e, Iiilr. ii. p.453.§ Fain. Hist. Nat. 38, 9. || 'Mem. 11.S 2Chapter Visit.Voracity of Caterpillars, Grubs, and Maggots.Insects, in the early stage of their existence, maybecompared to an Indian hunter, who issues fromhis hut, as they do from the egg, with a keenappetite. As soon as he is successful in findinggame, he gorges himself till he can eat no more,and then laying him down to sleep, only bestirshimself again to go through a similar process ofgorging and sleeping; just so the larvae of insectsdoze away a day or more when casting their skins,and then make up for their long fast by eating withscarcely a pause. Professor Bradley calculates(though upon data somewhat questionable) that apair of sparrows cari-y to their young about threethousand caterpillars in a week * ; but this is nothingwhen compared with the voracity of caterpillars. Ofthe latter we have more accurate calculations than thatof Bradley, who multiplied the number of caterpillarswhich he observed taken in one hour by the hours ofsunlight in a week. Redii ascertained by experimentthat the maggot of the common blow-fly (Musca car-maria)becomes from 140 to 200 times heavier withintwenty-four hours t; and the cultivators of silk wormsknow the exact quantities of leaves which their broodsdevour. " The result," says Count Dandolo, " ofthe most exact calculations is, that the quantity ofleaves drawn from the tree employed for each ounceof dogs amounts to 1609 lbs. 8 oz., divided in thefollowing manner :" —Account of the Works of Nature.f Experience de Insetli, p. 23. - -VORACITY OP CATERPILLARS. 197Sorted leaves. Refuse.lbs. oz. lbs. OZ.First age 6 1 8Second age 18 3Third age 60 9Fourth age 180 27Filth age 1098 102Per ounce of eggs of sorted leaves . .lbs. 1362 142 8Refuse 142 8Lost from the leaves by evaporation, &c . 1051609 8He adds to this curious table, that from the 1362 lbs.of sorted leaves Q;\\en to the caterpillars, it is necessaryto deduct 155 lbs. 7 oz. 4 drs. of litter, consistingof fragments of uneaten leaves, stalks, fruit, &c.,and consequently that they actually devour only 1206lbs. 4 oz. 4 drs. It is necessary also to mention thatof this quantity 745 lbs. 8 oz. of dung are carried fromthe hurdles ; and consequently there is only digested771 lbs. 7 oz. 4 drs. of pure leaves, which produce120 lbs. of silk cocoons, — giving a loss by evaporationfrom the worms in gas and vapour of 496 lbs. 4 oz.,nearly three parts of this loss occurring in the six lastdays of the fifth age *. These deductions, however,do not affect the amount eaten by the caterpillarsproduced from 1 oz. of eggs, which is upwards of1200 lbs. A single silk-worm, as we before mentioned,consumes within thirty days about 60,000times its primitive weight.When we take these facts into consideration, weneed not be surprised at the extensive ravages committedby other caterpillars, many of which are muchlarger than the silk-worm, and all of them producedin broods of considerable numbers. Mr. Stephens,in his valuable catalogue of British insects, a work ofCount Dandolo's Art of rearing Silk-Worms, p. 322-24,Eug. Trans.s3198 - INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.very extraordinary accuracy, enumerates nearly 2000species of native moths and butterflies ; and as thefemales of these are for the most part very prolific, wehave little reason to be surprised at thei occasionalextent of their depredations. The 2000 species justmentioned are, besides, not more than a fifth of ournative insects, most of the grubs and maggots ofwhich are exceedingly voracious and destructive.It appears to be indispensable for most insects tofeed copiously during their lana state, in order tosupply a store of nutriment for their subsequentchanges ; for many of them eat nothing, and most ofthem little, after they have been transformed into pupaeand perfect insects. What is no less wonderful, acorresponding change takes place in the internalformation of their organs of digestion. A caterpillarwill, as we have seen, devour in a month60,000 times its own weight of leaves, while themoth or the butterfly into which it is afterwards transformedmay not sip a thousandth part of its weightof honey during its whole existence. Now, in thecaterpillar, nature has provided a most capacious stomach,which, indeed, fills a very large portion of itsbody ; but in the butter-fly the stomach is diminishedto a thread. By a series of minute dissections,conducted with great skill, Heroldt traced thesechanges, as they successively occur, from the caterpillarto the butterfly. In the caterpillar he foundthe gullet, the honey stomach, the true stomach, andthe intestines capacious. Two days after its firstchange all these are visibly diminished, as well as thesilk reservoirs, which, in a chrysalis eight days old,have wholly disappeared ; while the base of the gulletis dilated into a crop, and the stomach still more contractedinto a spindle form. When near its changeinto the perfect insect the gullet is still more drawnout, while the crop, still small, is now on one side ofVISCERA OF THE COSSUS. 199View ©f the upper side. View of the under side.BJA,B,C, Theaeso-plague and its appendages.D, E, The stomach;— a pair ofmuscles wind spirallyround it, andley their contractionsqueeze the digestedfood into the intestines.E, F. The firstlarge intestine. F,G, the second. G,H, the third.I, I, The six smallintestines,-^llllillHle:h:Viscera of the Cossus.INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.A, A, Caterpillar of Vanessa article magnified, a — ft, theintestines of the same. «, the gullet, bb b b, pulmonary tubes.c c, ligament of the stomach, d d dd, transparent rings of thesame, e e, small intestines, //, their origin, g g h A, their windings,i k, the rectum.INTESTINAL STRUCTURE.the guWei ; and in the butterfly is enlarged into ahoney stomach.a^Intestinal canals of the caterpillar, piipa, and butterfly."1. Caterpillar. «, the oesophagus, h, the stomach, c 'd, thetwo large intestines.2. Fv.fthtuo days old. a, the oesophagus. Z-, the stomach, cd,tie two large intestines.3. Pupa eight days old. o, dilation of the oesophagus, formingthe crap or Itoney-stomavh.4. Pupa immediately before its transformation, a, the honey-stomachbecome a lateral appendage of the oesophagus. J,the stomach, c d, the large intestines.5. Butterfly. o, honey-stomach, t. the digesting stomach, c'rf,the large intestines, become very long.It is remarkable that in men of such extraordinaryappetite as amounts to a disease {Bulimia, Sullen),the natural capacity of the stomach, which, according"to Blumenbach, contains about three pints*,is very much enlarged. This was peculiarly thecase with Rare, an Italian juggler, who, from swallowingflints, whole baskets of fruit, &c., seemsto have enlarged the capacity of his stomach so asto render his appetite insatiable. M. Lesser, of theInfirmary at "Versailles, where Rare died of consumption,found on examination that his stomachBlumenbach, Physiol,, s, xxiii.tOZ INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.was prodigiously distended *, The same must havebeen the case with the French prisoner at Liverpool,who, on the testimony of Dr. Cochrane, consumed,in one day, sixteen pounds of raw meat and tallowcandles, besides five bottles of porter t„The mandibles of caterpillars, which do not actperpendicularly like the jaws of quadrupeds, but horizontally,are for the most part very sharp and strong,being of a hard, horny substance, and moved bypowerful muscles. They are, for the most part,slightly bent in the form of a reaping-hook ; havingthe concavity indented with tooth-shaped projections,formed out of the substance of the jaw, and not socketedas the teeth of quadrupeds. These are made to meetlike the blades of a pair of pincers ; and in some casesthey both chop and grind the food |. Besides thesethere is a pair of jaws (jnaxillcd) placed on each sideof the middle portion of the under lip; and from theirbeing of a softer substance they seem to be more forthe purpose of retaining the food, than for mastication.This formidable apparatus for masticating strophe)is well adciptcd to supply the large demands of thecapacious stomachs of larvae; and when we considerthat all of them are employed in eating at least forten or twelve hours in the day, and a great numberduring the night, we need not wonder at their extensiveravages upon the substances on which theyfeed. It may be interesting, however, to give a fewexamples of their destructiveness ; and with this viewit will be convenient to consider them under the threepopular names of caterpillars, grubs, and maggots.Caterpillars.The ravages of caterpillars are amongst the mostM. Percy in Rapport destitute Nationale.t Med.aad Phys. Journ., iii.; 209. J Cuvier, Aunt. Coin., iii., 322.RAVAGES OF CATERPILLARS. 203conspicuous of insect depredations, in consequenceof their being committed upon the leaves of trees,bushes, and plants, which are often stripped as bareas in winter. Even the smaller sorts of caterpillarsbecome, from their multiplicity, sometimes as destructiveas those which are of considerable magnitude.During the summer of 1S27 we were told that an extraordinaryblight had suddenly destroyed the leaves of allthe trees in Oak of Honour Wood, Kent. On goingthither, we found the report had been little exaggerated; for though it was " in the leafy month ofJune," there was scarcely a leaf to be seen on theoak-trees, which constitute the greater portion of thewood. But we were rather surprised when we discovered,on examination, that this extensive destructionhad been effected by one of the small solitaryleaf-rollers {Tortrix viridana, Haworth) * ; for oneof this sort seldom consumes more than four or fiveleaves, if so much, during its existence. The number,therefore, of these caterpillars must have beenalmost beyond conception ; and that of the moths,the previous year, must also have been very great :for the mother moth only lays from fifty to a hundredeggs, which are glued to an oak branch, and remainduring the winter. It is remarkable that in thiswood during the two following summers these caterpillarsdid not abound t.Instances like this, however, from solitary species,are, we believe, less common than those of the ravagesof gregarious caterpillars. In 1826, colonies of thebuff-tip (Pygfera biicephala, Ochsenheim.) were insome parts of the country very abundant. We remarkedthem particularly at Harrow-on-the-Hill, andat Compton-Basset in Wiltshire. From their feedingin company, they strip a tree, branch after branch,See figures of this caterpillar and its moth in "Insect Architecture,"pp. 162-3. ^ t J. R.INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.scarcely leaving the fragment of a leaf, till a greatportion of it is completely bare. Some of the magnificentbeeches in Compton Park, from this cause, appearedwith the one-half of their branches leaflessand naked, while the other half was untouched.Besides the beech, these caterpillars feed on the oak,the lime, the hazel, the elm, and the willow. Whennewly hatched they may be readily discovered, fromtheir singular manner of marshalling themselves, likea file of soldiers, on a single leaf, only eating it halfthrough ; and in their more advanced stage, theirgaudy stripes of yellow and black render them veryconspicuous on the branches which they have nearlystripped bare. The cuckoo feeds as greedily uponthem as they do on leaves , and may be seen early inRavages of the buff-tip caterpillar (^Pygcera bucephalus). a, thefctll-growa caterpillar, b, the moth, c c, a line of young caterpillars,advancing along a leaf aud devouring it half through asthey inarch, d, the eggs.RAVAGES OF CATERPILLARS. 205the morning perched in the midst of their colonies,and devouring them by dozens.Those caterpillars which feed upon fruit-trees andhedge shrubs are still more likely to attract attention ;since, when any of these are abundant, it is scarcelypossible to stir out of doors without observing them.Thus, in the suburbs of London, in the summer of1S29, not only the orchards and gardens, but everyhedge, swarmed with the lackey caterpillars {Clisio-campa neustria)^ which are what naturalists termpolyphemus feeders, that is, they do not confine themselvesto a particular sort of tree, but relish a greatnumber. The hawthorn, the black thorn, and theoak, however, seem to be most to their taste ; whilethey are rare on the willow, and we have never observedthem on the poplar, or the elder.Another of what may be appropriately termedthe encamping caterpillars, of a much smaller size,and of a different genus, is the small ermine (Ypo-momenta padeila)^ which does not, besides, feed quiteso indiscriminately ; but when the bird-cherry {Pru-nua palais), its peculiar food, is not to be had, itwill put up with black thorn, plum-tree, hawthorn,and almost any sort of orchard fruit-tree. With respectto such caterpillars as feed on different plants,Reaumur and De Geer make the singular remark,that in most cases they would only eat the sort ofplant upon which they were originally hatched f.We verified this, in the case of the caterpillar in question,upon two different nests which we took, in 1806,from the bird-cherry at Crawfordland, in Ayrshire.Upon bringing these to Kilmarnock, we could notreadily supply them with the leaves of this tree ; andhaving then only a slight acquaintance with the habitsot" insects, and imagining they would eat anysort of leaf, we tried them with almost every thingJ. R. tDeGeer;Mera.i.319.TINSECT Transformations.green in the vicinity of the town : but they refused totouch any which we offered them. After they hadfasted several days, we at length procured some freshbranches of the bird-cherry, with which they grorcredthemselves so that most of them died. Last summer(1S29) we again tried a colony of these caterpillars,found en a seedling; plum-tree at Lee, inKent, with black thorn, hawthorn, and many otherleaves, and even with those of the bird-cherry; butthey would touch nothing except the seedling plum,refusing the grafted varieties*.Eficasipment of the caterpillar of the small engine (Tpouowuntapatella) oa the Siberian crab.A circumstance not a little remarkable in so verynice a feeder is, that in some cases the mother mothwill deposit her eggs upon trees not of indigenousgrowth, and not even of the same genus with herRAVAGES OF CATERPILLARS. Josusual favourites. Thus, iu 1825, the cherry-apple,or Siberian crab (Cyrus prunifolia^WiLLGE^ovr)^so commonly grown in the suburbs of London,swarmed with them. On a single tree at Islington,we counted above twenty nests, each of which wouldcontain from fifty to a hundred caterpillars ; andthough these do not grow thicker than a crow-quill,so many of them scarcely left a leaf endeavoured, and,of course, the fruit, which shewed abundantly inspring, never came to maturity. The summer followingthey were still more abundant on the hawthornhedges, particularly near the Thames, by Batterseaand Richmond. Since then we have only seenthem sparingly ; and last summer we could only findthe single nest upon which we tried the precedingexperiment*. This present spring (1S30) they haveagain appeared in millions on the hedges.Reaumur says that in some years they were exceedinglydestructive to his apple-trees, though theydid not touch his pears, plums, or apricots, whichagrees precisely with our own remarks. We are wellaware that there are several species of the small ermines,all similar in manners, such as the one whichfeeds on the spindle-tree, {Euojiymus)^ and producesthe prettiest moth of the genus {YponomeutaEuonymeUa) ; but our preceding remarks all applyto one species.In 1829 we remarked a very extraordinary numberof webs of some similar caterpillar, of which wedid not ascertain the species, on the willows in Hollandand the Netherlands, from Amsterdam toOstend. In some districts, particularly near Brugesand Rotterdam, the leaves were literally strippedfrom whole rows of trees ; while other rows, at noconsiderable distance, were entirely free from theirravages. A foreign naturalist, quoted by Harris inJ. R. t Reaumur, Mem. ii. 198.t2208 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.his aurelian, says, that the caterpillar of the Camberwellbeauty {{Vanessa Ajitiopa), which feeds ^res^a-piously on the willow, sometimes defoliates the treesof a whole district in the Low Countries ; but theravages observed by us were evidently made by thecaterpillars of some small moth*.None of the preceding details, however, appear sostriking as what is recorded of the brown-tail moth(Portkesia aun/Iiia), by Mr. W. Curtis f, whosemultitudinous colonies spread treat alarm over thecountry in the summer of 1782. This alarm was muchincreased by the exaggeration and ignorant detailswhich found their way into the newspapers. The actualnumbers of these caterpillars must have been immense,since Curtis says, " in many of the parishesnear London subscriptions have been opened, andthe poor people employed to cut off the webs at oneshilling per bushel, which have been burnt under theinspection of the churchwardens, overseers, or beadleof the parish : at the first onset of this business fourscorebushels, as I was most credibly informed, werecollected in one day in the parish of Clapham."It is not, therefore, very much to be wondered at,that the ignorant, who are so prone to become thevictim of groundless fears, should have taken seriousalarm on having so unusual a phenomenon forcedupon their attention. Some alarmists accordinglyasserted that the caterpillars " were the usual presageof the plague ; " and others that they not only presagedit, but would actually cause it, for " theirnumbers were great enough to render the air pestilential,"while, to add to the mischief, " they woulddestroy every kind of vegetation, and starve the cattlein the fields." " Almost every one," adds Curtis,J. R.f Curtis, Hist, of Brown-tail Moth, to. London, 1782.J See Insect Architecture, page 330, for a figure of the nest.RAVAGES OF CATERPILLARS. 20$*' ignorant of their history, was under the greatestapprehensions concerning them; so that even prayerswere ordered up in some churches to deliver thecountry from the apprehended approaching calamity."It seems to have 1 been either the same caterpillar, orone very nearly allied to it, probably that of thegolden-tail {PorthtsiaChrysorrhcea),'wh'\ch in 1731-2,produced a similar alarm in France. Reaumur, ongoing from Paris to Tours, in September 1730, foundevery oak, great and small, literally swarming withthem, and their leaves parched and brown as if someburning wind lead passed over them ; for when newlyhatched, like the young buff-tips, they only eat oneof the membranes of the leaf, and of course the otherwithers away. These infant legions, under the shelterof their warm nests*, survived the winter in suchnumbers, that they threatened the destruction notonly of the fruit-trees, but of the forests, — every tree,as Reaumur says, being over-run with them. TheParliament of Paris thought that ravages so widelyextended loudly called for their interference, andthey accordingly issued an edict, to compel the peopleto caterpillar (deche/iiUer) the trees ; which Reaumurridiculed as impracticable, at least in the forests.About the middle of May, however, a succession ofcold rains produced so much mortality among thecaterpillars, that the people were happily releasedfrom the edict ; for it soon became difficult to find ajingle individual of the species f. In the same way thecold rains, during the summer of 1829, seem to havenearly annihilated the lackeys, which in the early partof the summer, swarmed on every hedge aroundLondon:. The ignorance displayed in France at thetime in question, was not inferior to that recorded bySee Insect Architecture, p. 331, for a figure.t Reaumur, ii.p.l 37. J Insect Architecture, p. 329.t3210 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.Curtis ; for the French journalists gravely assertedthat part of the caterpillars were produced by spiders;and that these spiders, and not the caterpillars, constructedthe w ebs of the slime of snails, which theywere said to have been seen collecting for the purpose!" Verily," exclaims Reaumur, "there ismore ignorance in our age than one might believe."It is justly remarked by Curtis, that the caterpillar ofthe brown-tail moth is not so limited a feeder as some,nor so indiscriminate as others ; but that it alwaysconfines itself to trees or shrubs, and is never foundon herbaceous plants, whose low growth would seldomsupply a suitable foundation for its web. Hence theabsurdity of supposing it would attack the herbageof the field, and produce a famine among cattle.Curtis says, it is found on the " hawthorn most plentifully,oak the same, elm very plentifully, most fruit-treesthe same, black thorn plentifully, rose-trees thesame, bramble the same, on the willow and poplarscarce. None have been noticed on the elder, walnut,ash, fir, or herbaceous plants. With respect to fruit-treesthe injuries they sustain are most serious, as, indestroying the blossoms as yet in the bud, they alsodestroy the fruit in embryo ; the owners of orchards,therefore, have great reason to be alarmed."The sudden appearance of great numbers of thesecaterpillars in particular years, and their scarcity inothers, is in some degree explained by a fact statedby Mr. Salisbury. " A gentleman of Chelsea," hesays, " has informed me that he once took a nestof moths and bred them; that some of the eggscame the first year, some the second, and others ofthe same nest did not hatch till the third season."We reared, during 1829, several nests both ofthe brown-tails and of the golden-tails, and a numberof the females deposited their eggs in our nurse-salisbury,Hints on Orchards, p. 53.RAVAGES OF CATERPILLARS. 211cages ; but, contrary to the experiment just quoted,all of these were hatched during; the same autumn*.The difference of temperature and moisture in particularseasons may produce this diversity.An alarm, similar to those we have recorded, wasproduced in France in 1735 by the green stripedcaterpillars of a moth very common in Britain, calledby collectors, from a mark on its upper wings, the Y, ormore properly the 7 moth (Plusia Gamma Ochs.).Though ranked in some classifications amongst thenocturnal moths, it flies chiefly by day, and maybe seenin Battersea-fields, or other moist meadows, flittingfrom herb to herb and flower to flower, in short andlow flights; for it seldom soars higher than the tallestgrass-stem, or the crimson flower-heads of the knapweed,upon whose honey it sometimes regales, remainingon the wing all the while it is sipping it.During the cold rainy summer of 1829 it was almostthe only moth which appeared plentiful t. At leasttwo broods seem to be produced during the season;which may account for its being found from May tillthe setting-in of the winter frosts.Notwithstanding it being so plentiful, however,we have not heard of its having ever been so destructivehere as in France, where, as usual, the mostimprobable causes were assigned for its increase.*' In some places," says Reaumur, " they assuredme they had seen an old soldier throw the spell; andin other places an ugly and mischievous old womanhad wrought all the evil J." These supposed supernaturalagents, however, must have been either verynumerous or very active to fill, not only the gardens,but every field, with legions of those caterpillars,which devoured almost every green thing, and leftonly the stalks as monuments of their devastation. Thealarm proceeded farther, for it began to be whisperedJ. R. t J. R. J Reaumur, ii. 336.Insect TRANSFORMATIONS.that they were poisonous ; and many were in consequenceafraid to touch soups or salads. Reaumurthought it incumbent on him to refute this notion atsome leiii^th ; but we cannot accept his doctrine asvery palatable, when he tells us that few dishes of soupor salad are ever prepared without containing caterpillars,and yet all the world are not poisoned thereby,any more than by eating oysters or viper broth.He endeavoured also to account by calculation fortheir excess, fi-om the data of the female moth layingabout four hundred eggs. Now, if there wereonly twenty caterpillars distributed in a garden, andall lived through the winter, and became moths inthe succeeding May., the eggs laid by these, if allfertile, would produce 800,000, a number much morethan sufficient to effect great destruction*. Didnot Providence, therefore, put causes in operation toTransformations of the y molli (Plusia Gamma), a, the egg,greatly inagQitied, on a morsel of leaf, b, the eg^on a leaf, naturalsize, c, the larva, d, the pupa, e, the moth.Reaumur, ii. 337,RAVAGES OF Caterpillars 213keep them in due bounds, the caterpillars of thismoth alone, leaving out of consideration the 2000other British species, would soon destroy more thanhalf of our vegetation.The caterpillar just mentioned, amongst other potherbsattacks cohorts and cabbage ; and maysometimes be found there along with another, notuncommon, but seldom very destructive, called by collectorsthe burnished brass (Plusia chrysalis), whichdiffers little from the caterpillar of the 7 moth, exceptin being of a brighter green. Another, called the oldgentlewoman {Mameslra brassiere, Treitsche), is sodestructive to cabbages in Germany, that the gardenersgather whole baskets full and bury them ;but as Rosell remarks, they might as well endeavourto kill a crab by covering it with sea-water, for itis natural to them to burrow under ground whenthey change into chrysalides*. We have seen thiscaterpillar, as well as that of the brown-eye {Mames-tra oleracea)y do considerable damage in "Wiltshire,but nothing to what is reported of it in Germany.The leaves of cabbages, cauliflower, brccoli, cole-words,and turnips, are frequently devoured to amore considerable extent by the sub-gregarious caterpillarsof the white butterflies {Poniia brassicce, P.nape, &c.) From the great multiplicity of the butterflies,indeed, and from there being two broods inthe year, we have reason to wonder that theirravages are not more extensive. But we have remarked,that they seem more partial to wild thancultivated plants ; for we have seen, near Islington,the herbaceous weeds, such as rape (Brassicanapys)^over-run with them in the very same fields with cultivatedcabbages, which were not touched t ; so thatthe caterpillars are not always so injurious as wemight at first suppose, since in this case they tend toRosell, Inseckten, i. iv. 170. f J R.214 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.keep down the weeds, while the birds and theichneumon flies keep them in check by making preyof them.The gregarious caterpillars of an allied species,called the black-veined white butterfly (PierisCratfEgi, Stephens), is in some seasons and districtsno less destructive to orchards and hawthorn hedgesthan the preceding ones are to the kitchen-garden.Salisbury, who wrote at Chelsea in 1815, says it*' commits great destruction every spring, and notonly to the apple-trees, but other kinds of fruits."Mr. Stephens, writing in 1827, says, " in June 1810,I saw it in plenty at Combe Wood, and in the following*year I captured several at Swell-hill, sincewhich time I have not seen any at larges." Mr.Haworth also says, " it has not of late years beenseen at Chelsea, where it formerly abounded." Wehave never met with it at all. According to Salisburythe female butterfly lays her eggs near the extremityof an old rather than a young branch, and coversthem with a coating of gluten, which is both imperviousto moisture and impenetrable (this we doubt)to the bills of birds. " In this state," he adds, " wehave instances of their remaining without losingtheir vitality for several years, until a favourable opportunityof their being brought into existence arrives."The caterpillars, which are at first black and hairy,live in common in a silken tent. They become subsequentlystriped with reddish brown, and disperseover the trees. This caterpillar and its butterflyare figured in a subsequent page.Our gooseberry and red-currant bushes are veryfrequently despoiled of their leaves, both by thespeckled caterpillar of the magpie moth {Abraxasgrossulariata), and by what Reaumur terms theHints on Orchards, p. 56. f Illustrations, i. Hausleliata, 27.+ Hints on Orchards, p. 07,RAVAGES OF CATERPILLARS.pseudo-caterpillars of one of the saw-flies (SenatusRibesii, Stephens). The latter insect has a flatyellow body and four pellucid wings, the two outerones marked with brown on the edge. In April it issuesfrom the pupa, which has Vain under ground fromthe preceding September. The female of the gooseberrysaw-fly does not, like some of the family, cut agroove in the branch to deposit her eggs ; — " ofwhat use, then," asks Reaumur, " is her ovipositorsaw?" In order to satisfy himself on this point, heintroduced a pair of the flies under a bell-glass alongWith a branch bent from a red-currant bush, that hemight watch the process. The female immediatelyperambulated the leaves in search of a place suited toher purpose, and passing under a leaf began to lay,a a a. Saw-fly of the gooseberry (Nemus Ribesii, Stephens).h, its eggs on the nerves of a leaf, d d, the caterpillars eating.c, one rolled up. /, one extended.See Insect Architecture, chap.vii. for a description of thiscurious instrument.216 Insect TRANSFORMATIONS.depositing six eggs within a quarter of an hour.Each time she placed herself as if she wished to cutinto the leaf with her saw ; but, upon taking outthe leaf, the eggs appeared rather projecting thanlodged in its substance. They adhered so firmly,however, that they could not be detached withoutcrushing them. He could not discover any groove *;but we think it likely that a minute cut is made inthe exterior membrane of the leaf, the edges of whichgrasp and hold firm the part of the eg which isthrust into it by the insect. Be this as it may, thecaterpillars are hatched in two or three weeks ; andthey feed in company till after midsummer, frequentlystripping both the leaves and fruit of an extensiveplantation. The caterpillar has six legs and sixteenprocess, and is of a green colour mixed with yellow,and covered with minute black dots raised like shagreen.In its last skin it loses the black dots andbecomes smooth and yellowish white. The CaledonianHorticultural Society have published a numberof plans for destroying these caterpillars.An allied species of saw-fly (Nemus Capre(BjStephens) frequently becomes extensively destructiveto several species of willow, sallow, and osier.It is so like that of the gooseberry and that of thewillow (Senatus salicifi), which is not British, that ithas been confounded with these by Fabricius, Stewart,Gmelin, and other authors. In the summer of1828, we observed a considerable group of youngstandards of the golden osier {Salix vitellina), in anursery at Lewisham, rendered quite leafless by thesecaterpillars ; which, when feeding, throw themselvesinto singular postures by holding only with theirfore feet. The fly appears in spring, and places itseggs in a round patch on the back of the leaf, andnot along the nervures, like the gooseberry saw fly.Reaumur, v, 125.RAVAGES OF CATERPILLARS.During the three last summers, we also remarkedthat the alders (Arius glutinous) along the banks ofthe Ravensbourne, in Kent, were extensively strippedof their leaves by a saw-fly caterpillar, very like thepreceding, but of a larger size*. It appears to bethesame as one figured by Reaumur t alexandriaAli? Stephens).■a, Senatus caprice, on the osier ; I, Selandria ali ? on the alder.Another slimy cater-pillar of a saw-fly, allied tothat of the cherry {Tenthredo Crash), is called thesluo- worm in North America, where it has increasedJ. R.f Reaumur, vol. v., pi. 11, fig. 1, 2,U218 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.SO numerously as to threaten the entire destruction offruit trees, including the cherry, plum, pear, andquince. Where they are numerous, the air becomesloaded with a disagreeable and sickly effluvium. Thehistory of this orchard pest has been admirablywritten by Professor Peck*.When a turnip crop has been fortunate enough toescape the ravages committed on it in the seed leafby a small jumping beetle {Haltica yiemorum, Milliner),and by a root weevil (Nedyus contractus,Stephens), a no less formidable depredator sometimesappears in a caterpillar belonging to the saw-flyfamily {Tenthredinidce), and apparently of thegenus Thalia. An instance is recorded by Marshall,in the Philosophical Transactions, of ma«iythousand acres having had to be ploughed up onaccount of the devastations caused by these insects.It is, he informs us, the general opinion in Norfolk,that they come from over-sea ; and a farmer averredthat he saw them arrive in clouds so as to darkenthe air, while the fishermen reported that they hadrepeatedly witnessed flights of them pass over theirheads when they were at a distance from land. Onthe beech and the cliffs, indeed, they lay in heaps,so that they might have been taken up with shovels ;while three miles inland they crowded together likea swarm of bees t.We have little doubt, however, that these detailsare put in an inverse order ; as frequently occurs inhistories of the proceedings of insects by those butlittle acquainted with their habits. Insects of thisfamily, indeed, seldom fly far, and could not at allevents cross the sea, unless it might be a narrow bayor inlet ; and if they had, we ought to have heard oftheir departure as well as their arrival, since theirNat. Hist, of the Slug Worm, Boston, 1799.t PhiL Trans, vol. IxxUi. p. 317.RAVAGES OP CATERPILLARS. 219extraordinary number could not have failed to attractpublic notice on other shores. The nature ofthese insects is to lie in the pupa state during thewinter under ground ; and when, at its appointedtime, the fly comes forth, it only lives to lay its eggs,usually dying within a few days or weeks. It musthave been, therefore, after the laying their eggs on theturnips, and not before, that clouds of the flies wereseen at sea and on the shore, though not arriving,but going away. They were, doubtless, impelled bythat restless desire of change felt by all animalswhen death is approaching, and which in tropicalcountries is yearly exemplified in the destruction oflocusts, for these always make for the sea, andperish there. But though they were thus got ridof in August, 1782, they left a progeny behind themin the black caterpillars which were hatched fromtheir eggs. In the summer of 1783, accordingly,we are told by Mr. Marshall, that whole districtswere ravaged by them, — the descendants, of course,in the second generation, of the saw-flies which perishedon the beach and at sea the preceding autumn.Some caterpillars, which either conceal themselvesunder ground, or feed on roots and the woodof trees, do considerable injury, without apparentcause; and often give occasion to the popular notionsrespecting mysterious blights. In this manner willthe caterpillars of the ghost moth {Hepialus Tumuli)gnaw the roots of the burdock, and, what is of moreconsequence, of the hop plant, till the shoots areweakened and the leaves droop in bright sunshine.We have repeatedly seen, in the gardens about Lee,a large branch of the red-currant bush, though previouslyhealthy and loaded with fruit, all of a suddendroop and wither, giving good cause to surmise,except in the leaves not being brown oru2220 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.parched, that it had been struck with lightning. Oncutting into such branches, however, the cause wasuniformly found to be the ravages of the caterpillarof the currant hawk-moth (Egeria tipuliformis^Stephens), which abounds in the vicinity. But wehave also remarked that it only occasionally producesthis effect upon the trees ; for several bushes uponwhich we have found old pupa-cases projecting fromthe bark, remained healthy and uninjured*. SirJoseph Banks showed Mr. Kirby a currant branchperforated by this caterpillar to the pith, and said thesize of the fruit was in consequence diminished t-In Germany it is reported to destroy even largebushes of the red currant. There can be no doubtthat the caterpillars of the goat moth frequentlydestroy willow, poplar, and oak trees, of considerablemagnitude ; but the mother moth seems to preferlaying her eggs upon those which have alreadybegun to decay. A black poplar tree, not thickerthan a man's leg, and stripped on one side of morethan a foot of the bark, was bored by above a dozencaterpillars of the clear underwing egeria asili-forms, Stephens), without seeming to have itsgrowth at all retarded |.It does not appear that a minute moth, called byleeuwenhoek, who writes its history, the wolf, andby Haworth the mottled woollen {Ph. Tinea arabella,IjInn^us), is so abundant in Britain as to do muchdamage to the grain stored in granaries, upon whichit feeds. But it seems to have created considerablealarm on the Continent. It has been found nearLondon, and nay increase with us. The caterpillar,which is smooth and white, ties together withsilk several grains of wheat, barley, rye, or oats, weave.R, f Kirby and Spence, vol. i. p. 197.X See Ins. Arphit., p. 192,RAVAGES OF CATERPILLARS.ing" a gallery between them, from which it projects itshead while feeding ; the grains, as Reaumur remarks,being' prevented from rolling or slipping by the silkwhich unites them. He justly ridicules the absurdnotion of its filing off the outer skin of the wheat byrubbing upon it with its body, the latter being thesofter of the two ; and he disproved, by experiment,Leeuwenhoeck's assertion that it will also feed onwoollen cloth. It is from the end of May till thebeginning of July that the moths, which are of asilvery grey, spotted with brown, appear and lay theireggs in granaries.The caterpillar of another still more singulargrain moth (Tinea Horde., Kirby) proves sometimesvery destructive to granaries. The mothermoth, in May or June, lays about twenty or moreeggs on a grain of barley or wheat ; and when thecaterpillars are hatched they disperse, each selectinga single grain. M. Reaumur imagines that sanguinarywars must sometimes arise, in cases of pre-occupancy,a single grain of barley being a richTransformations of the grain moths. a, grain of barley includinga caterpillar ; 6, c, the grain cut across, seen to be hoUo-^edout, and divided by a partition of silk j d, the moth tineaHorde) ; e, grains of wheat tied together by the caterpillars;g, the moth ( Euplocamus arabella).V 3222 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.heritage for one of these tiny insects ; but he confesseshe never saw such contests*. When thecaterpillar has eaten its way into the interior of thegrain, it feeds on the farina, taking care not to gnawthe skin nor even to throw out its excrements, so thatexcept the little hole, scarcely discernible, the grainappears quite sound. When it has eaten all thefarina, it spins itself a case of silk within the nowhollow grain, and changes to a pupa in November f.Two other cater-pillars of a different family, thehoneycomb moth {Galleria cereana^ Fabr.), and thehoney moth {G. algeria, Fabr.), the first havingsquare, and the second rounded wings |, do veryconsiderable damage to the hives of bees. Themoths of both, according to Reaumur, appear aboutthe end of June or beginning of July; and when indanger they run rather than fly, gliding with suchcelerity that they can easily elude the vigilance ofthe bees, which, indeed, if we may trust ,never attack them, nor prevent their entranceinto the hives, unless they chance to brushagainst them in their passage. But Reaumur actuallysaw the bees pursue one, though withoutsuccess. It becomes easy for a moth, at all events,to lay eggs among the combs ; or as Keys says, atthe entrance of the hive : this writer adds, " shespins a close and strong web to defend the young §;"which is impossible, as no insect, subsequent to itslarva state, can spin.The caterpillar of the first species, " wherever itpasses," says Swammerdam, " gnaws round holesthrough the waxen cells, one caterpillar sometimesbreaking open and destroying fifty or sixty cells.See Insect Architecture, p. 231.f Reaumur, Mem., vol. ii. p. 486, &c.I Stephens's Catalogue, vol. ii. p. 213.§ Keys, Treatise on Bees, p.l78, edit. 1814.RAVAGES OF CATERPILLARS.Wherever it penetrates it always fabricates a hollowtubulated web, in which, as a rabbit in its burrow,it can very swiftly pass from one part to another,and speedily run back again. It fills the wholecomb with such webs, and turns itself in themevery way into various bending and windings ; sothat the bees are not only perplexed and disturbed intheir work, but they frequently entangle themselvesby the claws and hairs of their legs in those webs,and the whole hive is destroyed."The other species he accuses of being not onlydestructive to the wax, but to the bees themselves.*'I saw one of these little caterpillars," he says,*' whilst it was still small, and was breaking the cellsin which the pupa of the bees lie, and eating the waxTransformations of the honeycomb moths, a, a, a. Galleries ofthe cell-boring caterpillar ; b, the female ; c, the male moth {Gal-feria algeria) ; d, d, d, d, galleries of the wax-eating caterpillar,e, seen at the entrance ; /, the same exposed ; g, itscocoon ; A, the moth {Gallcria serena).fS4 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS,there, cover up these pupae with its excrements, sothat they could scarcely be known." He adds withgreat naivete, " I have learned these matters muchagainst my inclination, and have been full of wrathEffainst the insect for thus defiling and killing: somebee pupse which I had designed to observe in theirchanges."M. Bazin, a friend of Reaumur's, discovered thecaterpillar of a moth of this order feeding on chocolate,of which it seemed very choice, always preferringthat which had the finest flavour. The mothis sometimes produced in September, and sometimesin the beginning of the following summer.It is probable that, like the cheese-fly, it might, indefault of chocolate, select some other aliment t-Swammerdam, vol, i. p. 225. f Reaumur, vol. iii. p. 277Chapter IX.Voracity of Caterpillars, Grubs, and Maggots;— continued.Grubs.We frequently hear farmers and gardeners complainingthat their produce is destroyed by " thegrub ; " they might with equal propriety accuse^^ the bird" when their ripe seeds are devouredby sparrows, chaffinches, linnets, and other seed-eaters.Instead of one sort of grub, as the expressionseems to indicate, we are far under the mark inreckoning a thousand species indigenous to Britain,each peculiar in its food and its manners. We shall,however, adhere as nearly as possible to the terms incommon use; but as the larvae of the crane-flies(Tipulidce, Leach), being without legs, cannot beaccurately ranked with the legged grubs of beetles,we shall consider them as maggots, though they areusually termed grubs by the farmers.The most destructive, perhaps, of the creaturesusually called grubs, are the larvae of the may-bugor cockchafer {Melolontha vulgaris), but too wellknown, particularly in the southern and midlanddistricts of England, as well as in Ireland, wherethe grub is called the Connaught worm*; but fortunatelynot abundant in the north. We only oncemet with the cockchafer in Scotland, at Sorn, in Ayr-shiret. Even in the perfect state, this insect is notalittle destructive to the leaves of both forest andfruit trees. In 1823, we remember to have observedalmost all the trees about Dulwich and CamberwellBingley, Anim. Biog. vol. iii. p. 230. t J. R.226 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.desolated by them ; and Salisbury says, the leavesof the oaks in Richmond Park were so eaten bythem, that scarcely an entire leaf was left. But it isin their previous larva state that they are most destructive,as we shall see by tracing their history.The mother cockchafer, when about to lay her eggs,digs into the earth of a meadow or corn-field to thedepth of a span, and deposits them in a cluster atthe bottom of the excavation. Rosell, in order towatch their proceedings, put some females intoglasses half-filled with earth, covered with a tuft ofgrass, and a piece of thin muslin. In a fortnight,he found some hundreds of eggs deposited, of anoval shape and a pale yellow colour. Placing theglass in a cellar, the eggs were hatched towardsautumn, and the grubs increased remarkably in size.In the following May they fed so voraciously thatthey required a fresh turf every second day ; andeven this proving too scanty provender, he sowed inseveral garden pots a crop of peas, lentils, and salad,and when the plants came up, he put a pair of grubsin each pot ; and in this manner he fed them throughthe second and third years. During this period,they cast their skins three or four times, going forthis purpose deeper into the earth, and burrowingout a hole where they might effect their' change undisturbed; and they do the same in winter, duringwhich they become torpid and do not eat.When the grub changes into a pupa, in the thirdautumn after it is hatched, it digs a similar burrowabout a yard deep ; and when kept in a pot, and preventedfrom going deep enough, it shows great uneasinessand often dies. The perfect beetle comesforth from the pupa in January or February ; but it isthen as soft as it was whilst still a grub, and doesnot acquire its hardness and colour for ten or twelvedays, nor does it venture above ground before May,RAVAGES OF GRUBS.on the fourth year from the time of its hatching. Atthis time, the beetles may be observed issuing fromtheir holes in the evening, and dashing themselvesabout in the air as if blind.Transformations of the cockchafer {Melolontha vulgaris), a,newly hatched larvae. 6, larva, one year old. c, the same larvaat the second year of its growth, d, the same three years old. e,section of a bank of earth, containing the chrysalis of the fourthyear, f, the chafer first emerging from the earth, g, the perfectchafer in a sitting posture, h, the same flying.During the three summers then of their existencein the grub state, these insects do immense injury,burrowing between the turf and the soil, and devouringthe roots of grass and other plants ; so that the228 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.turf may easily be rolled off, as if cut by a turfingspade, while the soil underneath for an inch or moreis turned into soft mould like the bed of a garden,Mr. Anderson, of Norwich, mentions having seena whole field of fine flourishing grass so underminedby these grubs, that in a few weeks it becameas dry, brittle, and withered as hay *. Bingley alsotells us that " about sixty years ago, a farm nearNorwich was so infested with cockchafers, that thefarmer and his servants affirmed they gathered eightybushels of them ; and the grubs had done so muchinjury, that the court of the city, in compassion tothe poor fellow's misfortune, allowed him twenty-fivepounds." In the year 1785, a farmer, nearBlois, in France, employed a number of children andpoor persons to destroy the cockchafers at the rateof two liars a hundred, and in a few days they collectedfourteen thousand J.I remember," says Salisbury, " seeing, in a nurserynear Earshot, several acres of young foresttrees, particularly larch, the roots of which were completelydestroyed by it, so much so, that not a singletree was left alive §." We are doubtful, however,whether this was the grub of the cockchafer, andthink it more likely to have been that of the greenrose beetle (Catania auratd), which feeds on the rootsof trees.The grub of an allied genus, the midsummerheifer (Zantheiunia Solstitialis, Leach), has for thelast two years been abundant on Lewisham Hill,Blackheath, doing considerable injury to herbageand garden plants. This beetle may be known frombeing smaller and paler than the cockchafer, andfrom its not appearing before midsummer. The grubis very similar.Philosophy. Trans, xliv. 579. f Anim. Biog. ill. 233.X Anderson's Rear. ia Agricola. iii, 420. § Hints, 74.RAVAGES OF GRUBS. 229The best way of preventing the ravages of theseinsects would be to employ children to collect theperfect insects when they first appear, before they laytheir eggs ; but when a field is once overrun withthe larva, nothing can be done with it, except paringand burning the surface, or ploughing it up, andturning in a flock of ducks or other poultry, or adrove of pigs, which are said to eat these grubs,and to fatten on the fare. Drenching the field withstable urine* by means of reservoir carts, like thoseused for watering roads, would, if sufficiently done,both kill the grubs, and beneficially manure the land.The grub called the wire worm, though not veryappropriately, is the larva of one of the spring orclick beetles (Hemirhipus linnaeus, and H. obscures,Latreille), known by their long flattish body, andtheir power of springing with a clicking sound outof the hand when caught. In some works on agriculture,the larva of a common crane fly {Tipulaoleracea or T. croats) is called the wire worm, — wesuppose by mistake t- The grubs of the cock beetles,just alluded to, are said by Bierscander I andby Mr. Paul of Stanton, Norfolk §, who watchedtheir transformations, to continue five years beforeproducing the perfect insect. During this time thegrub feeds chiefly on the roots of wheat, rye, oats,barley, and grass ; but seems also sometimes to attackthe larger roots of potatoes, carrots, and salads. Itsravages are often so extensive as to cut off entirecrops of grain. It appears to be most partial to landnewly broken up ; and has not been found so abundantin meadows and pastures, unless in fields recentlylaid down with grass. " The wire worm," saysSpence, " is particularly destructive for a few yearsSee the Harleigh Dairy System, p. 222.f See Loudon's Encycl. ofAgricult. §. 6921.X Act. Holm. 1779, p. 284, § Kirby and Spence, i. 182.INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.in gardens recently converted from pasture ground.In the botanic garden at Hull, thus circumstanced, agreat proportion of the annuals sown in 1813 weredestroyed by it. A very simple and effectual remedy,in such cases, was mentioned to me by Sir JosephBanks. He recommended that slices of potatoesstuck upon skewers, should be buried near the seedssown, examined every day, and the wire-worms,which collect upon them in great numbers, destroyed*."The wire worm is long, slender, and very toughand hard ; but otherwise it has no resemblance towire, being whitish in colour, of a flattish form, andjointed or ringed. Its breathing spiracles, two innumber, are on the back of its last ring.a. Wire worm ; b. Click beetle.An insect of this family relater noctilucits, Linn.)is exceedingly destructive, in the West Indies, to thesugar-canethe grub, according to Humboldt andfeeding: on its roots andkillingtheCopland,plants t.Instances are by no means rare, however, of insectsbeing accused of depredations of which they arenot guilty, from the mere circumstance of their beingIntr. i. 182-3. f Geog. des Plantes, 136.RAVAGES OF GRUBS. 231found ill abundance where ravages have been committedby others that have naturally disappeared. Itis not improbable that this was the case with a grubof some beetle {Staphylinid(B?), mentioned byMr. Walford, and mistaken by him for the wireworm. Out of fifty acres of wheat sown in 1802,ten had been destroyed in October, by this grubeating into the centre of the young stem an inchbelow the surface and killing the plant*. It seemsstill more probable that the grub of a native beetle{Zabnis gibbus, Stephens), which has been foundin considerable numbers near Worthing, Brighton,Hastings, and Cambridge, has been unjustly blamedas a destroyer of corn ; though we have the respectableauthority of Germar, who, with other membersof the society of Natural History of Halle, imaginedhe had ascertained the fact. In the spring of1813, about two hundred and thirty acres of youngwheat are said to have been destroyed by it ; and itis farther supposed to be the same insect whichcaused great destruction in Italy in 1776. This grubis said to take probably three years in coming to abeetle, in which state it is alleged to clamber up thestems at night, to get at the corn. It is importantto remark, that along with these grubs were founda, Sabres gibbus ; b, Melolontha ruficornis.Linn. Trans, ix. 156-61.x2232 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.those of a chafer (Melolontha ruficornis, Fabr.), inthe proportion of about a fourth *.To this account, Mr. Stephens appends the shrewdquestions — " May not these herbivorous larvae [of thechafer] have been the principal cause of mischief tothe wheat, while those of the Sabres rather contributedto lessen their numbers, than to destroy thecorn ? And is it not probable that the perfect insectsascend the corn for the purpose of devouring theinsect parasites thereon ? This is a subject," hejustly adds, "that requires investigation, as it ishighly important, for the interests of the agriculturistin those districts where the insect abounds,that the question should be thoroughly set at rest ;because, should the Zabri depart from the habits ofthe group to which they belong, and become herbivorousinstead of carnivorous, their destruction wouldbe desirable ; while, on the contrary, if they destroythe devourer of our produce their preservationshould be attempted t."We have little doubt that Mr. Stephens is right,and Germar wrong ; but it would be improper todecide the question by analogy unsupported by directexperiment. One thing is certain, that both thisfamily (Harpalidm, Maclean) and the whole section{Adephaga, Glanville) are not herbivorous,but carnivorous +. Similar errors will come underour notice, as we proceed, not more defensiblethan that of the old soldier causing caterpillars inFrance.Even when agricultural produce escapes beingdevoured at the root, or the young shoots eaten up,the seeds are often made the prey of the grubs ofGermar, Mag. der Entomb., i. 1-10 ; and Kirby and Spence,i. 169.f Stephens, Illustrations, i. Mandib.pp. 4 and 140.\ See an Illustration in Insect Architect., p. 207-8.RAVAGES OF GRUBS. 233beetles and weevils. Among the first, the gnawingbeetles {Bruchidfe, Leach) are very destructive.In North America, the pea beetle {Bruchus Plsi,Linn.) commits such extensive depredations onpulse, that in some districts the sowing of peas hasbeen abandoned as useless. Kali, the Swedishtraveller, having witnessed these depredations inAmerica, became quite alarmed when he discoveredthe insect among some peas he had brought toSweden, lest he should be the means of introducingso formidable a pest*. His fears seem to us to havebeen in a great measure groundless ; for, probably,the insect may be indigenous to Sweden, as it is toBritain, though from circumstances of climate, andother causes, it is seldom produced in such numberswith us as to occasion extensive damage. It may havebeen the same or an allied species of grub mentionedby Amorous as having spread an alarm in France in1780, when the old fancy of its being poisonousinduced the public authorities to prohibit peas frombeing sold in the markets. The insect mostdestructive to our peas is the pulse beetle (Brutusgranaries, Linn), which sometimes lays an egg onevery pea in a pod, which the grub, when hatched,destroys. In the same way, clover seed is often attackedby two or more species of small weevil (Apion,Herbst), known by the yellow colour of theirthighs or their feet; and when the farmer expects toreap considerable profit, he finds nothing but emptyhusks.We have mentioned the ravages committed ingranaries by the caterpillars of small moths ; butthese are rivalled in the work of destruction byseveral species of grubs. One of these grubs isKali's Travels, vol. i. p. 173.t Amorous, Insectes Venimeux, 288. Kirby and Spence;i. 177.x3234 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.called by the French capelle (Trogosita mauritaniaOlivier), and is reported to have done more damageto housed grain than any other insect*. The pestof the granaries, which is but too well known in thiscountry, is the grain weevil calantha granaries,Glanville), the same, probably, which is mentionedby Virgil,Population invented harris certumCurculio. Georg. i. 87.The high stacks of cornAre wasted by the weevil. Trapp.Kirby and Spence calculate that a single pair ofweevils may produce in one season 6000 descendants ;and they were told by an extensive brewer that hehad collected and destroyed them by bushels t, —meaning, no doubt, insects and damaged graintogether.Corn-weevil calantha granaries), magnified.Another beetle grub, popularly called the mealworm, the larva of Tenehrio monitor, Linn., whichlives in that state two years, does no little damage toflour, as well as to bread, cakes, biscuit, and similararticles. Accounts are also given of the ravages committedby the grubs of other beetles, of several speciesapparently not well ascertained, upon different sorts ofprovisions, such as bacon, ham, dried tongues, ship-biscuit,&c. Spartan tells us, that he has witnessedthe ground peas on ship-board so infestedOlivier, ii. 19. f Intr. i.173.RAVAGES OF GRUBS. 235with these grubs, that they were seen in everyspoonful of the soup. In the case of soup, or of otherfood which has been exposed to heat, the onlyinconvenience is the disgust which must ensue;but, unfortunately, there may sometimes occur circumstancesof a more serious nature, — from either Athe eggs or the insects themselves being incautiouslyswallowed alive. We do not wish, however, tocreate, so much as to allay, the fears entertained bythose who are unacquainted with the habits ofinsects ; and nothing we are persuaded will do this jmore effectually than a statement of facts well -ascertained. " Several people," says the Abbe de la-^^Pluche, *' never eat fruit because they believe that *spiders and other insects scatter their eggs upon it latrandom* ;" but even if this were so, as it is not, .it would be impossible for the young, should they be j|hatched in the stomach, to live there for an instant.The possible cases in which this may occur we shallnow briefly notice ; they are fortunately very rare.The meal worm, and some of the grubs whichfeed on grain and other provisions, are recorded tohave been swallowed, and to have given rise todisorders in the stomach and bowels ; but in all suchcases it is plain, that if the insects did survivethe increased temperature of the stomach, theycould only live on the food swallowed from time totime, for, not being carnivorous, they would not attackMeal worm, and the beetle produced from it.Spectacle de la Nature, i. 65.23§INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.the stomach itself. The same remark will apply noless forcibly to the herbivorous larvae, which mightchance to be swallowed in salad, &c. The caterpillarof the tabby moth {Aglossa pivguinalisyLatreille), which feeds on butter, the leather onbook-boards, &c., is said, on the authority of Linnaeus,to get sometimes into the stomach, and toproduce considerable disorder* ; but this insect isvery common in houses t, and, from the rarity ofsuch accidents, we are led to doubt the evidenceusually brought forward. In this case we arethe more induced to question the authority of Linnaeus,from his having made an evident mistake in asimilar case respecting intestinal worms.Transformations of the tabby moth {Aglossa pinguinalis). a, thecaterpillar feeding on butter ; b, c, d, feeding on leather undergalleries e, the moth with the down rubbed off; /, the sameperfect.Linnaeus affirms, that in the presence of seven ofhis companions he discovered, near Reuterholm, inDalecarlia, a tape worm in acidulous ochre cochranacidularem)t at which he marvelled the more sinceLinnaeus, quoted by Kirby and Spence, i. 136.t Latreille; Hist. Generale, xiv. 229.INTESTINAL "WORMS. 237acidulous water of this kind had been drank withthe design of expelling these worms*. Thisaccount, however, proves too little ; for, as Bonnet,Reaumur, Pallas, and other eminent naturalistsremark, if such were the fact, we should find intestinalworms (so very numerous in most animals)swarming in such places, and from their size(Boerhaave saw one thirty ells long) they couldnot escape observation ; whereas this was at thattime the only instance recorded of one foundout of the body. We are of opinion that Linnaeusmust have been deceived by similarity ofform. A subsequent instance is recorded by Dr.Barry, of Cork, who imagined he had found theorigin of the common small thread worm {Oxyuriavermicidaris, Bremser) in the water of a well — theaquatic only differing from the intestinal wormsin colour. But were all descriptions as loose as thisthe grossest mistakes must ensue ; for it is quiteclear that Dr. Barry's aquatic worms were a verycommon species (Navis), and though similar inexternal form, altogether different in internalstructure from the Oxyuridce of the intestines.Were the latter, indeed, introduced into the bodyfrom water, they would not only be found in thisparticular well, two miles from Cork, but wouldswarm in all the waters in the empire ; since thereare few individuals who are not affected with theseworms at some period of their lives. According toour experiments, the dis ceases to exist in a temperatureconsiderably less than that of the humanbody ; besides, as it lives on minute fresh-watermollusca, it could find no food in the intestines.The celebrated Dr. J. P. Frank is no less mistakenin referring us for the origin of intestinal worms to"minute insects flying in the air ;" for, if so, theLinnaeus, quoted by Bonnet, Oeuvres, iii. 137. f J. R,\ Frank. De Currant. Hominy. More. lib. vi.238 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.worms would naturally produce similar insects totheir parents ; whereas they are either oviparous, asGoethe affirms, or, as Bremser thinks, viviparous *both agreeing that they are not transformed intoflying insects. Reaumur made the more plausibleconjecture, that they might be introduced by eatingtench and other fish, in which they are known toabound t; but, independently of their being destroyedby heat in cooking, this has been subsequently disprovedby experiment; for M, Deslonchamps says,that '^ when animals are fed for some time on intestinalworms (Entodzarid) alone, and then killed,they are not found infested with these worms |."Valisnieri and Hartsocker suppose, without a shadowof proof, that worms are transmitted from parentsto children like other hereditary disorders ; whilethe late M. Lamarck refers their production to "themarch of nature in the production of all livingbeings $ I" This indefinite doctrine is also heldby Geoffrey St. Hilaire, Cuvier, Blumenbach, andother distinguished living naturalists ; but we thinkit more philosophical and more manly, in suchobscure cases, at once to confess our ignorance of theways of nature, and to wait for further observation,than to frame idle theories, supported only by vagueanalogies and doubtful facts.It may not be uninteresting to mention, however,that upwards of 1200 species of intestinal wormshave been discovered; and probably there may betwice as many more of whose existence nothing isyet known. Sixteen of these species have beenfound in the human body ; the rest are peculiar toother animals ||. Some of the more singular speciesBremser, Uber Legend Wiirtner in leb. Mensch.f Letter to Bonnet, Oeuvres, vol. ill. p. 344.\ Diet. Classique, vol. viii. p. 589.§ Anim. sans Vertebrae, vol.i. p. 15.II Diet. Classique, vol. viii. p. 593.INTESTINAL WORMS. 289are here represented, from the splendid work ofBremser.Intestinal worms.That insects are, in some rare cases, introducedinto the human stomach, has been more thanonce proved ; though the greater number of theaccounts of such facts in medical books are tooinaccurate to be trusted*. But one extraordinarycase has been completely authenticated, both by medicalmen and competent naturalists ; and is publishedin the Dublin Transactions, by Dr. Pickellsof Corks. Mary Jordan, aged 28, had been muchaffected by the death of her mother, and at one ofher many visits to the grave seems to have partiallylost her senses, having been found lying there onthe morning of a winter's day, and having been exposedto heavy rain during the night. When shewas about fifteen, two popular Catholic priests haddied, and she was told by some old women that if sheSee Good's Nosologia, Helminthia Alvij and Study of Med.vol. i. p. 336.f Trans, of Assoc. Phys. in Ireland, iv, yii. and T., P. 177, Svo,Dublin, 1824—1828.240 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.would drink daily, for a certain time, a quantity ofwater, mixed with clay taken from their graves, shewould be for ever secure from disease and sin. Followingthis absurd and disgusting prescription, shetook from time to time large quantities of the draught;some time afterwards, being affected with a burningpain in the stomach {Cardialgia), she began to eatlarge pieces of chalk, which she sometimes also mixedwith water and drank.Now, whether in any or in all of these draughts sheswallowed the eggs of insects, cannot be affirmed ;but for several years she continued to throw up incrediblenumbers of grubs and maggots, chiefly of thechurchyard beetle (Slaps mortis aga, Fabr.). " Ofthe larvae of the beetle," says Dr. Pickells, " I amsure I considerably underrate, when I say that notless than 700 have been thrown up from the stomachat different times since the commencement of myattendance. A great proportion were destroyed byherself to avoid publicity; many, too, escaped immediatelyby running into holes in the floor. Upwardsof ninety were submitted to Dr. Thomson's*examination; nearly all of which, including two of thespecimens of the meal worm (Tenehrio monitor), Isaw myself, thrown up at different times. The averagesize was about an inch and a half in length, andfour lines and a half in girth. The larvae of the dipterousinsect, though voided only about seven or eighttimes, according to her account, came up almostliterally in myriads. They were alive and moving."Altogether, Dr. Pickells saw nearly 2000 grubs ofthe beetle, and there were many which he did notsee. Mr. Clear, an intelligent entomologist of Cork,kept some of them alive for more than twelve months.Mr. S. Cooper cannot understand whence the continuedsupply of the grubs was provided, seeing thatThe well-known author of " Zoological Researches' &c.INTESTINAL GRUBS AND BEETLES.larvae do not propagate, and that only one pupa andone perfect insect were voided * ; but the simple factthat most beetles live several years in the state oflarvae sufficiently accounts for this. Their existing andthriving in the stomach, too, will appear less wonderfulfrom the fact that it is exceedingly difficult to killthis insect ; for Mr. Henry Baker repeatedly plungedone into spirits of wine, so fatal to most insects, but itrevived, even after being immersed a whole night,and afterwards lived three years t-° Churchyard beetle QBlaps mortis aga), in the grub and perfect state,from the figures of Dr. Pickells.That there was no deception on the part of thewoman, is proved by the fact that she was alwaysanxious to conceal the circumstance ; and that it wasonly by accident that the medical gentlemen, Drs.Pickells, Herrick, and Thomson, discovered it. Moreover,it does not appear that, though poor, she evertook advantage of it to extort money. It is interest-cooper'sedition of Good's Study of Medicine, i. 358.t Philosoph. Trans., No. 457.Y242 INSECT transformationsing to learn that by means of turpentine, in largedoses, she was at length cured.The grub of the nut weevil (Balaninus Nucum^Germar) might, perhaps, by rare accident, get intothe stomach, either of man or of the quadrupedswhich feed on nuts ; but as it is by no means sotenacious of life as the grub of the churchyard-beetleflaps mortis aga) above described, it is unlikelythat it would produce any considerable disorder.The weevil in question, like the rest of its congeners,is furnished with an instrument for depositing itseggs considerably different from those of the ichneumonand saw-flies. For this purpose the weevilmakes use of its long horny beak (Rostrum) to drilla hole in filberts and hazel-nuts, while in their youngand soft state, about the beginning of August. Themother weevil may then be seen eagerly runningover the bushes, and it would appear that she alwaysrejects the nuts in which one of her neighbours mayhave previously laid an egg ; at least we never findtwo grubs in the same nut. The egg, which is thusthrust into the young nut, is of a brown colour, andis hatched in about a fortnight, the grub feeding onthe interior of the shell as well as the soft pulp, tillthe one becomes too hard and the other too dry to benutritive. It is remarkable that, during this period,he takes care not to injure the kernel, but permits itto ripen before he attacks it Had he done this prematurely,he would have ultimately been starved, ashehas not the power of perforating another nutwhen the first is consumed. It is said also that heis very careful to preserve the original hole made bythe mother, by gnawing around its inner edges, inorder to facilitate his exit*, which he effects when theBingley, Auirual Biography, vol. iii,, p, 251.GRUBS OP WEEVILS.mnut falls to the ground in September or October.The hole found in the nut appears much too smallto have admitted of its passage; but from being verysoft it no doubt stretches itself out for the purpose,using its short claws as instruments of motion.Rusel, in order to observe the transformation ofthese nut grubs, put a number of them, at the commencementof winter, into glasses half filled withearth, covered with green turf All of them dugdirectly down into the earth, remained there allthe winter, and did not change into pupae till the followingJune ; the perfect wee-ils appeared from the1st till about the 20th of August, but still kept undergroundfor the first week after their change.Nut and apple-tree beetles. A, a branch of the filbert-tree.a, egg hole in the nut; b, exit hole of the grub. B, the larvae ofthe nut beetle. C, the same in the pupa state. D, female beetle.E, male beetle, c, the beetle that destroys the bloom-bud of theapple-tree ; a, the same in the larva state ; 6, the chrysalis ofthe same.*' During the autumn," says Salisbury, " we frequentlyobserve a small red weevil busily employedin traversing the branches of apple-trees, on whichit lays its eggs by perforating the bloom buds. Inthe spring, these hatch, and the grubs feed on they2244 INSECT Transformations.petals of the flowers, drawing up the whole flowerinto a cluster by means of their web. The bloomthus becomes destroyed, and the grub falls to theground, where it lays itself up in the chrysalis state ;and in the autumn afterwards we find the weevilrenewed, which again perforates the buds, and causesa similar destruction in the following spring. Mr.Knight, in his treatise on the apple, mentions a beetlewhich commits great destruction on the apple-trees inHerefordshire ; but I do not think it the same as theone I have described above, and which is very commonin the gardens near London." Salisbury's weevilis probably the AnthonoTniis Bonorum of Germar ;and Knight's, his Polydrusus Mali. Another weevil{Rhynchites Bacchus, Herbst), one of our mostsplendid but not very common native insects, boresinto the stone of the cherry, &c. while it is youngand soft, and deposits an egg there, as the nut weevildoes in the nut.Perhaps the most voracious grub on record is thatof a large and beautiful beetle {Calosoma sycophants,Weber), which is rare in Britain. It issometimes found in the nests of the professional andother gregarious caterpillars, so gorged with those ithas devoured that it can scarcely move withoutbursting. Not contented with this prey alone, however,the younger grubs are said " often to take advantageof the helpless inactivity into which the gluttonyof their maturer comrades has thrown them,and from mere wantonness, it should seem, when inno need of other food, pierce and devour them." Itis a familiar occurrence to those who breed insects tofind caterpillars, whose natural food is leaves, devouringothers in the same nurse-box ; and without anySalisbury's Hints on Orchards, p. 92.f Kirby and Spence, vol, i. p. 277,GRUBS OF BEETLES.Ilkapparent discrimination whether these are the progenyof their own mother, or of a different species *.We have frequently observed a very remarkableinstinct in the grubs of a species of beetle {ScolytusDestructor, Geoffrey), which lives under the deadbark of trees. The mother insect, as is usual withbeetles, deposits her eggs in a patch or cluster in achink or hole in the bark ; and when the brood ishatched, they begin feeding on the bark which hadformed their cradle. There is, of course, nothing wonderfulin their eating the food selected by their mother;but it appears that, like the caterpillars of the clothesmoth, and the tent insects, they cannot feed exceptundergone. They dig, therefore, long tubular galleriesbetween the bark and the wood ; and, in order notto interfere with the runs of their brethren, theybranch off from the place of hatching like rays fromthe centre of a circle : though these are not alwaysin a right line, yet, however near they may approachto the contiguous ones, none of them everBark mined in rays by beetle grubs.J. R, See also De Geer, i. 533, &c., and Reaumur, ii. 413.y3246 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.break into each other's premises. We cannot but admirethe remarkable instinct implanted in those <^rubsby their Creator ; which guides them thus in hues divergingfarther and farther as they increase in size,so that they are prevented from interfering with thecomforts of one another.The various instances of voracity which we havethus described sink into insignificance, when comparedwith the terrible devastation produced by thelarvae of the locust locusts migratory. Leach),the scourge of oriental countries. " A fire devouredbefore them," says the Prophet Joel, " andbehind them a flame burnet : the land is as thegarden of Eden before them, and behind them adesolate wilderness ; yea, and nothing shall escapethem. The sound of their wings is as the sound ofchariots, of many horses running to battle ; on thetops of mountains shall they leap, like the noise of aflame of fire that devoured the stubble, as a strongpeople set in battle-array. Before their faces, thepeople shall be much pained, all faces shall gatherblackness. They shall run like mighty men ; theyshall climb the wall like men of war ; and they shallmarch every one in his ways, and they shall not breaktheir ranks; neither shall one thrust another."The intelligent traveller. Dr. Shaw, was an eyewitnessof their devastations in Barbary in 1724,where they first appeared about the end of March,their numbers increasing so much in the beginningof April as literally to darken the sun ; but by themiddle of May they began to disappear, retiring intothe Mettijiah and other adjacent plains to deposittheir eggs. " These were no sooner hatchedin June," he continues, " than each of the broodscollected itself into a compact body, of a furlong ormore in square ; and marching afterwards directlyJoel ii. 2, &c.RAVAGES OP LOCUSTS. 24>forwards toward the sea, they let nothing escapethem, — they kept their ranks like men of war; climbingover, as they advanced, every tree or wall thatwas in their way ; nay, they entered into our veryhouses and bed-chambers, like so many thieves.The inhabitants, to stop their progress, formedtrenches all over their fields and gardens, which theyfilled with water. Some placed large quantities ofheath, stubble, and other combustible matter, in rows,and set them on fire on the approach of the locusts ;but this was all to no purpose, for the trenches werequickly filled up, and the fires put out, by immenseswarms that succeeded each other.A day or two after one of these hordes wasin motion, others were already hatched to march andglean after them. Having lived near a month in thismanner, they arrived at their full growth, and threwoff their nympha-state by casting their outward skin.To prepare themselves for this change, they clungby their hinder feet to some bush, twig, or corner ofa stone ; and immediately, by using an undulatingmotion, their heads would first break out, and thenthe rest of their bodies. The whole transformationwas performed in seven or eight minutes ; after whichthey lay for a small time in a torpid, and, seemingly,in a languishing condition ; but as soon as the sunand the air had hardened their wings by drying up themoisture that remained upon them after casting theirsloughs, they resumed their former voracity, with anaddition of strength and agility. Yet they continuednot long in this state before they were entirely dispersed."It is difficult to form an adequate conception ofthe swarms of locusts which, in 1797, invadedthe interior of southern Africa, as recorded by Mr.Barrow. In the part of the country where he was,Shaw's Travels, p. 287.248 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.the whole surface of the ground, for an area ofnearly two thousand square miles, might literally besaid to be covered with them. The water of a verywide river was scarcely visible, on account of the deadcarcases of locusts that floated on the surface, drownedin the attempt to come at the reeds that grew in it.They had devoured every blade of grass, and everygreen herb, except the reeds. But they are not preciselywithout a choice in their food. When they attacka field of corn just come into ear, they first, accordingto Mr. Barrow, mount to the summit andpick out every grain before they touch the leaves andstem, keeping the while constantly in motion, with thesame intent of destruction always in view. When thelarvae, which are much more voracious than the perfectinsects, are on a march during the day, it is utterlyimpossible to turn the direction of the troop, and thisseems usually to correspond with that of the wind.Towards the setting of the sun the march is discontinued,when the troop divides into companies that surroundthe small shrubs, or tufts of grass, or anthills,in such thick patches, that they appear like somany swarms of bees ; and in this manner they rest tillday-light. At these times it is that the farmers haveany chance of destroying them ; this they sometimeseffect by driving among them a flock of two or threethousand sheep, by whose restlessness great numbersof them are trampled to death. The year 1797 wasthe third of their continuance in Sneuwberg; and theirincrease had been more than a million-fold from yearto year.This district, however, had been entirely free fromthem for ten years preceding their visit in 1794.Their former exit was singular : all the full-growninsects were driven into the sea by a tempestuousnorth-west wind, and were afterwards cast up on thebeach, where they formed a bank of three or four feetRAVAGES OF LOCUSTS. 249high, and extending to a distance of nearly fifty miles.When this mass became putrid, and the wind was atsouth-east, the stench was sensibly felt in several partsof Sneuwberg, although distant at least a hundredand fifty miles*.Pallas gives a more detailed account of the dailyproceedings of the larvae of the Italian locust {Lo~crista Italics, Leach). " In serene weather," hetells us, " the locusts are in full motion in the morning,immediately after the evaporation of the dew ;and if no dew has fallen, they appear as soon as thesun imparts his genial warmth. At first, some areseen running about like messengers among the reposingswarms, which are lying partly compressedupon the ground at the side of small eminences, andpartly attached to tall plants and shrubs. Shortlyafter the whole body begins to move forward in onedirection, and with little deviation. They resemble asvvarm of ants, all taking the same course, at smalldistances, but without touching each other : they uniformlytravel towards a certain region as fast as a flycan run, and without leaping, unless pursued ; inwhich case, indeed, they disperse, but soon collectagain and follow their former route. In this mannerthey advance from morning to evening without halting,frequently at the rate of a hundred fathoms, andupwards, in the course of a day. Although they prefermarching along high roads, foot-paths, or opentracts, yet, when their progress is opposed by bushes,hedges, and ditches, they penetrate through them :their way can only be impeded by the waters ofbrooks or canals, as they are apparently terrified atevery kind of moisture. Often, however, they endeavourto gain the opposite bank, with the aid ofoverhanging boughs ; and, if the stalks of plants orshrubs be laid across the water, they pass in closeBarrow's Travels in South Africa, p. 257,250 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.columns over these temporary bridges, on which theyeven seem to rest, and enjoy the refreshing coolness.Towards sun-set, the whole swarm gradually collectin parties, and creep up the plants, or encamp onslight eminences. On cold, cloudy, or rainy days,they do not travel. As soon as they acquire wings,they progressively disperse, but still fly about in largeswarms."When Captains Irby and Mangles were travellinground the southern extremity of the Dead Sea, in theend of May, they had an opportunity of observingthese insect depredators. " In the morning," saythey, "we quitted Shobek. On our way we passed aswarm of locusts that were resting themselves in asully ; they were in sufficient numbers to alter apparentlythe colour of the rock on which they hadalighted, and to make a sort of crackling noise whileeating, which we heard before we reached them.Volley compares it to the foraging of an army. Ourconductors told us they were on their way to Gaza,and that they pass almost annually t-"Even our own island has been alarmed by the appearanceof locusts, a considerable number havingvisited us in 1748; but they happily perished withoutpropagating. Other parts of Europe have not beenso fortunate. In 1650 a cloud of locusts were seento enter Russia in three different places ; and theyafterwards spread themselves over Poland and Lithuaniain such astonishing multitudes, that the airwas darkened, and the earth covered with their numbers.In some places they were seen lying dead,heaped upon each other to the depth of four feet ; inothers they covered the surface of the ground like ablack cloth : the trees bent with their weight, and theTravels in Russia, ii. 422-6.f Irby and Mangles' Travels in Egypt and Syria, p. 443.RAVAGES OP LOCUSTS.damage the country sustained exceeded computation*.They have frequently come also from Africa intoItaly and Spain. In the year 591 an infinite armyof locusts, of a size unusually large, ravaged a considerablepart of Italy, and being at last cast into thesea, (as seems for the most part to be their fate,)a pestilence, it is alleged, arose from their stench,which carried off nearly a million of men and beasts.In the Venetian territory, likewise, in 1478, morethan 30,000 persons are said to have perished in afamine chiefly occasioned by the depredations oflocusts t.Bingley, Anim. Biog., ill., 280.f Buffet, Theatre. Insect., 123.Locust.Chapter X.Voracity of Caterpillars, Grubs, and Maggots ;— concluded.Maggots.Adhering to the distinction of terming those larvaewhich are destitute of feet, maggots, we shall noticehere a very destructive one, which is sometimes popularlycalled the grub, and sometimes confounded withthe wire worm*. We allude to the larvae of one or twocommon species of crane flies {Tipulidce), well knownby the provincial names of father-long-legs, Jenny-spinners,and tailors. These insects are so commonin some meadows, that, being very shy and fearful ofdanger, they rise in swarms at every step — some ofthem flying high, others only skipping over the grass,and others running and using their long legs as theinhabitants of marshy countries use stilts, and employingtheir wings like the ostrich to aid theirlimbs.These flies deposit their eggs in the earth ; sometimesin grass fields or moist meadows, and sometimesin the tilled ground of gardens and farms.For this purpose the female is provided with an ovipositorwell adapted to the operation, consisting of asort of pincers or forceps of a horny consistence, andsharp at the point. By pressure, as Reaumur says,the eggs may be extruded from this in the same wayas the stone can be easily squeezed out of a ripecherry, as in the following figure.See Stickney's Observe. an the Grub, svo. Hull, 1800.Maggots of crane sues.253:Ovipositor and eggs of the crane fly Stipulateeggs are exceedingly small and black, likegrains of gunpowder, and each female lays a goodmany hundreds. The position which she assumesappears somewhat awkward, for she raises herselfperpendicularly on her two hind legs, using her ovipositoras a point of support, and resting with herfore-legs upon the contiguous herbage. She thenthrusts her ovipositor into the ground as far asthe first ring of her body, and leaves one or moreeggs in the hole ; and next moves onwards to anotherplace, but without bringing herself into a horizontalposition. The maggot, when hatched fromthe egg, immediately attacks the roots of the grassand other herbage which it finds near t to it; andof course the portion of the plant above groundwithers for lack of nourishment.The maggots of this family which seem to do mostinjury are those of Tlpiila oleracea and T. cornicina.In the summer of 1S2S, we observed more than anacre of ground, adjoining the Bishop of Oxford'sgarden, at Blackheath, as entirely stripped, both ofgrass and every thing green, as if the turf had beenINSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.Crane fly ovipositing, and the larva beneath, in the earfli, feedingupon grass roots.pared off from the surface, the only plant untouchedbeing the tiny bird tare {Ornithopus perpusillus).On digging here to learn the cause, we found theselarvae already full-fed, and about to pass into pupse,after having left nothing upon which they could subsist.It was not a little remarkable that they seemed to bealtogether confined to this spot ; for we did not meetwith a single foot of turf destroyed by them in anyother part of the heath, or in the adjacent fields. SoRAVAGES OF MAGGOTS. 255very complete, however, was their destruction of theroots on the spot in question, that even now, at thedistance of two years, it is still visibly thinner ofherbage than the parts around it *.Reaumur gives a similar account of their ravagesin Poitou, where, in certain seasons, the grass of thelow moist meadows has been so parched up in consequence,as not to afford sufficient provender for thecattle. He describes the soil in Poitou as a blackpeat mould; and it was the same in which we foundthem at Blackheath, with this difference, that the spotwas elevated and dry. According to M. Reaumur, also,their only food is this sort of black mould, and not theroots of grass and herbage, which he thinks are onlyloosened by their burrowing f. This view of the matterappears strongly corroborated by the fact that severalspecies of the family feed upon the mould in the holesof decaying trees, particularly the larva of a verybeautiful one (Ctenophora JLaveolata^ Me i gen),which is very rare in Britain. It is proper to mention,however, that Mr. Stickney's experiments |,contrary to the conclusions of Reaumur, indicatethat these larvae devour the roots of grass ; and Stewartsays they " feed on the roots of plants, corn, andgrasses, and are thence destructive to gardens, fields,and meadows. They prevailed in the neighbourhoodof Edinburgh, and other places in Scotland, in thespring of 1800, when they laid waste whole fields ofoats and other grain §."In many districts of England these insects cut offalarge proportion of the wheat crop, particularly, itwould appear, when it had been sown on clover less.** In the rich district," say Kirby and Spence, " ofSunk Island, in Wilderness, in the spring of 1813,hundreds of acres of pasture have been entirely def.R. t Reaumur, v. 12, &c.J Sobs. on the Grub. § Elements, ii,, 267.z 2256 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.strayed by them, being rendered as completely brownas if they had suffered a three months' drought, anddestitute of all vegetation except a few thistles. Asquare foot of the dead turf being dug up, 210 grubswere counted on it ; and, what furnishes a strikingproof of the prolific powers of those insects, last yearit was difficult to find a single ones."It is worthy of remark that the mandibles of thesedestructive creatures, which are claw-shaped andtransverse, do not act against each other as is usualamong insects, but against two other pieces which areimmoveable, convex, and toothed, — as if the under-jawin quadrupeds were divided into two, and shouldact vertically on the two portions of the immoveableupper-jaw thrown in between them.The maggot of a minute fly of the same family,known by the name of the wheat fly (Cecido-wyia Critics, Kirby), is frequently productive ofgreat damage in the crops of wheat. Its history wasfirst investigated by Marshal, and subsequently byKirby, and several other intelligent naturalists Theparent fly is very small, not unlike a midge {Cvlicoi-des punctata, Latr.), of an orange colour, and wingsrounded at the tip, and fringed with hairs t- Thefemale is furnished with a retractile ovipositor, fourtimes as long as the body, and as fine as a hair, fordepositing her eggs, which she does in the glumesof the florets of the grain. The following account ofits proceedings is given by Mr. Shires, an intelligentfarmer of East Lothian.Wheat-flies," he says, " were first observed herethis season on the evening of the 21st of June, and,from the vast number seen, it is probable a few ofthem may have been in existence some days previous.Intr. i. 318, note,f Linn. Trans., iii., 243— iv., 234^240; v., 96.RAVAGES OF MAGGOTS. Scytheeggs were visible on the 23d, the larvae on the30th of that month, and the pupae on the 29th ofJuly. The flies were observed depositing eggs onthe 2Sth, and finally disappeared on the 30th July ;thus having existed throughout a period of thirty-ninedays.The flies were observed to frequent the wheat-plant,including the thick-rooted couch-grass {Triti-cum repens). They generally reposed on the lowerparts of the stems during the day, and became activeabout sunset, except when the wind was high. Ihave, however, seen them flying about on cloudymornings, till seven o'clock ; and, upon one occasion,witnessed them depositing their eggs, in a shadedsituation, at two in the afternoon. Their movementsappear to be influenced by the rays of light, of whichthey seem impatient, being active when the sun isbelow or near the horizon : they frequent the mostumbrageous part of the crop, and shun that which isdeficient in foliage.** The flies almost invariably preferred the earsemerffins: from the vagina to those farther advanced,for depositing their eggs on ; and as one side onlyof the ear is exposed when the plant is in this stageof growth, the other side generally remained uninjured.The fly deserted the fields as the crop advancedtowards maturity, and were found longeston the spring-sown portion of the crop. It seemedto feed on the gum adhering to the newly emergedears ; and as there is a great diversity in the time ofsowing wheat in this neighbourhood, and consequentlyof the ears escaping from the vagina, Iattribute the unusual long-th of time it has existedthis season, to the supply of food thus graduallyfurnished.The fly deposits its eggs with much intensity,and may easily be taken when so employed. Uponz3258 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.one occasion, I numbered thirty-five flies on a singleear ; and, after carrying it a distance of a quarter ofa mile, six of them still continued to deposit eggs.At another time, I placed a fly, then laying, betweenthe face and glass of my watch, where it depositedseveral eggs, although invariably interrupted by therevolution of the moment hand.The eggs of the fly are generally found in clusters,varying in number from two to ten, upon theinner chaff, in which the furrowed side of the grain isembedded, and are also occasionally to be seen inthe interior parts of the flower and chaff. The eggsare deposited by means of a long slender tube, andfixed with a glutinous substance possessed by the fly.A thread of glutinous matter frequently connects acluster of eggs with the style, where the larvae seemto subsist on the pollen ; in one instance, fifteen eggswere numbered on such a thread, several of whichwere suspended on the portion extending betweenthe chaff* and the style. The fly not only seems thusto provide a conveyance from the larvae to the style,but also food for their support. The anthers areprevented from leaving the style in consequence ofbeing gummed down by the glutinous matter of thefly, and the pollen thereby detained for the use of thelarvae, which otherwise would, in part, be carried outof the glumes by the expansion of the filaments, —known to farmers by the term bloom. In the exertionof gumming down the anthers, many of the flies areentangled in the vascular of the corolla, and thusbecome a sacrifice to their maternal affection.The larvae are produced from the eggs in thecourse of eight or ten days : they are at first perfectlytransparent, and assume a yellow colour a few daysafterwards. They travel not from one floret to another,and forty-seven have been numbered in one.Occasionally there are found in the same floret larvasRAVAGES OF MAGGOTS.and a grain, which is generally shrivelled, as if deprivedof nourishment ; and although the pollen mayfurnish the larvae with food in the first instance,they soon crowd around the lower part of the germen,and there, in all probability, subsist on the matterdestined to have formed the grain."^^S 4 m .^-v5tS\ T-'l \A. ^D:Germination of a grain of wheat. «, the heart of the grain,the part devoured by the insect, b, ha? of the seed, c, the root.d, vessels to convey the nutriment lor the root, e, feathers conveyingthe pollen to fructify the seed.Another intelligent observer, Mr. Gorrie, of AnnaGardens, Derbyshire, found that by the first of Augustall the maggots leave the ears, and go into the groundabout the depth of half an inch, where it is probablethey pass the winter in the pupa state."It is interesting to learn that this destructive iu-Loudon's Mag. of Nat.Hht Nov. 1829, p. 450.t Ibid. September, 1829, p. 324.260 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.Transformations of the wheat fly. a, the female fly mailed ;b, larvae, natural size, feeding ; c, one magnified.sect is providentially prevented from multiplying sonumerously as it might otherwise do, by at least twospecies of ichneumons, which deposit their eggs in thelarvae. One of these {Encyrius inherent, Latr.) isvery small, black, and shining. The other {Platy-gaster TipulcB, Latr.) is also black, with red feet, and ablunt tail These have been frequently mistaken forthe wheat-fly ; but as it has only two wings, while theyhave four, the distinction is obvious. In order toobserve the proceedings of the ichneumons, Kirbyplaced a number of the larvae of the wheat-fly on asheet of white paper, and set a female ichneumon inthe midst of them. She soon pounced upon her victim,and intensely vibrating her antennae, and bendingherself obliquely, plunged her ovipositor into the bodyof the larva, depositing in it a single egg. She thenpassed to a second, and proceeded in the same manner,depositing a single tgg in each. Nay, whenshe examined one which she found had already beenpricked, she always rejected it and passed to another *.Mr. Shires repeated these experiments successfully,except that he saw an ichneumon twice prick thesame maggot, which " writhed in seeming agony,"and " it was again stung three times by the samefly." He adds, " the earwig also destroys the larvae,three of which I successively presented to an earwig,which devoured them immediately f." Mr. Gorriedescribes these ichneumons as appearing in myriadsLinn. Trans, ut supra. f Loudon's Mag. ut supra.WHEAT FLIES.on the outside of the ear; but as impatient of brightlight, sheltering themselves from the sun's raysamonof the husks.Our English naturalists were for many years ofopinion, that the insect called the Hessian-fly, sodestructive to wheat crops in America, belonged tothe same family {MuscidcE) with the common house-fly; and Mr. Markwick, an intelligent naturalist, bya series of observations on a British fly {Chloropspymiliojiis, Meigen) which attacks the stems ofwheat, created no little alarm among agriculturists.Markwick's fly is less than a fourth of an inch inlength, with dark shoulders striped with two yellowlines, and the maggot is white. He planted roots ofwheat containing larvae in a small flower-pot, andcovered them with gauze. Each stem produced oneof the above flies. The crop of wheat attacked bythis maggot, though at first it appeared to fail,turned out well in consequence of numerous sideshoots. It is only the early wheat sown in Octoberthat is affected by it *.a. The Hessian fly (^Cecidomijia destructor); b, Markwick flyChiurups pumiliunis') magnitied.It now appears that Markwick was altogethermistaken in identity his insect with time Hessianfly {Cecidcmyia destruction, Say), which has beenaccurately described by Mr. Say in the " Journal ofthe Academy of Natural Sciences c,f Philadelphia"Mag. Nat. Bist. July 1829, p. 292.262 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.for 1817. It is a little larger than our wheat-fly,more slender in the body, has longer legs, and isnot orange, but black and fulvous. The femaledeposits from one to eight or more eggs on a singleplant of wheat, between the sheath of the inner leafand the stem nearest the roots ; in which situation,with its head towards the root or first joint, theyoung larva passes the winter, eating into the stem,and causing it to break *.The devastation committed by the Hessian flyseems to have been first observed in 1776, and itwas erroneously supposed that the insect was conveyedamong straw by the Hessian troops from Germany.It was first noticed in the wheat fields ofLong Island, from which it spread gradually at therate of fifteen or twenty miles round ; and in 1789 ithad advanced two hundred miles fi-om its originalstation in Long Island. Other accounts state that itdid not travel more than seven miles annually, anddid little serious damage before 1788. Their numbersseem almost incredible. The houses in theinfested districts swarmed with them to so great adegree, that every vessel was filled with them ; fivehundred were actually counted on a glass tumblerwhich had been set down for a few minutes with alittle beer in it. They were observed crossing theDelaware river like a cloud ; and even mountains donot seem to interrupt their progress f. We can wellunderstand, therefore, that so formidable a ravagershould have caused a very great alarm ; and even ourown government was in fear lest the insect should beimported. The privy council, indeed, sat day afterday in deep consultation what measures should beadopted to ward off the danger of a calamity more tobe dreaded, as they well knew, than the plague orthe pestilence. Expresses were sent off in all directNat. Hist., vol. i. p. 228.f Kirby and Spence; vol. i.p. 172.CHEESE FLY. actionsto the officers of the customs at the different outportsrespecting the examination of cargoes, — despatcheswere written to the ambassadors in France,Austria, Prussia, and America, to gain information, —and so important altogether was the business deemed,that the minutes of council, and the documents collectedfrom all quarters, fill upwards of two hundredpages *.As in the case of the English wheat-fly, the AmericanHessian fly has a formidable enemy in aminute four-winged ^y (Ceraphron destructor. Say),which deposits its eggs in the larvae. Were it notfor the Ceraphron, indeed, Mr. Say is of opinion thatthe crops of wheat would be totally annihilated inthe districts where the Hessian fly prevails f.Those who have, from popular associations, beenaccustomed to look with disgust at the little whitelarvae common in cheese, well known under the nameof hoppers, will be somewhat surprised to hear theillustrious Swammerdam say, "I can take upon meto affirm, that the limbs and other parts of thismaggot are so uncommon and elegant, and contrivedwith so much art and design, that it is impossiblenot to acknowledge them to be the work of infinitepower and wisdom, from which nothing is hid,and to which nothing is impossible |." But whoeverwill examine it with care, will find that has not exaggerated the facts.The cheese-fly (Piophila Case, Fallen) is verysmall and black, with whitish wings, margined withblack. It was one of those experimented upon byRedii to prove that insects, in the fabric of which somuch art, order, contrivance, and wisdom appear,Young, Annals of Agric, vol. xi.f Journ. of Acid. Philadelphia. ut supra.J Bibl. Naturae, vol. ii. p. 63.264 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.could not be the production of chance or rottenness,but the work of the same Omnipotent hand whichcreated the heavens and the earth. This tiny littlefly is according-ly furnished with an admirable instrumentfor depositing its eg-gs, in an ovipositor, whichit can thrust out and extend to a g-i^eat leno-th, sothat it can penetrate to a considerable depth into thecracks of cheese, where it lays its egg-s, 256 innumber. " I have seen them myself," says ,"thrust out their tails for this purpose to anamazing length, and by that method bury the eggsin the deepest cavities. I found in a few days afterwardsa number of maggots which had sprung fromthose eggs, perfectly resembling those of the firstbrood that had produced the mother fly. I cannotbut also take notice that the rottenness of cheese isreally caused by these maggots ; for they both crumblethe substance of it into small particles and alsomoisten it with some sort of liquid, so that thedecayed part rapidly spreads. T once observed acheese which I had purposely exposed to this kind offly grow moist in a short time in those parts of itwhere eggs had been deposited, and had afterwardsbeen hatched into maggots ; though, before, thecheese was perfectly sound and entire."The cheese-hopper is furnished with two hornyclaw-shaped mandibles, which it uses both for digginginto the cheese and for moving itself, beingdestitute of feet. Its powers of leaping have beenobserved by every one ; and Swammerdam says, " Ihave seen one, whose length did not exceed thefourth of an inch, leap out of a box six inches deep,that is, twenty-four times the length of its ownbody: others leap a great deal higher." For thispurpose it first erects itself on its tail, which is furnishedwith two wart-like projections, to enable it toSwammerdanij vol. ii. p. 69. f Bibl. Nat., vol. ii. p. 65.CHEESE MAGGOTS.maintain its balance. It then bends itself into acircle, catches the skin near its tail with its hookedmandibles, and after strongly contracting: itself froma circular into an oblong" form, it throws itself with ajerk into a straight line, and thus makes the leap.Cheese hoppers QPiuphila case, Fallen). n, the maggot extended; 6, in a leaping position; d, the same magnified ; e, thefly magnified , f, g, the thy, natural size.One very surprising provision is remarkable inthe breathing-tubes of the cheese maggot, which arenot placed, as in caterpillars, along the sides, but apair near the head and another pair near the tail.Now, when burrowing in the moist cheese, thesewould be apt to be obstructed ; but to prevent this,it has the power of bringing over the front pair afold of the skin, breathing in the meanwhile throughthe under pair. Well may Swammerdam denominatethese contrivances " surprising miracles of God'spower and wisdom in this abject creature."Like the other destructive insects above mentioned,the multiplication of the cheese fly is checkedby some insect, whose history, so far as we areaware, is not yet known. Swammerdam foundmany of the maggots with other larvae in theirbodies ; but he did not trace their transformations.If they were the larvae of an ichneumon, it must beexceedingly minute.It must have attracted the attention of the most2 a266 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.incurious, to see, during the summer, swarms of fliescrowding about the droppings of cattle, so as almostto conceal the nuisance, and presenting instead adisplay of their shining corslet and twinklingwings. The object of all this busy bustle is todeposit their eggs where their progeny may findabundant food ; and the final cause is obviously bothto remove the nuisance and to provide abundantfood for birds and other animals, which prey uponflies or their larvae. The same remarks apply withno less force to the blow flies which deposit theireggs, and in some cases their young, upon carcasses.The common house fly (musca domestic) belongsto the first division, the natural food of its larvasbeing horse-dung ; consequently it is always mostabundant in houses in the vicinity of stables, cucumberbeds, &c., to which, when its numbersbecome annoying, attention should be primarilydirected, rather than having recourse to fly-waters.Another common insect {Biblo coriolanus,Meigen) lives in the larva state in cesspools, along withrat-tailed larvae, &c. The maggot of the bibio is verypeculiar in form. They are hatched from eggs withshells as hard as Paris plaster, deposited on the adjacentwalls, and frequently upon the pupa case which themother has previously quitted. Like the larvae of thecrane flies above described, this one moves itself chieflyby means of its mandibles, and therefore it can make noprogress on a piece of smooth glass. Its skin, it mayberemarked, is so exceedingly hard and tough, thatit is no easy matter to kill it *. We have introducedthis insect here, however, chiefly for the purpose ofrefuting an erroneous popular accusation againstit, which is supported by the high authorities ofRay and Reaumur. Our great English naturalistcalls it the deadliest enemy of the flowers in spring,and accuses it of despoiling the gardens and fields ofSwammerdam, x, 212.BIBIO Coriolanus.every blossom*. Reaumur is less decided in his opinion; for though he perceived that, not being furnishedwith mandibles, they could not, as is supposed,gnaw the buds of fruit-trees ; yet, from their being-foundcrowded upon flowers and buds, he thinks theymay suck the juices of these, and thus cause them towither t- We are satisfied, by repeated observation,that the fly only uses its sucker {fiaustelhnn) for sippingthe honey of flowers, or the gum with whichthe opening bud is usually covered. The damageof which it is accused is more probably done bycaterpillars, snails, or other night-feeding insects,which, not being seen by day, the fly is blamed forwhat it is entirely innocent of |.Transformations of B'xh'io coriolanus, Meigen. a, the eggmagnified ; o, the same when hatched ; c, d, the maggot andpupa magnified ; e, /, the same, natural size ; g, the fly.In the case of the blow-flies, Linnaeus tells us thatthe larvae of three females of Musca vomitoria willdevour the carcase of a horse as quickly as woulda lion ; and we are not indisposed to take thisRail Hist. Insect. Pres. p. xi. f Reaumur, v. 56.t J. R.2 A 2268 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.literally, when we know that one mother of an alliedspecies (M. carrara) produces about 20,000, andthat they have been proved by Redii to increase inweight two-hundredfold within twenty-four hours.The most extraordinary fact, illustrative of the voracityof these maggots which we have met with, is thefollowing, given by Kirby and Spence, from " Bell'sWeekly Messenger :" —On Thursday, June 25th, died at Asbornby,Lincolnshire, John Page, a pauper belonging toSilk-Willoughby, under circumstances truly singular.He being of a restless disposition, and not choosingto stay in the parish work-house, was in the habit ofstrolling about the neighbouring villages, subsisting onthe pittance obtained from door to door : the supporthe usually received from the benevolent was bread andmeat ; and after satisfying the cravings of nature, itwas his custom to deposit the surplus provision, particularlythe meat, betwixt his shirt and skin. Havinga considerable portion of this provision in store,so deposited, he was taken rather unwell, and laidhimself down in a field, in the parish of Scredington;when, from the heat of the season at that time, themeat speedily became putrid, and was of coursestruck by the flies : these not only proceeded todevour the inanimate pieces of flesh, but also literallyto prey upon the living substance; and when thewretched man was accidentally found by some of theinhabitants, he was so eaten by the maggots that hisdeath seemed inevitable. After clearing away, aswell as they were able, these shocking vermin, thosewho found Page conveyed him to Asbornby, and asurgeon was immediately ]procured, who declared thathis body was in such a state, that dressing it must belittleshort of instantaneous death ; and, in fact, theman did survive the operation but a few hours.When first found, and again when examined by theUTILITY OF INSECTS. fl69surgeon, he presented a sight loathsome in the extreme; white maggots of enormous size were crawlingin and upon his body, which they had mostshockingly mangled, and the removing of the externalones served only to render the sight more horrid."Kirby adds, " in passing through this parish lastspring, I inquired of the mail-coachman whether hehad heard this story ; and he said the fact was wellknown." The year in which this remarkable circumstanceoccurred is not mentioned.The importance of the insects just mentioned, inremoving with great rapidity what might otherwiseprove nuisances of considerable magnitude, naturallyleads us to notice another sort of larva, no less usefulin diminishing the numbers of the plant-lice (Aphides)which do so much damage to cultivated vegetables.We do this also the more readily, that these veryinsects, which are so beneficial to the husbandmanand the gardener, are often erroneously accused ofbeing themselves the cause of the mischief. A correspondentof the Natural History Magazine, for example,says, " the lady-bird is remarkably abundant thisseason. The shrimp (larva) of this insect destroysboth turnips and peas in many parts of England f."The truth is, however, that all the species of ladybirds(CoccinellidcB, Latr.), both in the larva and theperfect state, feed exclusively on aphides, and nevertouch vegetable substances. The eggs are usuallyplaced in a group of twenty or more upon a leaf,where aphides abound ; and when the young arehatched they find themselves in the midst of theirprey. There are a considerable number of species ofthis family (Mr. Stephens enumerates fifty) ; but themost common, perhaps, is the seven spotted ladybird(Cochineal septem pun data), whose larva is ofIntr. i. 140, and note. f Mag. of Nat. Hist. i. 191.2 a3INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.considerable size, and, of course, when abundant,must destroy a vast number of aphides.Transformations of the lady-bird (^Coccinella 2-punctata,Linn.) a, the eggs, h, the larva, c, the pupa, d, the beetle.e, the same flying. /, Coccinclla 2i)-punctata, Linn., flying.The maggots of many species of a beautiful family{Syrphidce, Leach) of two-winged flies are alsovoracious devourer of the aphides. These larvae areof a tapering form, and they can contract or lengthentheir bodies to a considerable extent ; while they havea retractile instrument, armed with three prongs likea trident, with which they transfix their helpless andhapless victims. " When disposed to feed," saysKirby, " he fixes himself by his tail, and being blind,gropes about on every side, as the Cyclops did forUlysses and his companions, till he touches one,which he immediately transfixes with his trident,VORACITY OF MAGGOTS.elevates into the air, that he may not be disturbed withits struggles, and soon devours. The havoc whichthese grubs make amongst the aphides is astonishing.It was but last week that I observed the topof every young shoot of the currant-trees in my gardencurled up by myriads of these insects. On examiningthem this day, not an individual remained ;but beneath each leaf are three or four full-fed larvae ofaphidivorous flies, surrounded with heaps of the skinsof the slain, the trophies of their successful warfare."The larvcB of the lace-winged flies (Hemerobidce,Leach) are even more destructive to the aphidesthan either of the preceding ; insomuch that Reaumurwas induced to call them the lions of the aphides.The mandibles of the larva of Hemerobius are somewhatcrescent-shaped, and, like those of the ant-lion,are hollow, by means of which they suck the juicesof their victims. These are rarely so numerous asthe two preceding families, but they make up fortheir fewness in the voracity with which they devourthe little destroyers of our vegetables.Intr. i. 264.rt, Lace \viiiged fly ; 6, the grub of the same, magnified ; c, syr-plus;rf, larva of the same devouring the aphides of the elder;e, the head magnified, to shew the mouth.SECTION III.— Pupil.Chapter XI.Mechanism of suspending Chrysalides.A SAILOR would find it no easy process to cut forhimself a suit of clothes out of a set sail, holding, thewhile, only by the portion that he was cutting.This is an operation which is performed every day bythe tent-making caterpillars*. Difficult, however,as this may be considered to be, it appears as nothingwhen compared with another problem performed bya different family of caterpillars. " Country fellows,for a prize," says Kirby, " sometimes amuse theassembled inhabitants of a village by running racesin sacks : take one of the most active and adroit ofthese, bind him hand and foot, suspend him by thebottom of his sack, head downwards, to the branchof a lofty tree ; make an opening in one side of thesack, and set him to extricate himself from it, to detachit from its hold, and suspend himself by his feetin its place. Though endowed with the supplenessof an Indian juggler, and promised his sack full ofgold for a reward, you would set him an absoluteimpossibility ; yet this is what our caterpillars, instructedby a beneficent Creator, easily perform f."The manner in which this is effected we shall nowdescribe.A caterpillar, when about to change into a chry-See Insect Architecture, p. 223. f Intr. iii. 209.SUSPENSION OF Pup. 273salis, usually steals away from the plant on which ithas been feeding, to find some secluded corner whereit may undergo its transformation unmolested ; as ifit were previously aware that it would no longer beable to escape from its enemies. Those which weshall first notice climb up the highest objects nearthem, such as walls, gates, palings, and trees, underthe projections of which they think they may begintheir operations in safety. Thus we once found a caterpillarof the small tortoiseshell butterfly upon thebranch of a fir-tree, in Epping Forest, from ten totwelve feet above its native patch of nettles below ;and we have seen the cabbage butterfly under thelintel of a window on the third story*.Having thus selected a safe spot, the caterpillarbegins, in order to attach itself securely, to weave amooring of silk, the structure of which is well worthyof notice. The threads of which this is composed areso fine, that they are not easily distinguished ; andwe recollect being not a little astonished at seeing achrysalis of the admirable butterfly {{Vanessa Atlanta)hanging within an inverted glass tumbler,where we had confined it, the silk being transparent,and all but invisible. It is necessary, therefore, inorder to see it distinctly, to confine the caterpillarswithin a black box or other vessel. The silk threadsare not drawn tight along, so as to be parallel withthe surface, but are formed into a sort of projectingbutton, the caterpillar, for this purpose, alternatelyraising and depressing its head over the spot so as todraw out the threads, in the same way as a tambouringneedle is worked in making a dot upon muslin :the base is accordingly made the broadest part, andthe centre the most projecting, for a reason whichwill immediately appear.When it has finished this little button of silkJ.K.274 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.a. Caterpillar of Vanessa Antiopa weaving its button of silk.6, suspended by its hinder pro-legs from the silk button, c, bendingin order to split the old skin.which is thickly interlaced and strong, it turns roundto examine it with its hinder pair of pro-legs ; and ifit judges it to be sufficiently firm, it thrusts theseamong the meshes, taking secure hold with the numeroushooks with which these are fringed*, andswings itself fearlessly into the air, hanging vnih. itshead downwards. All this seems easy enough ofperformance, but it is only preliminary ; for it hasstill to throw off its skin, together with the hooks bywhich it is suspended, and this without losing itshold. The old skin is rent by the forcible bendinground of the upper part of the body, which pushesthrough some of the angular projections of the chrysalis— a tedious and probably a painful operation, inSee Insect Architecture, p. 307, right hand figure.SUSPENSION OF PUPiE. 275which it is often engaged the greater part of a day,and sometimes two, according to its strength. Whenthe first rent is made, however, the included chrysalissoon wedges itself through the breach, the lower portionswelling out greatly more than the upper, so asto form an inverted but somewhat irregular cone.The included insect continuing its laborious exertions,by successively contracting and dilating the rings of itsbody, pushes off the now rent skin by degrees from thehead towards the tail, as the sack-racers mentionedby Kirby would disengage themselves from the sacksin which they were inclosed, or as one would rolldown a stocking from the leg. There are two circumstancesworthy of notice in this process : theposition of the insect in hanging with its head downwards,throws a greater portion of the fluids of thebody towards the head, by means of their weight,which swell out the part that splits ; and also pushesback the old skin, while the sloughing skin is preventedfrom retaliating by a series of pegs, which actlike the toothed rack of a sluice-fate. The old skin,being by these means pushed towards the tail, is ofcourse compressed into several folds, which in somedegree prevent the extension of the rent, and serveto keep the chrysalis from falling ; for being nowdetached from the skin, it has no hold upon themeshes of the silk button, and is, in fact at somedistance from it.This, then, is the part of the process where thenicety of the mechanism is most worthy of admiration; for the hooks by which the insect is in the firstinstance suspended from the meshes of the silk aresloughed off, together with the skin, the grasp ofwhose folds becomes then the only support of thechrysalis. But this chrysalis, now deprived of feet,and some distance fi-om the suspensory cordage of silk,has still to reach this, fix itself there, and cast off theINSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.sloughed skin altogether. This operation causes, saysBonnet, a spectator to tremble for the consequences,for every movement seems to render its fall almostcertain. It is, however, provided with means whichanswer the same purpose as hands, to enable it toclimb ; it can elongate and contract at pleasure therings of its body. It accordingly, with two contiguousrings, lays hold, as with a pair of pincers, ofthe portion of the sloughed skin nearest the head ; andelongating the rings beyond this, seizes upon a moredistant portion, while it lets go the first. Repeatingthis process several times, it at length arrives at thesilk button.ft, suspended caterpillar of Vanessa Antiopa splitting its skinfor the evolution of the chrysalis, b, the head of the chrysalisemerging, c, the same process farther advanced, d, the perfectpapa.The tail of a chrysalis, to an ordinary observer,would appear smooth, and quite unfitted for beingSUSPENSION OF Pup. 277fixed to the silk in such a manner as to sustain itsweight ; but careful examination discovers that it hasbeen furnished with an efficient apparatus for thispurpose, in a number of very minute hooks, similarto those of the pro-legs which have been sloughed off.Feeling about then with its tail for the silk, it insinuatesthese hooks among the meshes, and being nolonger in danger of falling, it can swing secure,as it had previously done in the caterpillar state.Reaumur has, however, seen some chrysalidesfall before they completed the process, in consequence,as he thinks, of having spun too slight amesh-work of silk. In order to ascertain the correctnessof this inference, we tried a series of experimentsupon a considerable number of a brood of thepeacock butterfly {{Vanessa lo), the same upon whichReaumur made his observations. We allowed someto spin only half the usual portion, and removed themto another station. Here they eagerly recommencedthe task, and, if left unmolested, never fell from thespot ; but if previously removed a second time, theyseldom succeeded in completing the process in theusual way. They did not, indeed, in such cases,attempt spinning an imperfect silken suspensory; butabandoning in despair what they felt themselves incapableof performing, they crept down to the bottomof the nurse box, and cast their skins without havinganything to which they could attach themselves*.When the hooks of a chrysalis have been properlyfixed among the meshes, it remains suspended contiguousto the skin which it has just cast ; but notliking the neighbourhood of its now useless spoil, itsets itself to get rid of it. For this purpose it consortsitself in various ways, sometimes assuming afigure similar to an S, so that it may push againstJ. R.2 bINSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.the spines of the old skin ; and then giving itself asudden jerk, it spins itself rapidly round a dozen ortwenty times. Reaumur says that this gyrationusually throws off the slough, in consequence of itsbeing farther from the centre of motion, and thereforeexposed to a greater centrifugal force ; but unluckilyfor this refined philosophy, it is not the silkbutton, but the chrysalis which spins round, and consequentlythe old skin does not twirl at all, and onlymoves like a pendulum ; — the best method, evidently,of disengaging the hooks it hangs by. Besides, thethreads of the silk are not broken by the gyration, asReaumur, followed by Kirby and Spence, asserts ;otherwise the weight of the chrysalis would to a certaintybreak its threads, more easily than the supposedcentrifugal force would break those whichsuspend the slough. Repeated observation has satisfiedus, therefore, that the twirling of the chrysalis isboth for the purpose of disengaging the old skin andstrengthening its own hold*. Bonnet may be rightor wrong in thinking the stimulus of the spines of theold skin is the cause of the twirling : we have observedthat the insects which change into chrysalides,a, 6, front and side view of chrysalides of Vanessa urticce stir'pended by their anal hooks, c, anal hooks magnified. d, oldskin fallen off.» J. R.SUSPENSION OF PUPiE. 279after being removed from their suspensories, also rollabout and manifest great uneasiness*.But this is only one mode by which chrysalidesare suspended ; for nature, rich in variety, has taughtothers to employ a different mechanism, and considerablymore complicated, not only fixing themselvesby the tail, but throwing around their body a girdleof silk, which binds it firmly to the spot selected, andfrequently in a horizontal position. Amongst those,the caterpillars of the pretty butterflies called by collectorshair streaks (TheclcB, Fabr.), are remarkable,both for their resemblance in shape to the commonwoodlouse (Priscus), and for their singular proceedings.In order to construct a silken cincture around themiddle of its body, after it has secured itself at the tail,the Thecla draws back its head, and pushing out itsspinners on one side, forms an arched thread by passingit over to the other side. It then insinuates itshead under this thread, and pressing the fore part of itsbody down as closely as possible, it contrives to placethe girth over its middle. This circumstance is the moreremarkable when it is considered that the silk is sofine as scarcely to be distinguishable to the eye, andthat the back of the caterpillar over which it has to passis thickly studded with spines. The caterpillars, indeed,of this whole family {LyccencEidcE, Leach),which includes our splendid blue and copper butterflies,seem to follow the same process, repeating itfrom thirty to fifty times, in order to strengthen theband. As the caterpillars of the family just mentionedare but seldom found, those who are desirousof observing the formation of the cincture of a chrysalismay readily gratify their curiosity by watchinga brood of any of the native white butterflies, asthose of the cabbage or of the hawthorn (PierisCratcBgi, Stephens). A caterpillar of this kind,Bonnet, (Euvres, vol. ii., p. 109.2 B 2INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.however, though it forms a silken suspensory girthsimilar to the LycfBUcEidce, constructs it in a differentmanner. Instead of retracting its head, it takesadvantage of its great pliability, and bending itselfnearly double, fixes a thread, carrying it over to theother side simply by turning its head. It repeatsthis process a great number of times, till it hasformed a packet of threads sufficient for its cincture.It then stretches its head out into a right line withthe body, and remains in this position till it casts itsskin. The usual position of the chrysalides belongingto the family (PapilionidfB, Leach) in question,is horizontal ; but they frequently also hang vertically,and at different angles. We possess one of the largegarden white butterfly (Notitia Brassicce), whichwas bound horizontally on the tipper surface of aleaf of the able tree (Populus alba), being laid, andnot hung, as is almost the invariable practice of thespecies. The leaf, moreover, is drawn together ina,Caterpillar of the black-veined white butterfly spinning itssuspensory band. 6, chrysalis horizontally bound to a branch,c, the butterfly (fieri Cratcsc/i), smaller than in nature.SUSPENSION OF PUPiE.2S1the manner of the leaf-rollers, another most unusualand remarkable circumstance*.Another caterpillar of the same family, that ofthe swallow-tailed butterfly papilio Macedon,Linn), one of our finest but local native insects,having a body less pliable than the preceding, hasrecourse to a still different method of forming acincture. The proceedings of this beautiful caterpillar,distinguished by two retractile horns, likethose of a snail, may be illustrated by the mode inwhich a skein of silk is wound fi'om the hand. Theinsect first attaches the end of his thread to the spotselected for hanging up the chrysalis, such as thebend of a branch of fennel or wild carrot, on which hehas been feeding ; and extends it outwards by thehooks on his claws, by which means he keeps itstretched till he fixes it on the other side, forming aa. Caterpillar of the swallow-tailed butterfly, weaving its suspensorycincture, b, the caterpillar suspended for its change.c, the chrysalis suspended in a similar manner.J. R.2 b3282 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.loop about twice the diameter of his body. He repeatsthis process successively till he has spun forty,sixty, or as many threads as he deems strong enoughfor his cincture; and then throwing it over his headtowards the middle of his body, he proceeds to disencumberhimself of his old skin.As the numerous threads composing the cinctureare not glued together, but remain separate, it sometimehappens that they slip, in whole or in part, fromthe claws of the caterpillar ; and Reaumur had onewhich was foiled in all its efforts to repair such anaccident. It did not, indeed, make any attempt tospin a fresh cincture, probably from its materialsbeing exhausted or from want of strength ; so thatwhen it could not recover the fallen and entangledthreads, it collected a few of them, suspended inwhich it cast its skin, but they, being too weak to sustainit, gave way, and it fell and perished '*.We will not revert in this place to the varied contrivancesof those insects which construct coveringseither of silk or other materials for inclosing theirpupae, such as the silk worm, the puss-moth caterpillar,the tent-makers, &c. ; but there is one familywhose proceedings are so singular that they wellmerit investigation. We refer to the numerous speciesof what are indefinitely termed common flies,(Muscidce), and some families allied to them. Unlikemost other larvae, these never cast their skins,not even when they change into pupae. The maggotof the common blow-fly (Musca vomitoria), forexample, when about to undergo its transformation,quits the carcase where it has been feeding, and burrowsfor an inch or two into the first soft earth it canmeet with. Here it draws in its body into a shortercompass, and the soft skin being thus condensed,^ * Mem. sur les Insectes, vols, i. ix,]CONTRACTION OF PUPiE. 283it acquires in thickness what it loses in extension : itsmoisture, also, disappearing by evaporation, or moreprobably by internal absorption, it becomes hard andtough, like thin parchment, and of a dull reddish-browncolour. The form is now that of an oblongball ; and it was from that circumstance termed an eggby Redii and other early naturalists, — a term at whichSwammerdam takes great offence in this instance.The various changes undergone by the included insectwere traced from hour to hour by Reaumur with hisusual patience and accuracy : but few of the minutecircumstances detailed by him would probably interestour readers ; except that in casting its mandibles,which are henceforth useless, they are not thrown offon the outside of the case, but remain on the inside.Were such an extraordinary transformation as thisto happen to one of the larger animals, it would beheldforth as altogether miraculous. Were a Hon oranelephant, for example, to coil itself up into a ball,compressing its skin into twice the thickness and halfthe extent, while it remained uniform in shape andwithout joining or openings ; and, at the same time,were it entirely to separate its whole body from thisskin, and lie within it, as a kernel does in a nut, or achick in an egg, throwing off its now useless tusksinto a corner, — and then, after a space, should itacquire wings, break through the envelope, and takeits flight through the air, — there would be no boundsto our admiration. Yet the very same circumstancesin miniature take place every day during summer,almost under the eye of every individual, in the caseof the blow fly, without attracting the attention of oneperson in a million.The maggots of the genus of two-winged flies(Syrphidcej mentioned above as feeding voraciouslyon aphides, do not, like those of the blow fly, burrowin the earth, but attach themselves to a deaf or aINSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.branch. Being furnished with a species of adhesivewhiten, a maggot of this sort apples a portion of thiswith its mouth to the spot which it has selected forits transformation, and, pressing its body upon it,becomes immoveable glued down there. When thussecurely fixed, it contracts and shortens its bodysimilarly to the maggot of the blow-fly; but, instead ofbecoming like that, uniformly oblong, the head swellsout and the tail becomes slender, till it terminates inapoint, just reversing the previous form of the maggot,which is rounded at the tail and pointed at thehead. When the change is completed, indeed, itis a good deal in the form of one of Prince Rupert'sglass drops. When we first met with these pupae, indeed,we concluded they were galls, and were not alittle surprised to see large wasp-looking flies issuefi'om them ; but as they may be found in considerableabundance, it becomes easy to gratify curiosity andto confirm the facts just stated. It may not be out ofplace to remark, that several species of ichneumonb-^diaiin^rfa. Pupa, of blow fly. l>, the same magnified, c, head of pupa-rumopened to shew the cast mandibles, d, papa of syrphus.Pup OF LADY-BIRD. 285flies make reprisals upon them for their destruction ofthe helpless aphides. Swammerdam observed eightof these parasites issue from one pupa of a Syrphus"^The lady-birds {Coccinellidce) glue their pupa? toleaves in much the same manner with the flies justmentioned: but their skin, instead of becoming smooth,wrinkles up by the shortening of the body of thegrub ; because it is not so soft and pliable, andcannot, therefore, be compressed. The interior, however,is smooth t-Those insects which live during their first stagesin the water, exhibit a very different economy whenthey change from larvae into nymphs, as may beexemplified in the May-flies (Ephemeral) and thedragon-flies (Libelling). But as these will require tobe described in a future page, we shall content ourselvesat present with an account of an interestingbut minute species of tipulidan gnat {Corethra ,Meigen), of a straw colour, whose historywas first given by Reaumur and De Geer. Thelatter was induced, from the beautiful transparencyof the larva, to name it Tipiila rivalling, — a qualitywhich renders it, its size being also very minute,rather difficult to discover : it is, however, a goodsubject for microscopical observations. Taking advantageof the recent improvements in microscopes.Dr. Goring has accordingly given coloured figuresboth of the larva and pupa, as observed by him, inwhich he has added a few minute details | that arenot in the otherwise very accurate figures of Reaumur.The larva is rather less than a quarter of an inchlong, and somewhat resembles in form those of thesame family, particularly in the parts about the head,Part ii., p. 99. t J. R.:J; Goring and Pritchard's Nat. Hist.; No. 1 j and Reaumur vol.V.J mem. 1.286 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.the mandibles being horny, jointed, and capable ofuniting into one pointed borer. The tail is furnishedwith plumed bristles, which appear to serve the purposeof fins. The nearer this crystalline larva is toits transformation, the more distinctly may be seenfour kidney-shaped transparent bodies, of a browncolour, a pair on the fourth ring from the tail, andanother pair at the shoulders. The former, perhaps,serve to inclose the tail fins of the pupa ; the latterthe horns of the pupa, which again encase the antennaeof the gnat ; but in another species (Corethraculiciformis) De Geer supposed these to be respiratoryorgans. We are not aware that this larva hasbeen actually seen to cast its skin, but there can beno doubt of the fact, for Reaumur found exuviae atthe bottom of the glasses where he kept them* ; andwe are not, consequently, authorized to assert that itstransformation is " not effected, as in other insects,by casting the outer skin, but by an actual conversionof one form of matter into another t." Wewatched above a hundred of them without being sofortunate as to see their transformation into pupae,though we more than once observed the emergenceof the fly.Our chief reason, however, for introducing it here,is to shew the mode in which the pupa is suspended,or rather buoyed up, in the water, by means of itsfoliated tail and the shape of its body, which isbulged out above, and narrowed as it approaches thelower extremity. It is, besides, very lively in thepupa state, and jerks about with great agility, butusually keeps close to the surface of the water, so asto project its horns or antennae cases above it. Inthe figures we have endeavoured to combine thedetails of Reaumur and Dr. Goring-reaumur,vol. v., p. 41-2.f Goring and Pritchard, Nat. Hist., Noel, p. 23.PUPiE OF GNATS.a a, lan-a of Corethra plumicornls magnified. 6, theman-bibles and palpi, c, the respiratory fins, d, the pupa magnified,e, pupa, natural size. /, larva, natural size, g, the female fly.h, the male fly.We possess a small aquatic pupa which is furnishedat the tail with four horny hooks resembling theprickles on the stem of a rose-tree, and evidentlyintended as suspensory appendages. It was foundhanging to a deal board, which had been immersedin running water, and seems from its form to be thepupa of a moth {Hydrocampa ?)*.•J,R.Chapter XII.Form and Structure of Purse.The figures delineated in the preceding" chapter shewhow different in form many pupae are, both fromtheir larvae and from the insects to be afterwardsevolved from them, — as different, indeed, as the formof a bud from the seething tree, or from the leaf,branch, or blossom, which is destined to shoot from it,Purse, as we formerly remarked, have as striking ananalogy to the buds of plants, as eggs have to seeds ;and this is the more necessary to be insisted on,that their nature has been grossly misrepresentedeven by authors of eminence, and, in other matters, ofunquestionable accuracy. The term Metamorphosis,so long applied to the various stages of insect life,has been one of the chief means of propagating theerroneous views in question, inasmuch as it impliesa supernatural change like those described in thepoetical fables of Ovid. The term Transformation,though not perhaps free from a similar implication,is much less strong and less likely to mislead.That our objection does not originate in hypercriticalnicety, but is of no little importance with regardto the accurate knowledge of the history of insects,could be proved by reference to many well-knownworks of natural history ; but we shall limit ourillustrations to one or two of those strange fancieswhich have obscured and perplexed this branch ofour subject.We shall begin with the illustrious Harvey, — thediscoverer of the circulation of the blood, — who, inOPINIONS RESPECTING INSECTS. 289his expectations on the generation of animals, says —*' There are two ways in which we observe one tintobe made out of another (as out of matter), bothin art and nature, especially in the generation ofanimals: one is, when a thing is made out of anotheralready in being, as a bed out of wood, anda statue out of a stone ; when, for example, allthe materials of the workmanship exist before theworkman begins the work or attempts to give it anyform. The other way is, when the stuff receives bothbeing and form at the same time. As, therefore, theworks of art are performed two ways ; the one by theworkman's dividing, cutting, and paring away thematter prepared for those operations, so as to leavebehind, like a statuary, the figure of the thing heintends to make: the other, by the workman's addingand moulding, as well as paring away, the materials,and at the same time tempering the matter itself, soas to produce, like a potter, the figure ; which, forthis reason, may be said to be made, rather thanformed; — in the same manner it happens in thegeneration of animals ; some of which are formed andtransfigured out of matter already digested and increasedfor this purpose, all the parts springing outtogether distinctly by a kind of metamorphosis, andthus forming a perfect animal, while other animalsare made piece by piece."He proceeds to tell us, that the generation of insectsis performed after the first manner ; the egg, bymetamorphosis, producing the worm ; or matter in astate of putrefaction, when it becomes too dry or toomoist, producing the primary rudiments ; and theseagain, by metamorphosis, a caterpillar, which, whengrown to its full size, is metamorphosed into an aurelianpupa), a butterfly, or a common fly. " Bees," hesubjoins, " wasps, hornets, or butterflies, and whatever2 c290 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.other animals are generated by metamorphosis from acreeping insect, are said to be the offspring of chance,and therefore never to keep up their species. Butthe lion or cock are never produced spontaneously orby chance. In the generation by metamorphosis,animals are fashioned as it were by the impression ofa seal, or framed in a curious mould, all the matterof which they consist being transformed."Goedart, a later naturalist of eminence, both fallsinto the foolish fancy of supposing that the form ofthe human face can be traced in the chrysalis, ofwhich he has actually given a figure in his plates,as Reaumur has done after him ; and also tells us,*' that wherever the legs are situated in the caterpillar,there is placed the back of the insect which isto arise by transmutation ; and, on the contrary,where the back of the caterpillar was, there are thelegs in the insect to be produced from it. Thismetamorphosis," he adds, *' is performed in a shortspace of time, so that it may be distinctly seen ; because,immediately after shedding its skin, this changeappears to the yet."Had this most absurd and imbrue doctrine passedinto oblivion, or become obsolete, we should havepassed it by in silence ; but as, like many of thetheories of former ages, it often meets us even inmodern books |, where we might least expect to findit, we deemed it proper to give it in the language oftwo of its most eminent advocates, which Swimmersjustly says contains almost as many errors aswords. The best method of opposing and overturningerror being the simple explanation of thetruth, we snail proceed to describe the form andHarvey, de General. Alm., Exercit. xlv. 'f De Insects, Exp, 77.See our quotation from Goring and Pritchard, p, 286,STRUCTURE OF PUPiE. 291structure of pupae, rather than stop to refute circumstantiallythe preceding theory of Harvey andGoedart.In the pupa state, then, we may remark, that thelegs, wings, and other external appendages of theinsect, are, in the greater number of instances, closelyfolded up and enveloped by an external covering,usually of a membranous structure, and differingconsiderably both from the skin of the larva and fromthat of the perfect insect. It is as different, indeed,as the winter envelope of the bud of a tree is fromthe bark or from the cuticle of a leaf. The angularforms exhibited in some chrysalides, are for the purposeof encasing particular limbs, &c. of the insectwhich Providence has not seen meet to fold downsmoothly to the body. The spines, hooks, and hairs,again, which are also of occasional occurrence, andwhich Goedart strangely enough mistook for feet*,are manifestly for aiding the animal in casting its oldskin, as has been explained in a preceding page;while the grooves, ridges, and other markings, arethe indications of the various members of the insectsfolded up, or otherwise disposed under them.As we have shown all the parts of the perfect insectcontained in the caterpillar, so these can be muchmore easily exhibited in the pupa, particularly whennear its final change ; for in more early periods thesubstance is so soft and pulpy — almost fluid indeedthat it would be next to impossible to developthem artificially. In some pupae the parts can evenbe seen through the membranous envelope, which inother cases requires, for this purpose, to be removed.In order to exhibit this, we shall select a few instancesin which the facts may be readily verified, by thosewho will take the trouble of breeding the insects.The first we shall advert to is that of the clamede Insects, IT .2 c 2INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.leon fly (Stations chameleon), whose singularlarva we formerly described *. When this draws nearthe period of its transformation, it leaves the water,betaking" itself to the adjacent bank, or to the plantswhich float on the vater, creeping up so as to leaveonly a part of its tail submersed. In this positionit remains, contracting itself by degrees in a mannerscarcely perceivable, and losing all power of locomotion.The internal portion of the tail at the sametime separates gradually and insensibly from theexterior skin, becoming greatly contracted ; and, gatheringinto three or four curvatures, the extremity isthereby left empty. Into this space the air penetratesand soon fills the place previously occupied by thebody, which is now contracted to one-third of itsformer size. When the air is prevented by too muchA, Pupa of chameleon fly, with the lid of the puparium raised.B, the same magnified, and the puparium laid open to slew theembryo fly. C, the embryo fly magnitied : — a a, antennae; b b,the eyes; c, sucker; d d, first pair of legs; e e, second pair;//, the wings folded up ; g h i, rings of the body j hk, breathing-tubes.Page 156j 7.FORM OP PUPiE. 293moisture from entering and distending the skin, itshrivels up ; but this occurs seldom. If the old skin,now become detached and forming a tubular envelope,be cut open, the pupa will be brought into view,exhibiting the parts of the future fly neatly foldeddown upon the body, as may be seen in the figure.This is one of the larvae which Swammerdam observedto cast, along with its external skin, the liningof the intestines, and breathing-tubes likewise, which,he remarks, " is very singular, and amazingly showsthe miracles of God, teaching at the same time howthe former body is entirely east off and renewed *."The pupa, when exposed in the preceding manner, isof a bright green colour, interspersed with whitetransparent particles, and the spiracles of the windpipeglittering like pearls.When the pupa of the lappit moth {Gastropachaquercifolia) is disengaged from the cocoon, it hasmuch the appearance of an Egyptian mummy, or aninfant in the old-fashioned swaddling bands. Thefeet are crossed over the breast, and folded closelydown nearly in the same manner as in the instanceof the chameleon fly just mentioned ; but the wingsare compressed into a very small compass. Thisappears the more remarkable as the wings of themoth are large and conspicuous, and so like thewithered leaf of an oak, both in form and colour, thatthe insect would readily impose upon a carelessobserver. It is, we believe, the only British exampleof what have been popularly termed leaf insects, —which have given origin to the fanciful and untenabletheory of intentional deception on the part of Providence.It was by opening one of these pupae thatReaumur first discovered the various sheaths appropriatedto the feet, the antennae, and the wings ; thesheath of the sucker (haustelliirti) being wanting, as itBibl. Nat. vol. ii. p. 54.2 c 3INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.is obsolescent in the moth. It is furnished, however,with a peculiar horn or projection on the forehead,the palpi — which the theorists to whom we havealluded might term its leaf stalk.a, Pupa of lappit moth,feet folded up.&, under side of the moth, with its]c, side view of the same.We can demonstrate the same position still moreobviously in the chrysalis of a butterfly, — for example,in that of the peacock (Vanessa lo), whose caterpillarsfeed on the nettle. This chrysalis is angularlike the others of the genus, — the two terminatingangles encasing the eyes, and the four lateralones the marginal folds of the wings, the contour ofwhich is disposed on what may be called the shoulderof the chrysalis (Piero-theca, Kirby). The legs, antennae,and sucker, are folded down longitudinallyupon the breast, very similarly to what occurs in themoth just described. When the membranous covering,which is thinner but more firm and elastic thanIndian paper, has been carefully removed, — selectingfor this operation an advanced period of the chrysalis,—the several members of the butterfly may be seenSTRUCTURE OP VVVM.folded up in the manner we have here indicated.The wines are still covered with moisture, so that thepowdery down which clothes them is scarcely visible,and they have not yet assumed their beautiful coloursand elegant markings, but are of a dusky ash-grey.The legs, however, are already so firm that the insectmoves them about, and also coils up its sucker, andplays its antennae. It is worthy of remark, that thea,under side of the chrysalis of the peacock butterfly, b, thewings and antennae traced out from the same, c, the perfect insect(Fa»e«o /o) fully developed.29» INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.membrane which covers the more prominently exposedparts, such as the legs, is considerably thicker than theother portions *. Our description will be renderedmore intelligible by the preceding figures.It will obviously appear from these details, in whatmanner superficial observations led to the fancy ofone insect being on a sudden miraculously metamorphosedor transmuted into another. Those, indeed,who persuaded themselves that a morsel of taintedbeef, or a bit of rotten wood, could, by some inexplicablechemistry, grow into limbs, wings, eyes, and allthe other parts of an insect, with its admirable organizationof muscles, nerves, and digestive apparatus,had no difficulty to overcome in believing that thegreen pulpy mass of a chrysalis could be transmutedinto the light airy wings of a butterfly: — nay, they consideredthe matter as proved, and admired the supposedmetamorphosis, without giving themselves thetrouble of investigating whether it was real or possiblet- Accurate observation, founded on the principlesof the Baroniae philosophy, gradually put toflight the reveries of those who (to use the words ofHarvey) " philosophize by traduction, who are not awhit wiser than the inanimate books through whichthey come at their ill-digested notions;}:." Yet thisdistinguished physiologist, though he could so expresshimself, occasionally struck upon the very sand-bankof which he here warns us to take care ; perhaps inconsequenceof a cause shrewdly and profoundlyassigned for philosophical errors by Des Cartes, inhis Essay on Method, who says, " I was always ofopinion, that more truth is to be found in thosereasonings which men make use of in the commonaffairs of life, whose bad success may prove a kind ofpunishment for their reasoning ill, than those whichSwammerdam, vol. ii. p. 17.t Reaumur, vol. i. p. 350. J Harvey, De Gen. An., £xer. 44.STRUCTURE OP PUP-S. 297some idle doctor, cooped up in his study, has invented,that conduce nothing to the ease and happinessof life, and from which he expects no other advantageunless that of reaping so much the greaterharvest of empty glory from his arguments ; as theycontain less of truth and common sense, on accountof the extraordinary strength of genius and applicationrequisite to give an imposing air to such absurdities."It was the decided opinion of Swammerdam thatthe several transformations of insects, particularly thechange from the egg to the caterpillar, and from thepupa to the perfect insect, are chiefly effected by theevaporation of the superabundant fluids. Thus hetells us that the nit, or egg of the louse peniculushwnanus)^ is nothing more than the insect itself,which only requires the evaporation of the surroundingmoisture and the casting of the old skin, to bringit to its perfect form *. It is not a little surprisingthat so very accurate a naturalist should never havethought of investigating the truth of such an opinionby experiment. That he neglected this precaution, isan instance, among thousands more, of the imperfectionof human studies ; for his very first trial wouldhave demonstrated the error, which pervades everypage of his great work. He was evidently misledinto the opinion by perceiving how fluid the contentsof an egg or of a pupa are when opened previous totheir change, and how dry the insect is upon itsevolution.It is much more surprising to find Kirby andSpence repeating the same, or nearly the same opinion,at the very time, too, when they are in the actof quoting the experiments of Reaumur, by which itis refuted, though the great experimenter himself misinterpretedthem. '* If you open a pupa," say they,^ Swammerdanij passim.298 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.*' soon after its assumption of that state, you will findits interior filled with a milky fluid, in the midst ofwhich the rudiments of its future limbs and organs,themselves almost as fluid, swim. Now the end tobe accomplished during the pupa's existence is, thegradual evaporation of the watery parts of this fluid,and the development of the organs of the enclosedanimal by the absorption and assimilation of the residuum."The evaporation, however, is so veryinconsiderable, that it is evidently only of secondaryconsequence.When the great quantity of fluid in the body of thechrysalis is taken into consideration, we must inferthat if it were evaporated to any extent, the insectwould be reduced to a mere shadow. We are disposed,therefore, to agree with Reaumur in thinkingit more probable that the fluids of pupae becomeunited to the more solid parts, in the same wayas the blood and lymph in our own bodies gotothe extension or to the repair of our bones andmuscles. To put this to the test of experiment,Reaumur, in the month of July, accurately weighedtwo chrysalides the instant they were disencumberedof the sloughs of the larvae. The lightest weighed atrifle less than 18, and the heavier a trifle less than19 grains. Putting them aside separately, with anote of their respective weights, he re-weighed themevery two or three days for sixteen days successively,that is, till they were transformed into perfect insects.On the last day, the lighter weighed more than 17,and the heavier more than 18 grains ; consequentlythe fluid evaporated during this period did not amountto a grain, perhaps not to more than f of a grain. Onweighing the insects themselves which issued fromthese pupa, together with the cast slough, the weightwas not sensibly different. The fluid, therefore,Introdd. iii. 262.STRUCTURE OF PUP.E. 299which escapes by what is termed insensible perspiration,is not so great as might have been supposed.To ascertain what it was, Reaumur enclosed severalchrysalides, whose envelope seemed very dry, in separateglass tubes, terminating at one end in a bulb,and at the other hermetically sealed. He kept thesein a temperature of fi'om 14° to 15° of his ownthermometer, corresponding to 63° — 65° Fahr. ; andin a few days minute drops of water appeared on thesides of the tube, which rolled down into the bulbin form of a larger drop — not " eight or ten largedrops," as Ku-by and Spence, by some oversight,have stated *.It would certainly be considered a strange anduntenable doctrine to maintain that it is the evaporationproduced fi'om the egg by the heat of the incubatingmother, which causes the development ofthe chick in the egg ; yet this is precisely similar towhat is maintained by Swammerdam, Kirby, andSpence, — the chief difference being, as Reaumur observes,that the chick has obvious organs for appropriatingthe nutriment contained in the egg, while theinsect in the pupa is surrounded, and, as it were,bathed by the fluid, whose passage into the interiorvessels we cannot trace by the eye f. That they dofind their way thither, the experiments above recordedunanswerably demonstrate.The pupa of insects, though they, in most instances,cease from locomotion, and appear torpid,are by no means really so ; for it would be no lessincorrect to look upon them in such a light, than toconsider an ox torpid when reclining in a meadow toruminate and digest the grass he had just been de-reaumur,vol. i. p. 373, " Une goutte beaucoup plus grosse j'and Kirby and Spence, Intro, iii, 262,t Mem. Tole i> p. 362; &c.INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.pouring. This is, in fact, the nearest analogy whichoccurs to us among the other classes of animals ;for the pupa, though it does not chew the cud likethe ox, assuredly rests for the purpose of digesting or(if the term be preferred) of assimilating the cruderfluids stored up by the caterpillar, and forming orperfecting therefrom the organs and members of themature insect *.Some pupae have a slight motion, particularly ofthe lower parts of the body, and a few others differlittle from the perfect insect, continuing to move andfeed ; but the greater number remain apparently motionless.That they have internal though imperceptiblemotions, however, is proved by their possessingsimilar organs of respiration with caterpillars andperfect insects. We have adverted, in a former page,to the eighteen spiracles which communicate withthe double windpipe of caterpillars, and the same apparatusis always found in chrysalides, situated onthe sides of the abdominal rings. This we thinkmight have convinced such distinguished observersas Lyonnet andMuschenbrok, that the most quiescentpupae could not exist without breathing.a, Chrysalis of Goneptery.v Rhamni. b, pupa of Maria fascelina,c, pupa of Sphinx Ligustri.J. R.STRUCTURE OP PUPJi:. 301Reaumur and De Geer proved this position bynumerous experiments. When a chrysalis, for instance,is suspended by a thread and immersed in oilup to the tip of the wing-cases, it does not seem tobe much injured, and the perfect insect is disclosedin due time. If respiration, therefore, be essential tothe life of the chrysalis, it appears as if it could existwith at least the greater number of its spiracles obstructed; but this does not happen with a chrysalisjust formed, which always dies. By immersing thewhole chrysalis in oil, it is certainly killed ; and evenby immersing its head downwards as far as the firstpair of spiracles situated near the head. This seems toindicate accordingly that this first pair is more essentialto the insect than all the rest ; and in other experimentsit is also found to emit a much greaterquantity of air by this first pair. It seems of muchimportance in such experiments to attend to the ageof the pupa ; for when near the change the functionof respiration is carried on more feebly, and at lengthnearly ceases.Besides the decisive experiments of immersion inoil, Reaumur placed pupae of various species in theexhausted receiver of an air-pump, and at everyfresh stroke of the piston their bodies both bulgedout and became elongated : because, as he inferred,the envelope is not pervious to the air contained inthe body, and the spiracles do not allow of its escapewith sufficient rapidity to keep pace with the exhaustionof the receiver ; — contrary to what happenswhen caterpillars are subjected to the same circumstances.Varying his experiments, he placed in theexhausted receiver a vessel containing water deprivedof its air, and in this plunged a chrysalis, keepingit immersed by means of a weight attached by athread. At the two or three first strokes of the piston,bubbles of air appeared at each of the spiracles,2 DINSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.issuing by jets, and a few smaller bubbles over thebody of the chrysalis, probably from not taking theprecaution afterwards suggested by Bonnet, ofmoistening it before immersion*.Upon examining the structure of the spiracles,M. Reaumur farther discovered that their mouths arefurnished with ciliary valves, which are shut whenthe pupa is plunged into water, but opened againwhen it is taken out. This circumstance accountsfor the swelling of the body under the exhaustedreceiver of the air-pump, for it may be supposed theanimal would closely shut the valves when it felt theair forcibly extracted from its body. It is remarkable,however, that though the shutting of the valves preventsthe entrance of water, it has not the power ofexcluding oil ; because, as Reaumur conjectures,it is not in the ordinary course of its nature exposedto such an accident, and therefore Providence madeno provision for its. It may be recollected that thelarvae of the cheese-fly and of blow-flies are providedwith a sort of valve with which they can cover suchof their spiracles as become immersed in any greasymatter |.a bSpiracles of pupae, a, the valve open ; h, the same shut.In the aquatic pupa of the ringed China-markmoth {Hydrocampa stratiotata, Stephens) De GeerBonnet, OEuvres, vol. iii., p. 39, &c. | Mem. i, 407, &c.X see page 265,STRUCTURE OP PUPiE. 303found three pairs of conspicuous spiracles, occupyingthe second, third, and fourth rings, and placed oncylindrical tubes. It is worthy of remark, that thecaterpillar spins a double cocoon, the outer of a thin,and the inner of a close texture ; and when the respiratorygills of the larva are cast off with the oldskin, the insect knows how to surround itself with anatmosphere of air in the midst of the water where itresides, the inner cocoon being impervious tomoisture. How it contrives to renew this air whenvitiated is not yet known, but that it derives it fromthe water is proved by its always dying if removedinto the air *.We have formerly described the beautiful apparatusfor respiration in the larvae of the gnat family{Culicidm, Latr.) t ; but this is rivalled by the organsdestined for the same purpose in their pupae, whichorgans are situated in the head instead of the tail. Thepupa, in the same way, changes its position in the water,swimming with its head upwards instead of downwardsas before. To enable it to maintain this position,the pupa is farther provided with a fin-tail, like a fish,by which it can move itself at pleasure in the water.It no longer, indeed, requires to take food, but air isindispensable to it ; and water being so unstable,were the pupa incapable of swimming, it would seldomescape being drowned. Its respiratory apparatusconsists of two tubes, situated behind the head,on what may be called the shoulders. They are of afunnel shape, and project very sensibly, though weshould not be disposed to compare them, as Reaumurdoes, to asses' ears. The transparency of this puparenders it easy to see in it the parts of the gnat.An apparently more simple, though no less remarkable,apparatus for respiration, was observed byReaumur in the pupa of a small crane-fly (TitularDeGeer, Mem. i. 531. f See page 156.2 D 2INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.). This consisted in a single tube, two orthree times longer than the body of the pupa, and asfine as a hair. The point of this hair always remainsabove or at the surface of the water, for the purposeof carrying on respiration, till the perfect fly is readyto emerge from the water.a, Tipula,-h, telescopic-tailed pupa of the same.c, front view of the pupa of the common gnat (^Culexpipiens),d, side view of the same.In another genus of this family the external organsof respiration are very elegant in form, resemblingmore the fibrillae of minute aquatic mosses {Con-fervoidece) than the appendages of an animal. Thelarva of this insect is well known to anglers, underthe name of the blood worm; though we do not findit mentioned by Walton, Brookes, Best, Sir H. Davy,or any of the other writers upon angling. It isusually less than half an inch long, flat, and jointedlike the wire worm, with several small appendages atthe tail, which appear to be breathing-tubes, of theSTRUCTURE OP Pup.nature of sills ; for the larva lives under water instreams and ditches, enclosed for the most part in atribe of earth. It is of a fine crimson colour, theorifi^in of its popular name ; but it becomes moredark and opaque in the pupa state.The appendages which are thrown off by the larvaa, Chironomus plumosus. h, larva [of the same, called theblood worm, c d, pup3e of the same, magnified to shew theirplumed spiracles.2d330& INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.are replaced by a brush-like bunch of bristles, thepoints of which, it is probable, have the power ofextracting air from the water ; and a similar coronetis produced on each side of the head, disposed in afive-rayed star of plumes. It is not a little remarkable,that a double envelope for the feet projectsfrom each side of the breast, a circumstance whichseems peculiar to this insect. In a few days it istransformed into a pretty gnat, with feathered antennae(Chironomus plumosiis, Meigen).Such are a few examples of the beautiful contrivancesfor carrying on the important process ofrespiration in that stage of life during which fewinsects take any food. Considering the great difficultiespresented to us in the investigation of thissubject, we may well wonder that experiments haveelucidated and proved so many facts. We are stillignorant, however, of the nature of the effects producedby respiration on the fluids of pupae.Chapter XIII,Transformation of Papa into perfect Insects.The period which pupae require to come to maturityseems to depend mainly on temperature and size,though there are several other causes at work apparentlyinscrutable to human research. Those whoadopt, after Swammerdam, the untenable theory ofevaporation being; all that is requisite to bring aninsect to maturity, tell us that these two circumstanceswill account for all the phenomena; but we shallimmediately have to record several curious facts quiteat variance with such a conclusion. *' It is plain,"say Kirby and Spence, " that this necessary transpiration,other circumstances being alike, must takeplace sooner in a small than in a large pupa. Sincethe more speedy or more tardy evaporation of fluidsdepends upon their exposure to a greater or lessdegree of heat, we might, a priori conclude thatpupa? exposed to a high temperature would soonerattain maturity, even though larger in bulk, thanothers exposed to a low one : and this is the fact.The pupa of a large moth, which has assumed thatstate in the early part of summer, will often disclosethe perfect insect in twelve or fourteen days ; whilethat of an ichneumon, not one-hundredth part of itssize, that did not enter this state till late in autumn,will not appear as a fly for seven or eight months.But this is not the whole. The very same insect,according as it has become a pupa at an earlier or alater period of the year, will at one time live but308 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.a few weeks, at another several months in thatstate *."But though we admit all these facts, which areknown to every naturalist, and too well ascertainedto be denied, we submit that the inference of evaporationbeing the exclusive effect, is, upon the whole,inadmissible. Reaumur, though he does not absolutelystate his belief in such an inference, shows byhis reasoning that he was strongly disposed to adoptnotions closely bordering upon it The theoreticaldoctrine, it may be perceived, takes for granted thatevaporation is the only result of heat ; overlookingthe no less obvious effect of expansion, besidesthe disposition it produces in chemical principles tocombine or be decomposed. But these are onlysome of its inanimate results, which would occurupon material objects independently of life ; whereasin living bodies, what may be called chemical changesare frequently very different from what can be effectedout of the living body, and consequently we cannottrace all the effects produced by heat in the two greatinternal processes of secretion and consolidation.In detailing, therefore, the interesting experimentsof Reaumur on pupae, which he subjected to differentdegrees of heat and cold, we shall not adopt his inferencesrespecting evaporation. The accuracy ofthe experiments themselves is unquestionable.Reasoning from some of the facts above stated,Reaumur thought it might be possible to hasten orretard the exclusion of insects from their pupae, inthe same way as some flowers are forced to blowearly, and others kept back from blowing at their dueseason ; and he commenced a series of experiments toascertain the facts. In January, 1734, he accordinglyplaced a great number of the chrysalides of mothsand butterflies of various species in one of the royalIntr. iii. 263.EXPERIMENTS ON INSECTS. 309hot-houses at Paris. His success was equal to hisexpectations, for the insects appeared in the middleof winter, some in ten or twelve days, and others infrom three to six weeks from the time of their removalinto a warmer atmosphere. Five or six days, indeed,seemed to be equal to a month of natural temperature.A week was even equal to a month for the chrysalideswhich naturally required the temperature of midsummerto bring them to maturity; because the artificialtemperature was both high and more uniform,particularly during the night. The butterflies andmoths thus forced into premature appearance, wereequally full grown, healthy and lively, with thoseproduced in the usual way ; and the females depositedtheir eggs and soon afterwards died, as they alwaysdo in summer in the open fields. The life of theseinsects was, therefore, shortened by some months.The following November, Reaumur tried a similarexperiment, which was consequently begun twomonths earlier than the former ; and the insects werealso evolved proportionally sooner. Those, for example,which ought naturally to have appeared inMay, he obtained in December. In butterflies whichhave a double brood, such experiments become stillmore interesting to the physiologist. The beautifulswallow-tailed butterfly papilio Macedon) is one ofthose which are double brooded, the first going intochrysalis in July, and the butterfly appearing inthirteen days ; — the second, in the autumn, and thebutterfly not appearing till the succeeding June. Butif placed in an artificial temperature of due warmth,and properly regulated, the second brood will appearin about the same time as the first.Reaumur tried some experiments, still more ingenious,with chrysalides, which were suggested by theeffects produced by birds sitting upon their eggs inorder to hatch them. He concluded, that if chry-310 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.slides were placed under a sitting bird, they wouldbe matured in a similar way as he had found themto be in the green-house. The difficulty was to preventthem from being bruised and crushed by thebird, as they are much softer and more easily injuredthan eggs. This he obviated by enclosing them inhollow glass balls about the size of a hen's egg, whichat the same time as readily deceived the bird as a pieceof chalk passes with the eggs set to hatch under a hen.The chrysalides which he first tried were those of thesmall tortoiseshell butterfly (Vanessa Article), eightof which, attached to square pieces of paper, were suspendedwithin the glass egg as near to each other aspossible, and placed under a hen on the 22d of June.The aperture of the glass egg was closed, but in sucha manner as to leave a communication with the externalair. The effect of the heat manifested itselfthe first day, in the moisture exhaled from the chrysalides,all the interior of the glass being covered withminute drops of water, which he allowed to evaporateby unstopping the glass, lest the moisture might spoilhis experiment. When it was dry, he replaced itunder the hen, and he observed no moisture exhaledon the following days, the chief transpiration havingoccurred in the first twenty-four hours. In aboutfour days the first butterfly that, perhaps, was everhatched under a hen made its appearance. He foundfour more evolved next morning, and one on the succeedingday, the 28th of June. Those of the samebrood which were contained in a nurse-box placed inawindow, did not appear before the 5th, and somenot before the 8th of July, which was ten or twelvedays later. Two out of eight of the chrysalides whichhad been enclosed in the glass egg died. He madea similar experiment with the same success uponseveral chrysalides of the peacock butterfly (Vanessa/o). With the pupae also of two winged flies andEXPERIMENTS ON INSECTS. 311Other insects, he tried all the preceding experimentswith very similar results. The heat communicated tothe glass egg was very considerable, amounting to31° or 32° of Reaumur's thermometer *, or about 100°Fahr. It was not surprising, therefore, that some ofthe pupae perished: we think it more wonderful thatany of them survived.Reaumur suggests, from these experiments, thatthose who are curious in obtaining the productionsof summer during winter, may add to the gaietyof their forced flowers, by forcing a brood of butterfliesinto life to sport amongst them ; and he recordsan instance in which a friend of his at Strasbourg inthis way hatched, by means of a stove, all the pupaehe could obtain. We have in several instances succeededin obtaining butterflies in winter, by keepingchrysalides under glasses on a mantel-piece in a roomwith a constant fire ; but during the winter of 1829-30,all which were thus kept died, probably from the firesrequired by the unusual severity of the season beingtoo great for them. Several, on the other hand,which we found on walls, and which had been exposedto all the rigours of the winter, were disclosedin due time in a perfect state.Having thus ascertained that heat produced theeffects which he had anticipated, Reaumur next tried anopposite series of experiments, by placing chrysalisin diminished temperatures. He accordingly enclosedin nurse-boxes a number of pupae formed inAugust 1733, and in the following January placedthem in a coal-cellar : their natural period of appearingin the perfect state being July 1734. During thehot months of this year he went from time to time tosee whether these pupae indicated an approachingchange, but they remained in their original stateduring July and August, and continued so till the suchReaumur, Mem. vol. ii, p. 17,312 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.feeding' August, 173 5, at the time he was writing thisaccount, when he found them still living and healthy,but not transformed into perfect insects. We are notaware whether he ever published the termination ofthe experiment.In another instance, he placed in a coal-cellar thepupae of the emperor moth (Saturnian pannonia), abouta fortnight or three weeks before the usual time oftheir evolution ; and they were in consequence retardedto five or six weeks later than those of the samebrood which he had kept in his cabinet. The chrysalidesof the large garden white butterfly portiaBrassicee), when placed in the cellar in January,appeared two months later than those in the temperatureof the atmosphere. A still more decisiveexperiment was made with the chrysalides of thesmall tortoiseshell butterfly {{Vanessa Article), whichrequire fourteen days of summer heat to maturethem, and which, when hatched under a hen, hadappeared in four days. Some of these he placed inthe cellar the 12th of June, and they did not appeartill the 2d and 3d of August, — about six weeks laterthan in their natural temperature.Reaumur, still haunted by the notion of the exhalationof moisture being the only cause of thedevelopment of chrysalides, tried upon them similaringenious experiments to those which he had successfullymade upon eggs, by varnishing them in order toprevent the escape of moisture. His experimentsupon varnishing eggs have led to a most useful discovery,now extensively acted upon in practice forthe preservation of eggs all over Europe. Thoseupon chrysalides, however, were not conducted withthe same degree of acute accuracy. To prevent thechrysalides from coming to maturity at the usualtime, by preventing the exhalation of their moisture,he conceived it would be sufficient to varnish overEXPERIMENTS ON INSECTS. 313the envelope, taking care to leave the respiratoryspiracles unobstructed. But it is most obvious, thatthe greater part of all the evaporation which occursmust be through the spiracles, in the same way as alarge proportion of the moisture of the human bodypasses oft* by the breath. The result, however, ofReaumur's experiments with the varnished chrysalideswas, that they were developed several weeks laterthan when placed in their natural circumstances,—which proves, we think, that the envelope has considerableinfluence on the transformation process goingon in the interior, even were we to leave the transpirationof moisture out of the question*.We may remark, that the results of these experimentsafford interesting illustrations of the torpidityof both the larger animals and of plants. In theUnited States of America, for example, many speciesof animals which become torpid in Pennsylvania, andother more northern parts of the country, remainlively in the Carolinas, and other southern parts ofthe continent t. Mr. Gough found that the dormousemay be prevented from becoming torpid by supplyingit plentifully with food ; and Dr. Reeve, of Norwich,observed the same circumstance in a hedge-hog,which being kept warm and well fed, showed no dispositionto become torpid even during severe weatherJ. Pallas had a tame marmot, also, which havingbecome very fat during the summer, showed no dispositionto torpidity, though exposed to a temperaturewhich threw the whole species into a torpidstate in that part of Siberia. In the vegetable kingdom,again, it is a very common phenomenon to seeplants revive after exposure to severe frosts. Mr.Reaumur, Mem. vol. ii. p. 56.•}■ Barton, in Amer. Phil. Trans, vol. iv.J Reeve on Torpidity, p. 73.2 E314 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.Gough made some ingenious experiments in proof ofthis upon several plants, such as the small duck'smeat (JLemna mi?ior)y and the viviparous fescuegrass (Festus vivipara), which led to the conclusionthat they could accommodate themselves withoutperishing to the vicissitudes of variable situations*.We observed a no less marked instance than thoserecorded by Mr. Gough, in a plant of the geranium,named Prince Leopold (Pelargonium marathon.Sweet), the whole of whose leaves were so hardfrozen as to break rather than bend. We immersedthe whole of the plant in cold water, a few degreesabove freezing, till it was thawed, and it recoveredso completely, that not a single frosted spot appearedon any of the leaves f.Several extraordinary facts relating to insectsprove that temperature alone will not account for thevariations of the periods of their disclosure. It isstated by Marshal, that Mr. Jones of Chelsea, in oneof his excursions, caught a female of the spottedmuslin moth (J)iaphora medical Stephens), whichlaid a number of eggs, and he fed thirty-six of thecaterpillars hatched from these, till they spun theircocoons and became pupae. At the usual seasononly a third of these produced moths, and he concludedthe rest were dead : but, to his utter astonishment,twelve more made their appearance the secondseason ; and the remaining twelve were evolved thethird season, as perfect and healthy as those whichhad been first produced |.The same extraordinary fact has been observed inthe pupae of the small egger-moth {Eriogaster lu"nostrils), the greater number of those which spin upin summer appearing in the succeeding February ;Manchester Trans-j- J. R.X Inn. Trans, vol. x, p. 402,EXPERIMENTS ON INSECTS, 315but others of them requiring two, three, and evenfour years*. Meinecken kept several pupse of theemperor-moth {Saturnia pannonia) through the winterin a room heated daily by a stove, and others in a coldchamber. Some of both these appeared in Marchandothers, though evidently healthy, had not appearedin July t.It is certain, however, that this is not the naturalorder of things, even in this species ; for we havereared several broods of the species respecting whichthe preceding facts are recorded, without havingobserved them. In a large brood of the small egger{Eriogaster lanestris) five or six of the cocoons didnot produce insects, and we consequently anticipatedtheir appearance next year, but we have now keptthem five years without any change, and thereforeconclude they are dead. The inference deduced,however, from the facts observed, is very plausible,namely, that it is intended by Providence to preservethe species : for were all the individuals of a brood toappear in the same season, it might happen to be soun genial, particularly in the early months of spring,as to destroy them before they could deposit theireggs ; whereas, by their appearing in different seasons,some of them have the chance of coming forth inmild weather §. Yet, perhaps, this may be an unnecessarythough ingenious refining upon a final cause rfor even in the most ungenial spring weather, therealways occur some fine days, and, further, a brood ofinsects does not all appear on one day, but more usuallyon many successive days, as may be seen by the experimentsof Reaumur recorded at the beginning of thisScribe, Journ. i,, vol. iii. p. 222 ; and Haworth, Lepidopt.Brit., vol.i. p. 125.t Nature., vol. viii. p. 143. + J. R.§ Kirby and Spence, vol, iii. p. 267.2 E 2316 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.chapter. In the instance of the clear underwing (Egeriaasiliformis, Stephens), we discovered a brood ofabove a dozen of the pupae in the trunk of a black poplar;but though, from feeding; on the Mood of the tree,the caterpillars must have been well protected from thevicissitudes of the seasons, there was nearly a monthbetween the appearance of the first and the last*.This, indeed, is so very common an occurrence thatit is almost superfluous to mention particular instances.The moths just mentioned, we may remark, wereonly observed to appear about noon ; and manyother insects are known to emerge from the pupaonly at one particular time of the day, similar to theflowers, such as the goat's-beard (Tragopogon), andthe night-flowering cereus cactus grandiflorus)^which only blow at particular hours. Some insectsare produced at sunrise, others at noon, and othersagain only at night. Several species are extremelyregular in their appearance, such as the orange-tipbutterfly {Pojitia Carabines), which is usually seenabout the end of April, varying but few days in thecourse of many years. The various species, also, ofMay-flies (Ephemera) are confined in their appearanceto two or three days ; and those observed byReaumur appear at no other time than betweeneight or ten in the evening. Those which we noticedon the Rhine in August, 1829, began toappear at sunset, and before morning were all dead.In the great square at Wiesbaden, their bodies wereso thickly strewn about that it seemed as if a showerof snow had fallen during the night, their wingsbeing white, and about the size of a broad snowflakef.The pupse of these May-flies, when about to .R. '\ J. R.MODES OF EMERGING PROM PUPiE. 31^tergo their transformation, emerge from their subaqueousgalleries and come to the surface of thewater. As they must keep their wings dry, the processwould appear to be one of considerable difficulty; yet an observer may remark that they performit with the utmost ease. In the instance of the gnat,this process of emerging from the water is still moreconspicuous on account of the difference of form inthe pupa and the fly.About eight or ten days after the larva of a gnat istransformed into a pupa, it prepares, generally towardsnoon, for emerging into the air, raising itselfup to the surface so as to elevate its shoulders justabove the level of the water. It has scarcely got intothis position for an instant, when, by swelling thepart of its body above water, the skin cracks betweenthe two breathing tubes, and immediately the head ofthe gnat makes its appearance through the rent.The shoulders instantly follow, enlarging the breachso as to render the extrication of the body comparativelyeasy. The most important and indeed indispensablepart of the mechanism, is the maintainingof its upright position so as not to get wetted, whichwould spoil its wings and prevent it fi'om flying. Itschief support is the rugosity of the envelope which itis throwing off, and which now serves it as a life-boattill it gets its wings set at liberty and trimmed forflight. The body of the insect serves this little boatfor a mast, which is raised in a manner similar tomoveable masts in lighters constructed for passingunder a bridge, with this difference, that thegnat raises its body in an upright direction from thefirst. *' When the naturalist," says Reaumur, " observeshow deep the prow of the tiny boat dips intothe water, he becomes anxious for the fate of thelittle mariner, particularly if a breeze ripples the2 E 3318 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.surface, for the least agitation of the air will waft itrapidly along", since its body performs the duty of asail as well as of a mast : but as it bears a muchgreater proportion to the little bark than the largestsail does to a ship, it appears in great danger ofbeing upset ; and once laid on its side, all is over.I have sometimes seen the surface of the watercovered with the bodies of gnats which had perishedin this way ; but for the most part all terminatesfavourably, and the danger is instantly overt'*When the gnat has extricated itself all but the tail,it first stretches out its two fore-legs t, and then themiddle pair, bending them down to feel for thewater, upon which it is able to walk as upon dryland, the only aquatic faculty which it retains afterhaving winged its way above the element where itThe gnat {Culex pipes) escaping from the pupa.Mem., vol, iv. p. 613.f Kirkland Spence, by mistake, say it "draws" these "out oftheir cases' vol. ill. p. 288.MODES OF EMERGING FROM VVVM, 319spent the first stages of its existence. *' It leaves,'says Swammerdam, " its cast skin on the waterwhere it insensibly decays." Reaumur doubtswhether Swammerdam ever actually saw this interestingtransformation. We have seen it twice only.The beautiful pupa formed from the blood worm,as before described, proceeds in its transformationmuch in the same way as the common gnat. Buthow, it may be asked, can the insect raise itsshoulders above the surface of the water, than whichit is specifically heavier, and suspend itself therewithout motion? " By a most singular and beautifulcontrivance, which," says Kirby, " I shall explain,the more particularly because it has escapedReaumur, and, as far as I know, all other entomologicalobservers. The middle of the back of thethorax has the property of repelling water, apparentlyfrom being covered with some oily secretion.Hence, as soon as the pupa has once forced thispart of its body above the surface, the water is seento retreat from it on all sides, leaving an oval spacein the disk, which is quite dry. Now though thespecific gravity of the pupa is greater than that ofwater, it is but so very slightly greater, that the mereattraction of the air to the dry part of the thorax,when once exposed to it, is sufficient to retain it atthe surface ; just as a small dry needle swims undersimilar circumstances. That this is a true solutionof the phenomenon, I am convinced by the result ofseveral experiments. If, when the pupa is suspendedat the surface, a drop of water be let fallupon the dry portion of the thorax, it instantly sinksto the bottom t, the thorax, which belongs to theheaviest half, being the lowest ; and if the pupa bePart i. p. 156.f Rut, if so, we may ask what has become of the power of thethorax to repel water .'* J. R.320 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.again brought to the surface, so that the fluid isrepelled from its disk, it remains there, withouteffort, as before. Just before the exclusion of thefly (Chironomus plumosus, Meigen), the dry partof the thorax is seen to split in the middle. Theair enters, and forms a brilliant stratum, resemblingquicksilver, between the body of the insect and it'spuparium ; and the former pushing forth its headand fore-legs, like the gnat, rests the latter upon thewater, and in a few seconds extricates itself whollyfrom its envelope."The grubs of several of the four-winged waterflies {PhryganidcB, Stephens), popularly calledcase worms and caddis worms, construct a remarkableapparatus for protecting the pupa during itsstate of inactivity and helplessness. So long as itremains in the grub state it can withdraw itself withinits case of shells, stones, or reed-stems ; but as soon asit feels its change approaching, it contrives additionalsecurity. It weaves, for this purpose, at the entranceof its gallery, a grating of its singular silk, whichhardens in water and remains indissoluble, as wasfirst observed by Vallisnieri. The strong threadsare made to cross each other, forming a smallthickish circular plate of brown silk, which becomesas hard as gum, fitting exactly into the opening,and placed a little within the margin. One of thesegratings (described by De Geer) is pierced all overwith holes, disposed in concentric circles, separatedby ridges running from the centre to the circumference,though not quite so regularly as the spokesof a wheel. Other ridges, again, are made to traversethe concentric rays, following the course of thecircles of holes, in such a manner as to form compartments,each having a hole in its centre t- Reaumurfound that these holes were for the purpose ofIntr., iii. p. 290. f De Geer, Mem., vol. ii. p. ,519—45.MODES OF EMERGING FROM PUP.E.breathing, by admitting; a current of fresh water,effected, no doubt, by the spiracles of the pupa ; andhe actually saw the grate-work in alternate motionfrom convex to concave, as the water passed outand in.Our motive, however, for introducing a notice ofthese structures is for the purpose of explaining thecontrivance by which the pupa makes its exit throughthe grating. To effect this, it is provided with a pairof curved mandibles, which appear to be appliedto no other use, for they are thrown off upon itstransformation into a fly, as was observed by WallisThese facts may be verified by searching forcaddis worms during the early spring months, asmost of them are transformed in the first part of thesummer.^.iZa, Pupa of a case-fly (Phryganea). c d, grate-works of thesame at the openings of the cases, greatly magnified, i, theperfect insect.In the common blow-fly (Musca carrara), andmany of the same family, the exit of the perfectinsect from the pupa case is effected by a very different,but no less admirable contrivance. The headof the perfect fly, it may be remarked, is hard andunyielding ; but in the pupa it is soft, and capable322 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.of great distension. When the insect, therefore,becomes desirous of escaping from its prison, itblows out the extensile part of its head like a bladder,alternately pushing it forward in the form of a muzzle,and swelling it out at the sides in the form of a ball,till it succeeds in rupturing the pupa case. As thisenvelope is too opaque to see the process distinctlyon the outside, it is necessary to open the pupa justbefore its transformation, when the movements becomeobvious. The same mechanism occurs in thepupae of some of the fibrous gall flies (Nephritis,for the purpose of dissevering the woody fibreswhich imprison the insects. In the instance of thethistle gall fly (Nephritis Cardui), Reaumur foundthat those kept in his study often became too rigidfor the insects to force their passage, and aftermaking repeated efforts they gave up the task indespair and died *. In the open air this accident isprevented by the rain moistening the galls. Wehave more than once had occasion to make the sameremark in the woody galls, such as the bedeguar ofthe rose, in which the flies have to gnaw for themselvesa passage, but which they cannot alwayseffect when the galls are kept through the winter inadry room.In another genus of flies, the pupa does notmake use of its head, but turns round and employsits tail to force a passage. This may be observedin the pupa formed fi'om the rat-tailed maggot ofthe common-sewer fly peristaltic tenax, Fabricius),which was observed by Reaumur to push off the lidof its pupa case by means of its tail.The caterpillar of the clear-wing hawk moth(egeria asiliformis, Stephens), before going intopupa, gnaws away the wood of the poplar tree,where it is lodged, till it leaves only a plate of it asReaumur, iv., Mem. 8. f J. R.MODES OF EMERGING FROM PUPiE. 323thin as writing-paper. The head of this pupa beingobtuse, it cannot of course cut through this woodencovering, thin as it is, but can only push against ittill it burst it open, which we have more than onceseen it actually do*. It is enabled to exert considerableforce in this process, by means of the beautifullyserrated structure of its rings, resembling in thisrespect the caterpillars of cossus and other wood-borders.Pupae of Cossus, a, and Egeria, b, shewing the features oftheir rings.Lyonnet justly remarks that in the cossus thereare sharp points upon the head for the purpose ofmaking the first breach, the rest of the body actingas a wedge to tear open the cocoon. Professor Peckhas given a very interesting account of similar proceedingsin the case of the locust moth {Cossus ,Peck). " In the silk moth," he says, " andall others which I have had an opportunity to observe,the chrysalis bursts in the cocoon, and the fluidwhich surrounded the new insect in it escaping at thesame time, so weakens or dissolves the fibre andtexture of the silk, that the moth is able to extricateitself, leaving the chrysalis behind it ; but this isnot the manner in the locust moth. After remainingtill all its parts are fully grown, and it is ready toquit its prison, a certain quantity of exercise is necessaryto break the ligaments which attach the mothJ. R.f See some observations on this doctrine; '' Insect Architecture,"pages 316,317; and 195,324 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.to the shell of the chrysalis, and to loosen the foldsof the abdomen. In taking this exercise, it canonly move the abdomen in various directions; asone side of the rings is moved forward, the hooks inthe serrated lines take hold of the silk and preventtheir sliding back ; the next flexure brings forwardthe opposite side of the rings, which are preventedby the points on that side from slipping back in thesame manner, and the chrysalis is forced out of theslightly-woven extremity of the cocoon, and throughthe silk-lined cavity, till it is protruded for about one-thirdof its length out of the opening in the bark andinto the air."A no less ingenious contrivance for escape wasobserved by Bonnet in one of the leaf-rollers, whichfeeds on the leaves of young ash trees. It rolls up theleaf into a cone, and is transformed into a small pupa,resembling a grain of oats. The chamber which itforms is not only extensive in proportion to the sizeof the insect, but is so very compact, that it does notappear in what manner it is to effect its escape.Within the capacious chamber of the leaf it hangsitself up by two lines, after the manner of a sailor'shammock. But, previous to this, it gnaws a circularpiece half through the leaf, taking care not toinjure the exterior membrane. In order to renderthis little door easy to be found, the caterpillar, as ifforeseeing that the blind pupa could not otherwisediscover it, fixes one of the suspensory threads nearits margin, guided by which the insect makes itsexit with the utmost ease, for the head is uniformlyswung up by the door thread f.A very similar proceeding is recorded of the minutegranary moth tinea arabella), which wehave before mentioned as destructive to grain. ThePeck, quoted by Kirby and Spence.f Bonnet, Oeuvres, vol. ii., p. 207.MODES OP EMERGING FROM PUP.E. 325eggs being laid on the outside of the grain, theentrance of the caterpillar into the interior is notlarger than a pin's point, and of course entirely uselessas a passage for the moth ; but, before its transformationinto the pupa, it shapes out a door in theskin of the grain, so that it may be easily broken openfrom within, while it appears entire on the outside.By pushing it accordingly it at once gives way.A prospective contrivance of the same kind occursin the economy of a caterpillar which lives on thedry pith in the seed heads of the wild teazle (Dipsa-cus sylvestris). The hole by which the newly hatchedcaterpillar enters is so minute, that in some hundredsof teazle heads, containing full-grown ones,we have never been able to detect it ; but its subsequentproceedings are easily traced. From the firstit is not contented with the protection afforded bythe walls of the seed head, but always spins a galleryof thick silk to cover it while feeding, the outside ofwhich is generally covered with its ejectment. Uptothe period of its approaching change, the walls ofthe seed head are left quite entire, as it only eats thedry pith contained in their cavity ; but through theseit would be impossible for the moth to make its way,inasmuch as it is unprovided with mandibles forgnawing. The provident caterpillar, therefore, takescare before its change to cut a circular hole into theteazle at the end of its own silken gallery, throughwhich the nascent moth may find an easy passage.Bonnet gives it farther credit for a piece of ingenuitywhich we have not been able to verify. After cuttingthe hole, he tells us, it carefully fortifies it on the outsideby amassing the fibres and seeds of the plant inaloose manner over the hole, to prevent the intrusionof rapacious insects from without ; and he gives avery minute detail of his discovery of this fortifies326 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.tion*. But we have only to examine the arrangementof the teazle seeds to perceive that he musthave been mistaken. In a dozen specimens novibefore us we find that, besides gnawing through thewall, the insect has eaten about an eighth of an inchinto the seeds themselves and the chaff which surroundsthem, leaving on the outside the extremitiesuntouched, but lining the whole with a slight tissueof silk, — the circumstance, no doubt, which misledBonnet. As these are extremely common in thevicinity of London, almost two-thirds of the seedheads of teazle containing a caterpillar, the proceedingsof the insect may be easily examined t-A similar prospective contrivance occurs in theinstance of a caterpillar which feeds on the cowparsnip heraclea spondyliiim), and makes a circularhole in the stem for the exit of the moth.In all the preceding instances, the pupa is left toeffect its extrication by its own unassisted efforts.But amidst the variety which claims our admirationin the economy of insects, we have to notice proceedingsno less remarkable in the case of thosepupae which require extraneous assistance in theirtransformations. An instance of this is mentionedby Kirby and Spence, on the authority of the Hon.Captain Percy, Ren., who, while he was watchingsome female crane flies fTipvlee oleracece ?J busilyemployed in depositing their eggs amongst the rootsof grass, saw one quitting her pupa case. She hadalready, by her own efforts, got her head, shoulders,and fore-legs disengaged, when two male flies arrivedto assist in her extrication. They immediately laidhold of her pupa case with their anal forceps and hind-legs,while with their fore-legs and mouths theyseemed to push her upwards, moving her backwardsBonnet, Oeuvres, vol. ii., sobs. xix. f J. R.MODES OP EMERGING FROM PUP.E. 327and forwards, and shifting their hold till she wasentirely extricated, when they left her to recover herstrength by herself. " Probably," say our authors,the extreme length of the two pair of hind-legs ofthese animals may render such assistance necessaryfor their extrication." We, however, imaginethat Captain Percy's instance was accidental andanomalous ; for the insect having already extricatedher head, shoulders, and fore-legs, all the difficultieswere surmounted. From the insect being so verycommon, also, the circumstance of such assistance,if it did happen, must be matter of frequent observation; but we have witnessed a considerablenumber of several species of this family undergo thechange without any assistance whatever.The best ascertained case of assistance occursamong ants, and was first observed by the accurateSwedish naturalist De Geer, though the best accountof it is given by the younger Huber, " Thegreater part of the pupae," says he, " are enclosed inatissue spun by themselves before their change ;but they cannot, like other insects, liberate themselvesfrom this covering by effecting an opening in it withtheir teeth. They have scarcely the power of moving; their covering is of too compact a texture, andformed of too strong a silk, to allow of their tearingit without the assistance of the workers. But how dothese indefatigable attendants ascertain the propermoment for this process ? If they possessed the facultyof hearing, we might imagine they knew the fittime, from some noise produced in the interior of theprison by the insects whose development has commenced; but there is no indication favouring thisopinion ; it is probable they have a knowledge of itfrom some slight movements that take place within,which they ascertain through the medium of theirIntr. iii.286. f J.R.2f2328 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.antennae ; for these organs are endowed with a sensibility,of which it would be difficult to form a justidea : whatever it be, they are never deceived.Let us still follow them in that labour in whichare displayed a zeal and attachment that would justlymerit our attention, even were they the real parentsof these pupae ; how much greater then must be ourastonishment, when we consider that they bear nofurther relation to them than that of being born underthe same roof Several males and females lay intheir envelopes in one of the largest cavities of myglazed ant-hill. The labourer-ants assembled togetherand appeared to be in continual motion aroundthem. I noticed three or four mounted upon one ofthese cocoons, endeavouring to open it with theirteeth at that extremity answering to the head of thepupa. They began to thin it by tearing away somethreads of silk where they wished to pierce it, and atlength, by dint of pinching and biting this tissue, soextremely difficult to break, they formed in it a vastnumber of apertures. They afterwards attempted toenlarge these openings, by tearing or drawing awaythe silk ; but these efforts proving ineffectual, theypassed one of their mandibles into the cocoon throughthe apertures they had formed, and by cutting eachthread, one after the other with great patience, atlength effected a passage, of a line in diameter, in thesuperior part of the web. They now uncovered thehead and feet of the prisoner, to which they were desirousof giving liberty, but, before they could effectits release, it was absolutely necessary to enlarge theopening. For this purpose these guardians cut outa portion in the longitudinal direction of the*cocoon,with their teeth alone, employing these instrumentsas we are in the habit of employing a pair of scissors.A considerable degree of agitation prevailed in thispart of the ant-hill. A number of labourer-ants wereMODES OF EMERGING FROM Pup. 329occupied in diseng-aging the winded individual fromits envelope ; they took repose and relieved eachother by turns, evincing great eagerness in secondingtheir companions in the task. To expedite the work,some raised up a little slip cut out in the length ofthe cocoon, whilst others drew the insect gently fromits imprisonment. When the ant was extricated fromits enveloping membrane, it was not, like other insects,capable of enjoying its freedom and takingflight ; it could neither fly, nor walk, nor, withoutdifficulty, stand ; for the body was still confined byanother membrane, from which it could not by itsown exertions disengage itself"In this fresh embarrassment, the labourer-antsdid not forsake it : they removed the satin-like pelliclewhich embraced every part of the body, drewthe antennae gently from their investment, then disengagedthe feet and the wings, and lastly the body,with the abdomen and its peduncle. The insect wasnov in a condition to walk and receive nourishment,for which it appeared there was urgent need. Thefirst attention, therefore, paid it by the guardians wasthat of giving it the food I had placed within theirreach.The ants in every part of the ant-hill were occupiedin giving liberty to the males, females, andyoung labourer-ants, which were still enveloped. Onbeing disencumbered of their coverings, the remnantswere collected and placed aside in one of themost distant lodges of their habitation ; for these insectsobserve the greatest order and regularity.Some species of ants remove these shreds to a distancefrom the ant-hill, others cover the exterior surfaceof their nest with them, or collect them in particularapartments."A very interesting experiment upon this subjectwas tried by Dr. J. R. Johnson, of Bristol. " AmongHuber on Ants, p. 88.2 F 3330 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.those ants I kept in confinement," says he, " I observedthat considerable bustle prevailed when any ofthe pupae were about to quit the cocoon. For themost part two or three stationed themselves onor near each cocoon. From seeing, more thanonce, two engaged in the operation, I placedin a wine-glass, with a little moistened earth,one of the yellow ants {Formica Jiavd)^ withthree or four pupae ; the first object with this littlecreature was that of excavating a chamber for thedeposition of its treasure. The pupae were thenbrought up, and laid on the surface of the earth fromday to day, to receive the sun's warmth. In a fewdays I saw the scattered remnants of one of thecocoons, and the worker, with his assistant, engagedin giving liberty to the remaining ants. I did not,at the time, notice whether the pupae were or werenot capable of effecting their own liberation ; but accordingto the statement of De Geer, the pupa dieswhen neglected by the workers *."The latter circumstance is contradicted by thetestimony of Swammerdam, one of the highestauthorities which could be adduced. The species hedescribes as flesh-coloured, and he was not a littlesurprised that they spun a cocoon like the silk-worm.This web," he says, " was of an oval figure, andwrought with delicate and fine threads about thebody, being of a rusty iron colour, and when I openedit I found a pupa in the interior. I likewise carriedsome of these enclosed pupae to Amsterdam, whichafter some days gnawed their way out of their webs,and produced some male ants : this happened on theeighteenth of Julyt-" It is obvious, therefore, thatat least some species can extricate themselves withoutassistance ; though this seems to be the regularprocess.Notes to Huber, p. 87.t Swammerdam; Biblia Nat., vol. i. p. 130.MODES OP EMERGING FROM Pup. 331We might have been led by analogy to supposethat bees would adopt a similar method of extricatingtheir young ; but observation shovels that they donot, for they break through their cocoon by means oftheir mandibles, at the same time forcing their waythrough the wax that is fastened down above to theweb and bursting it into several jagged pieces, whichthey throw off on all sides. The other bees carrythese broken pieces away, and clear the cells so thoroughlyas to make them quite smooth and even.The male, as well as the queen bees, force their wayalso out of their cells in the same manner as thecommon or working kind, and all undergo the samechange*. But there is one very remarkable differencepeculiar to the royal cocoons, first observed by theelder Huber, which well merits to be mentioned.A hive of bees is so essentially monarchical, thatwhen more queens than one are produced they exhibitmutual and deadly animosity, which leads themto destroy one another. When there are severalroyal pupae, therefore, in a hive, the first transformedattacks the rest and stings them to death ; though, ifthese pupae were enveloped in complete cocoons, thismurder could not be perpetrated ; — for the silk is ofso close a texture, that the sting could not penetrateit ; and if it did, the barbs would stick fast in themeshes, and the royal assailant, unable to retract herweapon, would become the victim of her own fury.In order, therefore, that she may destroy her rivals,it is necessary for the hinder rings to remain uncovered,and on this account it is inferred the royalgrubs spin only imperfect cocoons, open behind, andenveloping only the head, shoulders, and first ring ofthe abdomen.Huber was exceedingly anxious to discover whetherthe royal grubs spun their cocoons imperfect inconsequenceof a particular instinct, or of the greaterSwamraerdam; vol, i. p. 187.332 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.width of the cells preventing: them from stretchingthe thread up to the top. To ascertain this he dislodgedseveral royal grubs about to spin theircocoons, and introduced them into glass cells blownof varying dimensions. " They soon prepared towork," he says, " and commenced by stretching thefore part of the body in a straight line, while theother was bent m a curve, — thus forming an arc ofwhich the sides of the cells afforded two points ofsupport. It next directed the head to such parts ofthe cell as it could reach, and carpeted the surfacewith a thick bed of silk. I remarked that the threadswere not carried from one side to another, whichwould have been impracticable, for the larvae, beingobliged to support themselves, had to keep the posteriorrings curved ; and the free and moveable partof the body was not Ions: enough to admit of themouth reaching the opposite sides. The first experimentsobviated the probability of any particular instinctin the royal larvae, and proved that they spinincomplete cocoons, because they are forced to do soby the figure of their cells. But desirous of evidencestill more direct, I put them into cylindrical glasscells, where I had the satisfaction of seeing themspin complete cocoons in the same manner as thelarvae of workers. In fine, I put plebeian larvae intover)" wide cells, and they left the cocoon open, as isdone by the royal larvae. I also found that royallarvae, when lodged in artificial cells, where they canspin complete cocoons, undergo all their transformationsequally well. Thus the necessity which natureimposes on them of leaving the cocoon open, is noton account of their increment ; nor does it appear tohave any other object than that of exposing them tothe certainty of perishing by the wounds of theirnatural enemy ; — an observation truly new and singular*."Habet on Bees, p. 133.SECT. IV.— PERFECT INSECTS.Chapter XIV.Expansion of the Body and "Wings in Insects newly transformed.The mechanism by which winged insects, as well asbirds, are enabled to support themselves in the air, isone of the most admirable instances of providentialwisdom, to facilitate the locomotion and the distributionof the smaller animals. The great agent employedfor this purpose is air, which is made toserve the double purpose of assisting in the assimilationof nutriment by the supply of oxygen and theremoval of carbon, and of diminishing the weight ofthe body in order to render it buoyant. In birds,the lungs have several openings communicating withcorresponding air-bags or cells which fill the wholeca^^ty of the body from the neck downwards, andinto which the air passes and repassed in the processof breathing. This is not all : the very bones ofbirds are hollowed out with the design of receivingair from the lungs, from which air-pipes are conveyedto the most solid parts of the body, and eveninto the quills and plumelets of the feathers, which arehollow or sponge" for its reception. As all thesehollow parts, as well as the cells, are only open onthe side communicating with the lungs, the birdrequires only to take in a full breath to fill and distendits whole body with air, which, in consequenceof the considerable heat of its body, is rendered muchlighter than the air of the atmosphere. By forcingthis air out of the body again, the weight becomes so334 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.much increased that birds of large size can dart downfrom great heights in the air with astonishing velocity.In insects a similar mechanism occurs, though itis more difficult to trace it, on account of the greatminuteness of the several organs ; but so far as thecircumstances can be observed, they well merit ourattention. The most remarkable of these is theexpansion of the body and wings on the perfectinsect emerging from the pupa case. A verystriking exemplification of this occurs in the transformationof the ant-lion (Myr?neleon formicarium),whose singular stratagems in the grub state are sofamiliar to the readers of books on natural history*.When it is about to change into a pupa it constructsa cocoon of sand, which it lines with a beautifultapestry of silk, the whole being less than half aninch in diameter, the pupa itself, when rolled up,filling only a space of about half this dimension.When it has remained in the cocoon about threeweeks, it breaks through the envelope and emerges tothe outside, as the chrysalides of wood-borers maketheir way to the exterior of a tree to facilitate the exitof the perfect insect ; with this difference, that thenascent myrmeleon-fly makes use of its mandibles tognaw the cocoon. When it has arrived on the outsideit only requires to expand its wings and body tocomplete its transformation. But this is the processmost calculated to excite our admiration ; for thoughit is not on its emergence more than half an inch inlength, it almost instantaneously stretches out to aninch and a quarter, while its wings, which did notexceed the sixth of an inch, acquire an immediateexpansion of nearly three inchesTo the real wonders attending the history of thisremarkable insect, it has been fancifully added, that,as it has cast off the spoils and cumbersome weightSee " Insect Architecture," page 209, &c.EXPANSION OF PERFECT INSECTS.of its first form, so is it likewise divested of its barbarityand ravenous malignity ; but the formidablestructure of its mandibles, as Reaumur justly remarks,evidently disprove this opinion. A lady discoveredthat it would eat fruit, and Reaumur actuallysaw one munch part of a pear; but he thinksthat this is not its natural food*. Its close resemblance,indeed, to the dragon-flies (Libelling),except in being more slow in flight, affords a stronganalogical indication of its carnivorous propensities.a, Myrmeleon formicarium, the fly of the ant lion, b, the headmagnitied to shew the palliser-formed mandibles, c, the pupa.d, the pupa escaping from its cocoon.A still more striking difference of size may beremarked m the pupa and the perfect insect of a lace-wingedfly {Chrysopa Pera, Leach), by no meansuncommon near London, and well known by itsgolden e)'«s and green wings f. The cocoon of thisMem., vol. vi, p. 375. f See page 45.336 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.insect is not bigger than a small pea, while the fly isnearly an inch in length, and the expanse of thewings about two inches.In some aquatic insects this transformation is themore conspicuous from the change of element, thepupa emerging into the dry atmosphere, where the flyis evolved. In the case of the dragon-flies just mentioned,the approaching change is evinced by theincreasing transparency of the pupa, exhibiting thegrowing brilliancy of the large lustrous eyes of the includedinsect, which may be then brought into viewby removing the envelope. At this period it may beseen removing out of the water to a dry place, suchas a grassy bank or the stems of aquatic plants, intowhich it pushes its sharp claws, and remains for ashort time immoveable. By the swelling of theupper part of the body the envelope is soon distendedand burst asunder on the back of the head andshoulders, and, through the opening, first the headand then the legs of the perfect fly make their exit,whilst the empty slough of the legs continues fixedin its place. After this first part of the process isaccomplished, it hangs down its head and rests foraspace, as if exhausted by previous exertion, orrather to allow the newly excluded parts to dry andbecome more firm. It next erects itself, and layinghold of the upper part of the slough with its feet,pulls the parts still enveloped further out, thencreeping forward by degrees, it disengages the entirebody, and again rests for a time immoveable.The wings now begin to expand themselves, andtheir plaits and folds become gradually smooth.The body, also, becomes insensibly larger andlonger, and the limbs acquire their just size and proportions.While the wings are undergoing thisoperation of drying and expanding, the insect takescare to keep them from coming into contact with theEXPANSION OP PERFECT INSECTS. 337A, the dragon fly, beginning to escape from the pupa ; a, the fly ;h, the pupa case. B, the process further advanced ; c, the fly ; d,the pupa case. C, the fly nearly free, and forming an arch ; e, thefly ; /, the pupa case. D, the fly bending back its body, so as notto obstruct the expansion of the wings.2 G338 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.body, by bending itself into the form of a crescent ;for if they were obstructed, whilst wet, they couldnot afterwards be set to rights.All these changes are perfected, according toSwammerdam, by the force of the circulating fluidsand the air, impelled by respiration, a fact of which,we think, there cannot be any doubt. It is veryseldom, however, that we can surprise insects at theprecise moment of their transformation, as it is forthe most part very speedily accomplished, for thewhole of the preceding evolutions are usually completedin ten or fifteen minutes. " It happened bymere chance," says Swammerdam, *' that I observedthem for the first time : one of these vesiclesadhered to a stone-wall in the river Loire, and it wasso softened by the water dashing up against it, that itcould only half perfect its change, so that I took itpartly free and partly yet fixed in the skin. I onceafterwards saw this change in the large kind ofdragon-fly {JEshna 9) which had crept to land outof a small lake, and cast its skin sitting in thegrass."a, newly-hatched blow-fly magnified, shewing the pulpy,crumpled state of the wings, b, the wings dry and fully expanded.Bibl. Nat., vol. i. p. 98.EXPANSION OF PERFECT INSECTS. 339Some species of flies have their wings shortenedvery considerably in the pupa state by zig-zag ortransverse folds ; so that, when newly evolved, itmight be supposed, from their moist and crumpledappearance, that they could never become so fine,gauzy, and translucent, as they are actually seen todo.This will be better understood from the abovefigures than by description.We have taken the preceding examples of expansionof the wings from those insects in which theseare more or less transparent, and consequently thebranching of the tubes (jiervnres) through them ismore obvious then in moths and butterflies, inwhich the wings are covered with feathery scales.It is, however, less rare to see the latter transformedthan the former, from the greater facility of rearingthem, and on that account, it may be proper to takesome notice here of their transformation. Wecannot in this find better guides than Swammerdamand the celebrated Italian anatomist, Malpighi, inhis account of the silk-worm. " At length," saysthe latter, " within four days, the heart dorsal vessel)of the silk-worm continues moving slowly, and thebody growing bigger ; having thrown off the outwardskin like a slough, the pupa appears a newcreature. The throwing ofl* the old and assumingthis new form, is completed in the space of oneminute and ten seconds ; and it is thus done, as Ichanced to see it. The motion of the heart dorsalvessel) is very quick at first, and the whole frame ofthe body appears convulsed ; so that the several circularfolds of the segments emerge, and by thetransverse contraction of the sides, the externalskin is separated from the inner ; hence, uponmaking an effort, and thrusting the body, which nowappears particularly thick towards the head, the skin2 G 2340 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.is driven backward and downward ; and the portionsof the windpipe being separated from their externalproper orifices, are thrown away with the skin whichis then cast off. By this motion, a cleft or openingis made in the back near the head, and through theaperture the body makes its way, the skin being bydegrees drawn back towards the tail. This processis assisted greatly by a yellow kind of ichor whichexudes from the cavities of the skull ; and the pupaappears then free and disengaged.While the insect is making its passage out, theantennae are separated from the body of the pupa,and are torn, as it were, out of two cavities of theskull; and their length, as they become unfolded,occupies the same place which the two muscles of themandibles formerly occupied. The wings, also, andthe legs appear to be circumscribed in their limits ;the wings being drawn from their situation near thefore-legs, and the legs from the lateral parts of theback. But as these unfolded parts are yet mucous,they easily stick to each other, and, insensibly growingdry, they become so closely united that the pupaappears like one entire garment. Now as these partsare peculiar to the moths, and are destined for theiruse, the nature of the moths seems to be to emergesooner from the state of the caterpillar than is commonlybelieved, and also to be earlier implantedin it ; for evidently, in the silk-worm, the beginningsof the wings may be seen under the second andthird ring of the body, before the texture of theweb. The antennae are likewise delineated on theskull, and the web being finished, they have theirown termination; nor will it be improper to supposethat the new kind of life in the pupa is only a maskor veil of the moth, which is already perfect within,the intent of which is, that it should not be struck orEXPANSION OF PERFECT INSECTS. 341destroyed by external injuries, but might grow strong"and ripen."While the little creature remains in this condition,there is produced, as Swammerdam tells us, a violentagitation in its fluids, so that they are drivenfrom the internal vessels through the tubes in thewings, which are likewise supplied with air from thewindpipe. The insect, besides, labours violently withits legs, and all these motions concurring with thegrowth of the wings, it is impossible that the tenderskin which covers it should not at length give way,which it does by bursting in four distinct and regularpieces. When the legs become disengaged theymuch assist in freeing the body and other parts thatare yet bound up ; at the same time, the skin on theback flies open and uncovers the wings and shoulders.The insect, after this, remains for sometime in a stateof rest, with its wings drooping down like wet paper,and its legs fixed in the skin which it has just castoff,together with the lining of the windpipe andbreathing spiracles. This latter circumstance enablesthe insect to take more air into its body, and therebyrenders it the better able to fly, and perform theother functions dependant on a good supply of air.In consequence of this the wings expand so rapidly,that it is by no means easy to trace their unfolding; for in the space of a few minutes, they increasein dimensions about five-fold. Their spots andcolours at the same time, previously so small as tobe scarcely discernible, become proportionally extended,so that what but a few minutes before appearedas a number of confused and indistinct points,acquires many varied beauties of colour and form.From the wings extending themselves so suddenly,their soft wrinkled appearance is, in less than halfMalpighi, De Boyce.2 G 3342 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.an hour, no longer visible, and the insect becomesfitted for flight*.Kirby, in speaking of the swallow-tailed butterfly(Papilio Machaoii), says, " I had the pleasure ofseeing it leave its puparium the 16th of May. Withgreat care I placed it upon my arm, where it keptpacing about for the space of more than an hour ;when all its parts appearing consolidated and developed,and the animal perfect in beauty, I secured it,though not without great reluctance, for my cabinetit being the only living specimen of this fine fly Ihad ever seen. To observe how gradual, and yethow rapid, was the development of the parts andorgans, and particularly of the wings, and the perfectcoming forth of the colour and spots, as the sun gavevigour to it, was a most interesting spectacle. Atfirst, it was unable to elevate or even move its wings ;but in proportion as the aerial or other fluid wasforced by the motions of its trunk into their nervures,their numerous corrugations and folds graduallyyielded to the action till they had gained their greatestextent, and the film between all the nervures becametense. The ocelli, and spots and bars, which appearedat first as but germs or rudiments of what they wereto be, grew with the growing wing, and shone forthupon its complete expansion in full magnitude andbeauty t."The probable object of the movements which aninsect makes, upon just escaping from the chrysalis,is to impel the fluids that had been compressedduring its confinement, and more particularly air,into the various parts of the expanding body andwings. The wings, it may be remarked, are not, onthe exclusion of the insect, folded up as are the longwings of an earwig (Forficula auricular), but areSwammerdam, ii. 7, &c. f Intr. iii. 293,STRUCTURE OF WINGS. 343of a thick structure and easily expanded. They differ inthis from full-formed wings, which cannot be stretcheda hair's breadth without tearing them ; whereas wehave taken the wing of a butterfly on its emergingfrom the chrysalis, and extended it to four times itsoriginal expansion. That the fluids of the body areat this period impelled into the wings, is proved byan experiment first tried, we believe, by Swimmerson the wings of bees. " The blood in the bee,"he says, " is a limpid fluid, as maybe observed, if alittle part be at this time cut off from the wings ; forthen the fluid exudes from the cut part, appearing, byreason of the extreme smallness of the blood-vessels,under the form of little pellucid globules, which insensiblyand by degrees increase into considerablelittle drops." — " The wings of the bee have likewisemany pulmonary tubes, which, when the nymph iscasting its last skin, have also, together with all theother parts, once more to throw off their exuviae.After this, when these tubes are again distended bythe freshly impelled air, and the air-vessels, whichhave hitherto been contracted, are inflated and distendedwith the same air, it follows that the wholewing afterwards expands itself, and becomes thrice,nay, four times larger than it was before. Thisexpansion of the wings depends, therefore, both uponthe impulsion of the air and of the blood ; for at thesame time when the air is impelled into the wings, aconsiderable quantity of blood is likewise driven intothe vessels of the wings." — " The female bees do not,as the common bees and the male, come forth withtheir wings folded up, but expanded and displayed,and in a state ready for flight. On this account, theall-wise Author of Nature has provided for them amore spacious mansion, in which they may expandtheir wings conveniently and properly ; so that afterthey have burst from their cells they may be pre-insectTRANSFORMATIONS.pared forswarminf^ immediately, if there be a necessityfor it, or that the young queen may be in a conditionto drive out her royal mother and take her placeif there be occasion."It does not appear, however, that Swammerdamproved by dissection the simultaneous existence ofair and blood vessels in the wings, but merely infersthis, as Reaumur afterwards did, from the phenomena.But Urine has since actually demonstrated that everyvein (jiervure) of a wing contains an air-tube, whichoriginates in the windpipe, and follows in a serpentineform, without filling, every branches of thenervures. Those who have not paid attention to thiscurious subject have little conception of the greatdiversity of forms which are exhibited by the branchingsof these nervures, not only in different orders,but even in different species of insects. They differ,indeed, as much in this respect as the leaves of plantsdo in their mode of veining:.Wings of insects : — a, wing; of a beetle ; h, wing of an earwig ;c, wing of a saw fly; d, wing of a crane fly ; e, wing of a commonfly (musca) ; /, wing of a midge (psyche da).Swammerdam, i. 187.STRUCTURE OF WINGS.In moths and butterflies the nervures are in a lyreatmeasure concealed by the feathery scales ; — but whenthese are removed they are rendered apparent, andappear to resemble in some measure the arrangementobserved in the two-winged flies. To this arrangementthere occurs a remarkable exception in thefamily of plumed moths {Aluciiidce, Leach), ofwhich Stephens enumerates twenty-nine Britishspecies. One of the most common of these is thelarge white plume {Pterophorus pentadactylusyIjEACh), which maybe seen, during the summer, inhedges and gardens, flitting about like a tuft of downor a snow-white feather dropt from the breast of theeider duck. From being slow in its motions it iseasily taken ; but if rudely handled all its snowyplumage will come off. Another of the family, alsovery common, is the twenty-plume moth {Alucitahexadactylay Leach), which may be seen from Marcha, the twenty-plume moth, b, the same magnified, c, the whiteplume moth.till October, on windows and the walls of rooms, or,still more probably, on the leaves of honey-suckles,346 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.on which its caterpillar feeds. Reaumur, who hadnever found the caterpillar, thought that so delicatean insect could not exist out of doors during; the bleakweather of spring; and concludes that it feeds likethe clothes moth in-doors — an instance among hundredsmore how frequently our most plausible reasoningsare far removed from the facts. This moth is sosmall that it is not ready to catch the eye of those whoare unacquainted with it, and even when it is foundit requires a magnify in g-glass to perceive all itsbeauties.The movements of insects just escaped from thechrysalis appear, then, to be analogous in their designto the restless motions of the young of larger animals.In Darwin's fanciful language, the accumulation ofexcitability in the sensorium impels the creature tobe frisky for the purpose of getting rid of the superabundantstimulus ; but whatever the exciting causemay be, we are certain that the final cause and certaineffect is the brisker impulsion of fluids, and particularlyair, through the vessels appropriated to theircirculation, and consequently the more perfectnourishment and speedy growth of the several members.The analogy between the larger animals andinsects is, that th? latter, when they have undergonetheir last change from the pupa into the perfectinsect, never increase in size, as the former remainstationary soon after puberty.We notice this the more readily, as those who arebut little acquainted with insects are exceedinglyapt to think they grow like other animals, and fromthis cause commit many mistakes, not perhaps ofgreat moment, but which in a work like this it mayprove interesting to rectify. " The most commonBritish butterflies," it has been remarked, " mostpersons may have observed to be those which arewhite; and all these are usually looked upon asUNIFORM SIZE OF INSECTS. 347of the same species, differing in nothing, except,perhaps, in the size ; the latter being erroneouslyascribed to difference of age. But the fact is, thatthere are a considerable number of species of ourwhite butterflies, as well as several genera, and probablymore varieties even of these than have yet beenascertained or described. It is certain, indeed, thatbutterflies do not, like the larger animals, increasein size as they grow older; for every individual,from the moment it becomes a butterfly, continuesinvariably of the same size till its death. Butterflies,indeed, seldom live longer than a few days, orat most a few weeks, and during this time they eatlittle, except a sip of honey : and since this is so, itwould be absurd to expect that they could increase insize. It must not, however, be understood from this,that the same species will always measure or weighprecisely the same ; for though this will hold as ageneral rule, there are many exceptions, arising fromthe accidents the caterpillar may have suffered fromwhich an individual butterfly originated. It is onlyduring the caterpillar state that the insect eats voraciously,and grows in proportion ; and if it is, duringthis stage of its existence, thrown upon short allowance,it cannot acquire the standard magnitude, andthe butterfly will be dwarfed from the first. Thesame remarks with respect to growth apply to insectsof every kind, and the fact cannot be better exemplifiedthan in the uniformity of size in the house fly {{Muscadomestic) among which scarcely one individual in athousand will be found to differ a hair's breadth indimensions from its fellows."We may add, that there are many flies occasionallyfound in houses both larger arid smaller than theMusca domestica, but these are of a different spes.Jennie on the White Butterflies of Britain, Mag. Nat. Hist,vol. ii. p. 225.348 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.lies, and not, as is popularly believed, the old orthe yoiuif^ of the house fly ; no more than the midsummercoclichafer ( Za7itheu7n[a solstitialis. Leach)is the young; of the common cockchafer (Melolonthavulgaris). It would be equally correct to say thatan ass is the young of a blood-horse, or a mouse theyoung of a rat. Nor is this mistake confined merelyto popular belief, for we find it not only stated inbooks of natural history, but reasons assigned for itscorrectness. " It is held by some apiarians," saysHush, " that the bee, in emerging from its cell, hasattained its full growth ; I would, however, recommendto those gentlemen to try to thrust either abee or a drone into one of the breeding-cells, andhe will find that the capacity of their bodies is toolarge for the dimensions of the cell*" This experimentwould not, of course, succeed ; but that doesnot prove the doctrine, for the author does not takeinto consideration the great quantity of air by whichthe body is distended ; and even if this were expelledby putting the bee under the exhaustedreceiver of an air-pump, the wings and other parts,now become dry and rigid, could not be folded upin the very compact manner in which they existed inthe pupa state.The fact of the expansion of the wings by theimpulsion of air and fluids into their nervures,may be illustrated by the accidental circumstancesinto which chrysalides may fall. We have mentionedin a preceding page, that the thread by whicha chrysalis is suspended may sometimes snap asunder.When this happens, and the chrysalis is allowedto remain, it will not usually produce an insect completein all its parts ; for the side upon which it liesbeing pressed against an unyielding substance by itsown weight, instead of hanging lightly suspendedHush on Bees, p. 43.i:)EFORMED INSECTS. ' 349by a silken cord, is prevented from becoming dulyexpanded, and when the insect is excluded it is foundto be deformed. This might by some be imaginedto be a mere theoretical view deduced from physiologicalreasoning ; but we can prove it by specimensof moths and butterflies which we have reared. Acolony of the brown-tail moth (Porthesia auriflua)^which we reared during the summer of 1829, spun inthe corner of a nurse-box a common web of severalchambers for containing the pupae. One of thesechambers being accidentally torn, a pupa fell uponthe earth in the bottom of the box, and in due time afemale moth was produced from it ; but she neversucceeded in expanding her wings, which remainedtill her death shrunk, rumpled, and totally useless forthe purpose of flying, though in every other respectshe was full grown, and deposited in the box a groupof fertile eggs, covered with down from her tail asneatly as was done by her sisters of the same brood.In the summer of 1825, the chrysalis of a small tortoiseshellbutterfly (Vanessa Article) lost its hold ofits silken suspensory, and fell upon the pasteboardbottom of a nurse-box, resting in a sort of angularposition, so that the case of the upper wing on theleft side pressed upon the box with the whole weightof the chrysalis above it. When the butterfly madeits appearance, it expanded its wings as usual, butthe wing upon which it had rested was not half thesize of the one on the right side which had lainuppermost. Another of the same brood had bysome cause not grown so large in the caterpillarstate as the rest. It was transformed, notwithstanding,into a chrysalis, which appeared healthy andwell formed ; but when the butterfly appeared, thoughit did not differ from the usual appearance, its wingsnever expanded a single hair's breadth, and remained2 HINSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.always in the same state as when it issued from thechrysalis*.a, Vanessa utica, with one wing imperfect. 5, brown-tailmoth, Fort/tesia auriflua, with shrivelled wings, c, Vanessa urticce,with unexpanded' wings.It is not a little remarkable, that when insects areevolved from the pupa state, they always dischargesome substance. It is important to remark, that thematter voided at this period by many butterflies {Va-iiesscB, &c.) is of a red colour, resembling blood, whilethat of several moths is orang-e or whitish. It couldnot readily be supposed that this should become theobject of superstitious terror, yet so it has been inmore instances than one. MoufFet tells us, fromSheridan, that in the year 1553 a prodigious multitudeof butterflies swarmed throughout a great portion ofGermany, and sprinkled plants, leaves, buildings,clothes, and men, with bloody drops as if it had rainedblood t. Several historians, indeed, have recordedshowers of blood among the prodigies which havestruck nations with consternation, as the supposedomen of the destruction of cities and the overthrowof empires. About the beginning of July, 1 608, oneof these showers of blood was supposed to have fallen*J.R. t MouflFet, Theatre. Ins. 107.SHOWERS OF BLOOD EXPLAINED. 351in the suburbs of Aix, and for many miles aroundit. and particularly the walls of a churchyard werespotted with the blood. This occurrence would, nodoubt, have been chronicled in history as a supernaturalprodigy, had not Aix possessed at this time,in M. Peiresc, a philosopher, who, in the eager pursuitof all kinds of knowledge, had not neglected thestudy of insects. It is accordingly related, in thecurious life of Peiresc by Gassendi, that he had,about the time of the rumoured shower of blood,happened to find a large chrysalis, the beauty ofwhich made him preserve it in a box. Some timeafter, hearing a noise in the box, he opened it andfound a fine butterfly, which had left upon the bottoma red stain of considerable magnitude, and apparentlyof exactly the same nature with the drops on the stones,popularly supposed to be blood. He remarked, atthe same time, that there were countless numbers ofbutterflies flying about, which confirmed him in thebelief of his having discovered the true cause ; andthis was further corroborated by his finding none ofthe red drops in the heart of the city, where the butterflieswere rarely seen. He also remarked, that thedrops were never on tiles, and seldom on the upperpart of a stone, as they must have been had theyfallen from the heavens, but usually appeared incavities and parts protected by some angular projection.What Peiresc had thus ascertained, he lostno time in disclosing to many persons of knowledgeand curiosity, who had been puzzling themselves toaccount for the circumstance by far-fetched reasonings,such as a supposed vapour which had carriedup a supposed red earth into the air that had tingedthe rain ; — no less wide of the truth than the popularsuperstition which ascribed it to magic, or to thedevil himself*. Those who are curious to verify theReaumur, vol, i. p. 638.2 H 2352 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.discovery, as we may well call it, of Peiresc, mayeasily do so by rearing any of the spinous caterpillarswhich feed on the nettle till they are transformed intothe butter-fly. We have witnessed the circumstancein innumerable instances.It is a curious and interesting probability, that thecrimson snow of the Alpine and Arctic regions, whichhas recently excited so much scientific inquiry, shouldbe referable to a somewhat similar cause, — a circumstancewhich will apologize for our taking some noticeof it here by way of illustration. According toProfessor Agardh, red snow is very common in allthe alpine districts of Europe, and is probably of thesame nature with that brought from the polar regionsby Captain Ross. Saussure saw it in abundance onMont Brewer, in Switzerland, and elsewhere ;Raymond found it on the Pyrenees ; and Sommerfeldtin Norway. In March, 1808, the whole countryabout Atone, Bellona, and Feltri, is reported tohave been covered in a single night with rose-colouredsnow ; and at the same time a similar shower waswitnessed on the mountains of Valtelin, Brescia,Carinthia, and Tyrol. But the most remarkable redsnow shower was that which fell on the night betweenthe 14th and 15th of March, 1823, in Calabria,in Arezzo, in Tuscany, at Bologna, and through thewhole chain of the Apennines.Upon the return of Captain Ross from the Polarexpedition some years ago, the specimens of redsnow which he brought home were examined bythree of our most distinguished observers, Wollaston,Bauer, and Robert Brown, who all came to theconclusion that it was of a vegetable nature, butdiffered as to its botanical characteristics. Dr.Wollaston supposed it to be the seed of some moss ;Mr. Brown was inclined to consider it an algae, relatedto Tremella cruelty, a common native plant ;CAUSE OF RED SNOW, 353while Mr. Bauer thought it was a fungus of the genusUredo. Professor Agardh reft -^ it with Brown tothe lowest order of algae, but standing as a distinctgenus upon the very limits of the animal and vegetablekingdoms. Saussure, indeed, from finding thatthe red snow of the Alps gave out, when burnt, asmell like that of plants, concluded that it was ofvegetable origin, and supposed it to consist of thefarina of some plant, though he could not trace it toits source. Baron Angel, again, who discovered aproduction similar or identical with Agardh's rivals growing upon limestone rocks, mentionsthat it was easily detached when placed underwater,and in three days it was converted into animatedglobules like industry animalcules, whichswam about and were made prey of by other infusoria.Professor Nees von Esenbeck, of Bonn, is inclinedto think that the minute red globules, of whichthe Protococcus consists, are the vegetable state ofbodies which had gone through a previous animalexistence.The Rev. W. Scores, on the other hand, conjecturesthat the red colour of the snow may be tracedto the same cause as the orange-coloured ice of thepolar seas, which arises from innumerable minuteanimals belonging to the Radiata, and similar to theBerne glohulosa of Lamarck. It is about the size ofa pin's head, transparent, and marked with twelvebrownish patches of dots. In olive-green sea water,he estimated 110,592 of these in a cubic foot*.Agardh remarks, that it is agreed upon all handsthat the crimson snow always falls in the night, fromwhich he infers that it has not been actually seen tofall. He thinks it is called into existence by the vivifyingpower of the sun's light, after its warmth hascaused the snow to dissolve, accompanied by theJameson's Eden. Journ., Jan. 1829, p. 55.2 H 3354 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.incomprehensible power in white snow of producinga colour*.Reaumur says, with much justice, on another occasion,that an ordinary spectator frequently discoverswhat has escaped the notice of the best observers,and so it should seem it has happened in the presentcase, — the learned naturalists just mentioned havinggone as wide of the facts, as the philosophers at Paixin accounting for the supposed shower of blood.Mr. Thomas Nicholson, accompanied with two othergentlemen, made an excursion the 24th July, 1821,to Sowallick Point, near Bushman's Island, in PrinceRegent's Bay, in quest of meteoric iron. " Thesummit of the hill," he says, "forming the point, iscovered with huge masses of granite, whilst the sidewhich forms a gentle declivity towards the bay wascovered with crimson snow. It was evident, at firstview, that this colour was imparted to the snow by asubstance lying on the surface. This substance layscattered here and there in small masses, bearingsome resemblance to powdered cochineal, surroundedby a lighter shade, which was produced by the colouringmatter being partly dissolved and diffused bythe deliquescent snow. During this examination ourhats and upper garments were observed to be daubedwith a substance of a similar red colour, and a moment'sreflection convinced us that this was the excrementof the little auk (Uria alle, Temminck), myriadsof which were continually flying over our heads,having their nests among the loose masses of granite.A ready explanation of the origin of the red snowwas now presented to us, and not a doubt remainedin the mind of any that this was the correct one.The snow on the mountains of higher elevation thanthe nests of these birds was perfectly white, and a ravineat a short distance, which was filled with snowLoudon's Encycl. of Plants, Proiococcus^CAUSE OF RED SNOW. 355from top to bottom, but which afforded no hiding-placefor these birds to form their nests, presented an appearanceuniformly white."This testimony seems to be as clear and indisputableas the explanation Given by Peiresc of theejecta of the butterflies at Aix. But though it willaccount, perhaps, for the red snow of the polar regions,it will not explain that of the Alps, the Apennines,and the Pyrenees, which are not, so far as weknow, visited by the little auk. Thus the matter atpresent rests, till it be elucidated by further observations.Mag, of Nat. Hist. vol. ii. p. 322,Chapter XV.Peculiar Motions of Insects.Nothing that has life seems capable of existing longwithout motion. The oyster fixed upon the rockmust open and shut its shell, and the most gnarledoak must wave its branches, otherwise their fluidswill stagnate, and disease will ensue. In our owncase, we cannot, if we would, put a stop for anylength of time to all our motions. We have thepower, indeed, of interrupting the nictitation of theeyelids ; but if we keep our eyes fixed for a few minutesthey become dry and painful for want of theregular supply of moisture spread over them by theprocess of winking. Breathing, again, being a moreimportant operation, cannot be long interrupted,without serious consequences ; and when the motionof any of the limbs is prevented by the accidentalinjury of its joint, it usually shrinks and dwindlesinto less than half its natural magnitude, because theproper quantity of the nutritive fluids is not impelledthither in consequence of its deficiency of motion.We have already seen how indispensable the motionsof insects are to the due expanding of theirwings upon emerging from the pupa state ; andseveral remarkable circumstances show that, independentof change of place in search of food or ofother localities for their progeny, motion is necessaryto their well-being;. At least there does not seemany other plausible explication of what we may termstationary motions. Kirby and Spence's " motions ofinsects reposing," appears to be a phrase whichwould not apply, for example, to an ox chewing thecud, or a cat washing her face with her paw, — motionsprecisely similar to many of those of insectsIntrodd. vol. ii. p. 304.MOTIONS OF INSECTS. 357mentioned by them under this head. The modeadopted by cats of cleaning themselves with theirpaws, is, indeed, not a little similar to that of thehouse fly (Musca domestica), which, while it is baskingin a window and enjoying the heat of the sun,may be frequently seen not only brushing its feetupon one another to rub off the dust, but equallyassiduous in cleaning its eyes, head, and corslet withits fore-legs, while it brushes its wings with its hind-legs*.At the time of writing this, March, 1830,we have just witnessed a similar process in a watermeasurer {Hydrometra stagnorum, Latr.), whichwe had put into a glass containing water, with aleaf for it to rest upon. Not liking the narrow poolin the glass so well as the brook at Lee, from whichit had been taken, it began to climb the edges of theglass, for which its feet were far from being welladapted, and it slipped at every step ; but, determinednot to be baulked, after several unsuccessfultrials, it betook itself to the leaf as if to survey theobstacles before it again attempted the steep ascent.After deliberating for a moment, the thought seemedto strike it that its feet were not in the best trim forclimbing ; and it forthwith began with great assiduityto clean them somewhat in a similar way to the flyby wiping them upon one another, but with this difference,that it did not, like the fly, cross its legs fromopposite sides, the length and rigidity of the thighspreventing such a movement. It did not forget atthe same time to clean with much care its long antennae,in order, no doubt, to fit them the better forexploring an unknown path. It spent several minutesin this preliminary trimming, when it again beganto mount, and we were no less pleased, perhaps,than itself, to see its perseverance rewarded ; for,aided either by the greater cleanness of its feet, or bySee Insect Architecture, p. 368,353 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.some particles of slime and sand adhering to theglass, it triumphantly gained the brim, which it beganto perambulate with an apparent air of proud exultation*.This insect is figured at 6, page 382.The process of cleaning and brushing the legs, asbirds are seen to preen their feathers, is, however,the most remarkable, though, perhaps, but seldomtaken notice of among spiders. The same process, aswe have recently discovered, is employed by the Phalanges.The apparatus for this is admirably contrived.In the common garden geometric spider(Epeira diadema), the teeth are used as a comb,the smooth mandible being employed to hold downthe limb while it is slowly drawn between the teeth,to free it from flue and dust. In some other species,instead of smooth teeth, there is a thick-set brushof hairs, which is used in the same manner, andmust be a still more efficient instrument. The former,if we do not mistake, chiefly occurs among thegeometric spiders, whose webs are meshed and thin ;while the brush prevails among those which weavethick webs, such as the red spider {Dysdera ery-ihrina, Walckenaer), which we found in the creviceof a chalk rock near Erith, in Kent, but which isby no means common in Britain, though abundant inFrance. We kept this one for some time in a glass,and observed that it spent the greater part of itstime in brushing its legs. The eyes are placed informof a horse shoe f.It must have struck those who have visited amenagerie of wild animals, that, even while they arestanding in their cages, they frequently throw theirheads, and also their bodies, into a sort of oscillatorymovement, evidently not for the purpose of gettingthrough the bars, but to supply the place of theirnatural exercise which confinement prevents themJ. R. t J- R-MOTIONS OP INSECTS.a, red spider (Dysdera erythrina). h, the head of the redspider, magnified, c c, the mandibles, fringed on the inside withhair, d, the eight eyes, in form of a horse-shoe, e, the head ofthe garden spider (^Aranea diadema). fff, the eight eyes.g g, the upper mandibles, h, toothed comb.from taking. Perhaps this may help us to accountfor the singular motions of some of the crane flies(TipulidcB), while stationary upon a window or awall, their whole body vibrating alternately outwardsand inwards from the wall, with a pendulum-likemovement, as rapid, or more so, than the clicking ofa watch. Kirby and Spence say, this is produced bythe weight of their bodies and the elasticity of theirlegs ; and that, unless it be connected with respiration,it is not easy to say what is its object*. To usit appears, like the motion of the caged animals justmentioned, to be for the purpose of exercising themselvesand of driving the fluids into their long legs,which may not be effected in the exercise of flying onaccount of their legs then remaining almost motionless.Others of the same family may be seen hangingfrom a wall or ceiling by their fore-legs, while thehind ones are perked out into the air, and moving upand down in a slow manner, probably to watch againstapproaching danger, as they are very timid ; and ifthe door of the room where they are be hastily openedor shut, or if any other agitation of the air be pro-into.ii, 306.INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.duce, they immediately fly off* The long-leggedspiders, popularly called shepherds and harvest men(Phalangidce, Leach), have a similar mode of elevatingtheir legs, particularly the second pair, whichthey move about in all directions.c, Phalanges ; b, Hydrometra stagnorum, magnified.It can scarcely have escaped the remark of themost indifferent observer, that vv^hen butterflies (particularlythose of the genus Vanessa) alight duringsunshine on a leaf or a pathway, they flirt theirwings as a lady does her fan, and perhaps, as hasbeen conjectured, for the similar purpose of coolingtheir bodies. But to us it appears more probably withthe design of impelling air into the tubes of theirwings to fit them the better for flight ; for we haveremarked that they uniformly fan their wings whenabout to rise, though they had previously remainedmotionless for an hour together. A pretty family oftwo-winged flies (Syrphidce-\) may frequently beremarked in lanes and on the borders of woods,hovering on the wing for a considerable time withoutshifting a hair's-breadth from their place, though themotion of their wings is all the while so rapid as tobe almost imperceptible, similar to some moths{SphingidcBy Plusia mammals &c.) whilst sippingJ. R. t See p. 4. X See p. 214.MOTIONS OF OTHER ANIMALS. scythehoney of flowers. The vibratory motion of thewings in these instances is only to buoy them up soas to retain their place ; but the instant they arealarmed by the approach of danger, they may beseen to take several long strokes with their wings,and dart off with the rapidity of lightning. This iswell illustrated by the motions of birds preparatoryto flight, as they may be observed always to take severaldeep inspirations, at the same time often risingon tiptoe, and puffing out and balancing their bodiesto feel Whether they have thrown enough air intotheir bones and feathers to float them along. Birdsof prey raptures, Vigors) seem to have thegreatest power both of filling their bodies with airand of expelling it again at pleasure. Hence the kestrel(Falcon tlmiunculus) may be seen floating aboutfor a considerable time without moving a wing, or perhapsdrawing a breath, till it can hold out no longer,when it flutters its wings rapidly, not for moving toa different place, for it remains stationary, but torecover its decreasing buoyancy by inhaling a freshsupply of air. For the same reason a trout willoscillate its body when losing ground by the rapidityof a stream. The osprey {Falco ossifragus), on theother hand, we have seen, at the Kyle of Bute andelsewhere, shoot down like a thunderbolt from theair into the sea, plunging far into the water upon afish she had marked for her prey*, — a movement onlyto be explained by the rapid expulsion of the airwhich had been the chief agent in keeping her previouslyafloat in the region of the clouds. Manybirds which prey on smaller game have somewhatsimilar methods of poising and balancing theirbodies, of which the water-ouzel {Cinclus aquarius'super est Halioetos," says Pliny, "clarissa rotulorumache, libras ex alto sese, visoque in mari piece, precepts iu camruns, et discusses aquas, rapiers." — Hist. Nat.2i362 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.Bechstein) furnishes a good example, putting itselfin a constant state of preparation, jerking its piebaldhead up and down as it skips from stone tostone of the brook, to pounce under water upon thefirst grub it espies swimming. In the same waythe red-breast sylvia rubecula) pops jerking aboutwhen on the look-out for caterpillars; and so habitualdoes this become, that he does not fail to go throughthe manoeuvre when he pecks up a crumb at the cottagedoor, as well as when he pounces upon a caterpillarin the woods, where it is often indispensable tosecure the aim to prevent the insect putting in forcesome stratagem of escape*.We may next turn to a small two-winged fly,which, though equally common in gardens and elsewherewith the fanning butterflies (Vanessa) justalluded to, we can scarcely (considering its size) expectto have attracted the notice of those who paylittle attention to insects. We allude to the vibratingfly (Seioptera vibrate, Kirby), which is not above athird of the size of the house-fly, but may be knownby its shining black body, scarlet head, and transparentwings, tipped with black. This tiny little creaturewhether it trips over a leaf, or remains stationarybasking in the sunshine, is continually vibratingits wings. " This motion," says Kirby, " Ihave reason to think, assists its respiration ; " but ashehas not stated his reason, we are led, from anexperiment which we tried, to doubt the conclusion.Having always seen the fly vibrating its wings inthe sunshine only, as if it enjoyed the warmth andrejoiced in the feeling of existence, we wished to seehow it would comport itself at night, and enclosedone under an inverted wine glass for observation.The conjecture which we had formed appeared to becorrect ; for though, when moving about the glass,*J.R,MOTIONS OF INSECTS. SGSit vibrated its wings as much by candle-light as inthe sunshine, probably from the habit of associatingthe two movements, yet, whenever it remained stationary,it kept the wings motionless. Had themotion been indispensable to respiration, and analogousto the motion of the gills of fish, or the pantingin the anal scale of the water-louse (Apelles aqua-titus,Leach), this cessation would not have takenplace at night.We are, therefore, perhaps justified in concludingthat the vibration of the wings in this little fly is artindication of being pleased ; in the same way as anestling sparrow, when fed by its dam, will halfstretch its wings, and, as Thomson finely expressesit, willQuiver every feather with desire ;"or as a lamb when sucking will vibrate its tail, aswell as the pretty birds popularly termed wagtails(Motacillai), when they perambulate the margin of astream and find a plentiful banquet of insects totheir liking.It may prove still more interesting, we think, toturn our attention to some other movements of insectswhich seem to be expressive of pleasure whenthey are not stationary, and leaving out of consideration,also, their foraging for food. A familiar instanceof what we allude to occurs in the aerialdances of the tipulidan gnats and some other insects.These are performed not only in summer, butfrequently even in winter and in the earlier monthsof spring, — in sheltered places, indeed, such as undertrees and hedges, in lanes, and when a day chancesto be finer than usual, though the mildest day is ofcourse at these seasons comparatively chill. Themost common of these winter dancers is called byHarris the tell-tale (Trichocera hiemalis, Meigen), a2 i2364 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.troop of which may be occasionally seen gambolingin a sunny nook, though the ground be covered withsnow. When the weather is warm and mild, however,the dancing Tipulidae prefer the decline of day ;and we have remarked them keeping it up as longas we could distinguish them between the eye andthe waning: liijht of the western horizon : how muchlonger they continued to dance we cannot tell.It is a very singular fact connected with thesegnat dances, that the company always consists exclusivelyof males. This any person who will take thetrouble may verify by enclosing a group of them inabutterfly-net. If this be not at hand, he may procuregood evidence by wetting the hand, and passingit quickly amongst the thickest of the crowd ; whenseveral will be caught, and will uniformly exhibit thebeautifully fringed or plumed antennae, which in thefemale are without the hairs or the plumelets. Whatit may be, besides the same delighted and buoyantspirit which causes lambs to group together in theirfrolics, that induces those tiny gnats to sport in thismanner on the wing, is, perhaps, inexplicable.Wordsworth's opinion, though adopted by Kirbyand Spence, is, perhaps, as we shall presently endeavourto show, more poetical than correct. His wordsare;—Nor wanting here to entertain the thought,Creatures that in communities exist,Less, as might seem, for general guardianship,Or through dependence upon mutual aid,Than by participation of delight,And a strict love of fellowship combined.What other spirit can it be that promptsThe gilded summer flies to mix and weaveTheir sports together in the solar beam,Or, in the gloom and twilight, hum their joy."The Excursion.Ilia evening gambling of rooks on the wing,MOTIONS OF INSECTS. 3(15when they return from their more distant excursionsduring the autumn, may with more certainty be referredto this cause. White says, they rendezvousby thousands over Selborne Down, wheeling roundand diving in a playful manner in the air, and whenthis ceremony is over, with the last gleam of light,they retire to the deep beech woods of Tested andKepler. It may not be improper, however, to distinguishbetween this and the restless tossing aboutand flapping of the wings, often exhibited by rooksprevious to a storm, which more usually occurs in themorning, and closely resembles the tossing of seabirdson the billows during a gale*.The quickness of the vision of tipulidan gnats, andthe rapidity as well as the dexterity of their motion,may be considered not a little remarkable, from thecircumstance of their flying unsettled in a heavyshower of rain, whose drops — bigger than their ownbodies — if they fell upon them, must dash them to theground f ; unless it may be that the drops glide offtheir wings as they do off the feathers of a duck, whilethe elasticity of their bodies may save them fromaccidents, even when they chance to be pelted.Avery pretty species of these choral flies (Hieronymusterminus, Meigen), is exceedingly commonin the vicinity of London, appearing about the closeof winter, and readily distinguished by its shiningsnow-white wings, rendered more conspicuous by thecontrast of its black body, while the male has hisantennae adorned with beautiful lead grey plumelets.Though groups of these may be found sporting onthe borders of woods and near water, even in January,proving that, though not half the size of the commongnat {Culex pipes), they can brave the bleak windsof winter, — yet they often crowd into our apartments,like many others of the family. We have just beenJ. R. f Kirby and Spence, vol. ii. p. 374.2 I 3366 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.watching the proceedings of a pair of these elegantlittle creatures by candle-light, when they are morelively and alert than in the sunshine. We werereading a large quarto book with wide print and verybroad margins, the white colour of which seemed notonly to attract but to deceive them in the same wayas a bird or a blow-fly will mistake a pane of glassfor the " viewless air," and dash recklessly againstit. Our little snowy-winged flies, apparently from asimilar mistake, dashed themselves about on thepages of the book. We have been accustomed, fromboyhood, to see gnats and other insects tumblingabout in a similar manner when we have been readingat night, a circumstance which few of our readerscan have failed to observe ; but we always pitied themon the supposition that it was in consequence of theirheedlessly singeing their wings in the candle, andthus unfitting themselves to fly. This, no doubt, is afrequent cause of their falling on a book ; but it wasnot so with the two flies which we observed, for theyremained quite perfect and uninjured. The mostremarkable circumstance was, that they almost uniformlyfell on the back, which seems to indicate thatthey fly with the back downwards, a mode of flightnot a little singular, though it has an analogy to theswimming of some aquatic insects {Notonectidee^Leach). When they felt the paper, they spun roundin circles and half circles with great rapidity, andevidently not so much for the purpose of gettingupon their feet as of continuing the gyrations theyhad been performing while on the wing. This we inferredfrom their being in no hurry to get up, andfrom their continuing, even when they got upon theirfeet, to wheel round and round, as if waltzing withthe express design of showing that they could danceon the *' light fantastic toe," as well as on the wing.Their circular movement is not peculiar to them,MOTIONS OF INSECTS. 367being: observable in several others of the family, particularlyin a still smaller fly with black pellucidwings (Molobrus?), and not uncommon in summer,whose extremely rapid motion we have oftenadmired as it performs its minute gyrations on aleaf or the petal of a flower.It was no less remarkable, that the two snowy-wingedgnats just mentioned were male and female,as the latter is seldom seen, and when themales swarm upon a window, a single female canscarcely be found; but though they were flirtingabout on the same page, they took not the slightestnotice of one another, and each went through itsgyrations as if unconscious of the other's presence.The female, besides, contrary to what is usual amonginsects, was by far the most alert and agile of thetwo ; in so much that, though it was early in March,we at first mistook her for the minute summer flyalluded to in last paragraph*.From all we have observed, we think it probable,that notwithstanding the apparent sociality of thedancing gnats {Tipulid(B), they do not congregatein consequence of any gregarious feelings, or formutual assistance ; but merely because they are producedin numbers in the same places, and individuallyprefer similar haunts. The individual sportive movementsof the two snowy-winged flies just described,which were performed on the contiguous pages of abook, or severally at the top and bottom of the samepage, prove that they do not consider the presenceof numbers indispensable. This position is fartherillustrated by the proceedings of an insect of a verydifferent family — the whirlwig beetles (^GyrinidcdyLeach), which may be seen on the surface of everypool weaving their eccentric dances, and twinklingtheir polished corselets in the sun, both in summerand, as we have remarked, throughout the winter.J. R.36& INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.These are most frequently observed frolicking inparties of from two to a dozen or more ; but wehave very frequently seen an individual performinghis gyrations with the same alacrity when alone aswhen mingling with his companions. We conclude,therefore, that the apparent sociality of these insectshas no closer bond than that of the vultures whichcrowd to devour the same carcase, or of the unsocialsea-birds which congregate near a shoal offish*.Kirby and Spence appear to be of a differentopinion : — these " little beetles," say they, " whichmay be seen clustering in groups under warm banksin every river and every pool, and wheeling roundand round with great velocity ; at your approachdispersing and diving under water, but, as soon asyou retire, resuming their accustomed movements, —seem to be under the influence of the social principle,and to form their assemblies for no other purposethan to enjoy together in the sun-shine the mazydance f."The following account of the manners of thisbeetle, by Mr. Knapp, is well worth extracting;though it is much more lively and interesting thanstrictly correct :Water, quiet, still water, affords a place of actionto a very amusing little fellow (Gyriniis narrator),which, about the month of April, if the weather betolerably mild, we see gamboling upon the surfaceof the sheltered pool ; and every schoolboy, who hasangled for minnows in the brook, is well acquaintedwith this merry swimmer in his shining blackjacket. Retiring in the autumn, and reposing all thewinter in the mud at the bottom of the pond, itawakens in the spring, rises to the surface, and commencesits summer sports |. They associate in smallJ. R. f Intr. vol. ii. p. 4.I We have seen them throughout the severe winter of 1829-30,sporting oa the unfrozen springs at Lee, ia Kent, J. R.MOTIONS OF INSECTS. 369parties of ten or a dozen, near the bank, where somelittle projection forms a bay, or renders the waterparticularly tranquil ; and here they will circle roundeach other without contention, each in his sphere,and with no apparent object, from morning untilnight, with great sprightliness and animation ; and solightly do they move on the fluid, as to form onlysome faint and transient circles on its surface. Veryfond of society, we seldom see them alone, or, ifparted by accident, they soon rejoin their busy companions.One pool commonly affords space for theamusement of several parties ; yet they do not uniteor contend, but perform their cheerful circling inseparate family associations. If we interfere withtheir merriment they seem greatly alarmed, disperse,or dive to the bottom, where their fears shortly subside,as we soon again see our little merry friendsgamboling as before. This plain, tiny, glidingwater-flea seems a very unlikely creature to arrestour young attentions ; but the boy with his angle hasnot often much to engage his notice, and the socialactive parties of this nimble swimmer, presentingthemselves at these periods of vacancy, become insensiblyfamiliar to his sight, and by many of us arenot observed in after-life without recalling formerhours, scenes of, perhaps, less anxious days: fortrifles like these, by reason of some association, areoften remembered, when things of greater momentpass off and leave no trace upon the mind."The grins," say Kirby and Spence, " seemsthe merriest and most agile of all the inhabitants ofthe waves. Wonderful is the velocity with whichthey turn round and round, as it were pursuing eachother in incessant circles, sometimes moving inoblique, and indeed in every other direction. Nowand then they repose on the surface as if fatigued♦ Journal of a Naturalist, p. 307.t70 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.with their dances, and desirous of enjoying the fulleffect of the sunbeam : if you approach, they areinstantaneously in motion again. Attempt to entrapthem with your net, and they are under the water anddispersed in a moment. When the danger ceases,they re-appear and resume their vagaries. Coveredwith lucid armour, when the sun shines they look likelittle dancing masses of silver and brilliant pearl *,"The gyrations of the whirlwig are equalled inrapidity by its diving, when its sports are intrudedupon by our approach. Its great quickness of sight,indeed, is quite surprising ; and is to be accounted forbyone of the most striking instances of providentialcontrivance with which we are acquainted. Landanimals see indifferently under water, and aquaticanimals imperfectly in air ; and an animal with aneye equally fitted for seeing in water and in air,can, on account of the great difference of the mediums,possess but imperfect vision in either. TheHttle whirlwig, to obviate this difficulty, is furnishedwith two sets of eyes, one pair being placed on theupper part of the forehead for seeing in air, andanother pair on the under part of the forehead, exactlyunder the first, and separated from them by athin membrane, for seeing in water. As it swimshalf submerged, the latter pair of eyes must bevery useful in warning the insect of approachingdanger, from fishes or rapacious larvae below, whilethe former watch with equal keenness the approachof enemies above. The hind feet are no lessadmirably formed for swimming, being broad, thinand elastic ; while the fore feet are constructed toanswer the purpose of hands for the seizing of prey.The little animal is, besides all these wonderfulorgans, furnished with a pair of ample wings fortransporting itself, should the water of its nativeIntr. vol. ii. p, 372.MOTIONS OP INSECTS. 371pool chance to dry up in summer, and force it toemigrate.The sporting of butterflies in pairs, trios, or more,has been looked upon by some as pugnacious skirmishing." A few of our lepidopterous creatures,"says Mr. Knapp, " especially the common whitebutterflies of our gardens, are contentious animals,and drive away a rival from their haunts. We seethem progressively ascending into the air, in ardentunheeding contest ; and thus they are observed, captured,and consumed in a moment by some watchfulbird; but we have few more jealous and pugnaciousthan the little elegant blue argus butterfly {Polyom-natus Alexis, Stephens), noted and admired by all.When fully animated it will not suffer any of itstribe to cross its path, or approach the flower onwhich it sits, with impunity ; even the large admirable{{Vanessa atlanta), at these times, it will assail anddrive away. There is another small butterfly, thecopper (LyctBna Phineas, Fabr.), however, as handsomeand, perhaps, still more quarrelsome, frequentingtoo the same station and flowers ; and a constantwarfare exists between them. We shall see thesediminutive creatures, whenever they come near eachother, dart into action, and continue buffeting oneanother about till one retires from the contest ; whenthe victor returns in triumph to the station he hadleft. Should the enemy again advance, the combatis renewed ; but should a cloud obscure the sun, orabreeze chill the air, their ardour becomes abatedand contention ceases. The copper butterfly enjoysa combat even with its kindred. Two of them areseldom disturbed, when basking on a knot of astersin September, without mutual strife ensuing. Beingless affected by cold and moisture than the argus,they remain with us longer, and these contentionsare protracted till late in the autumn. The pugnaciousdisposition of the argus butterfly soon deprives372 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.it of much of its beauty ; and, unless captured soonafter its birth, we find the margins of its wings tornand jagged, the elegant blue plumage rubbed from thewings, and the creature become dark and shabby'*We are of opinion, on the other hand, that thesebutterfly skirmishing are not prompted by testinessnor jealousy, but by the spirit of gaiety and frolic —the buoyant feelings arising from the air expandedin their wings and bodies by the warm sunshine,causing the living principle to increase even to exuberance.Were these, indeed, actual combats amongthe males, like those which take place among gamecocksor ruffs strings pugnax, Linn), naturewould probably have furnished them with weaponssuited to such warfare. But butterflies have neitherspurs, claws, nor sharp bills, wherewith to assail anenemy ; and though they might flap one another withtheir wings, till their tiny feathers flew about like asnow-shower, yet we never have observed them doso, as Mr. Knapp's description seems to imply. Onthe contrary, they appear actually to take care thatsuch an accident should not occur while they friskabout one another, rising, falling, and performingzigzag pirouettes in the air, as we see kittens orpuppies do on the ground, in their more clumsy butno less frolicksome gambols. Did these skirmishes,besides, originate in rivalry or jealousy, we shouldalways see the butterflies combating in couples, for wenever see two or three game-cocks set upon an individual; but it is by no means uncommon to see threeand we have observed as many as five butterflies, allequally engaged in these supposed battles, and eachbouncing and popping indiscriminately at the otherswithout ever coming to blows. It seldom happensthat they actually touch one another, however longthey may be at play, — a circumstance which of itselfis sufficient to prove our position.Journ. of a Naturalist, p. 277.MOTIONS OF INSECTS. 373A more extraordinary display of insect dancing-andwhich in some instances seems better entitled tothe name of a ball, than our own dancing parties,occurs amongst the day-flies (Ephemeridce), whoseshort-lived existence renders it necessary for them tomake the most of the few hours at their disposal.The narrative of the observations made by Reaumurupon this subject is too interesting to admit of muchabridgment. It is not a little singular, he remarks,that moths, which fly only in the night, and shun theday, should be precisely those that come to seek thelight in our apartments ; but it is still more wonderfulthat the ephemerae — which, appearing after sun-setand dying before sun-rise, are destined never tobehold the dawn of day, — should have so strong aninclination for any luminous object.It is usually about the middle of August thatthe ephemerae of the Seine and Marne are expectedby the fishermen, and when their season iscome they talk of the manna beginning to appear,calling the insects by this term on account of thequantity of food for the fish, which falls as the mannais recorded to have done in the desert. On the19th of August, Reaumur, having received noticethat the flies had begun to appear, and that millionsof them were coming out of the water, got into hisboat about three hours before sunset ; but after stayingin the boat till eight o'clock without seeing any,he resolved, as a storm was foreboded, to return.He had previously detached from the banks of theriver several masses of earth filled with pupae, whichhe put into a large tub full of water. His servants,who were carrying the tub home, had scarcely set itupon one of the steps of the stairs leading from hisgarden to the Marne, when he heard them exclaim,*' What a prodigious number of ephemerae are here!"He immediately seized one of the torches and ran to2k374 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.the tub, where he found every piece of earth abovethe surface of the water swarming with the flies,some just beginning to quit their old skin, otherspreparing to fly, and others already on the wing,while every where under water they were seen in agreater or less degree of forwardness. The threatenedstorm of rain and lightning at length coming on, hewas compelled to leave the interesting scene ; but, toprevent the escape of the insects, he had the tubcovered with a cloth. The violence of the rain ceasedin about half an hour, when he returned to the garden,and as soon as the cloth was removed from the tubhe perceived that the number of the flies was prodigiouslyaugmented, and continued to increase forsome time as he stood watching them. Many flewaway, and many more were drowned, but the numberwhich had already undergone their transformationfrom the earth in the tub would have been sufficientto fill it, exclusively of crowds of others which thelight had attracted from a distance. He again spreadthe cloth over the tub, and the light was held aboveit : immediately the cloth was almost concealed bythe vast multitudes which alighted upon it, and theymight have been taken by handfuls from the candlestick.What he had observed, however, at the tub,was nothing to the scene now exhibited on the banksof the river, to which he was again attracted by theexclamations of his gardener.The countless numbers," he says,. '* of ephemeraewhich swarmed over the water can neither beconceived nor expressed. When snow falls thickestand in the largest flakes, the air is never so completelyfull of them as that which we witnessed filledwith ephemera. I had scarcely remained a fewminutes in one place, when the step on which I stoodwas covered in every part with their bodies, from twoto four inches in depth. Near the lowest step, aMOTIONS OF INSECTS. 375surface of water, of five or six feet dimensions everyway, was entirely covered with a thick layer of them,and those which the stream swept away were morethan replaced by the multitudes that were continuallyfalling, I was repeatedly compelled to abandon mystation, from not being able to bear the shower ofinsects, which, not falling perpendicularly like rain,struck me incessantly and in a manner extremelyuncomfortable, pelting against every part of my face,and filling my eyes, nose, and mouth almost to suffocation.On this occasion it was no pleasant post tohold the light, for our torch-bearer had his clothescovered with the insects in a few moments, whichrushed in from all quarters to overwhelm him.The light of the torch gave origin to a spectaclewhich enchanted every one who beheld it, and altogetherdifferent from a meteorological shower; even themost stupid and unobserving of my domestics werenever satisfied with gazing at it. No armillary spherewas ever formed of so many circular zones in everypossible direction, having the light for their commoncentre. Their number seemed to be infinite, crossingeach other in all directions, and in every imaginabledegree and inclination — all of which were more or lessoblique. Each of these zones was composed of anunbroken string of ephemerae, which followed eachother close in the same line as if they had been tiedtogether head and tail, resembling a piece of silverribbon deeply indented on its edges, and consistingof equal triangles placed end to end — so that theangles of those that followed were supported by thebase of those which preceded, the whole movinground with incredible velocity. This spectacle wascaused by the wings of the insects, which alone couldbe distinguished. Each of these flies, after havingdescribed one or two orbits, fell to the earth, or into2 k2376 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.the water, though not in consequence of having beenburned *."It is conjectured by Kirby and Spence, thatReaumur, though he was unquestionably a mostaccurate observer, may have mistaken the rapidmovements of single flies, and the deception ofvision thence arising, for a numerous troop, followingone another in zoned circular lines, — a mistake whichthey were once upon the point of committing whenobserving the dances of certain small flies whichmoved in spirals ; closer observation, however, provedthat what appeared to be a continuous line of flies,was produced by the rapid motion of an individual.Be this as it may, it will not alter the singularity ofthe spectacle. Some of our British ephemerae begintheir dances with the dawn, instead of waiting tillsun-set, — rising and falling continually over themeadows in May, sometimes beating the air rapidlywith their wings, and sometimes skimming about likehawks t. Those again which we observed in August,rising from the Rhine, did not dance at all, but flewin a heavy, unsteady, and lumbering manner abovethe current of the river J.In speaking of what appear to be the sports ofinsects, we cannot omit taking notice of the verysingular proceedings of some species of ants, which,at the intervals of busy industry, amuse themselveswith something apparently analogous to our wrestingand racing matches. Bonnet says, he observeda small species of ants, which employed themselvesin carrying each other on their backs, the rider holdingwith his mandibles the neck of his bearer, andembracing it closely with his legs, the positionReaumur, Mem. vol. vi. p. 485.f Kirby and Spence, vol. ii. p. 373. J J. R.§ Bonnet, (Euvres, volsci. p. 407.MOTIONS OF INSECTS. 377which the renowned John Gilpin may have sometimesbeen disposed to assume in his famous racethrough Edmonton. But though the very palpablemistakes committed by Bonnet respecting these veryants* may, perhaps, tend to invalidate his authoritywith respect to their riding, we have the undoubtedtestimony of both Gould and Huber for their wrestlings." You may frequently," says Gould, " perceiveone of these ants {Formica ruff, Latr.) runto and fro with a fellow-labourer in his forceps ofthe same species and colony." Mr. Gould observed,that, after being carried for some time, it was let goin a friendly manner and received no personal injury.This amusement is often repeated, particularly amongthe hill ants, who are very fond of this sportiveexercise t-It was amongst the same species, that Huber observedsimilar proceedings, which he has described withhis usual minuteness and accuracy. " I approached,"he says, " one day to the formulary of wood ants,exposed to the sun and sheltered from the north.The ants were heaped upon one another in greatnumbers, and appeared to enjoy the temperature onthe surface of the nest. None of them were at work,and the immense multitude of insects presented theappearance of a liquid in the state of ebullition, uponwhich the eye could scarcely be fixed without difficulty;but when I examined the conduct of eachant, I saw them approach one another, moving theirantennae with astonishing rapidity, while they pattedwith a slight movement the cheeks of other ants.After these preliminary gestures which resembledcaressing, they were observed to raise themselvesupright on their hind legs by pairs, struggle together,seize each other by a mandible, foot, or antenna, andHuber ou Ants, pres. and pp. 21 1 and 233.f Gould on Ants, p. 102, &c.2k3378 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONSthen immediately relax their hold to recommence theattack. They fastened upon each other's shoulders,or bellies, embraced and overthrew each other, thenraised themselves by turns, taking their revengewithout producing any serious mischief. They did notspurt out their venom as in their combats, nor retaintheir opponents with that obstinacy which we observein their real quarrels. They presently abandonedthose which they had first seized, and endeavoured tocatch others. I have seen some who were so eagerin these exercises, that they pursued several workersin succession, and struggled with them a fewmoments, the skirmish only terminating when the leastanimated, having overthrown his antagonist, succeededin escaping and hiding in one of the galleries. Inone place, two ants appeared to be gambolingabout a stalk of grass, — turning alternately to avoidor seize each other, which brought to my recollectionthe sport and pastime of young dogs when they riseon their hind-legs, attempting to bite, overthrow, andseize each other, without once closing their teeth.To witness these facts, it is necessary to approach theant-hills with much caution, that the ants shouldhave no idea of our presence; if they had, theywould cease at the moment their plays or their occupations,would put themselves in a posture of defence,curve up their tails, and ejaculate their venom."M. P. Ruler on Ants, p. 203.Chapter XVI.Peculiar Locomotion.Those who have attended to the paces of the largeranimals, are well aware of their almost infinitevariety ; but the differences between the heavy tread ofthe elephant or the waddling roll of an overgrownpig, the elegant pace of a blood-horse or thesprightly trip of an antelope, will bear no comparisonwith the infinite diversities observable among: themovements of insects. We look upon the long legsof the giraffe and the crane as inelegant and disproportionate,how well suited soever they may be totheir mode of life : but what should we think of aspecies of giraffe, with legs long enough to enable itto overtop the tallest trees, so as to browse on theirtops as oxen do on the grass of a meadow, while itwalked at ease through woods and forests ; or of awren or sparrow with legs as long as the hop-polesamong which it prowled to prey upon aphides andlady-birds. But animals of such descriptions, wildlyimaginary as they must be confessed to be, may bereadily matched in the insect world. The pendulumcrane fly {Tipula moiitatrix)^ formerly mentioned,as well as the shepherd spider (Phalangesopiliojy described in the same place, are remarkableexamples of this ; and we have still more strikinginstances in the large clouded-winged crane fly{Tipula giganiea, Meigen), popularly termed fatherlongings, or jenny-spinner, their stilted legs enablingthese insects to overtop the grass as they walk in themeadows, in the same way as our imaginary giraffe380 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.would overtop the trees in a forest. We have beenmore struck with instances of this in some of thebug tribe, because here it was least to have beenexpected. In our earlier entomological researches,we frequently noticed, upon a white-washed wall, avery strange looking insect, if insect it might becalled, moving about in the most awkward mannerimaginable. It looked, however, more like a slip ofgray tree bark, not half the breadth of a wheat-straw,that had been accidentally caught on some stragglingfilms of spiders' web, which allowed it to oscillateirregularly in the air, than a real living creature, — forthe long gossamer legs did not, to the unassisted eye,appear to move at all, and the slender awkwardbody progressed by interrupted jerks (if suchslow motions may be so termed), resembling themovement of the minute-hand of a clock. Theglass, however, showed that the body was covered bythe folds of four membranous wings, prettily mottled,which lay in a hollow groove on the back, while thelong slender legs were elegantly ringed with white.It was, in short, one of the numerous family of plant-bugs(insides elegant? Curtis) which had strayedfrom the adjacent garden to the wall. Anotheroccurred in the same place somewhat similar, butconsiderably smaller, and stalked along with equallyawkward jerks, upon only its four hind-legs, while itkept its two fore-legs, which were greatly shorter,folded up under its belly, in readiness, probably, toseize on the first luckless mite or aphis that came inits way*. The latter appears to be the wanderingplant-bug (Ploiaria vagabonds, Scopoli).Many insects are capable of performing a featwhich no other animal could accomplish without theaid of the water-shoes lately invented — we allude towalking on the water, as distinct from swimming,*J, R.Peculiar MOTIONS OF INSECTS.a ba, Ploiaria vagabonds, magnified, b, Neides e/^^anf, magnified.which most, if not all animals, save man, can dowithout instruction. The whirlwig beetle {Gyrimisnarrator) can scarcely be said either to walk, run, orswim, — for, as we have taken some pains to ascertain,it appears not to keep its " mary feet" plunged inthe water as it flits about, but strikes smartly out,and suddenly folds them flat under its belly ; on thesame principle as a waterman on the Thames maybeseen to give two or three quick pulls with his oars,to put way, as he calls it, upon his wherry, and thenperking them up out of the water, lets it skim alongwhile he rests motionless. Thus does the littlewhirlwig gode along the water as if by magic, forwe cannot see its feet moving on account of theborder of the wing cases elytra) which overlapthem ; no more than we can discern the feet of a swan,from their dark colour, resembling that of the water,even when she skims about at a small distance fromthe shore*.Most people must have been amused by observingthe groups of water insects which seem to delight in♦ J.R.382 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.swimming against small streams, and apparentlymore for the purpose of maintaining their place thanof making farther progress upwards. The mostcommon of these are two aquatic bugs of differentgenera — the one terris locusts, La.tr.) with along blackish body and legs, and white belly, thoughmore clumsy in form than the water measurer (stagnorum) formerly mentioned ; and theother {Velia currents Latr.), with short bodyand feet, black, with a red line running along eachside. We have been still more amused with adark greenish grey spider {Lycosa Sancta, Latr.),which, when we approach near its haunts on themargin of a stream, does not take shelter in the grass,nor in the holes of the bank, as most of its kindredwould do, but trips away over the water, where itappears to know instinctively that we cannot so easilypursue it. This is not, however, the diving waterspider (Argyroneta aquatic), for though it candive and remain under water, it does not seem torelish this, except when driven to the measure *.•fh, Hydrometra stagnorum. c d, Ht/drackna Geographical, Latr.,front and back view, both magnified, e, Delia rotulorum, Late.J. R.PECULIAR MOTIONS OF INSECTS. 383Some of these water insects have such slender feet,that we can only explain their not sinking in the wateron the same principle as that of a small needle floatingwhen very dry and laid exactly level. Othersagain have their feet fringed with fine hairs whichbuoy them up; while the tipulidan gnats {Chironomi)and other flies, are, perhaps, aided by their wings inkeeping them afloat; for we have observed severalaquatic flies skimming on the surface of the water,apparently half running, half flying. Linnaeus sawone of these little titular, of a black colour, performinggyrations on the water similar to those ofthe whirl wig {Gyrinus): others use their wings asthe swan does, by way of a sail.Other insects walk both through the water, and atits bottom, in a similar manner to walking on land,and not by striking with their feet, as is done inswimming. It is in this manner that the minutepretty water-mite {Hydrachna geographical, Miller),may be seen in every ditch and pond aroundLondon, pacing along, often in company with a stillmore showy one (Limnochares holosericea, La.tr.),whose bright scarlet colour renders it very easily recognised,and may readily lead a young naturalist tosuppose that the scarlet satin mite {Trombidiumholosericeumy Latr.), so frequent on dry banks in thespring, has abandoned the land for the water. Thelatter, however, is much larger.The amphibious nature of those winged beetleswhich can walk at the bottom of water, is matched,if not out-rivalled, by the water-ouzel {Cinclusflgiza^zcMs, B Eckstein), which we have repeatedly seenwalk deliberately under water, and continue its pacefor many yards, as if it had been on land*. As thisJ. R.384 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.little bird lives on water insects and the fry of fish,its amphibious powers are indispensable.Some of these aquatic insects, such as the whirl wig",are so highly polished, that the water will not adhereto their bodies ; while others (Hydrophobia, &c.) arecovered below with a thick coating of silky hair, whichrepels the water and usually surrounds them with aglobule of air that shines under water like quicksilver.The spider mentioned above is similarly furnishedwith downy hair for the same purpose.In walking, insects exhibit endless peculiarities.The hunting spiders, and many of the midges (Psy-choice, Latr.), instead of walking straightforward,most usually walk obliquely, and often at right-anglesto the line of their own bodies ; while most insectscan, when it is necessary, walk directly backwardswith almost as much facility as forwards. Whenthe centipedes {Scolopendridce, Leach) walk backwards,they only use their four hind-legs, and these,when they walk in the usual way, are not employed,but dragged after them like the locked wheel of a mail-coachin driving down a steep hill. It was firstobserved, we believe, by Kirby, that a millepedecommon under stones, the bark of trees, and thehollow stems of decaying plants, and provinciallycalled maggy-manyfeet {Julus terrestrial), performsits serpent-like motion by extending alternate portionsof its numerous legs beyond the line of thebody, while those in the intervals preserve a verticaldirection. So long, then, as it keeps moving, littlebunches of the legs are alternately in and out fromone end to the other of its long body, the undulatingline of motion successively beginning at the head andpassing off at the tail*. We may add, that the formand structure of this insect are admirably adaptedIntr. vol. ii. p. 309.PECULIAR MOTIONS OF INSECTS. 385to its mode of life, it being long and of small diameter,to enable it to thread its way through narrowholes ; while its covering is highly polished to facilitateits passage, and so hard as to prevent it beinglacerated by any splinter of wood which it mightchance to encounter, while it is at the same time soflexible, that it can coil itself up into a circle of verysmall diameter. The hardness and the flexibility,though apparently incompatible, are produced by asimilar contrivance to that of the spine in man — thewhole body of the julius being composed of smallhard rings united by flexible joints*.Instances have occurred in which a sheep or acow has come into the world with legs upon its back:this, of course, is a monstrosity out of the usual courseof nature ; but in a very singular insect, the bat-louse{Nycteribia Hermann, Leach), the legsappear to have their usual place on the back. " Ittransports itself," says Colonel Montagu, " withsuch celerity, from one part of the animal it inhabitsto the opposite and most distant, although obstructedby the extreme thickness of the fur, that it is notreadily taken." — " When two or three were put intoa small phial, their agility appeared inconceivablygreat ; for, as their feet are incapable of fixing uponso smooth a body, their whole exertion was employedin laying hold of each other ; and in this most curiousstruggle, they appeared actually flying in circles:and when the bottle was reclined, they would frequentlypass from one end to the other with astonishingvelocity, accompanied by the same gyrations : ifby accident they escaped each other, they very soonbecame motionless ; and as quickly were the wholeput in motion again by the least touch of the bottleor the movement of an individual t."Many of the beetles run with great velocity, andJ. R. f Linn. Trans, vol, xi. p. 13.2l38«INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS,dart off into holes and corners so suddenly, as oftento escape the quickest movements of an insecthunter. It is remarkable, however, that those swift-footedinsects seldom run far without making a fullpause to reconnoitre their position, as a deer may beseen to arch his neck from behind a tree to examinea stranger, and, after tripping off to some distance,turn round again to take another peep at the intruder.The same habit is observable among spiders, particularlythe hunters, and those which run aboutmeadows and the margins of water (Lycosa sancta,&c.) Some of the mites are still more rapid in theirmovements, and we have often admired a very commonone (Gammasus Baccarnm, Fabr.) which frequentsstrawberry-beds in gardens, and, as Kirbyand Spence justly say, appears rather to glide or flythan to use its legs*. Its minuteness adds to thea,Jvlui terrestrial. h, the same coiled up. c, oil beetle (Pro-scarabaeusvulgaris), d, Nycteribia Hermann.Intr. vpl*ii«p.Sll.PECULIAR MOTIONS OP INSECTS. 387surprise produced by its movements, for it is littlelarger than a grain of sand, of a pale reddish colour,with two black dots on the back : — and though theclods of garden-mould are mountains in comparisonto its size, it gallops over them at a thousand timesgreater proportional speed than the swiftest racehorse*.As a contrast to the quick moving insects justmentioned, we may turn for a moment to those whichmove very slowly. The hunting spiders, though theycan dart with the rapidity of lightning upon theirprey, yet take care to approach a victim with suchextraordinary caution, that the shadow upon a sun-dialadvances not more imperceptibly f. Some of thebeetles again move very slowly, particularly the onepopularly called the oil-beetle {Proscar abceus vulgaris,Stephens), on account of the oily-lookingfluid which oozes out from it when seized or alarmed.The unwieldy bulk of this animal makes it almostpainful to look at the efforts it apparently has tomake as it lumbers along. It always reminds usof those bees which, during autumn, may often beseen crawling lifelessly upon flowers, as if so over-gorgedwith the honey which they had extracted, thatthey are unfit to fly. How the oil-beetle becomesso fat, it is not easy to say, when we consider that itfeeds upon plants, and is seen very early in spring.After the severe winter of 1829-30, we found several,in the beginning of March, feeding on the bulbous-rootedbuttercup ranunculus bulbous), at Charlton,in Kent, and as plump as if there had not beena day's frost during the winter.Another very common insect, popularly called thebloody-nosed beetle {Timarcha tenebricosa, Me-merle),from its ejecting a red fluid from its mouthwhen caught, is one of the very slow walkers ; butJ. R, f Insect Architecture, p. 355.3l2388 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.it is furnished with feet most admirably contrived fortaking hold of the catched alium Aparine)^and other trailing plants, on which it feeds. Thiscontrivance consists of cushions, formed of a slightlyconcave mass of thick soft hair, which both adheresby its points, and also produces somewhat of a vacuum,which enables it to walk as easily with its headperpendicularly downwards as upwards.The most perfect contrivance of this kind, however,occurs in the domestic fly {{Musca domestica andits congeners, as well as in several other insects.Few can have failed to remark, that flies walk withthe utmost ease along the ceiling of a room, and no lessso upon a perpendicular looking-glass ; and thoughthis were turned downwards, the flies would not falloff, but could maintain their position undisturbedwith their backs hanging downwards. The conjecturesdevised by naturalists, to account for this singularcircumstance, previous to the ascertaining of theactual facts, are not a little amusing. *' Some suppose,"says the Abbe de la Pluche, " that when thefly marches over any polished body, on which neitherher claws nor her points can fasten, she sometimescompresses her sponge and causes it to evacuate afluid, which fixes her in such a manner as preventsher falling without diminishing the facility of herprogress ; but it is much more probable, that thesponges correspond with the fleshy balls which accompanythe claws of dogs and cats *, and that theyenable the fly to proceed with a softer pace, and contributeto the preservation of its claws, whose pointedextremities would soon be impaired without thisprevention t'" — *' Its ability to walk on glass," saysS. Shaw, " proceeds partly from some little ruggednessthereon, but chiefly from a tarnish, or dirtySee Menageries, Lib. of Entertain. Know. vol, i. p. 173.f Spect. de la Nat, vol. i. p. 116.Peculiar MOTIONS OF INSECTS, 389smoky substance, adhering' to the surface; so that,though the sharp points on the sponges cannot penetratethe surface of the glass, it may easily catch holdof the tarnish." This is evidently borrowed fromHooks. But it is singular that none of these fanciersever took the trouble to ascertain the existence ofeither a gluten squeezed out by the fly, or of thesmoky tarnish on glass. Even the shrewd Reaumurcould not give a satisfactory explanation of thecircumstance.The earliest correct notion on this curious subjectwas entertained by Derham, who, upon mentioningthe provision made for insects that hang on smoothsurfaces, says, " I might here name divers flies andother insects, who, besides their sharp-hooked nails,have also skinny palms to their feet to enable themto stick to glass and other smooth bodies, by meansof the pressure of the atmosphere — after the manneras I have seen boys carry heavy stones with only awet piece of leather clapped on the top of the stones."The justly celebrated Mr. White, of Selborne, apparentlywithout the aid of microscopical investigation,adopted Derham's opinion, adding the interestingillustration, that in the decline of the year, whenthe flies crowd to windows and become sluggish andtorpid, they are scarcely able to lift their legs, whichseem glued to the glass, where many actually sticktill they die; whereas they are, during warm weather,so brisk and alert that they easily overcome thepressure of the atmosphere §.This singular mechanism, however, is riot peculiarto flies, for some animals, a hundred times as large,can walk upon glass by the same means. St. PierreNature Dispel. vol. iii. p. 98. Lond. 1823.f Micrographiaj p. 170.I Physico-theology, voj.ii, p. 194, note (6), 11th ed.§ Nat. Hist, of Selborne, vol, ii. p. 274,2l3390 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.mentions ** a very small handsome lizard, about afinger's length, which climbs along the walls, andeven along glass, in pursuit of flies and other insects;"and Sir Joseph Banks noticed anotherlizard, named the gecko lacerta G^ecAro, Linn.) whichcould walk against gravity, and which made himdesirous of having the subject thoroughly investigated.On mentioning it to Sir Everard Home, he and Mr.Bauer commenced a series of researches, by whichthey proved incontrovertibly, that in climbing uponglass, and walking along the ceilings with the backdownwards, a vacuum is produced by a particularapparatus in the feet, sufficient to cause atmosphericpressure upon their exterior surface.The apparatus in the feet of the fly consists of twoor three membranous suckers connected with the lastjoint of the foot by a narrow neck, of a funnel shape,immediately under the base of each claw, and moveablein all directions. These suckers are convexabove and hollow below the edges, being marginedwith minute features, and the hollow portioncovered with down. In order to produce the vacuumand the pressure, these membranes are separated andexpanded, and when the fly is about to lift its foot,it brings them together, and folds them up as it werebetween the two claws. By means of a commonmicroscope, these interesting movements may beobserved when a fly is confined in a wine-glass t-It is a very remarkable analogy, that many flyinginsects, as well as many birds, instead of walking,leap or hop along somewhat in the manner of akangaroo or a jerboa. But the most common andbest known instance of a leaping insect, is the flea(Pulex irritant whose wings are, according toKirby, obsolescent. The structure of this annoyingVoyage to the Isle of France, p. 73.f Philosoph. Trans, for 1816, p. 325.PECULIAR MOTIONS OF INSECTS.• Feet of the blue-bottle fly, magnified 6400 times. A, a view of the undersideof the last joint of the toe, with the two suckers expanded, as seenwhen the fly is walking against gravity. B, side of ditto.Teetofthehhofehnlts, (LATB.,)magnified 6400 times." A, the undersideof the last joint of the toe, with the three suckers expanded. B,side view of ditto.392 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.creature, is well fitted for its mode of life — it beingfurnished with so tough a skin that it is no easymatter to crush it, while it is so smooth that it wouldalmost glide through a pin-hole. The extraordinarymuscular power of the thighs, again, combined withtheir elasticity, enable it to perform most astonishingleaps, as we have remarked in a preceding page ;while its comparative lightness and the toughness ofits skin prevent it from receiving any injury, fromwhatever height it may fall. It is very doubtful,indeed, as it appears to us, whether it observes thegood old proverb of looking before it leaps, for wehave seen fleas leap from the bottom of a deep pill-box,where they could not possibly perceive whitherthey were leaping *. It may not be out of place here tomention, that fleas (Pulicidce) undergo similar transformationsto other insects, laying their eggs at theroots of the hair of animals, the feathers of birds, orinwoollen stuffs. These, in a few days, produce aminute whitish grub, which, in warm weatherchanges to a perfect flea in about six weeks : as maybeverified by whoever will take the trouble of enclosingsome female fleas, which are always thelargest, in glass tubes, and feeding them with flies orraw beef, as was done by Rusel, De Geer, and manyFlea magnified, to show the muscular structure of the lees,J, R.PECULIAR MOTIONS OF INSECTS. 393others. Mr. Stephens enumerates no less than twelvespecies, from which it appears that those found onthe dog, the pigeon, and other animals, are quitedifferent from the common flea, and it is probablethese will not readily pass from their natural habit toinfest us, as is commonly believed.The extraordinary power of leaping in grasshoppersand their congeners is matter of common observation.The motion is effected by means of verystrong muscles with which the hind thighs are furnished; and it is a similar structure which enables thefrog-hoppers (CercopidcBy Leach), so common onplants during summer, to perform leaps of extraordinaryextent, in which, however, they have likewisethe assistance of their wings. Some species makeuse of their faculty of leaping to escape from theirenemies, as well as for the purpose of changingplace, while others use it to spring upon their prey.Among the former we may mention a familyof small insects (Poduridae^ Leach), some of thereinhabiting water or damp places, though most of thespecies are found under decaying bark or vegetable refuse.The one that is most likely to attract attentionis a very small gregarious one, the water spring-tail(Podura a^wa^icft), which may often be seen, duringthe summer, crowded upon the rain-water collectedin the footsteps of cattle, the ruts of cart-wheels, orby the edges of small ponds, and looking preciselyas if one had strewed about a handful of coal-ashesor gunpowder ; but, though at first glance they seeminanimate, closer inspection will show that they arein active motion, and particularly if they be alarmedleaping about and upon one another, and on thewater, like so many minute fire-works. Those whichare solitary are much larger, among which we maymention the velvet spring-tail {Podura holosericed),of which we Jiere sive a magnified figure, to shew394 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.the spring in the tail, by means of which it leaps,jerking it downwards and outwards from its body asthe flea does its legs.Leaping position of the velvet spring-tail, magnified.Amongst the insects which spring upon their preylike the cat and the lion, the most commonly observedis the little hunting spider {Salticus scemcws), whosezebra stripes of white and brown render it easilydiscovered on our window-frames and palings*.But all the spiders — even those which form webs —are accustomed to spring in a similar way upon whatthey have caught; and when we are told of thegigantic American one (My gale avicularia), whicheven makes prey of small birds (TrochilidcB)^ thenecessity of extraordinary agility must be obvious;for these tiny birds are described to move withalmost the velocity of light, — the eye, notwithstandingthe brilliancy of their metallic colours, beingfrequently baffled in tracking their flight. Thespider itself, however, being three inches in length,one and a half in breadth, and eleven inches in theexpansion of its legs, is little less than the bird uponwhich it pounces, as may be seen from the followingfigure, taken from the splendid work of MadameMerian upon the insects of Surinam.All animals which fly are furnished with powerfulmuscles for moving their wings, in the same way asthe limbs of those which leap are similarly provided ;See Insect Architecture, p. 355.PECULIAR MOTIONS OF INSECTS. 395Mygale avicularia, rom Madame Merian.and we may, therefore, remark, in passing, that anyinvention for enabling men to fly must take thecomparative weakness of our muscles into primaryconsideration. Let any one try merely to stretch outhis arm as a hawk, or a swift fly {Vol.ucelld), does itswings, when hovering apparently motionless in theair, — and the quick recurrence of weariness, speedilyincreasing to pain, will afford unequivocal proof ofthe apparently exhaustless vigour of their volitantmuscles, compared with ours. It would be no verydifficult matter to give voluminous illustrations onthis curious subject. A French naturalist, M. Charter,has actually written an elaborate quarto volume,on the flight of insects*. Though Chabrierhas unquestionable talents of the first order for research,it is unfortunate that he permits his fancy totravel somewhat beyond the boundaries of fact ; andto this, no doubt, we are to ascribe his retracting hisEssai sur le Vol des Insects, 4 to. Paris, 1801.396 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.former opinions on the fight of insects ; yet it mighthave been supposed, that in writing so voluminouslyon the subject, he had left no point uninvestigated.Nothing, however, can be more praiseworthy thanthe candour (not very common in such cases) withwhich Chabrier corrects his own mistake.In the two-winged flies {{Dipterd) Chabrier describestwo sets of muscular ribbons for putting thewings in play — the dorsal placed lengthwise, andused to lower the wings, and the sterno-dorsal placedobliquely across these for raising the wings. In thedragon-flies {Libellulina) , again, the disposition issomewhat different, the sterno-dorsal muscles beingplaced intermediate, while another set of powerfulmuscles, called pectoral, are placed lengthwise, andare inserted immediately into the wings. In his firstwork, our author thought these muscles acted separately,but he now says they act in concert; and heis not now inclined to ascribe, as he at first did,so much influence to the air in the interior of thebody, nor to the spring of the harder parts of theback and breast, " Certainly," he adds, " the elasticityof these parts, and the reaction of the interiorair have their use : the fluid, particularly, containedin their numerous vesicles, is, perhaps, very light, andcontributes to reduce the specific gravity of theinsect. Besides, by enveloping the interior organs,it appears to me intended to protect these againstthe violent motions of flight, and to contribute tothe expansion of the chest, dilating immediatelyafter being compressed by the contraction of themuscles in the act of raising the wings."It will appear, from this brief abstract, that thesubject is not a little interesting ; yet it is not so easyto throw it into a form likely to be understood by ageneral reader. Flying with wings, however, is aM. Chabrier in Ann. des Soc. Nat., Avril 1829, p. 505.PECULIAR MOTIONS OF INSECTS. 397Magnified views of the muscular ribbons for moving; the wingsin Sisyphus itianis. a, part of the belly, b, the coitu dorsal muscles,c, d, the sterno dorsal, e, part of the headlessdifficult subject of investigation than flying withoutwings, as is practised by the gossamer spider{Aranea obtextrix, Bechstein), and its congeners.We do not allude merely to the threads carried outfrom a spider by a current of air, till it is fixed andforms a bridge, along which the creature can pass,nor to the similar lines which are left to float freely,in the case of the gossamer, without attachment*.We refer to the power which the spider apparentlypossesses of directing its flight. Let any one endeavourto catch one of the spiders which may frequentlybe seen dropping from the ceiling of a room, thebranch of a tree, or other elevated object, and he willfind it no easy task to lay hold of the little web spia-See Insect Architecture, pp,339-54.2 M398 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.hier, for it will not only drop perpendicularly" byspinning a longer thread (it seldom tries to escapeby remounting), but it will swing itself away from theapproaching hand, in a manner which it seems not alittle difficult to comprehend, for it does not move alimb to produce an impulse in the air, as the divingspider {Argyroneta aquatic) does when it movesthrough the water. In instances when no escape isintended, when spiders, even of considerable size,drop from a height, we have often seen them swingout of the perpendicular without any apparent aidfrom the wind. It is highly probable that thismovement is effected by some internal apparatusanalogous to the swim-bladder of fishes; but atpresent we are not aware that anything beyond conjecturehas been published upon the subject. Wemay state, however, that they cannot in this mannermove far.Surplus.Chapter XVII.Rest of Insects,Mr. Brightvvell is reported to have once observedan individual living specimen of Attica concinna,which appeared to remain motionless on the samespot of a wall for three successive days*; but thoughthis is given as something unusual, we have madesimilar observations in the case of numerous insectsof all orders and families. The continual stationaryappearance, however, is, in most of such cases, quitefallacious. To use a familiar illustration, we mightas well think the snail stationary which we seeevery day, perhaps for weeks together, coiled up inthe same niche of the garden-wall, as if it were gluedto the spot, and had never moved from it a hair's-breadth,— were it not that the depredations committedupon a contiguous lettuce, prove that it does notalways sleep, though its excursions from its chosenniche, as they take place only at night, are seldom, ifever, observed. Like a very large portion of thewhole insect world, snails always sleep throughout theday, unless roused by an accidental shower of rain,which tempts them to banquet on the refreshedherbage. Upon butterflies, and some other day insects,again, the occurrence of rain or cloudy weatherusually operates like a continuance or a renewal ofnight; and this seems to happen even in-doors, wherethe air is warm and comparatively dry. We had afemale of the brimstone butterfly {GonepteryxRkamni) in our study, which we were desirous ofKirby and Spence, Intr. vol. iv. p. 193.2 M 2400 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.having deposit her eggs on a plant of the buckthorn{Rhamnus frangula), which we had placed in agarden-pot for this purpose ; and we remarked thatshe manifested no inclination to move from the sameleaf, except for an hour or two in the forenoon, andwhen it was damp or cloudy, not even then. Ifdisturbed in her repose, she would fall down as if lifeless,and continue her sleep — (if sleep it was), withoutbeing awakened by the fall, till her regular period ofanimation returned.We have used the qualifying phrase — " if sleep itwas;" because the rest of insects, though corresponding,in the circumstance of remaining without motion,with the sleep of the larger animals, may not agreein any other respect, — and particularly in thequiescence of the senses. In the important point ofthe state of the brain, it does not appear how therecould be any agreement in the phenomenon ; as maybeinferred from comparing the structure of insects,as respects their nerves and blood-vessels, with thatof man.Insects, though possessed of nerves, have nothingsimilar to our brain and spinal cord, the two sourcesof our nerves of feeing and of motion, as so beautifullyexplained by the recent discoveries of Mr. CharlesBell. Instead of this, they have a chain of what arecalled ganglia, or bundles of nervous substance, andfrom each of these bundles nerves branch out to theparts contiguous, — each ganglion forming the centreof feeling to the parts to which its nerves run ; andhence it is that insects will live, and (so far as wecan perceive) feel comparatively little general painand inconvenience from the loss of their limbs oreven of their heads. Thus the tail of a wasp or abee will sting long after it is severed from the body,and the head of a dragon-fly will eat as voraciouslyafter it is cut off, as if it had to supply an insatiableREST OP INSECTS. 401stomach, — phenomena easily accounted for from thewant of a brain, and from each ganglion having itsown set of nerves. This may be better understood bylooking at the central chain of ganglia in the larva ofthe day-fly before figured*.Insects again differ from man in having no heartnor circulating blood, at least so far as has hithertobeen discovered f. Dr. Cams, of Dresden, is, indeed,at present endeavouring to establish a claim to the discoveryof the circulation of the blood in insects ; butthis circulation, which is most probably only partial,has, we think, been observed by naturalists of a formerage. *' De Geer," say Kirby and Spence, " whoselove of truth and accuracy no one will call inquestion, saw the appearance of blood-vessels inthe leg of the larva of a caddis fly {Phryganea,Linn), as Lyonnet did in those of a flea, and inthe transparent thigh of the bird fly {Ornithomyiaavicularid) he discovered a pulse like that of anartery §. Baker, whose only object was to recordwhat he saw, speaks of the current of the bloodbeing remarkably visible in the legs of some smallbugs II ; what he meant by that term is uncertain,but they could not be spiders, which he hadjust distinguished. This author has likewise seena green fluid passing through the vessels of the wingsof grasshoppers; and M. Chabrier is of opinionthat insects possess the power of propelling a fluidinto the nervures of their wings, and withdrawing itat pleasure, as they are elevated or depressed** : butSee page 139.f See Cuvier, Anat. Comp. vol. iv. p. 478, &c. And Marcelde Ser-res, Mem. du Mus. pour 1819.j Lesser, vol. ii. p. 84, note.\ De Geer, vol. ii. p. 505 ; vol. vi. p. 287.II On the Microscope, vol. i. p. 130. ^ Ibid.** Sur le Vol des Insectes.2 Bi 340*2 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.these two last facts must be accounted for on otherprincipes, as there is clearly no circulation *."The statement recently published by one of theseauthors (Mr. Spence), respecting the alleged discoveryof insect circulation by Dr. Cams, is foundedon facts which were shown and explained to himby the doctor himself. " The first insect," saysMr. Spence, " to which Dr. Carus directed myattention, was the larva of ephemera vulgate (or anallied species), in which, near to the franchise andparallel with each side of the body, was very distinctlyvisible a constant current, towards the tail, of oblongglobules swimming in a transparent fluid, propelledwith a regular pulsating motion ; and on cutting thebody of the larva across near the tail, three globuleswere most plainly seen pushed out of the dividedvessels in a distinct mass, which increased at eachpulsation. I cannot express the pleasure which itgave me, to see thus clearly this ocular demonstrationof one of the most important physiological discoveriesof modern times ; and my gratification washeightened by the next object which Dr. Carus placedbefore his microscope, viz. — a specimen of sembleviridis (the green lace-winged fly), in which preciselythe same phenomena, but, if possible, moreclearly, were seen in the nervures of the wings andin the antennae, in both which the constant currentof globules was most apparent ; and in the former,the sudden turning of these globules, at the apex ofthe wing, out of the exterior nervure into a centralone, with which it joins and forms an acute angle,was equally curious and striking. On cutting off theend of the antennae, precisely the same emission ofglobules (which soon assume a greenish tint) tookplace as in the former case, forming a mass, whichwas increased with a sudden gush at each pulsation,♦ Introdd. vol. iv, p. 86.REST OF INSECTS. 403Dr. Cams has observed the same phenomena in thewings of Semble bilineata, and in the elytra (wingcases) of Lampyris noctibica (the glow-worm), andL. Italics, as well as in the fin-like appendages at thetail of the larva of Agrion j)udla (the damsel dragonfly), in which he first made the discovery, and inwhich the circulation is remarkably distinct *."We apprehend, as far as we can collect from thisdescription, that the alleged discovery of Dr. Camsdoes not advance a step in demonstrating a circulationin insects similar to that of other classes ofanimals ; for it is to be recollected, that the dorsalvessel, the only organ in insects analogous to aheart, although it pulsates irregularly, has no apparentarteries or veins connected with it : andtherefore the impulsions described by De Geer, thecurrent mentioned by Baker, and the phenomenaexhibited by Carus, furnish no proof whatever ofa general circulatory system, though they appear toindicate local movements in the fluids of insects,agreeably to the original views of Chabrier, or thoseof Swammerdam formerly quoted f.It may appear to some, that the preceding has butavery remote connexion with the subject immediatelybefore us ; but we shall presently show its connexionwith the phenomena of insect sleep. Weagree with Professor Blumenbach, that sleep in manmost probably consists in a diminished or impededflow of arterial blood into the brain. For example,if, by cold feet, a fit of passion, or a heavy supper,a gush of blood is forced into the brain and stagnatesthere, the consequence will be the snoringdeath-ike sleep of apoplexy; and the same willhappen, if a blow on the head, or a fever, throwsa quantity of blood upon the brain. BlumenbachSpence in Mag. of Nat. Hist., Jan. 1830, p.49.t See page 343.404 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.had ocular demonstration of the fact contended for,with respect to the diminished flow of blood, in aman whose brain was exposed by the accidental removalof a part of the skull ; for, whenever this manfell asleep, the brain was seen to shrink and subside,but the moment he awoke a tide of blood was seenrushing through the vessels and swelling the brain.The same is also proved by the fact, that in madnessand inflammation of the brain, when the blood flowsrapidly, the unhappy sufferer is altogether deprivedof sleep, unless the current of the blood is retardedby strong doses of opium, or by taking away a largequantity by the lancet. It will follow, that when theblood-vessels of the brain are gorged, as well as whenthey are not sufficiently full, — sleep will be equallyproduced. Force more blood into the brain than canfind room to flow, and drowsiness, sleep, perhapsapoplexy, will follow; — diminish the quantity, so thatit may lack force to keep up the current, and sleepwill also come on. On these principles it it is thatthinking, by bestirring the brain and driving thither abrisker current of blood, prevents sleep ; while,bathing the feet in warm water, eating a moderatesupper, or rubbing the body with a flesh-brush, bydrawing a superabundance of blood to the feet, to thestomach, or to the skin, will cause sleep. Again, itis a general hiw of animated nature, for rest to succeedfatigue, as temporary insensibility succeeds vividsensations. The pain of a burn, for example, comesand goes alternately; and by holding out the armfrom the body, the feeling of fatigue and pain soonbecome so insupportable, that rest cannot be dispensedwith. Sleep, then, seems to be a generalconsequence of this rest after fatigue.With regard to insects, it is evident that many ofthe above facts will not at all apply ; for as insectshave neither a heart nor a brain, their sleep cannotREST OF INSECTS. 405be proximately caused by a retarded current of blood.We want data also for determining whether similareffects are produced upon the senses of insects duringtheir quiescence, or apparent sleep, as take place inourselves. The shutting of the eye-lids, next tomotionless rest, is one of the most obvious characteristicsof sleep in man ; but in insects nothing likethis can be observed, because they have nothinganalogous to eye-lids. The senses of insects, indeed,may not sleep at all — and what renders this the moreprobable is, that in the case of gnats, crane-flies(TipulidiB), moths, butterflies, &c., however long theymay have been observed to be quiescent, or sleeping,in the same place, they are instantly on the alert atthe approach of danger, though no noise be made toalarm them*. It may serve to illustrate this state ofwakefulness in the senses of quiescent insects, thatthe senses in man do not all sleep in the same degreeof profundity. This very curious fact was first, webelieve, opened by M. Cabanis, who also foundthat some of our senses and members go to sleepsooner than others — in proportion, it may be presumedto their fatigue from their waking exertions,and to the flow of blood through them. Accordingto Cabanis, then, the muscles of the legs and armsare the first to become drowsy, and next those thatsustain the head, which, losing its support, falls forward;the muscles of the back follow, and it becomesbent. Among the senses, the eye is the first thatgoes to sleep ; and after it the smell, taste, hearing,and touch, become drowsy in succession. The senseof touch never sleeps so profoundly as the others,—a fact inferred from our frequent change of positionduring sleep, which must be the consequence ofuneasy sensations of touch. Besides this, it is wellknown that a slight tickling of the soles of the feetJ.R,406 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.will waken a person whom no noise could rouse. Inthe order of their awaking again, taste and smell arealways last, and sight appears more difficult to awakenthan hearing ; for a slight noise will often rouse asleep-walker, who had borne an intense light on hisunshut eyes, without seeming in the least to feel itsinfluence *.The torpidity of insects during winter, which insome of its circumstances is analogous to sleep, willrequire the less to be discussed here, that we have,under our three former divisions of Eggs, Pupae, andLarvae, considered it very amply. The number ofinsects, indeed, which hybernate in the perfect stateare comparatively few. Of the brimstone butterfly{Gonepteryx Rhamni), Mr. Stephens tells us the secondbrood appears in autumn, " and of the latter,"he adds, " many individuals of both sexes remainthroughout the winter, and make their appearance onthe first sunny day in spring. I have seen themsometimes so early as the middle of February t."The commonly perfect state of the wings in suchcases might, we think, lead to the contrary conclusion,that the butterfly has just been evolvedfrom its chrysalis. Several other species, however,chiefly of the genus Vanessa, do live through thewinter in the perfect state ; but this, as far as generalobservation extends, can only be affirmedof the female. Yet will insects bear almost incredibledegrees of cold with impunity. Out of themultiplicity of instances of this on record we shallselect two. In Newfoundland, Captain Buchan sawa lake, which in the evening was entirely still andfrozen over, but as soon as the sun had dissolved theice in the morning, it was all in a bustle of animation,in consequence, as was discovered, of myriadsCabanis, Rapports du Physique et Moral,•}■ Illustrations, vol, i. p. 9.REST OP INSECTS. 407of flies let loose, while many still remained -" infixedand frozen round." A still stronger instance is mentionedby Ellis, in which a large black mass, likecoal or peat upon the hearth, dissolved, when thrownupon the fire, into a cloud of mosquitoes {Culicid^) *.It has been remarked by most writers upon thetoi-rapidity of warm-blooded animals, that cold doesnot seem to be its only cause, and the same apparentlyholds in the case of insects. Bees, indeed,which remain semi-torpid during the winter, may beprematurely animated into activity by the occurrenceof some days of extraordinary mildness in spring ;but, what is not a little wonderful and inexplicable,they are not roused by much milder weather whenit occurs before Christmas, — on the same principle,perhaps, that a man is more easily awakened after hehas slept six or seven hours than in the earlier partof the night. Immediately after the first severe frostin the winter of 1829-30, we dug down into thelower chambers of a nest of the wood-ant (Formicaruff), at Forest Hill, Kent, which we had thatchedthickly with fern-leaves the preceding November, bothto mark the spot and to protect the ants in winter.About two feet deep we found the little colonists allhuddled up in contiguous separate chambers, quitemotionless till they were exposed to the warm sunshine,when they began to drag themselves sluggishlyand reluctantly along. Even upon bringingsome of them into a warm room, they did not awakeninto summer activity, but remained lethargic, unwillingto move, and refusing to eat, and continuedin the same state of semi-torpidity till their brethrenin the woods began to bestir themselves to repair thedamages caused by the winter storms in the outworksof their encampments f*Quarterly Review, April 1821, p. 200. f J. R,408 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.The younger Huber has given an interesting accountof the hybernation of ants, which differs insome particulars from what we have observed of thewood-ant ; but he speaks of ants in general. Thesubject, indeed, derives importance from the popularopinion, that they amass wheat and other grain as awinter store, having been refuted by the experimentsof Gould and other accurate observers. " Wehave endeavoured," says M. Huber, " to explaintheir preservation, by supposing them to fall into astate of torpor at this period. They, in fact, becametorpid during the intense cold, but when theseason is not very severe, the depth of their nestguards them from the effects of the frost : they donot become torpid unless the temperature is reducedto the second degree of Reaumur under the freezingpoint, (27° Fahrenheit). I have occasionally seenthem walking upon the snow, engaged in their customaryavocations. In so reduced a temperature,they would be exposed to the horrors of famine,were they not supplied with food by the pucerons,who, by an admirable concurrence of circumstances,which we cannot attribute to chance, become torpidat precisely the same degree of cold as the ants, andrecover from this state also at the same time : theants, therefore, always find them when they needthem.Those ants that do not possess the knowledge ofthe mode of assembling these insects, are, at least,acquainted with their retreat ; they follow them to thefeet of the trees and the branches of the shrubs theybefore frequented, and pass at the first degree of frostalong the hedges, following the paths which conductto these insects. They bring back to the republica small quantity of honey ; a very little sufficingfor their support in winter. As soon as the antsrecover from their torpid state, they venture forth toREST OF INSECTS. 40^procure their food. The aliment contained in theirstomach is, on their return, equally distributed totheir companions. These juices scarcely evaporate,during this season, owing to the thickness of thehoney rings investing the body. I have known antspreserve, during a considerable time, their internalstock of provisions, when they could not impart it totheir companions. When the cold increases in agradual manner, (and this is commonly what theants experience, who are screened from it by a thickwall of earth,) they collect and lie upon each otherby thousands, and appear all hooked together. Isthis done in order to provide themselves a little heat ?I presume this to be the case, but our thermometersare not sufficiently delicate to indicate if this be reallythe fact."During the frosts of 1829-30, we opened twonests of the yellow ant (Formica Flava) , in which wefound the inhabitants by no means torpid or inactive,although not so lively as in summer ; but thesenests were in a peculiarly warm situation, being bothin the old trunks of willows, rendered quite spongyby the dry-rot, and facing the south-west, where theyhad the benefit of every glimpse of sunshine. Wesearched with great minuteness for the eggs of theaphides mentioned by Huber, but without success,and we cannot account for their means of subsistence,unless they fed on the various insects and crustaceousanimals which abounded in the trees,{Onisci, Juice, &c.) They were also, in both instances,within a yard of a stream of water, to thevicinity of which we have observed that this speciesis partial, and it is not improbable that it may forman indispensable part of their subsistence. No speciesof ants, indeed, can live without drinking. InFebruary of the same year, immediately after theHuber on Ants, p. 239. See also thisvolumc; pages 113-116.2n410 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.breaking up of the first frost, we also observed numbersof the small black ant {Formica fused) runningabout the sunny sides of hedge-banks ; and thoughwe did not trace them to their winter quarters, wethink it not improbable, from their very early appearance,that they had never been completely torpid *.The bee is popularly believed to hybernate, the sevenwinter sleepers being said to be, "the bat, the bee, thebutterfly, the cuckoo, and the three swallows ;" but,like many of the popular notions on natural history,this is almost wholly erroneous, for at least, out ofthese seven, the four birds certainly do not becometorpid. With respect to the bee, again, we find someof the most distinguished observers at variance.Reaumur is an advocate for the popular opinion.It has been established," he says, *' with a wisdom,which we cannot but admire,' — with whicheverything in nature has been made and ordained, —that during the greater part of the time in which thecountry furnishes nothing to bees, they have nolonger need to eat. The cold which arrests the vegetationof plants — which deprives our fields andmeadows of their flowers — throws the bees into astate in which nourishment ceases to be necessary tothem : it keeps them in a sort of torpidity, in whichno transpiration from them takes place, or at leastduring which the quantity of what transpires is soinconsiderable, that it cannot be restored by alimentwithout their lives being endangered. In winter,while it freezes, we may observe without fear the interiorof hives that are not of glass ; for we may laythem on their sides, and even turn them bottomupwards, without putting any bee into motion. Wesee the bees crowded and closely pressed one againstthe other ; little space then suffices for themesAgain, when mentioning the custom of putting .t Mem. V. p. 667,REST OF INSECTS. 411hives during the winter into out-houses and cellars,he says, " that in such situations, the air, thoughmore temperate than out of doors, during the greaterpart of the winter, is yet sufficiently cold to keep thebees in that species of torpidity which does awaywith the necessity of their eating *." He also says,positively, that the milder the weather, the more riskthere is of the bees consuming their honey before thespring, and dying of hunger ; confirming his positionby an account of a striking experiment, inwhich a hive that he transferred during winter intohis study, where the temperature was usually, in theday, 10° or 12° of Reaumur's thermometer abovefreezing, or 59° Fahrenheit, though the bees were providedwith a plentiful supply of honey, that if theyhad been in a garden would have served past theend of April, had consumed nearly their whole stockbefore the end of February f-But the elder Huber records some observationsdirectly opposed to these, affirming unequivocally,that, so far from being torpid in winter, the heat in awell peopled hive is as high as 25° Reaumur, or 86°Fahrenheit, even when the thermometer in the openair is several degrees below zero, the heat thus observedbeing generated in the hive by their clusteringtogether, and keeping themselves in motion ; andeven in the middle of winter they may be heardbuzzing as they always do when ventilating thehive, — a process which appears to have been originallydiscovered by Huber, and of which, on accountof its connexion with the disputed question before us,we shall give his own description :During fine weather," (in summer), says he, " acertain number of bees always appear before the entranceof the hive occupied in vibrating their wings,but still more are found to be engaged in ventilatingMem. vol. v. p. 682. f lb. vol. v. p. 668.2n2412 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.the interior. The ordinary place of ventilation is onthe board ; those outside of the entrance have theirheads towards it ; those within have them in theopposite direction.*' We may affirm that they arrange themselves regularlyto ventilate more at ease, thus forming: files,which terminate at the entrance, and sometimes disposedlike so many diverging rays. This order isnot uniform, but is probably owing to the necessityfor the ventilating bees giving way to those goingand coming, whose rapid course compels them torange themselves in a file, to avoid being hurt oroverthrown every instant.Sometimes above twenty bees ventilate at thebottom of a hive, at other times their number ismore circumscribed, and their employment of variousduration. We have seen them engaged in it duringtwenty-five minutes, only taking breath, as it were,by the shortest interruption of the vibration. Onceasing, they are succeeded by others, so that thereis never any intermission of the buzzing of a populoushive.*' If under the necessity of ventilating duringwinter, being then united near the centre of the masstowards the top of their dwelling, doubtless the beesperform this important function among vacuities ofthe irregular combs, where there is room for theirwings to expand, as at least half an inch is requisitefor them to play freely.The ventilation of the bees, or the buzzingwhich denotes it, seems to me more active duringwinter than at any other time. It was easy to provethat this operation established a current of air ; foranemometers of light paper or cotton, hung by athread, were impelled towards the entrance and repelledfrom it with equal rapidity. The action onthem never was entirely interrupted, and its forceREST OF INSECTS. 4l5appeared proportional to the number of bees fanningthemselves.If some cultivators of bees shut up the entranceof their hives in winter vv^ithout prejudice to the bees,it must be considered that the air will penetratethrough the straw composing them. I confided anexperiment on this to M. Burdens, then at a distancefrom me. Having closed down a very populousstraw hive fast on its board, he found that apiece of the finest paper, suspended by a hair beforethe entrance, oscillated above an inch off the perpendicularline. He poured liquid honey through anopening in the top, when a buzzing soon began, anda tumult increasing within, several bees departed.The oscillations now became stronger and more frequent.His experiments were made at three o'clock,the sun shining and the thermometer in the shadestanding at 44°*."Swammerdam also seems to indicate that beesremain active during the winter, and in order toenable them to bear its inclemency, they both fortifytheir hive and provide a store of honey. " The order,"he says, *' in which bees that live in the wintermonths conduct themselves is this : they first openthe cells and eat the honey deposited in the lowestpart of the hive, ascending by degrees to the upperparts. This they do in order to preserve a mutualwarmth between them ; and the female deposits hereggs in the little cells as they are emptied. ThereforeI discovered both stock and nymphs about thebeginning of March. Let no one be surprised atthis, since towards the beginning of August I haveseen some thousand eggs enclosed in the ovary of afemale bee ; so that it is natural for the bees at anytimeof the year to lay their eggs and increase theirfamily f."Huber on Bees, p, 295. j Book of Nature, i, 160.2n3414 INSECT TRANSFORMATIONS.John Hunter,. whose authority stands as high asany on record, found a hive to grow lighter in a coldthan in a warm week of winter, and that a hive, fromNovember 10th till February 9th, lost more thanfour pounds in weight* , a loss which could not wellbe ascribed to evaporation.These discrepancies among naturalists so distinguishedas both shrewd and faithful observers, forbidus, we think, to come to any decided conclusion on thesubject, till further researches and experiments havebeen made. It is not improbable, however, that thetruth lies in the middle between the two extremes, —for it is quite accordant with what we know both ofinsects and other animals, that a high degree of coldshould render them torpid, while they may continueactive if there should be a certain degree of warmth.The following observations by the ingenious Mr.Gough, of Manchester, form an interesting illustrationof this curious subject with respect to anotherinsect.Those," says he, '* who have attended to themanners of the hearth cricket cachet domestica)know that it passes the hottest part of the summerin sunny situations, concealed in the crevices of wallsand heaps of rubbish. It quits its summer abodeabout the end of August, and fixes its residence bythe fireside of kitchens or cottages, where it multipliesits species, and is as merry at Christmas asother insects in the dog-days. Thus do the comfortsof a warm hearth afford the cricket a safe refuge,not from death, but from temporary torpidity, whichit can support for a long time, when deprived byaccident of artificial warmth. — I came to the knowledgeof this fact," continues Mr. Gough, " by plantinga colony of these insects in a kitchen, where aconstant fire was kept through the summer, butPhil. Trans, for 1790, p. 161.REST OF INSECTS. 415which is discontinued from November till June, withthe exception of a day once in six or eight weeks. Thecrickets were brought from a distance, and let 2:0 inthis room, in the beginning' of September, 1806 ;here they increased considerably in the course of twomonths, but were not heard or seen after the fire wasremoved. Their disappearance led me to concludethat the cold had killed them ; but in this I wasmistaken ; for a brisk fire being kept up for a wholeday in the winter, the warmth of it invited my colonyfrom their hiding-place, but not before the evening :after which they continued to skip about and chirpthe greater part of the following day, when theyagain disappeared ; being compelled, by the returningcold, to take refuge in their former retreats.They left the chimney corner on the 25th of May,1807, after a fit of very hot weather, and revisitedtheir winter residence on the 31st of August. Herethey spent the summer merely, and lie torpid atpresent (January 1808) in the crevices of the chimney,with the exception of those days on which theyare recalled to a temporary existence by the comfortsof a fire."Reeve, Essay on the Torpidity of Animals, p. 84.[The subject of Insects will be completed in a ThirdVolume, which will comprise many MiscellaneousFacts that were not capable of being classed underthe heads of " Insect Architecture," or " InsectTransformations ;" with directions for the collectionand preservation of Insects for purposes of study ;and a popular account of the various Systems ofClassification.]ILLUSTRATIONS.Page1. Comparative figures of a bee and a syrphus . . . . .42. Cell of a queen of the Termites bcllicusi, broken open in front;the labourers surrounding; the queen, and carrying: off the eggs 153. Groups of eggs of the rose-leaf roller on a pane of glass . . 204. Plants of sphcerubulus, natural size . 265. Ditto, magnified view ib.6. Ditto, sectional view, with the seed just previous lo projection . ib.7. Ditto, with the seed in the act of projection . . . . ib.8. Ditto, immediately after projection ib.9. Microscopic views of apple and pear mould 3010. Eggs of a butterfly and of a moth, magnified . . . .4111. Magnified eg of the angle-shades moth . 4212. Sea egg, natural size ib.13. Egg of the meadow brown butterfly, magnified . 4314. Egg of the brimstone moth, magnitied . . . , . ib.15. Dung-fly, with its eggs magnified, and mode of deposition . 4416. Lace-winged fly, and position of its eggs on a twig of lilac . .4517. Ichneumon fly, with its ovipositor, magnified 5718. Ichneumon flies ovipositing . 5819. Generation of ichneumons, seven figures . 6220. Magnified view of a parasite fly (Crania ajjendi^ras^er) . . 6621. Bee parasite (^Stylops Melittce) 6722. Leaf-mining maggots and fly, four figures 7023. Gnats forming their egg-boats 7424. Magnified view of the boat of gnats' eggs . 7525. Female gypsey moths, and modes of depositing their eggs, fourfigures 8126. Females of the brown and gold-tailed moths, two figures . . 8327. Tweezers of the brown and gold tailed moths, magnified, twofigures 8428. Spiral groups of eggs of an unknown moth . . . .8529. Eggs of the lackey moth wound spirally round a twig of hawthorn,natural size and magnified, two figures . . . .8630. Eggs of the coccus, covered with down, and with the bodies of themothers 8931. Magnified cochenille insects, male and female, two figures . ib.32. Eggs of the hawthorn coccus, covered by the body of the deadmother 9133. Ditto, one of these magnified . ib.34. Section of ditto, showing the eggs within . . . . . ib.35. Suspended spiders' nests, three figures . 9436. Vapourer moth, male and female, and depositions eggs, three figures 9537. Drum of the ear, shewing that there is no passage through it tothe brain 10338. Chequered blow fly .110418 ILLUSTRATIONS.Page39. Abdomen of ditto, opened and magnified, shewing the coil ofyoung larvae . ib.40. Coil of larvae of ditto, partly unwound . ib.41. Large grey blow-fly, with the abdomen opened, shewing the yotmgmaggots lU42. Breathing apparatus of the maggot of a large grey blow-fly . ib.43. Spider flies, two figures 11744. Generations a water-mite, four figures 12145. Hatching of the egg of the garden spider, four figures . . 12446. Egg of the privet hawk moth, magnified, shewing the inclosedembryo 12547. Caterpillar of ditto, when grown ib.48. Construction of eggs to facilitate the escape of the larvae, threefigures 12649. Supposed animal and vegetable metamorphoses . . . 13150. Egg of the large cabbage butterfly . . . . . 13351. Embryo butterflies as they appear in the bodies of caterpillars,two figures 13552. Female of the perfect cabbage butterfly ib.53. Magnified view of a section of the bud of a labumam . . 13654. Section of a bean-seed ib.55. Seed-leaves, root, and first true leaf of the beech . . . ib.56. Dissection of the water grub of a May-fly 13957. Caterpillars of the Clifden nonpareil feeding on the grey poplar . 14258. Ditto, in a more advanced stage of growth 14359. Walking-leaf insect, magnified . . . 14460. Transformations of the brimstone moth 14561. Caterpillars of the swallow-tailed moth 14662. A two-winged fly (Fo^Mce/to^^umato) 14963. Transformations of the puss moth 15264. Lobster caterpillar 15365. Aquatic grubs of gnats in a glass vessel of water . . . 15566. Larvae of the common gnat, floating in water, two figures . 15667. Buoy-like structure in the tail of a water-grub of a two-winged fly 15768. Telescopic-tailed water larvae, three figures 15869. Water-worms, two figures . 15970. Grub of the dragon-fly, and various parts of its body magnified,five figures 16271. Mark of the dragon-fly grub, four figures 16472. Mounting of caterpillars, and magnified views of parts, ten figures 17273. Exuviae and pulmonary vessels of the rhinoceros beetle . . 17574. Goat moth caterpillar escaping from a drinking-glass . . 17875. Magnified view of the dorsal muscles of the upper half of the cossus 18276. Caterpillar of cossus escaping from under a loaded glass . . 18477. Methods used by spiders and caterpillars for ascending theirthreads 18678. Caterpillar of the tiger-moth, two figures 18779. Grub of the museum beetle, natural size and magnified, two figures ib.80. Tail of ditto, magnified . . ib.81. Hairs of ditto, magnified, two figures ib.82. Thorny hairs of caterpillars, three figures 18983. Green tortoise beetle (Cassida equestrian) 19184. Grub of ditto, magnified, to shew its anal forks . . . ib.85. Grub of ditto, with its canopy of excrements . . . . ib.86. Spit frog-hopper, and froth covering the grub of the same, twofigures * < 19287. Caterpillar of the drinker moth, two figures 19488. Caterpillar of the angle-shades moth ib.ILLUSTRATIONS. 41989. Moth of ditto .sib.90. Viscera of the cossus, two figures 19991. Caterpillar of ranessaurftco-, magnified 20092. Intestines of ditto . ib.93. Intestinal canals the caterpillar, pupae, and butterfly, five figures dol94. Buff-tip caterpillar, and moth of ditto, two figures . . . 20495. Encampment of the caterpillar of the small ermine on the Siberiancrab 20696. Transformations of the gamma moth, five figures . , . 21297. Saw-fly of the gooseberry, and caterpillars, four figures . 21498. Caterpillar of the saw-fly (iVe)«af!/5 Ca/>rc«) on the osier . 21799. Caterpillar of the saw-fly (Se/andria ali) on the alder . ib.100. Transformations of the grain moth, seven figures . . . 221101. Transformations of the honeycomb moth, seven figures . 223102. Transformations of the cockchafer, nine figures . . . 227103. Wire-worm and click beetle 230104. Zabrusgihbus 231105. Melulontha rujicornis ib.106. Corn weevil 234107. Meal-worm, and the beetle produced from it , , . 235108. Transformations of the tabby moth, six figures . 236109. Intestinal worms, three figures 239110. Churchyard beetle, in the grub and perfect state, four figures . 241111. Nut and apple-tree beetles, eight figures 243112. Bark mined in rays by beetle grubs 245113. Locust 251114. Ovipositor and eggs of the crane-fly 253115. Crane fly ovipositing, and the larva beneath in the earthfeedingupon grass roots . 254determination of a grain of wheat 259117. Transformation of the wheat-fly, three figures . . . . 260118. The Hessian fly 261119. The Markwick fly ib.120. Transformations of the cheese-hopper, seven figures . . 265121. Transformations of 5i6(o /ioriu/anws, six figures . . . 267122. Transformations of the lady-bird, six figures . . . 270123. Transformations of the lace-winged fly and syrphu.s, five figures 271124. Caterpillar of Vanessa Antiopa, three figures 274125. Suspended caterpillar of Vanessa Antiopa splitting its skin forthe evolution of the chrysalis, four figures . . . 276126. Chrysalides of Vanessa urticce suspended, with the anal hooksmagnified, and old skin fallen ois, four figures . . . 278127. Black-veined white butterfly, caterpillar, and chrysalis, threefigures 280128. Caterpillar and chrysalis of swallow-tailed butterfly, threefigures 281129. Pupae of blow-fly and syrphus, four figures 284130. Transformations of the gnat (^Corethra plumicornis), six figures 287131. Pupa of chameleon fly, three figures . 292132. Pupa of lappit moth, three figures . 294133. Chrysalis of Gonepteryx Rhamni 300134. Papnoi Lariafascclina . ib.135. Pupa, of Spkin.vLigustri . ib.136. Spiracles of pupae, two figures 302137. Pupae of the gnat and r/;>«/a , four figures . . . 304138. Transformations of C/a>onom«s/)/«mo««s, four figures . . 305139. Case fly, with the pupa, and the grate-works of the opening ofthe latter, four figures i * • < • • f • 321420 ILLUSTRATIONS.'Page140. Pupa oi Cossus and egeria 323141. The fly and pupa of the ant-lion, four figures 335142. Transformation of the dragon-fly, five features . . . 337143. Blow-fly, magnitied, two figures 33S144. Wings of insects, shewing the nervures, six figures . . 344145. Twenty-plume moth, two figures 343146. White-plume moth ib.147. Specimens of deformed butterflies and moth, three figures . 350148. Red spider, and the head, magnified, two figures . . . 359149. Head of the garden spider magnified. . ib.150. Phalanges 360151. Hydrometra star/norum, magnified ib.152. Pluiaria vayabunda, inagairied 381153. Neides elegant, magnified . . . . . , , ib.154. Hydrometra stagnorum, natura.! size . . . . - . 382155. Hydrachna geographical, magnified, two figures . . t . ib.156. Delia rivulurum .*» ib.157. Julius terrestrial, two figures . 386158. Oil-beetle ib.159. Nycterihia Hermnnn'i ib.160. Feet of the fly, greatly magnified, four figures . . . 391.161. Flea, magnified . . 392162. Velvet spring-tail, magnified 394163. American spider (^Mygale avicularia) destroying a bird . . 395164. Muscular ribbons for moving the wings in Surplus inanis, magnified,two figures .-. . . 397165. Surplus 398FINIS.London: V/iw>iam Gi-oves, Stamford-street.