ITALY,A POEM.BYSAMUEL ROGERS.LONDON:PttlNTED FOR T. CADELL, STRAND; JENNINGS AND CHAPLIN,62, 0HBAP8IDB ; AND E. ITOXON, 64, NEW Bond-street.1830.LONDON :Printed BY THOMAS Davison, WHITEFRIARS.3' 57THE PREFACE.Whatever may be the fate of this Poem, it has ledthe Author in many an after-dream through a beautifulcountry ; and may not perhaps be uninterestingto those who have learnt to live in Past Times aswell as Present, and whose minds are familiar withthe Events and the People that have rendered Italyso illustrious ; for, wherever he came, he could notbut remember ; nor is he conscious of having sleptover any ground that had been * dignified by wisdom,bravery, or virtue.'Much of it was originally published as it waswritten on the spot. He has since revised itthroughout, and added many stories from the oldChroniclers and many notes illustrative of the manners,customs and superstitions.IVWith regard to the embellishments of this volume,they require no praise of his. The two Artists, whohave contributed so much to give it a value, wouldhave done honour to any age or country.CONTENTS.PAaBThe Lake of Geneva IMeillerie 5St. Maurice 9The Great St. Bernard 11The Descent 17Morass 20Marguerite de Tours 25The Alps 29Como 32Bergamo 37Italy 41Contralto 43Venice 47Luigi 54St. Mark's Place 57The Gondola 65VIPAGETie Brides of Venice 69Foscari 75Marcolini 85Aqua 88Ginevra 92Bologna 97Florence 1 02Don Garzia 107The Campagna of Florence illThe Pilgrim 127An Interview 131Rome 137A Funeral 144National Prejudices 149The Campagna of Rome 153The Roman Pontiffs 158Caius Cestius 1 60The Nun 162The Fire-Fly 166Foreign Travel 169The Fountain 175Banditti 178An Adventure 183EllPAGENaples 189The Bag of Gold - 197A Character 205Paestum 207Amalfi 212Monte Cassino 217The Harper 220The Felucca 223Genoa 228Marco Griffin 230A Farewell 233Notes 237THE LAKE OF GENEVA.Day glimmered in the east, and the white MoonHung like a vapour in the cloudless sky,Yet visible, when on my way I went,Glad to be gone ; a pilgrim from the north,Now more and more attracted as I drewNearer and nearer. Ere the artisanHad from his window leant, drowsy, half-clad.To snuffle mom, or the caged lark poured forth,BFrom his green sod springing as to heaven,(His tuneful bill o'erflowing with a songOld in the days of Homer, and his wingsWith transport quivering) on my way I went.Thy gates, Geneva, swinging heavily,Thy gates so slow to open, swift to shut ;As on that Sabbath-eve when He arrived, *Whose name is now thy glory, now by thee,Such virtue dwells in those small syllables.Inscribed to consecrate the narrow street.His birth-place — when, but one short step too late.In his despair, as tho' the die were cast.He sat him down to weep and wept till dawn ;Then rose to go, a wanderer thro' the world.*Tis not a tale that every hour brings with it.Yet at a City-gate, from time to time,Much may be seen, much learnt ; and most at thine,London — thy hive the greatest of them all.Gathering, enlarging still. Let us stand by.And note who passes. Here comes one, a Youth,Glowing with pride, the pride of conscious power,A Chatterton — in thought admired, caressed.And crowned like Petrarch in the Capitol ;Ere long to die, to fall by his own hand,And fester with the vilest. Here come two,Less feverish, less exalted — soon to part,A Garrick and a Johnson ; Wealth and FameJ. J. Rousseau.Awaiting one — even at the gate ; NeglectAnd Want the other. But what multitudes,Urged by the love of change, and, like myself,Adventurous, careless of tomorrow's fare.Press on — tho' but a rill entering the Sea,Entering and lost! Our task would never end.Day glimmered and I went, a gentle breezeRuffling the Leman Lake. Wave after wave.If such they might be called, dashed as in sport,Not anger, with the pebbles on the beachMaking wild music, and far westward caughtThe sun-beam — where, alone and as entranced,Counting the hours, the fisher in his skiffLay with his circular and dotted lineOn the bright waters. When the heart is lightWith hope, all pleases, nothing comes amiss ;And soon a passage-boat swept gaily by.Laden with peasant-girls and fruits and flowers,And many a chanticleer and partlet cagedFor Vevay's market-place — a motley groupSeen thro' the silvery haze. But soon 'twas gone.The shifting sail flapped idly to and fro.Then bore them off. I am not one of thoseSo dead to all things in this visible world.So wondrously profound — as to move onIn the sweet light of heaven, Hke him of old*(His name is justly in the Calendar)• Bernard, Abbot of Clairvaux.Who thro' the day pursued this pleasant pathThat winds beside the mirror of all beauty,And, when at eve his fellow-pilgrims sat.Discoursing of the lake, asked where it was.They marvelled, as they might ; and so must all,Seeing what now I saw ; for now 'twas day,And the bright Sun was in the firmament,A thousand shadows of a thousand huesChequering the clear expanse. Awhile his OrbHung o'er thy trackless fields of snow, Mont Blanc,Thy seas of ice and ice-built promontories.That change their shapes for ever as in sport ;Then travelled onward, and went down behindThe pine-clad heights of Jura, lighting upThe woodman's casement, and perchance his axeBorne homeward thro' the forest in his hand ;And on the edge of some overhanging cliff.That dungeon-fortress never to be named,Where, like a lion taken in the toils,Toussaint breathed out his brave and generous spirit.Ah, little did He think, who sent him there.That he himself, then greatest among men.Should in like manner be so soon conveyedAthwart the ocean — to a rock so smallAmid the countless multitude of waves.That ships have gone and sought it, and returned,Saying it was not !MEILLERIE.These grey majestic cliffs that tower to Heaven,These glimmering glades and open chesnut-groves,That echo to the heifer's wandering bell,Or woodman's axe, or steers-man's song beneath,As on he urges his fir-laden bark.Or shout of goatherd-boy above them all.Who loves not ? And who blesses not the light.When thro' some loop-hole he surveys the lakeBlue as a sapphire-stone, and richly setWith chateaux, villages, and village-spires.Orchards and vineyards, alps and alpine snows ?Here would I dwell ; nor visit but in thoughtFerney far south, silent and empty nowAs now thy Chartreuse and thy bowers, Ripaille ;Neva Y, so long an exiled Patriot's * home ;Or Chillon's dungeon-floors beneath the wave.Channelled and worn by pacing to and fro ;Lausanne, where Gibbon in his sheltered walkNightly called up the Shade of ancient Rome ;• Ludlow.Or Copper, and that dark untrodden grove*Sacred to Virtue, and a daughter's tears !Here would I dwell, forgetting and forgot ;And oft methinks (of such strange potencyThe spells that Genius scatters where he will)Oft should I wander forth like one in search.And say, half-dreaming, " Here St. Preux has stood!'Then turn and gaze on Cares.Yet there is.Within an eagle's flight and less, a SceneStill nobler if not fairer (once againWould I behold it ere these eyes are closed,For I can say, * 1 also have been there !')That Sacred Lakes withdrawn among the hills.Its depth of waters flanked as with a wallBuilt by the Giant-race before the flood ;Where not a cross or chapel but inspiresHoly delight, lifting our thoughts to GodFrom God-like men, men in a barbarous ageThat dared assert their birth-right, and displayedDeeds half-divine, returning Good for 111 ;That in the desert sowed the seeds of life.Framing a band of small Republics there.Which still exist, the envy of the World !Who would not land in each, and tread the ground ;♦ The residence and burial-place of Necker.f The Lake of the Four Cantons.Land where Tell leaped ashore ; and climb to drinkOf the three hallowed fountains ? He, that does,Comes back the better ; and relates at homeThat he was met and greeted by a raceSuch as he read of in his boyish days ;Such as MiLTiADES at MarathonLed, when he chased the Persians to their ships.There, while the well-known boat is heaving in.Piled ^vith rude merchandise, or launching forth.Thronged with wild cattle for Italian fairs.There in the sun-shine, mid their native snows.Children, let loose from school, contend to useThe cross-bow of their fathers ; and o'er-runThe rocky field where all, in every age,Assembling sit, like one great family.Forming alliances, enacting laws ;Each cliff and head-land and green promontoryGraven to their eyes with records of the pastThat prompt to hero-worship, and exciteEven in the least, the lowliest, as he toils,A reverence no where else or felt or feigned ;Their chronicler great Nature ; and the volumeVast as her works — above, below, around !The fisher on thy beach, Thermopylae,Asks of the lettered stranger why he came,First from his lips to learn the glorious truth !And who that whets his scythe in Runnymede,Tho* but for them a slave, recalls to mindThe barons in array with their great charter ?Among the everlasting Alps alone,There to burn on as in a Sanctuary,Bright and unsullied lives the' ethereal flame ;And mid those scenes unchanged, unchangeable.Why should it ever die ?ST. MAURICE.Still by the Leman Lake, for many a mile,Among those venerable trees I went.Where damsels sit and weave their fishing-nets,Singing some national song by the way-side.But now the fly was gone, the gnat careering;Now glimmering lights from cottage-windows broke.Twas dusk ; and, journeying upward by the Rhone,cThat there came down, a torrent from the Alps,I entered where a key unlocks a kingdom ;The mountains closing, and the road, the riverFilling the narrow pass. There, till a rayGlanced thro' my lattice, and the household-stirWarned me to rise, to rise and to depart,A stir unusual and accompaniedWith many a tuning of rude instruments.And many a laugh that argued coming pleasure,Mine host's fair daughter for the nuptial rite,And nuptial feast attiring — there I slept.And in my dreams wandered once more, well-pleased.But now a charm was on the rocks, and woods,And waters ; for, methought, I was with thoseI had at morn and even wished for there.THE GREAT ST. BERNARD.Night was again descending, when my mule,That all day long had climbed among the clouds.Higher and higher still, as by a stairLet down from Heaven itself, transporting me,Stopped, to the joy of both, at that low door,That door, which ever, as self-opened, movesTo them that knock, and nightly sends abroadMinistering Spirits. Lying on the watch,Two dogs of grave demeanour welcomed me,All meekness, gentleness, tho' large of limb ;And a lay-brother of the Hospital,Who, as we toiled below, had heard by fitsThe distant echoes gaining on his ear.Came and held fast my stirrup in his hand.While I alighted. Long could I have stood,With a religious awe contemplatingThat House, the highest in the Ancient World,And destined to perform from age to ageThe noblest service, welcoming as guestsAll of all nations and of every faith ;A Temple, sacred to Humanity !It was a pile of simplest masonry.With narrow windows and vast buttresses.Built to endure the shocks of Time and Chance ;Yet shewing many a rent, as well it might.Warred on for ever by the elements.And in an evil day, nor long ago.By violent men — when on the mountain-topThe French and Austrian banners met in conflict.On the same rock beside it stood the church.Reft of its cross, not of its sanctity;The vesper-bell, for 'twas the vesper-hour,Duly proclaiming thro' the wilderness,All ye who hear, whatever be your work,Stop for an instant — move your lips in prayer !"ISAnd, just beneath it, in that dreary dale,If dale it might be called, so near to Heaven,A little lake, where never fish leaped up,Lay like a spot of ink amid the snow ;A star, the only one in that small sky.On its dead surface glimmering. 'Twas a placeResembling nothing I had left behind,As if all worldly ties were now dissolved ; —And, to incline the mind still more to thought,To thought and sadness, on the eastern shoreUnder a beetling cliff stood half in gloomA lonely chapel destined for the dead,For such as, having wandered from their way,Had perished miserably. Side by side.Within they lie, a mournful company.All in their shrouds, no earth to cover them ;Their features full of life yet motionlessIn the broad day, nor soon to suffer change,Tho* the barred windows, barred against the wolf.Are always open ! But the North blew cold ;And, bidden to a spare but cheerful meal,I sat among the holy brother-hoodAt their long board. The fare indeed was suchAs is prescribed on days of abstinence.But might have pleased a nicer taste than mine ;And thro' the floor came up, an ancient croneServing unseen below ; while from the roof(The roof, the floor, the walls of native fir,)A lamp hung flickering, such as loves to flingIts partial light on Apostolic heads,And sheds a grace on all. Theirs Time as yetHad changed not. Some were almost in the prime ;Nor was a brow o'ercast. Seen as they sat.Ranged round their ample hearth-stone in an hourOf rest, they were as gay, as free from guile.As children ; answering, and at once, to allThe gentler impulses, to pleasure, mirth ;Mingling, at intervals, with rational talkMusic ; and gathering news from them that came,As of some other world. But when the stormRose, and the snow rolled on in ocean-waves,When on his face the experienced traveller fell.Sheltering his lips and nostrils with his hands,Then all was changed ; and, sallying with their packInto that blank of nature, they becameUnearthly beings. " Anselm, higher up.Just where it drifts, a dog howls loud and long.And now, as guided by a voice from heaven.Digs with his feet. That noble vehemenceWhose can it be, but his who never erred ?A man Hes underneath ! Let us to work ! —But who descends Mont Vela ? 'Tis La Croix.Away, away ! if not, alas, too late.Homeward he drags an old man and a boy,Faltering and falling, and but half awaked,Asking to sleep again." Such their discourse.Oft has a venerable roof received me ;St. Bruno's once* — where, when the winds were hushed,Nor from the cataract the voice came up,You might have heard the mole work underground.So great the stillness of that place ; none seen,Save when from rock to rock a hermit crossedBy some rude bridge — or one at midnight tolledTo matins, and white habits, issuing forth.Glided along those aisles interminable.All, all observant of the sacred lawOf Silence. Nor is that sequestered spot,Once called * Sweet Waters,' now * The Shady Vale,'fTo me unknown ; that house so rich of old.So courteous, and by two, that passed that way,Amply requited with immortal verse,The Poet's payment. But, among them all,None can with this compare, the dangerous seatOf generous, active Virtue. What tho' FrostReign everlastingly, and ice and snowThaw not, but gather — there is that within.Which, where it comes, makes Summer; and, in thought,Oft am I sitting on the bench beneathTheir garden-plot, where all that vegetatesIs but some scanty lettuce, to observe• The Grande Chartreuse. f Vallombrosa.Those from the South ascending, every stepAs tho' it were their last — and instantlyRestored, renewed, advancing as with songs,Soon as they see, turning a lofty crag.That plain, that modest structure, promisingBread to the hungry, to the weary rest.THE DESCENT.My mule refreshed — and, let the truth be told,He was nor dull nor contradictory,But patient, diligent, and sure of foot.Shunning the loose stone on the precipice,Snorting suspicion while with sight, smell, touch,Trying, detecting, where the surface smiled ;And with deliberate courage sliding down.Where in his sledge the Laplander had turnedDWith looks aghast — my mule refreshed, his bellsMingled once more, the signal to depart,And we set out in the grey light of dawn.Descending rapidly — by waterfallsFast-frozen, and among huge blocks of iceThat in their long career had stopt mid-way.At length, unchecked, unbidden, he stood still ;And all his bells were muffled. Then my Guide,Lowering his voice, addressed me : " Thro' this GapOn and say nothing — lest a word, a breathBring down a winter's snow — enough to whelmThe armed files that, night and day, were seenWinding from cliff to cliff in loose arrayTo conquer at Marengo. Tho' long since,Well I remember how I met them here.As the sun set far down, purpling the west ;And how Napoleon, he himself, no less.Wrapt in his cloak — I could not be deceived —Reined in his horse, and asked me, as I passed,How far 'twas to St. Remit. Where the rockJuts forward, and the road, crumbling away,Narrows almost to nothing at its base,*Twas there ; and down along the brink he ledTo Victory! — Desaix,* who turned the scale,•* Of all the generals I ever had under me, Desaix possessed thegreatest talents. He loved glory for itself."Leaving his life-blood in that famous field,(When the clouds break, we may discern the spotIn the blue haze,) sleeps, as thou saw'st at dawn.Just where we entered, in the Hospital-church."So saying, for awhile he held his peace,Awe-struck beneath that dreadful Canopy ;But soon, the danger passed, launched forth again.Morass.JoRASSE was in his three-and-twentieth year ;Graceful and active as a stay just roused ;Gentle withal, and pleasant in his speech,Yet seldom seen to smile. He had grown upAmong the Hunters of the Higher Alps ;Had caught their starts and fits of though fulness,Their haggard looks, and strange soliloquies,Arising (so say they that dwell below)From frequent dealings with the Mountain-Spirits.But other ways had taught him better things ;And now he numbered, marching by my side,The great, the learned, that with him had crossedThe frozen tract, with him familiarlyThro' the rough day and rougher night conversedIn many a chalet round the Peak of Terror,*Round Tacul, Tour, Well-horn and Rosenlau,And Her, whose throne is inaccessible, fWho Sits, withdrawn in virgin-majesty,Nor oft unveils. Anon an AvalancheRolled its long thunder ; and a sudden crash.Sharp and metallic, to the startled earTold that far-down a continent of IceHad burst in twain. But he had now begun ;And with what transport he recalled the hourWhen to deserve, to win his blooming bride,Madeleine of Annecy, to his feet he boundThe iron crampons, and, ascending, trodThe Upper Realms of Frost ; then, by a cordLet half-way down, entered a Grot star-bright.And gathered from above, below, around,The pointed crystals ! — Once, nor long before,(Thus did his tongue run on, fast as his feet.And with an eloquence that Nature givesTo all her children — breaking off by starts• The Scbrekhorn. f The Juiig-frau.Into the harsh and rude, oft as the MuleDrew his displeasure,) once, nor long before,Alone at day-break on the Wittenberg,He slipped, he fell ; and, thro' a fearful cleftGliding from ledge to ledge, from deep to deeper,Went to the Under-world ! Long-while he layUpon his rugged bed — then waked like oneWishing to sleep again and sleep for ever !For, looking round, he saw or thought he sawInnumerable branches of a Cave,Winding beneath that solid Crust of Ice ;With here and there a rent that shewed the stars !What then, alas, was left him but to die ?What else in those immeasurable chambers,Strewn with the bones of miserable men.Lost like himself? Yet must he wander on.Till cold and hunger set his spirit free !And, rising, he began his dreary round;When hark, the noise as of some mighty FloodWorking its way to light ! Back he withdrew,But soon returned, and fearless from despair.Dashed down the dismal Channel ; and all day,If day could be where utter darkness was.Travelled incessantly, the craggy roofJust over-head, and the impetuous waves,Nor broad nor deep, yet with a giant's strengthLashing him on. At last as in a poolThe water slept ; a pool sullen, profound,Where, if a billow chanced to heave and swell,It broke not ; and the roof, descending, layFlat on the surface. Statue-like he stood.His journey ended; when a ray divineShot thro' his soul Breathing a prayer to HerWhose ears are never shut, the Blessed Virgin,He plunged, he swam — and in an instant rose,The barrier passed, in sunshine ! Thro' a vale,Such as in Arcady, where many a thatchGleamed thro' the trees, half-seen and half-embowered.Glittering the river ran ; and on the bankThe Young were dancing (twas a festival-day)All in their best attire. There first he sawHis Madeleine. In the crowd she stood to hear,When all drew round, inquiring ; and her face.Seen behind all, and, varying, as he spoke,With hope, and fear, and generous sympathy.Subdued him. From that very hour he loved.The tale was long, but coming to a close.When his wild eyes flashed fire ; and, all forgot.He listened and looked up. I looked up too ;And twice there came a hiss that thro' me thrilled !'Twas heard no more. A Chamois on the cliffHad roused his fellows with that cry of fear.And all were gone. But now the theme was changed;And he recounted his hair-breadth escapes,When with his friend, Hubert of Bonny,(His ancient carbine from his shoulder slung,His axe to hew a stair way in the ice)He tracked their wanderings. By a cloud surprised,Where the next step had plunged them into air,Long had they stood, locked in each other's arms.Amid the gulfs that yawned to swallow them ;Each guarding each thro' many a freezing hour.As on some temple's highest pinnacle,From treacherous slumber. Oh, it was a sportDearer than life, and but with life relinquished !My sire, my grandsire died among these wilds.As for myself," he cried, and he held forthHis wallet in his hand, " this do I callMy winding-sheet — for I shall have none else !"And he spoke truth. Within a little monthHe lay among these awful solitudes,(''Twas on a Glacier — half-way up to Heaven)Taking his final rest. Long did his wife.Suckling her babe, her only one, look outThe way he went at parting, but he came not ;Long fear to close her eyes, from dusk till dawnPlying her distaff thro' the silent hours,Lest he appear before her, lest in sleep.If sleep steal on, he come as all are wont.Frozen and ghastly blue or black with gore.To plead for the last rite..-%»\A^^MARGUERITE DE TOURS.Now the grey granite, starting thro' the snow,Discovered many a variegated moss *That to the pilgrim resting on his staffShadows out capes and islands ; and ere long• Lichen Geographical.Numberless flowers, such as disdain to liveIn lower regions, and delighted drinkThe clouds before they fall, flowers of all hues,With their diminutive leaves covered the ground.There, turning by a venerable larchesin two yet most majesticalWith his long level branches, we observedA human figure sitting on a stoneFar down by the way-side — just where the rockIs riven asunder, and the Evil OneHas bridged the gulf, a wondrous monumentBuilt in one night, from which the flood beneath.Raging along, all foam, is seen not heard,And seen as motionless !Nearer we drew ;And lo, a woman young and delicate,Wrapt in a russet cloak from head to foot.Her eyes cast down, her cheek upon her hand.In deepest thought. Over her tresses fair.Young as she was, she wore the matron-cap ;And, as we judged, not many moons would changeEre she became a mother. Pale she looked.Yet cheerful ; tho*, methought, once, if not twice,She wiped away a tear that would be coming ;And in those moments her small hat of straw,Worn on one side, and glittering with a bandOf silk and gold, but ill concealed a faceNot soon to be forgotten. Rising upOn our approach, she travelled slowly on ;And my companion, long before we met,Knew, and ran down to greet her.She was born(Such was her artless tale, told with fresh tears)In Val d'Aosta ; and an Alpine stream,Leaping from crag to crag in its short courseTo join the Dora, turned her father's mill.There did she blossom till a Valais,A townsman of Martin, won her heart,Much to the old man's grief. Long he refused,Loth to be left ; disconsolate at the thought.She was his only one, his link to life ;And in despair — year after year gone by —One summer-morn, they stole a match and fled.The act was sudden ; and, when far away.Her spirit had misgivings. Then, full oft,She pictured to herself that aged faceSickly and wan, in sorrow, not in wrath ;And, when at last she heard his hour was near,Went forth unseen, and, burdened as she was,Crossed the high Alps on foot to ask forgiveness,And hold him to her heart before he died.Her task was done. She had fulfilled her wish,And now was on her way, rejoicing, weeping.A frame like hers had suffered ; but her loveWas strong within her ; and right on she went,Fearing no ill. May all good Angels guard her !And should I once again, as once I may,Visit Martin, I will not forgetThy hospitable roof. Marguerite De Tours ;Thy sign the silver swan. Heaven prosper Thee !THE ALPS.Who first beholds those everlasting clouds,Seed-time and harvest, morning noon and night,Still where they were, steadfast, immovable ;Those mighty hills, so shadowy, so sublime.As rather to belong to Heaven than Earth —But instantly receives into his soulA sense, a feeling that he loses not,A something that informs him 'tis an hour,Whence he may date henceforward and for ever ?To me they seemed the barriers of a World,Saying, Thus far, no farther ! and as o'erThe level plain I travelled silently,Nearing them more and more, day after day.My wandering thoughts my only company,And they before me still, oft as I looked,A strange delight was mine, mingled with fear,A wonder as at things I had not heard of!And still and still I felt as tho' I gazedFor the first time ! — Great was the tumult there.Deafening the din, when in barbaric pompThe Carthaginian on his march to RomeEntered their fastnesses. Trampling the snows,The war-horse reared ; and the towered elephantUpturned his trunk into the murky sky.Then tumbled headlong, swallowed up and lost,He and his rider. — Now the scene is changed ;And o'er the Simplon, o'er the Spleen windsA path of pleasure. Like a silver zoneFlung about carelessly, it shines afar.Catching the eye in many a broken link,In many a turn and traverse as it glides ;And oft above and oft below appears.Seen o'er the wall by him who journies up.As tho' it were another, thro' the wildLeading along he knows not whence or whither.Yet thro' its fairy-course, go where it will,The torrent stops it not, the rugged rockOpens and lets it in ; and on it runs,Winning its easy way from clime to climeThro' glens locked up before. — Not such my path !The very path for them that dare defyDanger, nor shrink, wear he what shape he will ;That o'er the caldron, when the flood boils up,Hang as in air, gazing and shuddering onTill fascination comes and the brain turns !The very path for them, that list, to chooseWhere best to plant a monumental cross,And live in story like Empedocles ;A track for Heroes, such as He who came.Ere long, to win, to wear the Iron Crown ;And (if aright I judge from what I feltOver the France, just where the Abbot fell.Rolled downward in an after-dinner's sleep)The same as Hannibal's. But now 'tis passed.That turbulent Chaos ; and the promised landLies at my feet in all its loveliness !To him who starts up from a terrible dream.And lo, the sun is shining, and the larkSinging aloud for joy, to him is notSuch sudden ravishment as now I feelAt the first glimpses of fair Italy.tCOMO.I LOVE to sail along the Marian LakeUnder the shore — though not to visit Pliny,To catch him musing in his plane-tree walk,Or angling from his window : * and, in truth,Could I recall the ages past, and playThe fool with Time, I should perhaps reserveMy leisure for Catullus on Ms Lake,Epist. I. 3. ix. 7.S3Though to fare worse, or Virgil at his farmA Httle further on the way to Mantua.But such things cannot be. So I sit still,And let the boatman shift his little sail.His sail so forked and so swallow-like,Well-pleased with all that comes. The morning-airPlays on my cheek how gently, flinging roundA silvery gleam : and now the purple mistsRise like a curtain ; now the sun looks out,Filling, o'erflowing with his glorious lightThis noble amphitheatre of hills ;And now appear as on a phosphor-seaNumberless barks, from Milan, from Paria ;Some sailing up, some down, and some at rest.Lading, unfading at that small port-townUnder the promontory — its tall towerAnd long flat roofs, just such as Gaspar drew.Caught by a sun-beam slanting through a cloud ;A quay-like scene, glittering and full of life.And doubled by reflection.What delight,After so long a sojourn in the wild.To hear once more the peasant at his work !But in a clime like this where is he not ?Along the shores, among the hills 'tis nowThe hey-day of the Vintage ; all abroad,But most the young and of the gentler sex,FBusy in gathering ; all among the vines,Some on the ladder, and some underneath,Filling their baskets of gi-been wicker-work.While many a canzonet and frolic laughCome thro' the leaves ; the vines in light festoonsFi*om tree to tree, the trees in avenues,And every avenue a covered walkHung with black clusters. 'Tis enough to makeThe sad man merry, the benevolent oneMelt into tears — so general is the joy !While up and down the cliffs, over the lake.Pains oxen-drawn, and mannered mules are seen,Laden with grapes and dropping rosy wine.Here I received from thee, Basilica,One of those courtesies so sweet, so rare !When, as I rambled thro' thy vineyard-groundOn the hill-side, thou dentist thy little son.Charged with a bunch almost as big as he.To press it on the stranger. May thy vatsO'erflow, and he, thy willing gift-bearer.Live to become a giver ; and, at length.When thou art full of honour and wouldst rest,The staff of thine old age !In a strange landSuch things, however trivial, reach the heart.And thro' the heart the head, clearing awayThe narrow notions that grow up at homo,And in their place grafting Good Will to All.At least I found it so, nor less at eve,When, bidden as a lonely ti-weller,(''Twas by a little boat that gave me chaseWith oar and sail, as homeward-bound I crossedThe bay of Tramezzine,) right readilyI turned my prow and followed, landing soonWhere steps of purest marble met the wave ;Where, thro' the trellises and corridors.Soft music came as from Armada's palace,Breathing enchantment o'er the woods and waters ;And thro' a bright pavilion, bright as day,Forms such as hers were flitting, lost amongSuch as of old in sober pomp swept by.Such as adorn the triumphs and the feastsBy Paolo painted ; where a Fairy-queen,That night her birth-night, from her throne received(Young as she was, no floweret in her crown,Hyacinth or rose, so fair and fresh as she)Our willing vows, and by the fountain-sideLed in the dance, disporting as she pleased.Under a starry sky — while I looked on.As in a glade of Cashmere or Siiiraz,Reclining,' quenching my sherbet in snow.And reading in the eyes that sparkled round,The thousand love-adventures written there.Can I forget — no never, such a sceneSo full of witchery. Night lingered still,When, with a dying breeze, I left Bellaggio ;But the strain followed me ; and still I sawThy smile, Angelica ; and still I heardThy voice — once and again bidding adieu.Sut^l-ni K.ABERGAMO.The song was one that I had heard before,But where I knew not. It inclined to sadness ;And, turning round from the delicious fareMy landlord's little daughter BarbaraHad from her apron just rolled out before me,Figs and rock-melons — at the door I sawTwo boys of lively aspect. Peasant-likeThey were, and poorly clad, but not unskilled ;With their small voices and an old guitarWinning their way to my unguarded heartIn that, the only universal tongue.But soon they changed the measure, entering onA pleasant dialogue of sweet and sour,A war of words, with looks and gestures wagedBetween Trappanti and his ancient dame,MoNA LuciLiA. To and fro it went ;While many a titter on the stairs was heard,And Barbara's among them. When it ceased.Their dark eyes flashed no longer, yet, methought,In many a glance as from the soul, disclosedMore than enough to serve them. Far or near,Few looked not for their coming ere they came,Few, when they went, but looked till they were gone ;And not a matron, sitting at her wheel.But could repeat their story. Twins they were.And orphans, as I learnt, cast on the world ;Their parents lost in an old ferry-boatThat, three years since, last Martinmas, went down,Crossing the rough Menaces. *May they liveBlameless and happy — rich they cannot be,Like him who, in the days of Minstrelsy, fCame in a beggar's weeds to Petrarch's door,Asking, beseeching for a lay to sing.And soon in silk (such then the power of song)Returned to thank him ; or like that old man.Old, not in heart, who by the torrent-sideDescending from the Tyrol, as Night fell.Knocked at a City-gate near the hill-foot.The gate that bore so long, sculptured in stone.An eagle on a ladder, and at onceFound welcome — nightly in the bannered hallTuning his harp to tales of ChivalryBefore the great Lasting, and his guests];Ago di Garda.f Petrarch, Epist Rer. Sen. 1. v. ep. 3.^ See Note.The three-and-twenty kings, by adverse fate,By war or treason or domestic strife,Reft of their kingdoms, friendless, shelterless,And living on his bounty.But who comes.Brushing the floor with what was once, methinks,A hat of ceremony. On he glides.Slip-shod, unaltered ; his long suit of blackDingy, thread-bare, tho', patch by patch, renewedTill it has almost ceased to be the same.At length arrived, and with a shrug that pleads'Tis my necessity !' he stops and speaks,Screwing a smile into his dinnerless face.Blame not a Poet, Signor, for his zeal —When all are on the wing, who would be last ?The splendour of thy name has gone before thee ;And Italy from sea to sea exults,As well indeed she may ! But I transgress.He, who has known the weight of Praise himself.Should spare another.' Saying so, he laidHis sonnet, an impromptu, at my feet,(If his, then Petrarch must have stolen it from him)And bowed and left me ; in his hollow handReceiving my small tribute, a zecchine.Unconsciously, as doctors do their fees.My omelet, and a flagon of hill-wine,Pure as the virgin-spring, had happilyFled from all eyes ; or, in a waking dream,I might have sat as many a great man has.And many a small, like him of Santillane,Bartering my bread and salt for empty praise.\ITALY.Am I in Italy? Is this the Minus?Are those the distant turrets of Verona?And shall I sup where Juliet at the MasqueFirst saw and loved, and now by him who cameThat night a stranger, sleeps from age to age ?Such questions hourly do I ask myself;And not a stone, in a cross-way, inscribedTo Mantua' — * To Ferrara — but excitesSurprise, and doubt, and self-congratulation.O Italy, how beautiful thou art !Yet I could weep — for thou art lying, alas,Low in the dust ; and we admire thee nowAs we admire the beautiful in death.Thine was a dangerous gift, when thou wast born.The gift of Beauty. Would thou hadst it not ;Or wert as once, awing the caitiffs vileThat now beset thee, making thee their slave !Would they had loved thee less, or feared thee more !But why despair ? Twice hast thou lived already ;Twice shone among the nations of the world,GAs the sun shines among the lesser HghtsOf heaven ; and shalt again. The hour shall come,When they who think to bind the ethereal spirit,Who, like the eagle cowering o'er his prey.Watch with quick eye, and strike and strike againIf but a sinew vibrate, shall confessTheir wisdom folly. Even now the flameBursts forth where once it burnt so gloriously.And, dying, left a splendour like the day.That like the day diffused itself, and stillBlesses the earth — the light of genius, virtue,Greatness in thought and act, contempt of death,God-like example. Echoes that have sleptSince Athens, Lacedaemon, were Themselves,Since men invoked * By Those in Marathon !'Awake along the aegean ; and the dead,They of that sacred shore, have heard the call,And thro' the ranks, from wing to wing, are seenMoving as once they were — instead of rageBreathing deliberate valour.I>IContralto.In this neglected mirror (the broad frameOf massy silver serves to testifyThat many a noble matron of the houseHas sat before it) once, alas, was seenWhat led to many sorrows. From that timeThe bat came hither for a sleeping place ;And he, that cursed another in his heart,Said, * Be thy dwelling, thro* the day and night.Shunned like Contralto.' 'Twas in that old Pile,Which flanks the cliff with its grey battlementsFlung here and there, and, like an eagle's nest.Hangs in the Treviso, that thus the Steward,Shaking his locks, the few that Time had left.Addressed me, as we entered what was calledMy Lady's Chamber.' On the walls, the chairs.Much yet remained of the rich tapestry ;Much of the adventures of Sir LancelotIn the green glades of some enchanted wood.The toilet-table was of silver wrought,Florentine Art, when Florence was renowned ;A gay confusion of the elements.Dolphins and boys, and shells and fruits and flowers :And from the ceiling, in his gilded cage.Hung a small bird of curious workmanship.That, when his Mistress bade him, would unfold(So says the babbling Dame, Tradition, there)His emerald-wings, and sing and sing againThe song that pleased her. While 1 stood and looked,A gleam of day yet lingering in the West,The Steward went on. * She had (tis now long since)A gentle serving-maid, the fair Pristine,Fair as a lily, and as spotless too ;None so admired, beloved. They had grown upAs play-fellows ; and some there were, that said.Some that knew much, discoursing of Pristine,She is not what she seems.' When unrequited,She would steal forth ; her custom, her delight.To wander thro' and thro' an ancient groveSelf-planted half-way down, losing herselfLike one in love with sadness ; and her veilAnd vesture white, seen ever in that place,Ever as surely as the hours came round,Among those reverend trees, gave her belowThe name of The White Lady. But the dayIs gone, and I delay thee.In that chairThe Countess, as it might be now, was sitting,Her gentle serving-maid, the fair Pristine,Combing her golden hair ; and, thro' this doorThe Count, her lord, was hastening, called awayBy letters of great urgency to Venice;When in the glass she saw, as she believed,Twas an illusion of the Evil Spirit —Some say he came and crossed it at the time)A smile, a glance at parting, given and answered,That turned her blood to gall. That very nightThe deed was done. That night, ere yet the MoonWas up on Monte Salvo, and the wolfBaying as still he does (oft is he heard,An hour and more, by the old turret-clock)They led her forth, the unhappy lost Pristine,Helping her down in her distress — to die.No blood was spilt ; no instrument of deathLurked — or stood forth, declaring its bad purpose ;Nor was a hair of her unblemished headHurt in that hour. Fresh as a flower just blown,And warm with life, her youthful pulses playing.She was walled up within the Castle-wall.The wall itself was hollowed secretly ;Then closed again, and done to line and rule.Would'st thou descend ? 'Tis in a darksome vaultUnder the Chapel : and there nightly now.As in the narrow niche, when smooth and fair.And as tho' nothing had been done or thought.The stone-work rose before her, till the lightGlimmered and went — there, nightly, at that hour(Thou smiles, and would it were an idle tale !)In her white veil and vesture white she standsShuddering — her eyes uplifted, and her handsJoined as in prayer ; then, like a Blessed SoulBursting the tomb, springs forward, and awayFlies o'er the woods and mountains. Issuing forth,The hunter meets her in his hunting-track ;The shepherd on the heath, starting, exclaims(For still she bears the name she bore of old)Tis the White Lady !'^t,^^ fVENICE.There is a glorious City in the Sea.The Sea is in the broad, the narrow streets,Ebbing and flowing ; and the salt sea-weedClings to the marble of her palaces.No track of men, no footsteps to and fro,Lead to her gates. The path lies o'er the Sea,Invisible; and from the land we went.As to a floating City — steering in,4SAnd gliding up her streets as in a dream,So smoothly, silently — by many a domeMosque-like, and many a stately portico,The statues ranged along an azure sky ;By many a pile in more than Eastern pride,Of old the residence of merchant-kings ;The fronts of some, tho' Time had shattered them,Still glowing with the richest hues of art.As tho' the wealth within them had run o'er.Thither I came, and in a wondrous Ark,(That, long before we slipt our cable, rangAs with the voices of all living things)From Padua, where the stars are, night by night.Watched from the top of an old dungeon-tower,Whence blood ran once, the tower of Ezzelin —Not as he watched them, when he read his fateAnd shuddered. But of him I thought not then,Him or his horoscope ; far, far from meThe forms of Guilt and Fear ; though some were there.Sitting among us round the cabin-board.Some who, like him, had cried, * Spill blood enough !'And could shake long at shadows. They had playedTheir parts at Padua, and were floating home,Careless and full of mirth ; tomorrow a dayNot in their Calendar. Who in a strainTo make the hearer fold his arms and sigh.Sings * Caro, Caro !' — 'Tis the Prima Donna,And to her monkey, smiling in his face.Who, as transported, cries, * Brava ! Ancona !''Tis a grave personage, an old macaw,Perched on her shoulder. — But who leaps ashore,And with a shout urges the lagging mules ;Then climbs a three that overhangs the stream.And, like an acorn, drops on deck again ?'Tis he who speaks not, stirs not, but we laugh ;That child of fun and frolic, Arlecchino.And mark their Poet — with what emphasisHe prompts the young Soubrette, conning her part !Her tongue plays truant, and he raps his box,And prompts again ; for ever looking roundAs if in search of subjects for his wit.His satire ; and as often whisperingThings, tho' unheard, not unimaginable.Had I thy pencil, Crabbe (when thou hast done,Late may it be . . it will, like Prospero's staff,Be buried fifty fathoms in the earth)I would portray the Italian — Now I cannot.Subtle, discerning, eloquent, the slaveOf Love, of Hate, for ever in extremes ;Gentle when unprovoked, easily won.But quick in quarrel — thro' a thousand shadesHis spirit flits, cameleon-like ; and mocksThe eye of the observer.Gliding on,HAt length we leave the river for the sea.At length a voice aloft proclaims " Venezia !"And, as called forth, she comes. — A few in fear.Flying away from him whose boast it was, *That the grass grew not where his horse had trod.Gave birth to Venice. Like the water-fowl.They built their nests among the ocean-waves ;And where the sands were shifting, as the windBlew from the north or south — where they that came,Had to make sure the ground they stood upon,Rose, like an exhalation from the deep,A vast Metropolis, with glittering spires.With theatres, basilicas adorned ;A scene of light and glory, a dominion,That has endured the longest among men.And whence the talisman, whereby she rose.Towering ? 'Twas found there in the barren sea.Want led to Enterprise ; and, far or near.Who met not the Venetian? — now amongThe i^GEAN Isles, steering from port to port,Landing and bartering ; now, no stranger there,In Cairo, or without the eastern gate.Ere yet the Cafilaf came, listening to hearIts bells approaching from the Red-sea coast;Then on the Euxine, and that smaller SeaOf Azoph, in close converse with the Russ,Attila. f A Caravan.And Tartar* ; on his lowly deck receivingPearls from the Persian gulph, gems from Golconda ;Eyes brighter yet, that shed the light of love,From Georgia, from Circassia. Wandering round.When in the rich bazaar' he saw, displayed.Treasures from climes unknown, he asked and learnt,And, travelling slowly upward, drew ere longFrom the well-head, supplying all below ;Making the Imperial City of the East,Herself, his tributary.If we turnTo those black forests, where, thro' many an age.Night without day, no axe the silence broke.Or seldom, save where Rhine or Danube rolled ;Where o'er the naiTow glen a castle hangs.And, like the wolf that hungered at his door.The baron lived by rapine — there we meet,In warlike guise, the Caravan from Venice;When on its march, now lost and now beheld,A glittering file (the trumpet heard, the scout 'Sent and recalled) but at a city-gateAll gaiety, and looked for ere it comes ;Winning regard with all that can attract.Cages, whence every wild cry of the desert,Jugglers, stage-dancers. Well might Charlemagne,And his brave peers, each with his visor up,On their long lances lean and gaze awhile,When the Venetian to their eyes disclosedThe Wonders of the East ! Well might they thenSigh for new Conquests !Thus did Venice rise,Thus flourish, till the unwelcome tidings came,That in the Tagus had arrived a fleetFrom India, from the region of the Sun,Fragrant with spices — that a way was found,A channel opened, and the golden streamTurned to enrich another. Then she feltHer strength departing, yet awhile maintainedHer state, her splendour ; till a tempest shookAll things most held in honour among men.All things the giant with the scythe had spared,To their foundations, and at once she fell ;She who had stood yet longer than the lastOf the Four Kingdoms — who, as in an Ark,Had floated down, amid a thousand wrecks.Uninjured, from the Old World to the New,From the last glimpse of civilized life — to whereLight shone again, and with the blaze of noon.Thro' many an age in the mid-sea she dwelt,From her retreat calmly contemplatingThe changes of the Earth, herself unchanged.Before her passed, as in an awful dream.The mightiest of the mighty. What are these,Clothed in their purple? O'er the globe they flingTheir monstrous shadows ; and, while yet we speak,Phantom-Hke, vanish with a dreadful scream !What — but the last that styled themselves the Caesar?And who in long array (look where they come ;Their gestures menacing so far and wide)Wear the green turban and the heron's plume ?Who — but the Caliphs ? followed fast by shapesAs new and strange — Emperor, and King, and Czar,And Soldan, each, with a gigantic stride,Trampling on all the flourishing works of peaceTo make his greatness greater, and inscribeHis name in blood — some, men of steel, steel-clad;Others, nor long, alas, the interval.In light and gay attire, with brow sereneWielding Jove's thunder, scattering sulphurous fireMingled with darkness ; and, among the rest,Lo, one by one, passing continually.Those who assume a sway beyond them all ;Men grey with age, each in a triple crown.And in his tremulous hands grasping the keysThat can alone, as he would signify.Unlock Heaven's gate.Liii.Happy is he who loves companionship,And Lights on thee, Luigi. Thee I found,Playing at Mora on the cabin-roofWith Punchinello. — 'Tis a game to strikeFire from the coldest heart. What then from thine ?And, ere the twentieth throw, I had resolved,Won by thy looks. Thou wert an honest lad ;Wert generous, grateful, not without ambition.Had it depended on thy will alone.Thou wouldst have numbered in thy familyAt least six Doges and the first in fame.But that was not to be. In thee I sawThe last, if not the least, of a long line.Who in their forest, for three hundred years,Had lived and laboured, cutting, charring wood ;Discovering where they were, to those astray,By the re-echoing stroke, the crash, the fall.Or the blue wreath that travelled slowly upInto the sky. Thy nobler destiniesLed thee away to jus tie in the crowd ;And there I found thee — by thine own AdviceTrying once more a change of air and diet,Crossing the sea, and springing to the shoreAs tho' thou knowest where to dine and sleep.First in Bologna didst thou plant thyself,Serving behind a Cardinal's gouty chair,Listening and oft replying, jest for jest ;Then in Ferrara, every thing by turns.So great thy genius and so Proteus-like 1Now serenading in a lover's train.And measuring swords with his antagonist ;Now carving, cup-bearing in halls of state ;And now a guide to the lorn ti-weller,A very Cicerone — yet, alas.How unlike him who fulminated in old Rome !Dealing out largely in exchange for penceThy scraps of Knowledge — thro' the grassy streetLeading, explaining — pointing to the barsOf Tasso's dungeon, and the latin verse.Graven in the stone, that yet denotes the doorOf Ariosto.Many a year is goneSince on the Rhine we parted; yet, methinks,I can recall thee to the life, Luigi,In our long journey ever by my side ;Thy locks jet-black, and clustering round a faceOpen as day and full of manly daring.of)Thou hadst a hand, a heart for all that came,Herdsman or pedlar, monk or muleteer ;And few there were, that met thee not with smiles.Mishap passed o'er thee like a summer-cloud.Cares thou hadst none ; and they, that stood to hear thee,Caught the infection and forgot their own.Nature conceived thee in her merriest mood,Her happiest — not a speck was in the sky;And at thy birth the cricket chirped, Luigi,Thine a perpetual voice — at every turnA larum to the echo. In a clime,Where all were gay, none were so gay as thou ;Thou, like a babe, hushed only by thy slumbers ;Up hill and down, morning and noon and night.Singing or talking ; singing to thyselfWhen none gave ear, but to the listener talking.ST. MARKS PLACE.Over how many tracts, vast, measureless,Ages on ages roll, and none appearSave the wild hunter ranging for his prey ;While on this spot of earth, the work of man,How much has been transacted ! Emperors, Popes,Warriors, from far and wide, laden with spoil.Landing, have here performed their several parts,Then left the stage to others. Not a stoneIn the broad pavement, but to him who hasIAn eye, an ear for the Inanimate World,Tells of Past Ages.In that temple-porch,(The brass is gone, the porphyry remains,)Did Barbarossa fling his mantle off.And, kneeling, on his neck receive the footOf the proud Pontiff — thus at last consoledFor flight, disguise, and many an aguish shakeOn his stone-pillow. In that temple-porch,Old as he was, so near his hundredth year,And blind — this eyes put out — did DandoloStand forth, displaying on his crown the cross.There did he stand, erect, invincible,Tho' wan his cheeks, and wet with many tears.For in his prayers he had been weeping much ;And now the pilgrims and the people weptWith admiration, saying in their hearts,Surely those aged limbs have need of rest!"There did he stand, with his old armour on,Ere, gonfalon in hand, that streamed aloft,As conscious of its glorious destiny.So soon to float o'er mosque and minaret,He sailed away, five hundred gallant ships.Their lofty sides him with emblazoned shields,Following his track to fame. He went to die ;But of his trophies four arrived ere long,Snatched from destruction — the four steeds divine,That strike the ground, resounding with their feet,And from their nostrils snort ethereal flameOver that very portal — in the placeWhere in an after-time, beside the Doge,Sat one yet greater, * one whose verse shall liveWhen the wave rolls o'er Venice. High he sat,High over all, close by the ducal chair.At the right hand of his illustrious Host,Amid the noblest daughters of the realm.Their beauty shaded from the western rayBy many-coloured hangings ; while, beneath,Knights of all nations, some of fair renownFrom England, from victorious Edward's court,Their lances in the rest, charged for the prize.Here, among other pageants, and how oftIt met the eye, borne thro' the gazing crowd.As if returning to console the least.Instruct the greatest, did the Doge go round;Now in a chair of state, now on his bier.They were his first appearance, and his last.The sea, that emblem of uncertainty,Changed not so fast for many and many an age,As this small spot. To-day 'twas full of masks ;And lo, the madness of the Carnival,The monk, the nun, the holy legate masked !To-morrow came the scaffold and the wheel ;• Petrarch.And he died there by torch-hight, bound and gagged,Whose name and crime they knew not. UnderneathWhere the Archangel, as alighted there,Blesses the City from the topmost-tower,His arms extended — there, in monstrous league,Two phantom-shapes were sitting, side by side,Or up, and, as in sport, chasing each other ;Horror and Mirth. Both vanished in one hour!But Ocean only, when again he claimsHis ancient rule, shall wash away their footsteps.Enter the Palace by the marble stairsDown which the grizzly head of old FalterRolled from the block. Pass onward thro' the hall.Where, among those drawn in their ducal robes.But one is wanting — where, thrown off in heat,A brief inscription on the Doge's chairLed to another on the wall as brief;And thou wilt track them — wilt from rooms of state,Where kings have feasted, and the festal songRung through the fretted roof, cedar and gold,Step into darkness ; and be told, " 'Twas here,Trusting, deceived, assembled but to die.To take a long embrace and part again,Carrara and his valiant sons were slain ;He first — then they, whose only crime had beenStruggling to save their Father." Thro' that door.So soon to cry, smiting his brow, " 1 'm lost !"Was with all courtesy, all honour, shewnThe great and noble captain, Carmagnola.That deep descent (thou canst not yet discernAught as it is) leads to the dripping vaultsUnder the flood, where light and warmth were never !Leads to a covered Bridge, the Bridge of Sighs ;And to that fatal closet at the foot.Lurking for prey, which, when a victim came,Grew less and less, contracting to a span ;An iron-door, urged onward by a screw,Forcing out life. But let us to the roof.And, when thou hast surveyed the sea, the land.Visit the narrow cells that cluster there.As in a place of tombs. There burning suns,Day after day, beat unrelentingly ;Turning all things to dust, and scorching upThe brain, till Reason fled, and the wild yellAnd wilder laugh burst out on every side,Answering each other as in mockery !Few Houses of the size were better filled ;Though many came and left it in an hour.Most nights," so said the good old Nicol,(For three-and-thirty years his uncle keptThe water-gate below, but seldom spoke.Though much was on his mind,) " most nights arrivedThe prison-boat, that boat with many oars,And bore away as to the Lower World,Disburdening in the Canal Orfano,That drowning-place, where never net was thrown,Summer or Winter, death the penalty;And where a secret, once deposited.Lay till the waters should give up their dead."Yet what so gay as Venice? Every galeBreathed music! and who flocked not, while she reigned,To celebrate her Nuptials with the Sea ;To wear the mask, and mingle in the crowdWith Greek, Armenian, Persian — night and day(There, and there only, did the hour stand still,)Pursuing through her thousand labyrinthsThe Enchantress Pleasure ; realizing dreamsThe earliest, happiest — for a tale to catchCredulous ears, and hold young hearts in chains.Had only to begin, * There lived in Venice'Who were the Six we supped with Yesternight?' *Kings, one and all ! Thou couldst not but remarkThe style and manner of the Six that served them.'Who answered me just now ? Who, when I said,'Tis nine," turned round and said so solemnly,Signor, he died at nine !" * 'Twas the Armenian ;The mask that follows thee, go where thou wilt.'But who moves there, alone among them all ?'The Cypriot. Ministers from distant CourtsBeset his doors, long ere his rising-hour ;See Note.His the Great Secret ! Not the golden houseOf Nero, nor those fabled in the East,Rich tho' they were, so wondrous rich as his !Two dogs, coal-black, in collars of pure gold,Walk in his footsteps — Who but his familiars ?He casts no shadow, nor is seen to smile !And mark Him speaking. They, that listen, standAs if his tongue dropped honey ; yet his glanceNone can endure ! He looks nor young nor old ;And at a tourney where I sat and saw,A very child (full threescore years are gone)Borne on my father's shoulder thro' the crowd,He looked not otherwise. Where'er he stops,Tho' short the sojourn, on his chamber-wall,Mid many a treasure gleaned from many a clime,His portrait hangs — but none must notice it ;For Titian glows in every lineament,(Where is it not inscribed. The work is his !)And Titian died two hundred years ago.'Such their discourse. Assembling in St. Mark's,All nations met as on enchanted ground !What tho' a strange mysterious Power was there,Moving throughout, subtle, invisible.And universal as the air they breathed ;A Power that never slumbered, nor forgave,All eye, all ear, no where and every where.Entering the closet and the sanctuary.No place of refuge for the Doge himself;Most present when least thought of — nothing droptIn secret, when the heart was on the lips,Nothing in feverish sleep, but instantlyObserved and judged — a Power, that if but namedIn casual converse, be it where it might.The speaker lowered at once his eyes, his voice.And pointed upward as to God in HeavenWhat tho' that Power was there, he who lived thus.Pursuing Pleasure, lived as if it were not.But let him in the midnight-air indulgeA word, a thought against the laws of Venice,And in that hour he vanished from the earth !THE GONDOLA.Boy, call the Gondola ; the sun is set.It came, and we embarked; but instantly,As at the waving of a magic wand,Tho' she had stept on board so light of foot,So light of heart, laughing she knew not why,Sleep overcame her ; on my arm she slept.From time to time I waked her ; but the boatRocked her to sleep again. The moon was nowRising full-orbed, but broken by a cloud.The wind was hushed, and the sea mirror-like.A single zephyr, as enamoured, playedWith her loose tresses, and drew more and moreHer veil across her bosom. Long I layContemplating that face so beautiful.That rosy mouth, that cheek dimpled with smiles.That neck but half-concealed, whiter than snow.*Twas the sweet slumber of her early age.I looked and looked, and felt a flush of joyI would express but cannot. Oft I wishedGently - - by stealth - - to drop asleep myself,And to incline yet lower that sleep might come ;Oft closed my eyes as in forgetfulness.'Twas all in vain. Love would not let me rest.But how delightful when at length she waked !When, her light hair adjusting, and her veilSo rudely scattered, she resumed her placeBeside me ; and, as gaily as before.Sitting unconsciously nearer and nearer.Poured out her innocent mind !So, nor long since.Sung a Venetian : and his lay of love, *Dangerous and sweet, charmed Venice. For myself,(Less fortunate, if Love be Happiness)No curtain drawn, no pulse beating alarm,I went alone beneath the silent moon ;Thy square, St. Mark, thy churches, palaces.Glittering and frost-like, and, as day drew on,Melting away, an emblem of themselves.Those Porches passed, thro' which the water-breezePlays, tho' no longer on the noble formsThat moved there, sable-vested — and the Quay,Silent, grass-grown — adventurer-like I launchedInto the deep, ere long discoveringIsles such as cluster in the Southern seas.All verdure. Every where, from bush and brake.The musky odour of the serpents came ;La Binding in Gondoletta.Their slimy track across the woodlands pathBright in the moonshine : and, as round I went,Dreaming of Greece, whither the waves were gliding,I listened to the venerable pinesThen in close converse, and, if right I guessed,Delivering many a message to the WindsIn secret, for their kindred on Mount Ida.Nor when again in Venice, when againIn that strange place, so stirring and so still.Where nothing comes to drown the human voiceBut music, or the dashing of the tide,Ceased I to wander. Now a JessicaSung to her lute, her signal as she satAt her half-open window. Then, methought,A serenade broke silence, breathing hopeThro* walls of stone, and torturing the proud heartOf some Priuli. Once, we could not err,(It was before an old Palladian house.As between night and day we floated by)A Gondolier lay singing ; and he sung,As in the time when Venice was herself,Of Tancred and Ermine. On our oarsWe rested ; and the verse was verse divine !We could not err — Perhaps he was the last —For none took up the strain, none answered him ;And when he ceased, he left upon my earA something like the dying voice of Venice !The moon went down ; and nothing now was seenSave where the lamp of a Madonna shoneFaintly — or heard, but when he spoke, who stoodOver the lantern at the prow and cried.Turning the corner of some reverend pile,Some school or hospital of old renown,Tho' haply none were coming, none were near,Hasten or slacken'* But at length Night fled;And with her fled, scattering, the sons of Pleasure.Star after star shot by, or, meteor-like.Crossed me and vanished — lost at once amongThose hundred Isles that tower majestically.That rise abruptly from the water-mark.Not with rough crag, but marble, and the workOf noblest architects. I lingered still ;Nor sought my threshold, till the hour was comeAnd past, when, flitting home in the grey light,The young Bianca found her father's door,That door so often with a trembling hand.So often — then so lately left ajar.Shut ; and, all terror, all perplexity.Now by her lover urged, now by her love.Fled o'er the waters to return no more.Primi o stall.THE BRIDES OF VENICE.It was St. Mary's Eve, and all poured forthFor some great festival. The fisher cameFrom his green islet, bringing o'er the wavesHis wife and Httle one; the husbandmanFrom the Firm Land, with many a friar and nun,And village-maiden, her first flight from home,Crowding the common ferry. All arrived ;And in his straw the prisoner turned and listened.So great the stir in Venice. Old and youngThronged her three hundred bridges ; the grave Turk,Turbaned, long-vested, and the cozening Jew,In yellow hat and thread-bare gaberdine.Hurrying along. For, as the custom was.The noblest sons and daughters of the State,Whose names are written in the Book of Gold,Were on that day to solemnize their nuptials.At noon a distant murmur thro' the crowd,Rising and rolling on, proclaimed them near ;And never from their earliest hour was seenSuch splendour or such beauty. Two and two,(The richest tapestry unrolled before them)First came the Brides ; each in her virgin-veil,Nor unattended by her bridal maids.The two that, step by step, behind her boreThe small but precious caskets that containedThe dowry and the presents. On she moved.Her eyes cast down, and holding in her handA fan, that gently waved, of ostrich-plumes.Her veil, transparent as the gossamer,Fell from beneath a starry diadem ;And on her dazzling neck a jewel shone.Ruby or diamond or dark amethyst ;A jewelled chain, in many a winding wreath,Wreathing her gold brocade.Before the Church,That venerable structure now no moreOn the sea-brink, another train they met,No strangers, nor unlooked for ere they came,Brothers to some, still dearer to the rest ;Each in his hand bearing his cap and plume,And, as he walked, with modest dignityFolding his scarlet mantle. At the gateThey join ; and slowly up the bannered aisleLed by the choir, with due solemnityRange round the altar. In his vestments thereThe Patriarch stands ; and, while the anthem flows,Who can look on unmoved — the dream of yearsJust now fulfilling ! Here a mother weeps,Rejoicing in her daughter. There a sonBlesses the day that is to make her his ;While she shines forth thro' all her ornament.Her beauty heightened by her hopes and fears.At length the rite is ending. All fall down.All of all ranks ; and, stretching out his hands.Apostle-like, the holy man proceedsTo give the blessing — not a stir, a breath ;When hark, a din of voices from without,And shrieks and groans and outcries as in battle !And lo, the door is burst, the curtain rent,And armed ruffians, robbers from the deep,Savage, uncouth, led on by Barbara,And his six brothers in their coats of steel.Are standing on the threshold ! Statue-like,Awhile they gaze on the fallen multitude.Each with his sabre up, in act to strike ;Then, as at once recovering from the spell.Rush forward to the altar, and as soonAre gone again — amid no clash of armsBearing away the maidens and the treasures.Where are they now ? — ploughing the distant waves,Their sails out-spread and given to the wind,They on their decks triumphant. On they speed,Steering for I stria ; their accursed barks(Well are they known, the galliot and the galley,)Freighted, alas, with all that life endears !The richest argosies were poor to them !Now hadst thou seen along that crowded shoreThe matrons running wild, their festal dressA strange and moving contrast to their grief;And thro' the city, wander where thou wouldst.The men half armed and arming — every whereAs roused from slumber by the stirring trump ;One with a shield, one with a casque and spear ;One with an axe severing in two the chainOf some old pinnace. Not a raft, a plank.But on that day was drifting. In an hourHalf Venice was afloat But long before,Frantic with grief and scorning all controul,The Youths were gone in a light brigantine,Lying at anchor near the Arsenal ;Each having sworn, and by the holy rood.To slay or to be slain.And from the towerThe watchman gives the signal. In the EastA ship is seen, and making for the Port ;Her flag St. Mark's. And now she turns the point.Over the waters like a sea-bird flying !Ha, 'tis the same, 'tis theirs ! from stern to prowGreen with victorious wreaths, she comes to bringAll that was lost. Coasting, with narrow search,Friuli — like a tiger in his spring,They had surprised the Corsairs where they laySharing the spoil in blind securityAnd casting lots — had slain them, one and all,All to the last, and flung them far and wideInto the sea, their proper element ;Him first, as first in rank, whose name so longHad hushed the babes of Venice, and who yet,Breathing a little, in his look retainedThe fierceness of his soul.Thus were the BridesLost and recovered ; and what now remainedBut to give Thanks ? Twelve breast-plates and twelvecrowns,LBy the young Victors to their Patron-SaintVowed in the field, inestimable giftsFlaming with gems and gold, were in due timeLaid at his feet ; and ever to preserveThe memory of a day so full of change,From joy to grief, from grief to joy again,Thro' many an age, as oft as it came round,*Twas held religiously. The Doge resignedHis crimson for pure ermine, visitingAt earliest dawn St. Mary's silver shrine;And thro' the city, in a stately bargeOf gold, were borne with songs and symphoniesTwelve ladies young and noble. Clad they wereIn bridal white with bridal ornaments.Each in her glittering veil ; and on the deck.As on a burnished throne, they glided by ;No window or balcony but adornedWith hangings of rich texture, not a roofBut covered with beholders, and the airVocal with joy. Onward they went, their oarsMoving in concert with the harmony.Thro' the Rialto to the Ducal Palace,And at a banquet, served with honour there.Sat representing, in the eyes of all,Eyes not unwept, I ween, with grateful tears,Their lovely ancestors, the Brides of Venice.S^tf^i A//Oscar.Let us lift up the curtain, and observeWhat passes in that chamber. Now a sigh,And now a groan is heard. Then all is still.Twenty are sitting as in judgment there ;Men who have served their country, and grown greyIn governments and distant embassies,Men eminent alike in war and peace ;Such as in effigy shall long adornThe walls of Venice — to shew what she was !Their garb is black, and black the arras is,And sad the general aspect. Yet their looksAre calm, are cheerful ; nothing there like grief,Nothing or harsh or cruel. Still that noise.That low and dismal moaning.Half withdrawn,A little to the left, sits one in crimson,A venerable man, fourscore and five.Cold drops of sweat stand on his furrowed brow.His hands are clenched; his eyes half-shut and glazed;His shrunk and withered limbs rigid as marble.'Tis FoscARi, the Doge. And there is one,A young man, lying at his feet, stretched outIn torture. 'Tis his son. 'Tis Giacomo,His only joy (and has he lived for this ?)Accused of murder. Yesternight the proofs.If proofs they be, were in the lion's mouthDropt by some hand unseen ; and he, himself,Must sit and look on a beloved sonSuffering the Question. Twice to die in peace,To save, while yet he could, a falling house,And turn the hearts of his fell Adversaries,Those who had now, like hell-hounds in full cry.Chased down his last of four, twice did he askTo lay aside the Crown, and they refused,An oath exacting, never more to ask ;And there he sits, a spectacle of woe.Condemned in bitter mockery to wearThe bauble he had sighed for. Once againThe screw is turned ; and, as it turns, the SonLooks up, and, in a faint and broken tone.Murmurs * My Father !' The old man shrinks back,And in his mantle muffles up his face.Art thou not guilty V says a voice, that onceWould greet the Sufferer long before they met,Art thou not guilty V — * No ! Indeed I am not !'But all is unavailing. In that CourtGroans are confessions ; Patience, Fortitude,The work of Magic ; and, released, revived,For Condemnation, from his Father's lipsHe hears the sentence, * Banishment to Candia.Death, if he leaves it.' And the bark sets sail ;And he is gone from all he loves in life !Gone in the dead of night — unseen of any —Without a word, a look of tenderness.To be called up, when, in his lonely hoursHe would indulge in weeping. Like a ghost,Day after day, year after year, he hauntsAn ancient rampart, that overhangs the sea ;Gazing on vacancy, and hourly thereStarting as from some wild and uncouth dream,To answer to the watch. Alas, how changedFrom him the mirror of the Youth of Venice ;Whom in the slightest thing, or whim or chance,Did he but wear his doublet so and so,All followed ; at whose nuptials, when he wonThat maid at once the noblest, fairest, best,A daughter of the House that now amongIts ancestors in monumental brassNumbers eight Doges — to convey her home,The Bucentaur went forth ; and thrice the SunShone on the Chivalry, that, front to front,And blaze on blaze reflecting, met and rangedTo tourney in St. Mark's. But lo, at last,Messengers come. He is recalled : his heartLeaps at the tidings. He embarks : the boatSprings to the oar, and back again he goes —Into that very Chamber ! there to lieIn his old resting-place, the bed of steel ;And thence look up (Five long, long years of GriefHave not killed either) on his wretched Sire,Still in that seat — as though he had not stirred ;Immovable, and muffled in his cloak.But now he comes, convicted of a crimeGreat by the laws of Venice. Night and day,Brooding on what he had been, what he was,'Twas more than he could bear. His longing-fitsThickened upon him. His desire for homeBecame a madness ; and, resolved to go,If but to die, in his despair he writesA letter to the sovereign-prince of Milan,(To him whose name, among the greatest now,Had perished, blotted out at once and rased.But for the rugged limb of an old oak)Soliciting his influence with the State,And drops it to be found. * Would ye know all ?I have transgressed, offended wilfully ;And am prepared to suffer as I ought.But let me, let me, if but for an hour,(Ye must consent — for all of you are sons.Most of you husbands, fathers) let me firstIndulge the natural feelings of a man.And, ere I die, if such my sentence be.Press to my heart (tis all I ask of you)My wife, my children — and my aged mother —Say, is she yet alive V He is condemnedTo go ere set of sun, go whence he came,A banished man ; and for a year to breatheThe vapour of a dungeon. But his prayer(What could they less ?) is granted. In a hallOpen and crowded by the common herd,*Twas there a Wife and her four sons yet young,A Mother borne along, life ebbing fast,And an old Doge, mustering his strength in vain.Assembled now, sad privilege, to meetOne so long lost, one who for them had braved,For them had sought — death and yet worse than death ;To meet him, and to part with him for ever ! —Time and their wrongs had changed them all, him most!Yet when the Wife, the Mother looked again,'Twas he — 'twas he himself — 'twas Giacomo !And all clung round him, weeping bitterly ;Weeping the more, because they wept in vain.'Unnerved, and now unsettled in his mindFrom long and exquisite pain, he sobs and cries.Kissing the old Man's cheek, * Help me, my Father !Let me, I pray thee, live once more among ye :Let me go home.' * My Son,' returns the Doge,Mastering his grief, * if thou art indeed my Son,Obey. Thy Country wills it.'GiacomoThat night embarked ; sent to an early graveFor one whose dying words, * The deed was mine !He is most innocent ! 'Twas I who did it !'Came when he slept in peace. The ship, that sailedSwift as the winds with his deliverance.Bore back a lifeless corse. Generous as brave,Affection, kindness, the sweet officesOf duty and love were from his tenderest yearsTo him as needful as his daily bread ;And to become a by-word in the streets,Bringing a stain on those who gave him Hfe,And those, alas, now worse than fatherless —To be proclaimed a ruffian, a night-stabber.He on whom none before had breathed reproach —He lived but to disprove it. That hope lost,Death followed. Oh, if Justice be in Heaven,A day must come of ample Retribution !Then was thy cup, old Man, full to the brim.But thou wert yet alive ; and there was one,The soul and spring of all that Enmity,Who would not leave thee ; fastening on thy flank.Hungering and thirsting, still unsatisfied ;One of a name illustrious as thine own !One of the Ten! one of the Invisible Three!*Twas LoREDANO. When the whelps were gone,He would dislodge the Lion from his den ;And, leading on the pack he long had led.The miserable pack that ever howledAgainst fallen Greatness, moved that FoscariBe Doge no longer ; urging his great age ;Calling the loneliness of grief neglectOf duty, sullenness against the laws.I am most willing to retire,' said he :But I have sworn, and cannot of myself.Do with me as ye please.' He was deposed,He, who had reigned so long and gloriously ;His ducal bonnet taken from his brow,MHis robes stript off, his seal and signet-ringBroken before him. But now nothing movedThe meekness of his soul. All things alike !Among the six that came with the decree,FoscARi saw one he knew not, and inquiredHis name. * I am the son of Marco Memmo.'Ah,' he replied, * thy father was my friend.'And now he goes. * It is the hour and past.I have no business here.' * But wilt thou notAvoid the gazing crowd ? That way is private.'No ! as I entered, so will I retire.'And, leaning on his staff, he left the House,His residence for five-and-thirty years.By the same stairs up which he came in state ;Those where the giants stand, guarding the ascent.Monstrous, terrific. At the foot he stopt.And, on his staff still leaning, turned and said,By mine own merits did I come. I go.Driven by the malice of mine Enemies.'Then to his boat withdrew, poor as he came.Amid the sighs of them that dared not speak.This journey was his last. When the bell rangAt dawn, announcing a new Doge to Venice,It found him on his knees before the Cross,Clasping his aged hands in earnest prayer ;And there he died. Ere half its task was done.It rang his knell.ssBut whence the deadly hateThat caused all this — the hate of Loredano ?It was a legacy his Father left,Who, but for Foscari, had reigned in Venice,And, like the venom in the serpent's bag,Gathered and grew ! Nothing but turned to hate !In vain did Foscari supplicate for peace,Offering in marriage his fair Isabel.He changed not, with a dreadful pietyStudying revenge ; listening to those aloneWho talked of vengeance ; grasping by the handThose in their zeal (and none were wanting there)Who came to tell him of another Wrong,Done or imagined. When his father died.They whispered, * 'Twas by poison !' and the wordsStruck him as uttered fi'om his father's grave.He wrote it on the tomb (tis there in marble)And with a brow of care, most merchant-like,Among the debtors in his leger-bookEntered at full (nor month, nor day forgot)Francesco Foscari — for my Father's death.'Leaving a blank — to be filled up hereafter.When FoscARi's noble heart at length gave way,He took the volume from the shelf againCalmly, and with his pen filled up the blank.Inscribing, * He has paid me.'Ye who sitBrooding from day to day, from day to dayChewing the bitter cud, and starting upAs tho' the hour was come to whet your fangs,And, Hke the Pisan, gnaw the hairy scalpOf him who had offended — if ye must,Sit and brood on ; but oh forbear to teachThe lesson to your children.MARCOLINI.It was midnight; the great clock had struck, andwas still echoing through every porch and gallery inthe quarter of St. Mark, when a young Citizen,wrapt in his cloak, was hastening home under itfrom an interview with his Mistress. His step waslight, for his heart was so. Her parents had justconsented to their marriage ; and the very day wasnamed. " Lovely Giulietta !" he cried, " Andshall I then call thee mine at last ? Who was everso blest as thy Marcolini ?" But as he spoke, hestopped; for something glittered on the pavementbefore him. It was a scabbard of rich workmanship;and the discovery, what was it but an earnest ofgood fortune ? " Rest thou there !" he cried, thrustingit gaily into his belt. "If another claims theenot, thou hast changed masters !" and on he went asbefore, humming the burden of a song which he andhis Giulietta had been singing together. Buthow little we know what the next minute will bringforth ! He turned by the Church of St. Geminiano,and in three steps met the Watch. A murder hadjust been committed. The Senator Renal hadbeen found dead at his door, the dagger left in hisheart ; and the unfortunate Marcolini was draggedaway for examination. The place, the time, everythingserved to excite, to justify suspicion ; and nosooner had he entered the guardhouse than a damningwitness appeared against him. The Bravo inhis flight had thrown away his scabbard; and,smeared with blood, with blood not yet dry, it wasnow in the belt of Marcolini. Its Patrician ornamentsstruck every eye ; and when the fatal daggerwas produced and compared with it, not a doubt ofhis guilt remained. Still there is in the innocent anenergy, a composure, an energy when they speak, acomposure when they are silent, to which none canbe altogether insensible ; and the Judge delayed forsome time to pronounce the sentence, though he wasa near relation of the dead. At length however itcame ; and Marcolini lost his life, Giulietta herreason.Not many years afterwards the truth revealeditself, the real criminal in his last moments confessingthe crime : and hence the custom in Venice,a custom that long prevailed, for a cryer to cry outin the Court before a sentence was passed, " Rigorsdel povero Marcolini !" *Great indeed was the lamentation throughout theCity; and the Judge, dying, directed that thenceforthand for ever a Mass should be sung every nightin a chapel of the Ducal Church for his own souland the soul of Marcolini and the souls of all whohad suffered by an unjust judgment. Some landon the Brent was left by him for the purpose:and still is the Mass sung in the chapel ; still everynight, when the great square is illuminating and thecasinos are filling fast with the gay and the dissipated,a bell is rung as for a service, and a ray of lightseen to issue from a small gothic window that lookstowards the place of execution, the place where on ascaffold Marcolini breathed his last.• Remember the poor Marcolini !Aqua.Three leagues from Padua stands, and long has stood(The Padua student knows it, honours it)A lonely tomb beside a mountain-church ;And I arrived there as the sun declinedLow in the west. The gentle airs, that breatheFragrance at eve, were rising, and the birdsSinging their farewell-song — the very songThey sung the night that tomb received a tenant ;When, as alive, clothed in his Canon's stole.And slowly winding down the narrow path,He came to rest there. Nobles of the land,Princes and prelates mingled in his train.Anxious by any act, while yet they could.To catch a ray of glory by reflection ;And from that hour have kindred spirits flockedFrom distant countries, from the north, the south.To see where he is laid.Twelve years ago.When I descended the impetuous Rhone,Its vineyards of such great and old renown, *Its castles, each with some romantic tale,Vanishing fast — the pilot at the stern.He who had steered so long, standing aloft.His eyes on the white breakers, and his handsOn what was now his rudder, now his oar,A huge misshapen plank — the bark itselfFrail and uncouth, launched to return no more,Such as a shipwrecked man might hope to build.Urged by the love of home — Twelve years ago,When like an arrow from the cord we flew,• The Cote Rote, the Hermitage, &c.NTwo long, long days, silence, suspense on board,It was to offer at thy fount, Vaucluse,Entering the arched Cave, to wander wherePetrarch had wandered, to explore and sitWhere in his peasant-dress he loved to sit.Musing, reciting — on some rock moss-grown,Or the fantastic root of some old beech.That drinks the living waters as they streamOver their emerald-bed ; and could I nowNeglect the place where, in a graver mood.When he had done and settled with the world.When all the illusions of his Youth were fled,Indulged perhaps too much, cherished too long.He came for the conclusion ? Half-way upHe built his house, whence as by stealth he caught.Among the hills, a glimpse of busy lifeThat soothed, not stirred. But knock, and enter in.This was his chamber. 'Tis as when he went ;As if he now were in his orchard-grove.And this his closet. Here he sat and read.This was his chair ; and in it, unobserved,Reading, or thinking of his absent friends.He passed away as in a quiet slumber.Peace to this region ! Peace to each, to all !They know his value — every coming step.That draws the gazing children from their play.Would tell them if they knew not. But could aught,Ungentle or ungenerous, spring upWhere he is sleeping ; where, and in an ageOf savage warfare and blind bigotry,He cultured all that could refine, exalt ; ,Leading to better things ?Genera.If thou shouldst ever come by choice or chanceTo MoDENA, where still religiouslyAmong her ancient trophies is preservedBologna's bucket (in its chain it hangsWithin that reverend tower, the Guirlandine)Stop at a Palace near the Reggio-gate,Dwelt in of old by one of the Orsini.Its noble gardens, terrace above terrace.And rich in fountains, statues, cypresses.Will long detain thee ; thro' their arched walks.Dim at noon-day, discovering many a glimpseOf knights and dames, such as in old romance,And lovers, such as in heroic song,Perhaps the two, for groves were their delight.That in the spring-time, as alone they sat.Venturing together on a tale of love,Read only part that day.* A summer-sunSets ere one half is seen ; but, ere thou go,Inferno. V.Enter the house — prythee, forget it not —And look awhile upon a picture there.'Tis of a Lady in her earliest youth,The very last of that illustrious race,Done by Dampier* — but I care not whom.He, who observes it — ere he passes on.Gazes his fill, and comes and comes again.That he may call it up, when far away.She sits, inclining forward as to speak.Her lips half-open, and her finger up.As tho' she said * Beware !' her vest of goldBroidered with flowers, and clasped from head to foot.An emerald-stone in every golden clasp ;And on her brow, fairer than alabaster,A coronet of pearls. But then her face,So lovely, yet so arch, so full of mirth.The overflowing of an innocent heart —It haunts me still, tho' many a year has fled,Like some wild melody !Alone it hangsOver a mouldering heir-loom, its companion.An oaken-chest, half-eaten by the worm.But richly carved by Antony of TrentWith scripture-stories from the Life of Christ ;A chest that came from Venice, and had heldThe ducal robes of some old Ancestor.Commonly called Domenicuino.91.That by the way — it may be true or false —But don't forget the picture ; and thou wilt not,When thou hast heard the tale they told me there.She was an only child ; from infancyThe joy, the pride of an indulgent Sire.Her Mother dying of the gift she gave,That precious gift, what else remained to him ?The young Ginevra was his all in life,Still as she grew, for ever in his sight ;And in her fifteenth year became a bride,Marrying an only son, Francesco Doria,Her playmate from her birth, and her first love.Just as she looks there in her bridal dress.She was all gentleness, all gaiety,Her pranks the favourite theme of every tongue.But now the day was come, the day, the hour ;Now, frowning, smiling, for the hundredth time.The nurse, that ancient lady, preached decorum ;And, in the lustre of her youth, she gaveHer hand, with her heart in it, to Francesco.Great was the joy ; but at the Bridal feast.When all sat down, the Bride was wanting there.Nor was she to be found ! Her Father cried,'Tis but to make a trial of our love !'And filled his glass to all ; but his hand shook,And soon from guest to guest the panic spread.'Twas but that instant she had left Francesco,laughing and looking back and flying still,Her ivory-tooth imprinted on his finger.But now, alas, she was not to be found;Nor from that hour could any thing be guessed,But that she was not !Weary of his life,Francesco flew to Venice, and forthwithFlung it away in battle with the Turk.Orsini lived ; and long might'st thou have seenAn old man wandering as in quest of something,Something he could not find — he knew not what.When he was gone, the house remained awhileSilent and tenantless — then went to strangers.Full fifty years were past, and all forgot,When on an idle day, a day of searchMid the old lumber in the Gallery,That mouldering chest was noticed ; and 'twas saidBy one as young, as thoughtless as Ginevra,Why not remove it fi:om its lurking-place VTwas done as soon as said ; but on the wayIt burst, it fell ; and lo, a skeleton.With here and there a pearl, an emerald-stone,A golden clasp, clasping a shred of gold.All else had perished — save a nuptial ring.And a small seal, her mother's legacy.Engraved with a name, the name of both,Ginevra.'There then had she found a grave !Within that chest had she concealed herself,Fluttering with joy, the happiest of the happy ;When a spring-lock, that lay in ambush there,Fastened her down for ever !^iiimm^'mm^^'^'BOLOGNA.TwAs night ; the noise and bustle of the dayWere o'er. The mountebank no longer wroughtMiraculous cures — he and his stage were gone ;And he who, when the crisis of his taleCame, and all stood breathless with hope and fear,Sent round his cap ; and he who thrummed his wireAnd sang, with pleading look and plaintive strainMelting the passenger. Thy thousand cries, *So well pourtrayed and by a son of thine.Whose voice had swelled the hubbub in his youth.Were hushed, Bologna, silence in the streets,The squares, when hark, the clattering of fleet hoofs ;And soon a courier, posting as from far.Housing and holster, boot and belted coatAnd doublet, stained with many a various soil,Stopt and alighted. 'Twas where hangs aloftThat ancient sign, the pilgrim, welcoming• See the Cries of Bologna, as drawn by Hannibal Carrack. Hewas of very bumble origin ; and, to correct bis brother's vanity, oncesent him a portrait of their father, the tailor, threading his needle.OAll who arrive there, all perhaps save thoseClad like himself, with staff and scallop-shell.Those on a pilgrimage. And now approachedWheels, thro' the lofty porticoes resounding,Arch beyond arch, a shelter or a shadeAs the sky changes. To the gate they came.And, ere the man had half his story done.Mine host received the Master — one long usedTo sojourn among strangers, every where(Go where he would, along the wildest track)Flinging a charm that shall not soon be lost,And leaving footsteps to be traced by thoseWho love the haunts of Genius ; one who saw.Observed, nor shunned the busy scenes of life.But mingled not, and mid the din, the stir,Lived as a separate Spirit.Much had passedSince last we parted ; and those five short years —Much had they told ! His clustering locks were turn'dGrey ; nor did aught recall the Youth that swamFrom Sestos to Abydos. Yet his voice.Still it was sweet ; still from his eye the thoughtFlashed lightning-like, nor lingered on the way.Waiting for words. Far, far into the nightWe sat, conversing — no unwelcome hour.The hour we met ; and, when Aurora rose.Rising, we climbed the rugged Apennine.Well I remember how the golden sunFilled with its beams the unfathomable gulphs,As on we travelled, and along the ridge.Mid groves of cork and cistus and wild-fig,His motley household came — Not last nor least,Baptista, who upon the moonlight-seaOf Venice, had so ably, zealously.Served, and, at parting, thrown his oar awayTo follow thro' the world ; who without stainHad worn so long that honourable badge, *The gondolier's, in a Patrician HouseArguing unlimited trust. — Not last nor least.Thou, tho' declining in thy beauty and strength.Faithful Moreton, to the latest hourGuarding his chamber-door, and now alongThe silent, sullen strand of MissolonghiHowling in grief.He had just left that PlaceOf old renown, once in the Adrian sea, fRavenna ! where, from Dante's sacred tombHe had so oft, as many a verse declares, JDrawn inspiration ; where, at twilight-time.Thro' the pine-forest wandering with loose rein,• The principal gondolier, il fate di poppy, was almost alwaysin the confidence of his master, and employed on occasions thatrequired judgment and address.f Adrian mare. — Cic. \ See the Prophecy of Dante.Wandering and lost, he had so oft beheld*(What is not visible to a Poet's eye ?)The spectre-knight, the hell-hounds and their prey,The chase, the slaughter, and the festal mirthSuddenly blasted. 'Twas a theme he loved.But others claimed their turn ; and many a tower.Shattered, uprooted from its native rock.Its strength the pride of some heroic age,Appeared and vanished (many a sturdy steer fYoked and unyoked) while as in happier daysHe poured his spirit forth. The past forgot,All was enjoyment. Not a cloud obscuredPresent or future.He is now at rest ;And praise and blame fall on his ear alike,Now dull in death. Yes, Byron, thou art gone.Gone like a star that thro' the firmamentShot and was lost, in its eccentric courseDazzling, perplexing. Yet thy heart, methinks,Was generous, noble — noble in its scornOf all things low or little ; nothing thereSordid or servile. If imagined wrongsPursued thee, urging thee sometimes to doThings long regretted, oft, as many know.None more than I, thy gratitude would buildSee the tale as told by Boccaccio and Dryden.f They wait for the traveller's carriage at the foot of every hill.On slight foundations : and, if in thy lifeNot happy, in thy death thou surely wert.Thy wish accomplished ; dying in the landWhere thy young mind had caught ethereal fire,D)dng in Greece, and in a cause so glorious !They in thy train — ah, little did they think.As round we went, that they so soon should sitMourning beside thee, while a Nation mourned,Changing her festal for her funeral song ;That they so soon should hear the minute-gun.As morning gleamed on what remained of thee,Roll o'er the sea, the mountains, numberingThy years of joy and sorrow.Thou art gone ;And he who would assail thee in thy grave,Oh, let him pause ! For who among us all.Tried as thou wert — even from thine earliest years.When wandering, yet unspoilt, a highland-boy —Tried as thou wert, and with thy soul of flame ;Pleasure, while yet the down was on thy cheek,Uplifting, pressing, and to lips like thine.Her charmed cup — ah, who among us allCould say he had not erred as much, and more ?FLORENCE.Of all the fairest Cities of the EarthNone is so fair as Florence. 'Tis a gemOf purest ray ; and what a light broke forth,When it emerged from darkness ! Search within,Without ; all is enchantment ! 'Tis the PastContending with the Present ; and in turnEach has the mastery.In this chapel wroughtOne of the Few, Nature's Interpreters,The Few, whom Genius gives as Lights to shine,Massaccio ; and he slumbers underneath.Wouldst thou behold his monument ? Look round !And know that where we stand, stood oft and long,Oft till the day was gone, Raphael himself,He and his haughty Rival * — patiently,Humbly, to learn of those who came before.To steal a spark from their authentic fire,Theirs who first broke the universal gloom.Sons of the Mornings that ancient seatsThe seat of stone that runs along the wall,South of the Church, east of the belfry-tower,(Thou canst not miss it) in the sultry timeWould Dante sit conversing, and with thoseWho little thought that in his hand he heldThe balance, and assigned at his good pleasureTo each his place in the invisible world.To some an upper region, some a lower ;Many a transgressor sent to his account.Long ere in Florence numbered with the dead;The body still as full of life and stirAt home, abroad ; still and as oft inclinedTo eat, drink, sleep; still clad as others were,And at noon-day, where men were wont to meet,Met as continually ; when the soul went,Relinquished to a demon, and by him(So says the Bard, and who can read and doubt ?)• Michael Angelo. f A tradition.Dwelt in and governed. Sit thee down awhile ;Then, by the gates so marvellously wrought,That they might serve to be the gates of Heaven,Enter the Baptistery. That place he loved.Loved as his own ; * and in his visits thereWell might he take delight ! For when a child.Playing, as many are wont, with venturous feetNear and yet nearer to the sacred font,Slipped and fell in, he flew and rescued him,Flew with an energy, a violence.That broke the marble — a mishap ascribedTo evil motives ; his, alas, to leadA life of trouble, and ere long to leaveAll things most dear to him, ere long to knowHow salt another's bread is, and the toilOf going up and down another's stairs, fNor then forget that Chamber of the Dead,Where the gigantic shapes of Night and Day,Turned into stone, rest everlastingly;Yet still are breathing, and shed round at noonA two-fold influence — only to be felt —A light, a darkness, mingling each with each ;Both and yet neither. There, from age to age.Two Ghosts are sitting on their sepulchres.That is the Duke Lorenzo. Mark him well.He meditates, his head upon his hand.What from beneath his helm-like bonnet scowls ?Mabel Giovanni. Inferno. 19. f Paradise. 17.Is it a face, or but an eyeless scull ?*Tis lost in shade ; yet, like the basilisk.It fascinates, and is intolerable.His mien is noble, most majestical !Then most so, when the distant choir is heardAt morn or eve — nor fail thou to attendOn that thrice-hallowed day, when all are there ;When all, propitiating with solemn songs,Visit the Dead. Then will thou feel his Power !But let not Sculpture, Painting, Poesy,Or They, the Masters of these mighty Spells,Detain us. Our first homage is to Virtue.There, in what dungeon of the Citadel,(It must be known — the writing on the wallCannot be gone — 'twas with the blade cut in,Ere, on his knees to God, he slew himself,)Did he, the last, the noblest Citizen, *Breathe out his soul, lest in the torturing hourHe might accuse the Guiltless ? That debt paid,But with a sigh, a tear for human frailty,We may return, and once more give a looseTo the delighted spirit — worshipping.In her small temple of rich workmanship, fVenus herself, who, when she left the skies,Came hither.• Filippo Strozzi. f The Tribune.^ / ^ ■ /' //Ce^^Uct-'.DON Garcia.Among those awful forms, in elder timeAssembled, and thro' many an after-ageDestined to stand as Genii of the PlaceWhere men most meet in Florence, may be seenHis who first played the Tyrant. Clad in mail,But with his helmet off — in kingly state.Aloft he sits upon his horse of brass ;And they, that read the legend underneath.Go and pronounce him happy. * Yet, methinks,There is a chamber that, if walls could speak,Would turn their admiration into pity.Half of what passed, died with him; but the rest,All he discovered when the fit was on.All that, by those who listened, could be gleanedFrom broken sentences and starts in sleep.Is told, and by an honest Chronicler, fTwo of his sons, Giovanni and Garzia,(The eldest had not seen his nineteenth summer)Went to the chase ; but only one returned.• Cosmo, the ftrht Giaiid Duke. f ^^ Thou.Giovanni, when the huntsman blew his hornO'er the last stag that started from the brake,And in the heather turned to stand at bay,Appeared not ; and at close of day was foundBathed in his innocent blood. Too well, alas,The trembling Cosmo guessed the deed, the doer ;And, having caused the body to be borneIn secret to that Chamber — at an hourWhen all slept sound, save she who bore them both,*Who little thought of what was yet to come.And lived but to be told — he bade GarciaArise and follow him. Holding in one handA winking lamp, and in the other a keyMassive and dungeon-like, thither he led ;And, having entered in and locked the door.The father fixed his eyes upon the son.And closely questioned him. No change betrayedOr guilt or fear. Then Cosmo lifted upThe bloody sheet. * Look there ! Look there !' he cried.Blood calls for blood — and from a father's hand !Unless thyself wilt save him that sad office.What !' he exclaimed, when, shuddering at the sight.The boy breathed out, * I stood but on my guard.'Dar'st thou then blacken one who never wronged thee,Who would not set his foot upon a worm ? —Yes, thou must die, lest others fall by thee,Leonora di Toledo.And thou shouldst be the slayer of us all.'Then from Garzia's belt he drew the blade,That fatal one which spilt his brother's blood ;And, kneeling on the ground, * Great God !' he cried,Grant me the strength to do an act of Justice.Thou knowest what it costs me ; but, alas,How can I spare myself, sparing none else ?Grant me the strength, the will — and oh forgiveThe sinful soul of a most wretched son.*Tis a most wretched father that implores it.'Long on Garcia's neck he hung and wept.Long pressed him to his bosom tenderly ;And then, but while he held him by the arm,Thrusting him backward, turned away his face,And stabbed him to the heart.Well might a Youth,*Studious of men, anxious to learn and know.When in the train of some great embassyHe came, a visitant, to Cosmo's court.Think on the past ; and, as he wandered thro'The ample spaces of an ancient house, fSilent, deserted — stop awhile to dwellUpon two portraits there, drawn on the wallTogether, as of Two irf bonds of love.Those of the unhappy brothers, and conclude• De Thou.f The Palazzo Vecchia Cosmo had left it several years before.noFrom the sad looks of him who could have told,The terrible truth. Well might he heave a sighFor poor humanity, when he beheldThat very Cosmo shaking o'er his fire,Drowsy and deaf and inarticulate,Wrapt in his night-gown, o'er a sick man's mess.In the last stage — death-struck and deadly pale ;His wife, another, not his Eleanor,At once his nurse and his interpreter.ai^Baw^THE CAMPAGNA OF FLORENCE.'Tis morning. Let us wander thro* the fields,Where Cimabue found a shepherd-boy*Tracing his idle fancies on the ground ;And let us from the top of Fiesole,Whence Galileo's glass by night observedThe phases of the moon, look round belowOn Arno's vale, where the dove-coloured steerIs ploughing up and down among the vines.While many a careless note is sung aloud.Filling the air with sweetness — and on thee,Beautiful Florence, all within thy walls.Thy groves and gardens, pinnacles and towers,Drawn to our feet.From that small spire, just caughtBy the bright ray, that church among the restBy One of Old distinguished as The Bride, fLet us in thought pursue (what can we better ?)Those who assembled there at matin-time ; J• Giotto.f Santa Maria Novella. For its grace and beauty it was calledby Michael Angelo * La Sposa.*f In the year of the Great Plague. See the Cameron.Who, when Vice revelled and along the streetTables were set, what time the bearer's bellRang to demand the dead at every door,Came out into the meadows ; and, awhileWandering in idleness, but not in folly.Sat down in the high grass and in the shadeOf many a tree sun-proof — day after day.When all was still and nothing to be heardBut the cicala's voice among the olives.Relating in a ring, to banish care.Their hundred tales. Round the green hill they went.Round underneath — first to a splendid house,Gerard, as an old tradition runs,That on the left, just rising from the vale ;A place for Luxury — the painted rooms.The open galleries and middle courtNot unprepared, fragrant and gay with flowers.Then westward to another, nobler yet ;That on the right, now known as the Palmer,Where Art with Nature vied — a Paradise,With verdurous walls, and many a realised walkAll rose and jasmine, many a twilight-gladeCrossed by the deer. Then to the Ladies' Vale ;And the clear lake, that as by magic seemedTo lift up to the surface every stoneOf lustre there, and the diminutive fishInnumerable, dropt with crimson and gold.Now motionless, now glancing to the sun.Who has not dwelt on their voluptuous day ?The morning-banquet by the fountain-side,While the small birds rejoiced on every bough ;The dance that followed, and the noon-tide slumber ;Then the tales told ?n turn, as round they layOn carpets, the fresh waters murmuring ;And the short interval of pleasant talkTill supper-time, when many a syren-voiceSung down the stars ; and, as they left the sky,The torches, planted in the sparkling grass,And every where among the glowing flowers,Burnt bright and brighter.He, * whose dream it was,(It was no more) sleeps in a neighbouring vale ;Sleeps in the church, where, in his ear I ween.The Friar poured out his wondrous catalogue ; fA ray, imprimis, of the star that shoneTo the Wise Men ; a phial-ful of sounds.The musical chimes of the great bells that hungIn Solomon's Temple ; and, tho' last not least,A feather from the Angel Gabriel's wing,Dropt in the Virgin's chamber. That dark ridge.Stretching south-east, conceals it from my sight ;Not so his lowly roof and scanty farm.His copse and rill, if yet a trace be left,Who lived in Val di Pea, suffering longWant and neglect and (far, far worse) reproach,With calm, unclouded mind. J The glimmering towerOn the grey rock beneath, his land-mark once.Now serves for ours, and points out where he ateHis bread with cheerfulness. Who sees him not(tis his own sketch — he drew it from himself)Laden with cages from his shoulder slung.And sallying forth, while yet the morn is grey,To catch a thrush on every lime-twig there ;Or in the wood among his wood-cutters ;Or in the tavern by the highway-sideAt tric-trac with the miller ; or at night.Doffing his rustic suit, and, duly clad.Entering his closet, and, among his books,• Boccaccio. f Cameron, vi. 10. \ Machiavel.Among the Great of every age and clime,A numerous court, turning to whom he pleased,Questioning each why he did this or that.And learning how to overcome the fearOf poverty and death ? Nearer we hailThy sunny slope, Arcetri, sung of OldFor its green wine ; dearer to me, to most,As dwelt on by that great Astronomer,Seven years a prisoner at the city-gate.Let in but in his grave-clothes. Sacred beHis villa (justly was it called The Gem !)Sacred the lawn, where many a cypress threwIts length of shadow, while he watched the stars !ii^^Sacred the vineyard, where, while yet his sightGlimmered, at blush of morn he dressed his vines.Chanting aloud in gaiety of heartSome verse of Ariosto. There, unseen,In manly beauty Milton stood before him.Gazing with reverent awe — Milton, his guest,Just then come forth, all life and enterprize ;He in his old age and extremity,Blind, at noon-day exploring with his staff;His eyes upturned as to the golden sun.His eye-balls idly rolling. Little thenDid Galileo think whom he received ;That in his hand he held the hand of oneWho could requite him — who would spread his nameO'er lands and seas — great as himself, nay greater ;Milton as little that in him he saw.As in a glass, what he himself should be.Destined so soon to fall on evil daysAnd evil tongues — so soon, alas, to liveIn darkness, and with dangers compassed round.And solitude.Well-pleased, could we pursueThe Arno, from his birth-place in the clouds,So near the yellow Tiber's — springing upFrom his four fountains on the Apennine,That mountain-ridge a sea-mark to the shipsSailing on either sea. Downward he runs,Scattering fresh verdure thro* the desolate wild,Down by the City of Hermits, * and the woodsThat only echo to the choral hymn ;Then thro' these gardens to the Tuscan sea,Reflecting castles, convents, villages.And those great Rivals in an elder day,Florence and Pisa — who have given him fame.Fame everlasting, but who stained so oftHis troubled waters. Oft, alas, were seen,When flight, pursuit, and hideous rout were there,Hands, clad in gloves of steel, held up imploring ;The man, the hero, on his foaming steedBorne underneath, already in the realmsOf Darkness. Nor did night or burning noonBring respite. Oft, as that great Artist saw, fWhose pencil had a voice, the cry * To arms !'And the shrill trumpet, hurried up the bankThose who had stolen an hour to breast the tide.And wash from their unharnessed limbs the bloodAnd sweat of battle. Sudden was the rush, JViolent the tumult ; for, already in sight,Nearer and nearer yet the danger drew ;Each every sinew straining, every nerve,Each snatching up, and girding, buckling onMorion and greave and shirt of twisted mail,• II Sago Eremo. f Michael Angelo.\ A description of the Cutoon of Pisa.As for his life — no more perchance to taste,Arno, the grateful freshness of thy glades,Thy waters — where, exulting, he had feltA swimmer's transport, there, alas, to floatAnd welter.Nor between the gusts of War,When flocks were feeding, and the shepherd's pipeGladdened the valley, when, but not unarmed.The sower came forth, and following him that ploughed.Threw in the seed — did thy indignant wavesEscape pollution. Sullen was the splash.Heavy and swift the plunge, when they receivedThe key that just had grated on the earOf Ugolino, ever-closing upThat dismal dungeon henceforth to be namedThe Tower of Famine. Once indeed 'twas thine,When many a winter-flood, thy tributary,Was thro' its rocky glen rushing, resounding.And thou wert in thy might, to save, restoreA charge most precious. To the nearest ford,Hastening, a horseman from Arezzo came.Careless, impatient of delay, a babeSlung in a basket to the knotty staff'That lay athwart his saddle-bow. He spurs.He enters ; and his horse, alarmed, perplexed,Halts in the midst. Great is the stir, the strife ;And lo, an atom on that dangerous sea,The babe is floating ! Fast and far he flies ;Now tempest-rocked, now whirling round and round,But not to perish. By thy willing wavesBorne to the shore, among the bulrushesThe ark has rested ; and unhurt, secure.As on his mother's breast he sleeps within.All peace ! or never had the nations heardThat voice so sweet, which still enchants, inspires ;That voice, which sung of love, of liberty.Petrarch lay there ! And such the imagesThat here spring up for ever, in the YoungKindling poetic fire ! Such they that cameAnd clustered round our Milton, when at eveReclined beside thee, Arno ; when at eve,Led on by thee, he wandered with delight,Framing O vidian verse, and thro' thy grovesGathering wild myrtle. Such the Poet's dreams ;Yet not such only. For look round and say,Where is the ground that did not drink warm blood.The echo that had learnt not to articulateThe cry of murder? Fatal was the day*To Florence, when (twas in a narrow streetNorth of that temple, where the truly greatSleep, not unhonoured, not unvisited ;That temple sacred to the Holy Cross —There is the house — that house of the Donati,Powerless, and left long since, but to the last• See Note.Braving assault — all rugged, all embossedBelow, and still distinguished by the ringsOf brass, that held in war and festival-timeTheir family-standards) fatal was the dayTo Florence, when, at morn, at the ninth hour,A noble Dame in weeds of widowhood.Weeds by so many to be worn so soon,Stood at her door; and, like a sorceress, flungHer dazzling spell.f)\2lSubtle she was, and rich,Rich in a hidden pearl of heavenly light.Her daughter's beauty ; and too well she knewIts virtue ! Patiently she stood and watched ;Nor stood alone — but spoke not — In her breastHer purpose lay ; and, as a Youth passed by.Clad for the nuptial rite, she smiled and said,Lifting a corner of the maiden's veil,This had I treasured up in secret for thee.This hast thou lost !' He gazed and was undone !Forgetting — not forgot — he broke the bond.And paid the penalty, losing his lifeAt the bridge-foot ; and hence a world of woe !Vengeance for vengeance crying, blood for blood ;No intermission ! Law, that slumbers not,And, like the Angel with the flaming sword,Sits over all, at once chastising, healing.Himself the Avenger, went ; and every streetRan red with mutual slaughter — tho' sometimesThe young forgot the lesson they had learnt,And loved when they should hate — like thee, Imelda,Thee and thy Paolo. When last ye metIn that still hour (the heat, the glare was gone,Not so the splendour — thro' the cedar-groveA radiance streamed like a consuming fire,As tho' the glorious orb, in its descent,Had come and rested there) when last ye met,R\22And those relentless brothers dragged him forth.It had been well, hadst thou slept on, Imelda,Nor from thy trance of fear awaked, as nightFell on that fatal spot, to wish thee dead,To track him by his blood, to search, to find.Then fling thee down to catch a word, a look,A sigh, if yet thou couldst (alas, thou couldst not)And die, unseen, unthought of — from the woundSucking the poison. *Yet, when Slavery came,Worse followed. Genius, Valour left the land.Indignant — all that had from age to ageAdorned, ennobled ; and head-long they fell.Tyrant and slave. For deeds of violence.Done in broad day and more than half redeemedBy many a great and generous sacrificeOf self to others, came the unpledged bowl.The stab of the stiletto. Gliding byUnnoticed, in slouched hat and muffling cloak.That just discovered, Caravaggio-like,A swarthy cheek, black brow, and eye of flame.The Bravo stole, and o'er the shoulder plungedTo the heart's core, or from beneath the ribsSlanting (a surer path, as some averred)Struck upward — then slunk off", or, if pursued,Made for the Sanctuary, and there along• See Note.The glimmering aisle among the worshippersWandered with restless step and jealous look,Dropping thick blood. Misnamed to lull alarm,In every Palace was The Laboratory,Where he within brewed poisons swift and slow.That scattered terror 'till all things seemed poisonous,And brave men trembled if a hand held outA nosegay or a letter ; while the GreatDrank only from the Venice-glass, that broke,That shivered, scattering round it as in scorn.If aught malignant, aught of thine was there,Cruel ToPHANA ; and pawned provincesFor that miraculous gem, the gem that gaveA sign infallible of coming ill.That clouded tho' the vehicle of deathWere an invisible perfume. Happy thenThe guest to whom at sleeping-time 'twas said,But in an under-voice (a lady's pageSpeaks in no louder) * Pass not on. That doorLeads to another which awaits thy coming.One in the floor — now left, alas, unlocked.No eye detects it — lying under-foot,Just as thou interest, at the threshold-stone ;Ready to fall and plunge thee into nightAnd long oblivion !'In that Evil HourWhere lurked not danger ? Thro' the fairy-land1^4No seat of pleasure glittering half-way down,No hunting-place — but with some damning spotThat will not be washed out ! There, at Casino,Where, when the hawks were mewed and Evening came,PuLci would set the table in a roarWith his wild lay — there, where the Sun descends.And hill and dale are lost, veiled with his beams,The fair Venetian* died, she and her lord —Died of a posset drugged by him who satAnd saw them suffer, flinging back the charge ;The murderer on the murdered. Sobs of Grief, fSounds inarticulate - - suddenly stopt.And followed by a struggle and a gasp,A gasp in death, are heard yet in Hereto,Along the marble halls and staircases.Nightly at twelve ; and, at the self-same hour,Shrieks, such as penetrate the inmost soul.Such as awake the innocent babe to long.Long wailing, echo thro' the emptinessOf that old den far up among the hills.Frowning on him who comes from Pietro-Mala :In them, alas, within five days and less.Two unsuspecting victims, passing fair.Welcomed with kisses, and slain cruelly.One with the knife, one with the fatal noose.But lo, the Sun is setting ; earth and skyBiANCA Capelle. f See Note.One blaze of glory — What we saw but now,As tho' it were not, tho' it had not been !He lingers yet ; and, lessening to a point,Shines like the eye of Heaven — then withdraws ;And from the zenith to the utmost skirtsAll is celestial red ! The hour is come.When they that sail along the distant seas.Languish for home ; and they that in the mornSaid to sweet friends * farewell,' melt as at partingWhen, just gone forth, the pilgrim, if he hears.As now we hear it — echoing round the hill.The bell that seems to mourn the dying day.Slackens his pace and sighs, and those he lovedLoves more than ever. But who feels it not ?And well may we, for we are far away.. ,,,, ^ i^^ms^.~THE PILGRIM.It was an hour of universal joy.The lark was up and at the gate of heaven,Singing, as sure to enter when he came ;The butter-fly was basking in my path,His radiant wings unfolded. From belowThe bell of prayer rose slowly, plaintively;And odours, such as welcome in the day.Such as salute the early traveller.And come and go, each sweeter than the last,Were rising. Hill and valley breathed delight ;And not a living thing but blessed the hour !In every bush and brake there was a voiceResponsive! From the Thrasymene, that nowSlept in the sun, a lake of molten gold,And from the shore that once, when ai-mies met.Rocked to and fro unfelt, so terribleThe rage, the slaughter, I had turned away;The path, that led me, leading thro' a wood,A fairy-wilderness of fruits and flowers,And by a brook that, in the day of strife.Ran blood, but now runs amber — when a glade,Far, far within, sunned only at noon-day.Suddenly opened. Many a bench was there.Each round its ancient elm ; and many a track.Well-known to them that from the high-way lovedAwhile to deviate. In the midst a crossOf mouldering stone as in a temple stood,Solemn, severe ; coeval with the treesThat round it in majestic order rose ;And on the lowest step a Pilgrim knelt.In fervent prayer. He was the first I saw,(Save in the tumult of a midnight-masque,A revel, where none cares to play his part.And they, that speak, at once dissolve the charm)The first in sober truth, no counterfeit ;And, when his orisons were duly paid.He rose, and we exchanged, as all are wont,A traveller's greeting. Young, and of an ageWhen Youth is most attractive, when a lightPlays round and round, reflected, while it lasts.From some attendant Spirit, that ere long(His charge relinquished with a sigh, a tear)Wings his flight upward — with a look he wonMy favour ; and, the spell of silence broke,I could not but continue. ' Whence,' I asked,Whence art thou V — * From Contralto,' he replied,My native village in the Apennines.' —And whither journeying?' — * To the holy shrineOf Saint Antonio in the City of Padua.Perhaps, if thou hast ever gone so far,Thou wil direct my course.' — * Most willingly;But thou hast much to do, much to endure,Ere thou hast entered where the silver lampsBum ever. Tell me . I would not transgress.Yet ask I must . . . what could have brought thee forth.Nothing in act or thought to be atoned for V —It was a vow I made in my distress.We were so blest, none were so blest as we,Till Sickness came. First, as death-struck, I fell ;Then my beloved sister ; and ere long.Worn with continual watchings, night and day.Our saint-like mother. Worse and worse she grew ;And in my anguish, my despair, I vowed.That if she lived, if Heaven restored her to us,I would forthwith, and in a Pilgrim's weeds,Visit that holy shrine. My vow was heard ;And therefore am I come.' — * Thou hast done right ;And may those weeds, so reverenced of old,Guard thee in danger !' * They are nothing worth.But they are worn in humble confidence ;Nor would I for the richest robe resign them.Wrought, as they were, by those I love so well,Laureate and my sister ; theirs the task.But none to them, a pleasure, a delight.To ply their utmost skill, and send me forthAs best became this service. Their last words,*♦ Fare thee well, Carlo. We shall count the hours !"sWill not go from me.* * Health and strength be thineIn thy long travel ! May no sun-beam strike ;No vapour cling and wither ! May'st thou be,Sleeping or waking, sacred and secure !And, when again thou com'st, thy labour done,Joy be among ye ! In that happy hourAll will pour forth to bid thee welcome, Carlo ;And there is one, or I am much deceived,One thou hast named, who will not be the last.' —Oh, she is true as Truth itself can be !But ah, thou know'st her not. Would that thou couldst!My steps I quicken when I think of her ;For, tho' they take me further from her door,I shall return the sooner.'AN INTERVIEW.Pleasure, that comes unlooked-for, is thrice-welcome;And, if it stir the heart, if aught be there,That may hereafter in a thoughtful hourWake but a sigh, 'tis treasured up amongThe things most precious ; and the day it came.Is noted as a white day in our lives. .The sun was wheeling westward, and the cliffsAnd nodding woods, that everlastingly(Such the dominion of thy mighty voice.Thy voice, Velino, uttered in the mist)Hear thee and answer thee, were left at lengthFor others still as noon ; and on we strayedFrom wild to wilder, nothing hospitableSeen up or down, no bush or green or dry,That ancient symbol at the cottage-door,Offering refreshment — when Luigi cried,Well, of a thousand tracks we chose the best !'And, turning round an oak, oracular once,Now lightning-struck, a cave, a thorough-fareFor all that came, each entrance a broad arch,Whence many a deer, rustling his velvet coat,Had issued, many a gipsy and her broodPeered forth, then housed again — the floor yet greyWith ashes, and the sides, where roughest, hungLoosely with locks of hair — I looked and sawWhat, seen in such an hour by Sancho Panza,Had given his honest countenance a breadth.His cheeks a flush of pleasure and surprize.Unknown before, had chained him to the spot.And thou. Sir Knight, hadst traversed hill and dale,Squire-less. Below and winding far away,A narrow glade unfolded, such as SpringBrothers with flowers, and, when the moon is high,The hare delights to race in, scattering roundThe silvery dews. Cedar and cypress threwSingly their depth of shadow, chequeringThe greensward, and, what grew in frequent tufts,An underwood of myrtle, that by fitsSent up a gale of fragrance. Thro' the midst,Reflecting, as it ran, purple and gold,A rain-bow's splendour (somewhere in the eastRain-drops were falling fast) a rivuletSported as loth to go ; and on the bankStood (in the eyes of one, if not of both,Worth all the rest and more) a sumpter-muleWell-laden, while two menials as in hasteDrew from his ample panniers, ranging roundViands and fruits on many a shining salver,And plunging in the cool translucent waveFlasks of delicious wine. Anon a hornBlew, thro' the champlain bidding to the feast,Its jocund note to other ears addressed.Not ours ; and, slowly coming by a path,That, ere it issued from an ilex-grove.Was seen far inward, tho' along the gladeDistinguished only by a fresher verdure,Peasants approached, one leading in a leashBeagles yet panting, one with various game.In rich confusion slung, before, behind,Leveret and quail and pheasant. All announcedThe chase as over ; and ere long appeared.Their horses full of fire, champing the curb,For the white foam was dry upon the flank.Two in close converse, each in each delighting,Their plumage waving as instinct with life ;A Lady young and graceful, and a Youth,Yet younger, bearing on a falconer's glove,As in the golden, the romantic time.His falcon hooded. Like some spirit of air,Or fairy-vision, such as feigned of old.The Lady, while her courser pawed the ground.Alighted ; and her beauty, as she trodThe enamelled bank, bruising nor herb nor flower,That place illumined. Ah, who should she be,And with her brother, as when last we met,(When the first lark had sung ere half was said,And as she stood, bidding adieu, her voice,So sweet it was, recalled me like a spell)Who but Angelica ? That day we gaveTo Pleasure, and, unconscious of their flight.Another and another ; hers a homeDropt from the sky amid the wild and rude,Lorenzo-like ; where all was as a dream,A dream spun out of some Arabian taleRead or related in a roseate bower.Some balmy eve. The rising moon we hailed.Duly, devoutly, from a vestibuleOf many an arch, o'er-wrought and lavishlyWith many a labyrinth of sylphs and flowers,When Raphael and his school from Florence came.Filling the land with splendour — nor less oftWatched her, declining, from a silent dell,Not silent once, what time in rivalryTasso, Glaring, waved their wizard-wands,Peopling the groves from Arcady, and lo,Fair forms appeared, murmuring melodious verse,Then, in their day, a sylvan theatre.Mossy the seats, the stage a verdurous floor,The scenery rock and shrub-wood, Nature's own ;Nature the Architect.ROME.I AM in Rome ! Oft as the morning-rayVisits these eyes, waking at once I cry,Whence this excess of joy ? What has befallen me ?And from within a thrilling voice replies,Thou art in Rome ! A thousand busy thoughtsRush on my mind, a thousand images ;And I spring up as girt to run a race !Thou art in Rome ! the City that so longReigned absolute, the mistress of the world ;The mighty vision that the prophets saw,And trembled ; that from nothing, from the least,The lowliest village (What but here and thereA reed-roofed cabin by a river-side ?)Grew into every thing ; and, year by year,Patiently, fearlessly, working her wayO'er brook and field, o'er continent and sea,Not like the merchant with his merchandize,Or traveller with stair and scrip exploring.But hand to hand and foot to foot, thro' hosts,Thro' nations numberless in battle-array.Each behind each, each, when the other fell,Up and in arms, at length subdued them all.Thou art in Rome ! the City, where the Gauls,Entering at sun-rise thro' her open gates.And, thro' her streets silent and desolate.Marching to slay, thought they saw Gods, not men ;The City, that, by temperance, fortitude,And love of glory, towered above the clouds,Then fell — but, falling, kept the highest seat,And in her loneliness, her pomp of woe,Where now she dwells, withdrawn into the wild,Still o'er the mind maintains, from age to age.Her empire undiminished. There, as thoughGrandeur attracted Grandeur, are beheldAll things that strike, ennoble — from the depthsOf Egypt, from the classic fields of Greece,Her groves, her temples — all things that inspireWonder, delight ! Who would not say the FormsMost perfect, most divine, had by consentFlocked thither to abide eternally,Within those silent chambers where they dwell,In happy intercourse ?And I am there !Ah, little thought I, when in school I sate,A school-boy on his bench, at early dawnGlowing with Roman story, I should liveTo tread the Appian, once an avenueOf monuments most glorious, palaces.Their doors sealed up and silent as the night.The dwellings of the illustrious dead — to turnToward Tibur, and, beyond the City-gate,Pour out my unpremeditated verse.Where on his mule I might have met so oftHorace himself — or climb the Palatine,Dreaming of old Wander and his guest.Dreaming and lost on that proud eminence,Long while the seat of Rome, hereafter foundLess than enough (so monstrous was the broodEngendered there, so Titan-like) to lodgeOne in his madness ; * and inscribe my name,My name and date, on some broad aloe-leaf,That shoots and spreads within those very wallsWhere Virgil read aloud his tale divine,Where his voice faltered and a mother weptTears of delight!But what the narrow spaceJust underneath ? In many a heap the groundHeaves, as tho' Ruin in a frantic moodHad done his utmost. Here and there appears,As left to shew his handy-work not ours.An idle column, a half-buried arch,A wall of some great temple. It was once,And long, the centre of their Universe,The Forum — whence a mandate, eagle-winged.Went to the ends of the earth. Let us descendSlowly. At every step much may be lo t.The very dust we tread, stirs a? with life ;And not a breath but from the ground sends upSomething of human grandeur.We are come,Are now where once the mightiest spirits metIn terrible conflict ; this, while Rome wa s free,The noblest theatre on this side Heaven !Here the first Brutus stood, when o'er the corseOf her so chaste all mourned, and from his cloudNero.Burst like a God. Here, holding up the knifeThat ran with blood, the blood of his own child,ViRGiNius called down vengeance. — But whence spokeThey who harangued the people ; turning nowTo the twelve tables, now with lifted handsTo the Capitoline Jove, whose fulgent shapeIn the unclouded azure shone far off,And to the shepherd on the Alban mountSeemed like a star new-risen ? Where were rangedIn rough array as on their element.The beaks of those old gallies, destined still *To brave the brunt of war — at last to knowA calm far worse, a silence as in death ?All spiritless ; from that disastrous hourWhen he, the bravest, gentlest of them all, fScorning the chains he could not hope to break,Fell on his sword !Along the Sacred WayHither the Triumph came, and, winding roundWith acclamation, and the martial clangOf instruments, and cars laden with spoil,Stopt at the sacred stair that then appeared.Then thro' the darkness broke, ample, star-bright.As tho' it led to heaven, 'Twas night ; but nowA thousand torches, turning night to day.Blazed, and the victor, springing from his seat,The Rostra. f Marcus Junius Brutus.14^Went up, and, kneeling as in fervent prayer,Entered the Capitol. But what are theyWho at the foot withdraw, a mournful trainIn fetters ? And who, yet incredulous.Now gazing wildly round, now on his sons.On those so young, well-pleased with all they see,Staggers along, the last ? — They are the fallen.Those who were spared to grace the chariot-wheels ;And there they parted, where the road divides.The victor and the vanquished — there withdrew ;He to the festal board, and they to die.Well might the great, the mighty of the world,They who were wont to fare deliciously.And war but for a kingdom more or less.Shrink back, nor from their thrones endure to look,To think that way ! Well might they in their stateHumble themselves, and kneel and supplicateTo be delivered from a dream like this !Here Cincinnatus passed, his plough the whileLeft in the furrow ; and how many more,Whose laurels fade not, who still walk the earth,Consuls, Dictators, still in Curule pompSit and decide ; and, as of old in Rome,Name but their names, set every heart on fire !Here, in his bonds, he whom the phalanx saved notesThe last on Philip's throne; and the Numidian,fPerseus. f Jugurtha.So soon to say, stript of his cumbrous robe,Stript to the skin, and in his nakednessThrust under-ground, * How cold this bath of yours !'And thy proud queen, Palmyra, thro' the sands *Pursued, overtaken on her dromedary ;Whose temples, palaces, a wondrous dreamThat passes not away, for many a leagueIllumine yet the desert. Some invokedDeath, and escaped ; the Egyptian, when her aspCame from his covert under the green leaf; fAnd Hannibal himself; and she who said,Taking the fatal cup between her hands, JTell him I would it had come yesterday ;For then it had not been his nuptial gift.'Now all is changed ; and here, as in the wild,The day is silent, dreary as the night ;None stirring, save the herdsman and his herd,Savage alike ; or they that would explore,Discuss and learnedly ; or they that come,(And there are many who have crossed the earth)That they may give the hours to meditation,And wander, often saying to themselves,This was the Roman Forum !'Zenobia. f Cleopatra. \ Sopbonisba.A FUNERAL.Whence this delay V — * Along the crouded streetA Funeral comes, and with unusual pomp.'So I withdrew a little and stood still,While it went by. ' She died as she deserved,'Said an Abate, gathering up his cloak,And with a shrug retreating as the tideFlowed more and more. — * But she was beautiful !'Replied a Soldier of the Pontiffs guard.And innocent as beautiful !' exclaimedA Matron sitting in her stall, hung roundWith garlands, holy pictures, and what not ?Her Alban grapes and Muscular figs displayedIn rich profusion. From her heart she spoke ;And I accosted her to hear her story.The stab,' she cried, * was given in jealousy ;But never fled a purer spirit to heaven.As thou wilt say, or much my mind misleads,When thou hast seen her face. Last night at dusk.When on her way from vespers — None were near.None save her serving-boy, who knelt and wept.But what could tears avail him, when she fell —Last night at dusk, the clock then striking nine,Just by the fountain — that before the church.The church she always used, St. Isidore's —Alas, I knew her from her earliest youth.That excellent lady. Ever would she say.Good even, as she passed, and with a voiceGentle as theirs in heaven !' — But now by fitsA dull and dismal noise assailed the ear,A wail, a chant, louder and louder yet ;And now a strange fantastic troop appeared !Thronging, they came — as from the shades below ;All of a ghostly white ! * Oh say,' I cried,Do not the living here bury the dead ?uDo Spirits come and fetch them ? What are these,That seem not of this World, and mock the Day ;Each with a burning taper in his hand V —It is an ancient Brotherhood thou seest.Such their apparel. Thro' the long, long line,Look where thou wilt, no likeness of a man ;The living masked, the dead alone uncovered.But mark' — And, lying on her funeral-couch,Like one asleep, her eyelids closed, her handsFolded together on her modest breast.As 'twere her nightly posture, thro' the croudShe came at last — and richly, gaily clad.As for a birth-day feast ! But breathes she not ?A glow is on her cheek — and her lips move !And now a smile is there — how heavenly sweet !Oh no !' replied the Dame, wiping her tears,But with an accent less of grief than anger,No, she will never, never wake again !'Death, when we meet the Spectre in our walks',As we did yesterday and shall tomorrow,Soon grows familiar — like most other things,Seen, not observed ; but in a foreign clime.Changing his shape to something new and strange,(And thro' the world he changes as in sport.Affect he greatness or humility)Knocks at the heart. His form and fashion hereTo me, I do confess, reflect a gloom,A sadness round ; yet one I would not lose ;Being in unison with all things elseIn this, this land of shadows, where we liveMore in past time than present, where the ground.League beyond league, like one great cemetery.Is covered o'er with mouldering monuments ;And, let the living wander where they will.They cannot leave the footsteps of the dead.Oft, where the burial-rite follows so fastThe agony, oft coming, nor from far,Must a fond father meet his darling child,(Him who at parting climbed his knees and clung)Clay-cold and wan, and to the bearers cry,Stand, I conjure ye !'Seen thus destitute.What are the greatest ? They must speak beyondA thousand homilies. When Raphael went,His heavenly face the mirror of his mind.His mind a temple for all lovely thingsTo flock to and inhabit — when He went.Wrapt in his sable cloak, the cloak he wore,To sleep beneath the venerable Dome,*By those attended, who in life had loved,Had worshipped, following in his steps to Fame,(''Twas on an April-day, when Nature smiles)All Rome was there. But, ere the march began,• The Pantheon.Ere to receive their charge the bearers came,Who had not sought him ? And when all beheldHim, where he lay, how changed from yesterday,Him in that hour cut off, and at his headHis last great work ; when, entering in, they lookedNow on the dead, then on that master-piece.Now on his face, lifeless and colourless,Then on those forms divine that lived and breathed,And would live on for ages — all were moved ;And sighs burst forth, and loudest lamentations.NATIONAL PREJUDICES.Another Assassination ! This venerable City,' Iexclaimed, * what is it, but as it began, a nest ofrobbers and murderers? We must away at sunrise,Luigi.' — But before sun-rise I had reflected alittle, and in the soberest prose. My indignationwas gone; and, when Luigi andrew my curtain,crying, * Up, Signor, up ! The horses are at thedoor.* * Luigi,' I replied, * if thou lowest me, drawthe curtain'*It would lessen very much the severity with whichmen judge of each other, if they would but traceeffects to their causes, and observe the progress ofthings in the moral as accurately as in the physicalworld. When we condemn millions in the mass asvindictive and sanguinary, we should remember that,wherever Justice is ill-administered, the injured willA dialogue, which is said to have passed many years ago atLyons (Mem. de Gammon, I. 3.) and which may still be heardin almost every h6tellerie at day-break.redress themselves. Robbery provokes to robbery ;murder to assassination. Resentments become hereditary; and what began in disorder, ends as if all Hellhad broke loose.Laws create a habit of self-restraint, not only bythe influence of fear, but by regulating in its exercisethe passion of revenge. If they overawe thebad by the prospect of a punishment certain andwell-defined, they console the injured by the inflictionof that punishment ; and, as the infliction is a publicact, it excites and entails no enmity. The laws areoffended ; and the community for its own sake pursuesand overtakes the offender ; often without theconcurrence of the sufferer, sometimes against hiswishes.Now those who were not born, like ourselves, tosuch advantages, we should surely rather pity thanhate; and, when at length they venture to turnagainst their rulers, * we should lament, not wonderat their excesses ; remembering that nations are nagsthe descendants of an illustrious people have lately done.Can it be believed that there are many among us, who, from adesire to be thought superior to common-place sentiments andvulgar feelings, affect an indifference to their cause? * If theGreeks,' they say, * had the probity of other nations — but they arefalse to a proverb !' And is not falsehood the characteristic ofslaves ? Man is the creature of circumstances. Free, he has thequalities of a freeman ; enslaved, those of a slave.naturally patient and long-suffering, and seldom rise inrebellion till they are so degraded by a bad governmentas to be almost incapable of a good one.Hate them, perhaps,' you may say, * we shouldnot ; but despise them we must, if enslaved, like thepeople of Rome, in mind as well as body ; if theirreligion be a gross and barbarous superstition.' — Irespect knowledge ; but I do not despise ignorance.They think only as their fathers thought, worship asthey worshipped. They do no more ; and, if ourshad not burst their bondage, braving imprisonmentand death, might not we at this very moment havebeen exhibiting, in our streets and our churches, thesame processions, ceremonials, and mortifications ?Nor should we require from those who are in anearlier stage of society, what belongs to a later.They are only where we once were ; and why holdthem in derision ? It is their business to cultivatethe inferior arts before they think of the more refined;and in many of the last what are we as a nation, whencompared to others that have passed away ? Unfortunatelyit is too much the practice of governmentsto nurse and keep alive in the governed their nationalprejudices. It withdraws their attention from whatis passing at home, and makes them better tools inthe hands of Ambition. Hence next-door neighboursare held up to us from our childhood as naturalenemies; and we are urged on like curs to worryeach other.*In like manner we should learn to be just to individuals.Who can say, * In such circumstances Ishould have done otherwise?' Who, did he butreflect by what slow gradations, often by how manystrange concurrences, we are led astray ; with howmuch reluctance, how much agony, how many effortsto escape, how many self-accusations, how manysighs, how many tears — Who, did he but reflect foramoment, would have the heart to cast a stone?Fortunately these things are known to Him, fromwhom no secrets are hidden ; and let us rest in theassurance that His judgments are not as ours are.Candour, generosity, how rare are they in the world; andhow much is to be deplored the want of them ! When a ministerin our parliament consents at last to a measure, which, for manyreasons perhaps existing no longer, he had before refused to adopt,there should be no exultation as over the fallen, no taunt, no jeer.How often may the resistance be continued lest an enemy shouldtriumph, and the result of conviction be received as a symptom offear!Mw^.si-kk^THE CAMPAGNA OF ROME.Have none appeared as tillers of the ground,None since They went — as tho' it still were theirs,And they might come and claim their own again ?Was the last plough a Roman's? From this Seat,*Sacred for ages, whence, as Virgil sings.The Queen of Heaven, alighting from the sky,Looked down and saw the armies in array, fLet us contemplate ; and, where dreams from Jove• See Note. f-^neid, xii. 134.XDescended on the sleeper, where perhapsSome inspirations may be lingering still,Some glimmerings of the future or the past,Let us await their influence ; silentlyRevolving, as we rest on the green turf.The changes from that hour, when He from TroyWent up the Tiber ; when refulgent shields,No strangers to the iron-hail of war.Streamed far and wide, and dashing oars were heardAmong those woods where Sylvia's stag was lying.His antlers gay with flowers ; among those woodsWhere, by the Moon, that saw and yet withdrew not.Two were so soon to wander and be slain,Two lovely in their lives, nor in their deathDivided.Then, and hence to be discerned.How many realms, pastoral and warlike, layAlong this plain, each with its schemes of power,Its little rivalries ! What various turnsOf fortune there ; what moving accidentsFrom ambuscade and open violence !Mingling, the sounds came up ; and hence how ofl;We might have caught among the trees below.Glittering with helm and shield, the men of Tibur ;*Or in Greek vesture, Greek their origin.Some embassy, ascending to Pr^eneste;!Tivoli. t Palestrina.How oft descried, without thy gates, Alicia,*Entering the solemn grove for sacrifice,Senate and People ! — Each a busy hive,Glowing with life !But all ere long are lostIn one. We look, and where the river rollsSouthward its shining labyrinth, in her strengthA City, girt with battlements and towers.On seven small hills is rising. Round about,At rural work, the Citizens are seen.None unemployed ; the noblest of them allBinding their sheaves or on their threshing-floors,As tho' they had not conquered. Every whereSome trace of valour or heroic toil !Here is the sacred field of the Horatio.There are the Quintilian meadows. Here the hillsHow holy, where a generous people, twice,Twice going forth, in terrible anger sateArmed ; and, their wrongs redressed, at once gave way,Helmet and shield, and sword and spear thrown down.And every hand uplifted, every heartPoured out in thanks to heaven.Once againWe look ; and lo, the sea is white with sailsInnumerable, wafting to the shoreTreasures untold ; the vale, the promontories,• La Ricci. f Mons Sacer.A dream of glory ; temples, palaces,Called up as by enchantment ; aqueductsAmong the groves and glades rolling alongRivers, on many an arch high over-head ;And in the centre, like a burning sun.The Imperial City ! They have now subduedAll nations. But where they who led them forth ;Who, when at length released by victory,(Buckler and spear hung up — but not to rust)Held poverty no evil, no reproach,Living on little with a cheerful mind,The Decii, the Patricii ? Where the spade.And reaping-hook, among their household-thingsDuly transmitted? In the hands of menMade captive ; while the master and his guests.Reclining, quaff in gold, and roses swim.Summer and winter, thro' the circling year.On their Falernian — in the hands of menDragged into slavery, with how many moreSpared but to die, a public spectacle.In combat with each other, and requiredTo fall with grace, with dignity — to sink,While life is gushing, and the plaudits ringFaint and yet fainter on their failing ear.As models for the sculptor.But their days,Their hours are numbered. Hark, a yell, a shriek.A barbarous out-cry, loud and louder yet,That echoes from the mountains to the sea !And mark, beneath us, like a bursting cloud,The battle moving onward ! Had they slainAll, that the Earth should from her womb bring forthNew nations to destroy them ? From the depthOf forests, from what none had dared explore,Regions of thrilling ice, as tho' in iceEngendered, multiplied, they pour along,Shaggy and huge ! Host after host, they come ;The Goth, the Vandal ; and again the Goth !Once more we look, and all is still as night.All desolate ! Groves, temples, palaces,Swept from the sight ; and nothing visible,Amid the sulphurous vapours that exhaleAs from a land accurst, save here and thereAn empty tomb, a fragment like the limbOf some dismembered giant. In the midstA City stands, her domes and turrets crownedWith many a cross ; but they, that issue forth,Wander like strangers who had built amongThe mighty ruins, silent, spiritless ;And on the road, where once we might have metCaesar and Cato, and men more than kings.We meet, none else, the pilgrim and the beggar.THE ROMAN PONTIFFS.Those ancient men, what were they, who achievedA sway beyond the greatest conquerors ;Setting their feet upon the necks of kings.And, thro' the world, subduing, chaining downThe free, immortal spirit? Were they notMighty magicians ? Theirs a wondrous spell,Where true and false were with infernal artClose-interwoven ; where together metBlessings and curses, threats and promises ;And with the terrors of FuturityMingled whate'er enchants and fascinates,Music and painting, sculpture, rhetoric.And dazzling light and darkness visible,And architectural pomp, such as none else !What in his day the Syracuse sought,Another world to plant his engines on,They had ; and, having it, like gods not menMoved this world at their pleasure. Ere they came.Their shadows, stretching far and wide, were known ;And Two, that looked beyond the visible sphere,Gave notice of their coming — he who sawThe Apocalypse ; and he of elder time,Who in an awful vision of the nightSaw the Four Kingdoms. Distant as they were.Those holy men, well might they faint with fear !CAIUS Cestus.When I am inclined to be serious, I love to wanderup and down before the tomb of Caius Cestius.The Protestant burial-ground is there ; and most ofthe little monuments are erected to the young; youngmen of promise, cut off when on their travels, full ofenthusiasm, full of enjoyment; brides, in the bloomof their beauty, on their first journey ; or childrenborne from home in search of health. This stonewas placed by his fellow-travellers, young as himself,who will return to the house of his parents withouthim; that, by a husband or a father, now in his nativecountry. His heart is buried in that grave.It is a quiet and sheltered nook, covered in thewinter with violets; and the Pyramid, that overshadowsit, gives it a classical and singularly solemnair. You feel an interest there, a sympathy you werenot prepared for. You are yourself in a foreign land ;and they are for the most part your countrymen.They call upon you in your mother-tongue — in English— in words unknown to a native, known only toyourselves : and the tomb of Cestius, that old majesticpile, has this also in common with them. It isitself a stranger, among strangers. It has stood theretill the language spoken round about it has changed;and the shepherd, born at the foot, can read its inscriptionno longer.THE NUN.'Tis over ; and her lovely cheek is nowOn her hard pillow — there, alas, to beNightly, thro' many and many a dreary hour,Wan, often wet with tears, and (ere at lengthHer place is empty, and another comes)In anguish, in the ghastliness of death;Hers never more to leave those mournful walls,Even on her bier.'Tis over ; and the rite,With all its pomp and harmony, is nowFloating before her. She arose at home.To be the show, the idol of the day ;Her vesture gorgeous, and her starry head —No rocket, bursting in the midnight-sky.So dazzling. When tomorrow she awakes,She will awake as tho* she still was there.Still in her father s house ; and lo, a cellNarrow and dark, nought thro' the gloom discerned.Nought save the crucifix, the rosary.And the grey habit lying by to shroudHer beauty and grace.When on her knees she fell,Entering the solemn place of consecration,And from the latticed gallery came a chantOf psalms, most saint-like, most angelical.Verse after verse sung out how holily,The strain returning, and still, still returning,Methought it acted like a spell upon her,And she was casting off her earthly dross ;Yet was it sad as sweet, and, ere it closed.Came like a dirge. When her fair head was shorn,And the long tresses in her hands were laid,That she might fling them from her, saying, * Thus,Thus I renounce the world and worldly things !'When, as she stood, her bridal ornamentsWere, one by one, removed, even to the last,That she might say, flinging them from her, * Thus,Thus I renounce the world !' when all was changed.And, as a nun, in homeliest guise she knelt.Veiled in her veil, crowned with her silver crown,Her crown of lilies as the spouse of Christ,Well might her strength forsake her, and her kneesFail in that hour ! Well might the holy man.He, at whose feet she knelt, give as by stealth(''Twas in her utmost need ; nor, while she lives,Will it go from her, fleeting as it was)That faint but fatherly smile, that smile of loveAnd pity !Like a dream the whole is fled ;And they, that came in idleness to gazeUpon the victim dressed for sacrifice,Are mingling in the world ; thou in thy cellForgot, Teresa. Yet, among them all.None were so formed to love and to be loved,None to delight, adorn ; and on thee nowA curtain, blacker than the night, is droppedFor ever ! In thy gentle bosom sleepFeelings, affections, destined now to die,To wither like the blossom in the bud.Those of a wife, a mother ; leaving thereA cheerless void, a chill as of the grave,A languor and a lethargy of soul,Death-like, and gathering more and more, till DeathComes to release thee. Ah, what now to thee,What now to thee the treasure of thy Youth ?As nothing !But thou canst not yet reflectCalmly ; so many things, strange and perverse.That meet, recoil, and go but to return,The monstrous birth of one eventful day,Troubling thy spirit — from the first, at dawn,The rich arraying for the nuptial feast,To the black pall, the requiem. All in turnRevisit thee, and round thy lowly bedHover, uncalled. Thy young and innocent heart,How is it beating? Has it no regrets ?Discovered thou no weakness lurking there ?But thine exhausted frame has sunk to rest.Peace to thy slumbers !THE FIRE-FLY.There is an Insect, that, when Evening comes.Small tho' he be and scarce distinguishable,Like Evening clad in soberest livery,Unsheathed his wings and thro' the woods and gladesScatters a marvellous splendour. On he wheels.Blazing by fits as from excess of joy,Each gush of light a gush of ecstacy ;Nor unaccompanied ; thousands that flingA radiance all their own, not of the day,Thousands as bright as he, from dusk till dawn.Soaring, descending.In the mother's lapWell may the child put forth his little hands,Singing the nursery-song he learnt so soon ;And the young nymph, preparing for the danceBy brook or fountain-side, in many a braidWreathing her golden hair, well may she cry,Come hither ; and the shepherds, gathering round.Shall say, Florets emulates the Night,Spangling her head with stars.*Oft have I metThis shining race, when in the Muscular grovesMy path no longer glimmered ; oft amongThose trees, religious once and always green.That yet dream out their stories of old RomeOver the Alban lake ; oft met and hailed.Where the precipitate Anno thunders down,And thro' the surging mist a Poet's house(So some aver, and who woidd not believe ?)Reveals itself. Yet cannot I forgetHim, who rejoiced me in those walks at eve,*My earliest, pleasantness; who dwells unseen,• The glow-worm.And in our northern clime, when all is still,Nightly keeps watch, nightly in bush or brakeHis lonely lamp rekindling. Unlike theirs,His, if less dazzling, thro' the darkness knowsNo intermission ; sending forth its rayThro' the green leaves, a ray serene and clearAs Virtue's own.FOREIGN TRAVEL.It was in a splenetic humour that I sate me downto my scanty fare at Terracina ; and how long Ishould have contemplated the lean thrushes in arraybefore me, I cannot say, if a cloud of smoke, thatdrew the tears into my eyes, had not burst from thegreen and leafy boughs on the hearth-stone. * Why,'I exclaimed, starting up from the table, * why did Ileave my own chimney-corner? — But am I not onthe road to Brundusium ? And are not these thevery calamities that befel Horace and Virgil, andMaecenas, and Plotinus, and Varius? Horacelaughed at them — Then why should not I ? Horaceresolved to turn them to account; and Virgil —cannot we hear him observing, that to rememberthem will, by and by, be a pleasure V My soliloquyreconciled me at once to my fate ; and when, for thetwentieth time, I had looked through the window ona sea sparkling with innumerable brilliant, a sea onwhich the heroes of the Odyssey and the Aeneid hadsailed, I sat down as to a splendid banquet. Mythrushes had the flavour of ortolans ; and I ate withan appetite I had not known before. * Who,' Icried, as I poured out my last glass of Falernian, *(for Falernian it was said to be, and in my eyes itran bright and clear as a topaz-stone) * Who wouldremain at home, could he do otherwise? Who wouldsubmit to tread that dull, but daily round ; his hoursforgotten as soon as spent?' and, opening my journal-bookand dipping my pen in my ink-horn, I determined,as far as I could, to justify myself and my countrymenin wandering over the face of the earth. * Itmay serve me,' said I, * as a remedy in some futurefit of the spleen.'Ours is a nation of travellers ; f and no wonder,when the elements, air, water, fire, attend at ourbidding, to transport us fi-om shore to shore ; whenthe ship rushes into the deep, her track the foam asof some mighty torrent ; and, in three hours or less,♦ We were now within a few hours of the Campania Felix.On the colour and flavour of Falernian consult Galen andDioscorides.f As indeed it always was, contributing those of every degree,from a milord with his suite to him whose only attendant is hisshadow. Create in 1608 performed his journey on foot; and,returning, hung up his shoes in his village-church as an ex-vote.Goldsmith, a century and a half afterwards, followed in nearly thesame path; playing a tune on his flute to procure admittance,whenever he approached a cottage at night-falLwe stand gazing and gazed at among a foreign people.None want an excuse. If rich, they go to enjoy; ifpoor, to retrench ; if sick, to recover ; if studious, tolean ; if learned, to relax from their studies. Butwhatever they may say, whatever they may believe,they go for the most part on the same errand ; norwill those who reflect, think that errand an idle one.Almost all men are over-anxious. No sooner dothey enter the world, than they lose that taste fornatural and simple pleasures, so remarkable in earlylife. Every hour do they ask themselves what progressthey have made in the pursuit of wealth orhonour ; and on they go as their fathers went beforethem, till, weary and sick at heart, they look backwith a sigh of regret to the golden time of theirchildhood.Now travel, and foreign travel more particularly,restores to us in a great degree what we have lost.When the anchor is heaved, we double down theleaf; and for a while at least all effort is over. Theold cares are left clustering round the old objects ;and at every step, as we proceed, the slightest circumstanceamuses and interests. All is new andstrange. We surrender ourselves, and feel once againas children. Like them, we enjoy eagerly; like them,when we fret, we fret only for the moment ; and hereindeed the resemblance is very remarkable, for, if ajourney has its pains as well as its pleasures (andthere is nothing unmixed in this world) the pains areno sooner over than they are forgotten, while thepleasures live long in the memory.Nor is it surely without another advantage. Iflife be short, not so to many of us are its days and itshours. When the blood slumbers in the veins, howoften do we wish that the earth would turn faster onits axis, that the sun would rise and set before it does;and, to escape fi'om the weight of time, how manyfollies, how many crimes are committed ! Men rushon danger, and even on death. Intrigue, play, foreignand domestic broil, such are their resources; and,when these things fail, they destroy themselves.Now in travelling we multiply events, and innocently.We set out, as it were, on our adventures ;and many are those that occur to us, morning, noon,and night. The day we come to a place which wehave long heard and read of, and in Italy we do socontinually, it is an era in our lives ; and from thatmoment the very name calls up a picture. Howdelightfully too does the knowledge flow in upon us,and how fast ! * Would he who sat in a corner ofhis library, poring over books and maps, learn moreor so much in the time, as he who, with his eyes andhis heart open, is receiving impressions all day longTo judge at once of a nation, we have only to throw our eyeson the markets and the fields. If the markets are well-supplied,the fields well-cultivated, all is right If otherwise, we may say,and say truly, these people are barbarous or oppressed.from the things themselves ? * How accurately dothey arrange themselves in our memory, towns, rivers,mountains ; and in what living colours do we recallthe dresses, manners, and customs of the people!Our sight is the noblest of all our senses. * It fillsthe mind with most ideas, converses with its objectsat the greatest distance, and continues longest inactionwithout being tired.' Our sight is on thealert when we travel ; and its exercise is then so delightful,that we forget the profit in the pleasure.Like a river, that gathers, that refines as it runs,like a spring that takes its course through some richvein of mineral, we improve and imperceptibly — norin the head only, but in the heart. Our prejudicesleave us, one by one. Seas and mountains are nolonger our boundaries. We learn to love, and esteem,and admire beyond them. Our benevolence extendsitself with our knowledge. And must we not returnbetter citizens than we went? For the more webecome acquainted with the institutions of othercountries, the more highly must we value our own.I threw down my pen in triumph. * The question,*said I, * is set to rest for ever. And yet — 'And yet — * I must still say. The Wisest ofAssuredly not, if the last has laid a proper foundation. Knowledgemakes knowledge as money makes money, nor ever perhapsso fast as on a journey.MEN seldom went out of the walls of Athens; andfor that worst of evils, that sickness of the soul, towhich we are most liable when most at our ease, isthere not after all a surer and yet pleasant remedy,a remedy for which we have only to cross the threshold?A PiEDMONTESE nobleman, into whose companyI fell at Turin, had not long before experiencedits efficacy ; and his story, which he told me withoutreserve, was as follows.I was weary of life, and, after a day, such as fewhave known and none would wish to remember, washurrying along the street to the river, when I felt asudden check. I turned and beheld a Utile boy, whohad caught the skirt of my cloak in his anxiety tosolicit my notice. His look and manner were irresistible.Not less so was the lesson he had learnt.There are six of us ; and we are dying for want offood." — * Why should 1 not,' said I to myself, * relievethis wretched family ? I have the means ; andit will not delay me many minutes. But what, if itdoes V The scene of misery he conducted me to, Icannot describe. I threw them my purse ; and theirburst of gratitude overcame me. It filled my eyes . .it went as a cordial to my heart. * I will call againtomorrow,' I cried. * Fool that I was, to think ofleaving a world, where such pleasure was to be had,and so cheaply !'•<*-l^.THE FOUNTAIN.It was a wellOf whitest marble, white as from the quarry ;And richly wrought with many a high relief,Greek sculpture — in some earlier day perhapsA tomb, and honoured with a hero's ashes.The water from the rock filled, overflowed it ;Then dashed away, playing the prodigal.And soon was lost — stealing unseen, unheard.Thro* the long grass, and round the twisted rootsOf aged trees ; discovering where it ranBy the fresh verdure. Overcome with heat,I threw me down ; admiring, as I lay.That shady nook, a singing-place for birds.That grove so intricate, so full of flowers.More than enough to please a child a-Maying.The sun had set, a distant convent-bellRinging the Angelus; and now approachedThe hour for stir and village-gossip there.The hour Rebekah came, when from the wellShe drew with such alacrity to serveThe stranger and his camels. Soon I heardFootsteps ; and lo, descending by a pathTrodden for ages, many a nymph appeared.Appeared and vanished, bearing on her headHer earthen pitcher. It called up the dayUlysses landed there ; and long I gazed.Like one awaking in a distant time. *At length there came the loveliest of them all,Her Httle brother dancing down before her ;Aid ever as he spoke, which he did ever,♦ The place here described is near Mole di Facta in the kingdomof Naples.Turning and looking up in warmth of heartAnd brotherly affection. Stopping there,She joined her rosy hands, and, filling themWith the pure element, gave him to drink ;And, while he quenched his thirst, standing on tiptoe,Looked down upon him with a sister's smile,Nor stirred till he had done, fixed as a statue.Then hadst thou seen them as they stood, Canova,Thou hadst endowed them with immortal youth ;And they had evermore lived undivided.Winning all hearts — of all thy works the fairest.BANDITTI.'Tis a wild life, fearful and full of change,The mountain-robber's. On the watch he lies.Levelling his carbine at the passenger ;And, when his work is done, he dares not sleep.Time was, the trade was nobler, if not honest ;When they that robbed, were men of better faithThan kings or pontiffs ; when, such reverenceThe Poet di-ew among the woods and wilds,A voice was heard, that never bade to spare.Crying aloud, " Hence to the distant hills !Tasso approaches ; he, whose song beguilesThe day of half its hours ; whose sorceryDazzles the sense, turning our forest-gladesTo lists that blaze with gorgeous armoury,Our mountain-caves to regal palaces.Hence, nor descend till he and his are gone.Let him fear nothing."When along the shore.And by the path that, wandering on its way,Leads thro' the fatal grove where Tully fell,(Grey and o'ergrown, an ancient tomb is there)He came and they withdrew, they were a raceCareless of Hfe in others and themselves,For they had learnt their lesson in a camp ;But not ungenerous. 'Tis no longer so.Now crafty, cruel, torturing ere they slayThe unhappy captive, and with bitter jestsMocking Misfortune ; vain, fantastical.Wearing whatever glitters in the spoil ;And most devout, tho', when they kneel and pray,With every bead they could recount a murder.As by a spell they start up in array,As by a spell they vanish — theirs a band,Not as elsewhere of outlaws, but of suchAs sow and reap, and at the cottage-doorSit to receive, return the traveller's greeting ;Now in the garb of peace, now silentlyArming and issuing forth, led on by menWhose names on innocent lips are words of fear,Whose lives have long been forfeit. Some there areThat, ere they rise to this bad eminence.Lurk, night and day, the plague-spot visible,The guilt that says. Beware ; and mark we nowHim, where he lies, who couches for his preyAt the bridge-foot in some dark cavityScooped by the waters, or some gaping tomb,Nameless and tenantless, whence the red foxSlunk as he entered. There he broods, in spleenGnawing his beard ; his rough and sinewy frameRewritten with the story of his Hfe :On his wan cheek a sabre-cut, well-earnedIn foreign warfare ; on his breast the brandIndelible, burnt in when to the portHe clanked his chain, among a hundred moreDragged ignominiously ; on every limbMemorials of his glory and his shame,Stripes of the lash and honourable scars.And channels here and there worn to the boneBy galling fetters. He comes slowly forth,Unkennelling, and up that savage dellAnxiously looks ; his cruise, an ample gourd,(Duly replenished from the vintner's cask)Slung from his shoulder ; in his breadth of beltTwo pistols and a dagger yet cleansed,A parchment scrawled with uncouth characters.And a small vial, his last remedy.His cure, when all things fail. No noise is heard,Save when the rugged bear and the gaunt wolfHowl in the upper region, or a fishLeaps in the gulf beneath — But now he kneelsAnd (like a scout, when listening to the trampOf horse or foot) lays his experienced earClose to the ground, then rises and explores.Then kneels again, and, his short rifle-gunAgainst his cheek, waits patiently. Two Monks,Portly, grey-headed, on their gallant steeds.Descend where yet a mouldering cross overhangsThe grave of one that from the precipiceFell in an evil hour. Their bridle-bellsRing merrily ; and many a loud, long laughRe-echoes ; but at once the sounds are lost.Unconscious of the good in store below,The holy fathers have turned off, and nowCross the brown heath, ere long to wag their beardsBefore my lady-abbess, and discussThings only known to the devout and pureO'er her spiced bowl — then shrive the sister-hood,Sitting by turns with an inclining earIn the confessional. He moves his lipsAs with a curse — then paces up and down,New fast, now slow, brooding and muttering on ;Gloomy alike to him the past, the future.But hark, the nimble tread of numerous feet !'Tis but a dappled herd, come down to slakeTheir thirst in the cool wave. He turns and aims ;Then checks himself, unwilling to disturbThe sleeping echoes. Once again he earths ;Slipping away to house with them beneath,His old companions in that hiding-place.The bat, the toad, the blind-worm, and the newt ;And hark, a footstep, firm and confident.As of a man in haste. Nearer it draws ;And now is at the entrance of the den.Ha ! 'tis a comrade, sent to gather inThe band for some great enterprize. Who wantsA sequel, may read on. The unvarnished tale,That follows, will supply the place of one.Twas told me by the Count St. Angelo,When in a blustering night he sheltered meIn that brave castle of his ancestorsO'er Giuliano, and is such indeedAs every day brings with it — in a landWhere laws are trampled on, and lawless menWalk in the sun ; but it should not be lost,For it may serve to bind us to our Country.AN ADVENTURE.Three days they lay in ambush at my gate,Then sprung and led me captive. Many a wildWe traversed ; but Rusconi, 'twas no less,Marched by my side, and, when I thirsted, climbedThe cliffs for water ; though, whene'er he spoke,'Twas briefly, sullenly ; and on he led,Distinguished only by an amulet.That in a golden chain hung from his neck,A crystal of rare virtue. Night fell fast.When on a heath, black and immeasurable,He turned and bade them halt. 'Twas where the earthHeaves o'er the dead — where erst some AlaricFought his last fight, and every warrior threwA stone to tell for ages where he lay.Then all advanced, and, ranging in a square,Stretched forth their arms as on the holy cross.From each to each their sable cloaks extending.That, like the solemn hangings of a tent,Covered us round ; and in the midst I stood,Weary and faint, and face to face with one.Whose voice, whose look dispenses life and death.Whose heart knows no relenting. InstantlyA light was kindled, and the Bandit spoke.I know thee. Thou hast sought us, for the sportSlipping thy blood-hounds with a hunter's cry ;And thou hast found at last. Were I as thou,I in thy grasp as thou art now in ours,Soon should I make a midnight-spectacle.Soon, limb by limb, be mangled on a wheel.Then gib betted to blacken for the vultures.But I would teach thee better — how to spare.Write as I dictate. If thy ransom comes,Thou liv'st. If not — but answer not, I pray,Lest thou provoke me. I may strike thee dead ;And know, young man, it is an easier thingTo do it than to say it. Write, and thus.' —I wrote. * 'Tis well,' he cried. * A peasant-boy,Trusty and swift of foot, shall bear it hence.Meanwhile lie down and rest. This cloak of mineWill serve thee ; it has weathered many a storm.'The watch was set ; and twice it had been changed,When morning broke, and a wild bird, a hawk,Flew in a circle, screaming. I looked up,And all were gone, save him who now kept guard.And on his arms lay musing. Young he seemed,And sad, as tho' he could indulge at willSome secret sorrow. * Thou shrinks back,' he said.Well may'st thou, lying, as thou dost, so nearA Ruffian — one for ever linked and boundTo guilt and infamy. There was a timeWhen he had not perhaps been deemed unworthy.When he had watched that planet to its setting.And dwelt with pleasure on the meanest thingThat Nature has given birth to. Now 'tis past.Wouldst thou know more ? My story is an old one.I loved, was scorned ; I trusted, was betrayed ;And in my anguish, my necessity,Met with the fiend, the tempter — in Rusconi.Why thus?' he cried. * Thou wouldst be free and dar'st not,B BCome and assert thy birth-right while thou canst.A robber's cave is better than a dungeon ;And death itself, what is it at the worst,What, but a harlequin's leap V Him I had known,Had served with, suffered with ; and on the wallsOf Capua, while the moon went down, I sworeAllegiance on his dagger. Dost thou askHow I have kept my oath ? Thou shalt be told.Cost what it may. — But grant me, I implore.Grant me a passport to some distant land,That I may never, never more be named.Thou wilt, I know thou wilt.Two months ago,When on a vineyard-hill we lay concealedAnd scattered up and down as we were wont,I heard a damsel singing to herself.And soon espied her, coming all alone,In her first beauty. Up a path she came,Leafy and intricate, singing her song,A song of love, by snatches ; breaking offIf but a flower, an insect in the sunPleased for an instant ; then as carelesslyThe strain resuming, and, where'er she stopt,Rising on tiptoe underneath the boughsTo pluck a grape in very wantonness.Her look, her mien and maiden-ornamentsShewed gentle birth ; and, step by step, she came.Nearer and nearer, to the dreadful snare.None else were by ; and, as I gazed unseen.Her youth, her innocence and gaietyWent to my heart ; and, starting up, I breathed,Fly — for your life !' Alas, she shrieked, she fell ;And, as I caught her falling, all rushed forth.A Wood-nymph !' cried Rusconi. * By the light,Lovely as Hebe ! Lay her in the shade.*I heard him not. I stood as in a trance.What,' he exclaimed with a malicious smile,Wouldst thou rebel V I did as he required.Now bear her hence to the well-head below ;A few cold drops will animate this marble.Go ! *Tis an office dl will envy thee ;But thou hast earned it.* As I staggered down,Unwilling to surrender her sweet body ;Her golden hair dishevelled on a neckOf snow, and her fair eyes closed as in sleep,Frantic with love, with hate, * Great God !' I cried,(I had almost forgotten how to pray ;But there are moments when the courage comes)Why may I not, while yet — while yet I can.Release her from a thraldom worse than death V*Twas done as soon as said. I kissed her brow,And smote her with my dagger. A short cryShe uttered, but she stirred not ; and to heavenHer gentle spirit fled. *Twas where the pathIn its descent turned suddenly. No eyeObserved me, tho' their steps were following fast.But soon a yell broke forth, and all at onceLevelled their deadly aim. Then I had ceasedTo trouble or be troubled, and had now(Would I were there !) been slumbering in my grave.Had not Rusconi with a terrible shoutThrown himself in between us, and exclaimed,Grasping my arm, * 'Tis bravely, nobly done !Is it for deeds like these thou dearest a sword ?Was this the business that thou cam'st upon ?But 'tis his first offence, and let it pass.Like the young tiger he has tasted blood,And may do much hereafter. He can strikeHome to the hilt.' Then in an under-tone,Thus would'st thou justify the pledge I gave.When in the eyes of all I read distrust ?For once,' and on his cheek, methought, I sawThe blush of virtue, * I will save thee, Albert ;Again I cannot.'Ere his tale was told,As on the heath we lay, my ransom came ;And in six days, with no ungrateful mind,Albert was sailing on a quiet sea.But the night wears, and thou art much in needOf rest. The young Antonio, with his torch.Is waiting to conduct thee to thy chamber.NAPLES.This region, surely, is not of the earth. *Was it not dropt from heaven ? Not a grove,Citron or pine or cedar, not a grotSea-worn and mantled with the gadding vine.But breathes enchantment. Not a cliff but flingsOn the clear wave some image of delight,Un mezzo di ciel caduto in terra. Sannazaro.Some cabin-roof glowing with crimson flowers,Some ruined temple or fallen monument,To muse on as the bark is gliding by.And be it mine to muse there, mine to glide,From day-break, when the mountain pales his fireYet more and more, and from the mountain-top.Till then invisible, a smoke ascends.Solemn and slow, as erst from Ararat,When he, the Patriarch, who escaped the Flood,Was with his house-hold sacrificing there —From day-break to that hour, the last and best,When, one by one, the fishing-boats come forth,Each with its glimmering lantern at the prow.And, when the nets are thrown, the evening-hymnSteals o'er the trembling waters.Every whereFable and Truth have shed, in rivalry.Each her peculiar influence. Fable came.And laughed and sung, arraying Truth in flowers.Like a young child her grandam. Fable came ;Earth, sea and sky reflecting, as she flew,A thousand, thousand colours not their own :And at her bidding, lo ! a dark descentTo Tartarus, and those thrice happy fields,Those fields with ether pure and purple lightEver invested, scenes by Him pourtrayed,*VirgiLWho here was wont to wander, here invokeThe sacred Muses,* here receive, recordWhat they revealed, and on the western shoreSleeps in a silent grove, overlooking thee,Beloved Parthenope.Yet here, methinks.Truth wants no ornament, in her own shapeFilling the mind by turns with awe and love,By turns inclining to wild ecstacy,And soberest meditation. Here the vinesWed, each her elm, and o'er the golden grainHang their luxuriant clusters, chequeringThe sunshine ; where, when cooler shadows fall,And the mild moon her fairy net-work weaves,The lute, or mandoline, accompaniedBy many a voice yet sweeter than their own,Kindles, nor slowly; and the dance f displaysThe gentle arts and witcheries of love,Its hopes and fears and feigning, till the youthDrops on his knee as vanquished, and the maid,Her tambourine uplifting with a grace.Nature's and Nature's only, bids him rise.But here the mighty Monarch underneath.He in his palace of fire, diffuses round• Quorum sacra hero, intend percussus more.f The Tarantella.A dazzling splendour. Here, unseen, unheard.Opening another Eden in the wild,He works his wonders ; save, when issuing forthIn thunder, he blots out the sun, the sky,And, mingling all things earthly as in scorn,Exalts the valley, lays the mountain low.Pours many a torrent from his burning lake,And in an hour of universal mirth.What time the trump proclaims the festival.Buries some capital city, there to sleepThe sleep of ages — till a plough, a spadeDisclose the secret, and the eye of dayGlares coldly on the streets, the skeletons,Each in his place, each in his gay attire.And eager to enjoy.Let us go round.And let the sail be slack, the course be slow.That at our leisure, as we coast along,We may contemplate, and from every sceneReceive its influence. The Cum^ean towers.There did they rise, sun-gilt ; and here thy groves,Delicious Bai. Here (what would they not ?)The masters of the earth, unsatisfied.Built in the sea ; and now the boatman steersO'er many a crypt and vault yet glimmering.O'er many a broad and indestructible arch.The deep foundations of their palaces ;Nothing now heard ashore, so great the change,Save when the sea-mew clamours, or the owlHoots in the temple.What the mountainous Isle,*Seen in the South? 'Tis where a Monster dwelt, fHurling his victims from the topmost cliff;Then and then only merciful, so slow,So subtle were the tortures they endured.Fearing and feared he lived, cursing and cursed ;And still the dungeons in the rock breathe outDarkness, distemper. Strange, that one so vileShould from his den strike terror thro' the world ;Should, where withdrawn in his decrepitude.Say to the noblest, be they where they might,Go from the earth !' and from the earth they went.Yet such things were — and will be, when mankind,Losing all virtue, lose all energy ;And for the loss incur the penalty.Trodden down and trampled.Let us turn the prow.And in the track of him who went to die, JTraverse this valley of waters, landing whereA waking dream awaits us. At a stepTwo thousand years roll backward, and we stand,• Cares. f Tiberius.I The Elder Pliny. See the letter in which his Nephew relatesto Tacitus the circumstances of his death.C CLike those so long within that awful Place, *Immovable, nor asking. Can it be ?Once did I linger there alone, till dayClosed, and at length the calm of twilight came,So grateful, yet so solemn ! At the fount.Just where the three ways meet, I stood and looked,(''Twas near a noble house, the house of Pansa)And all was still as in the long, long nightThat followed, when the shower of ashes fell.When they that sought Pompeii, sought in vain ;It was not to be found. But now a ray.Bright and yet brighter, on the pavement glanced,And on the wheel-track worn for centuries,And on the stepping-stones from side to side.O'er which the maidens, with their water-urns,Were wont to trip so lightly. Full and clear,The moon was rising, and at once revealedThe name of every dweller, and his craft ;Shining throughout with an unusual lustre.And lighting up this City of the Dead.Mark, where within, as tho* the embers lived,The ample chimney-vault is dun with smoke.There dwelt a miller ; silent and at restHis mill-stones now. In old companionship♦ Pompeii.Still do they stand as on the day he went,Each ready for its office — but he comes not.And there, hard by (where one in idlenessHas stopt to scrawl a ship, an armed man ;And in a tablet on the wall we readOf shews ere long to be) a sculptor wrought,Nor meanly ; blocks, half-chiselled into life.Waiting his call. Here long, as yet attestsThe trodden floor, an olive-merchant drewFrom many an earthen jar, no more supplied ;And here from his a vintner served his guestsLargely, the stain of his o'erflowing cupsFresh on the marble. On the bench, beneath.They sate and quaffed and looked on them that passed.Gravely discussing the last news from Rome.But lo, engraved on a threshold-stone.That word of courtesy, so sacred once.Hail ! At a master's greeting we may enter.And lo, a fairy-palace ! every where.As thro' the courts and chambers we advance.Floors of mosaic, walls of arabesque.And columns clustering in Patrician splendour.But hark, a footstep ! May we not intrude ?And now, methinks, I hear a gentle laugh.And gentle voices mingling as in converse !And now a harp-string as struck carelessly,And now — along the corridor it comes —I cannot err, a filling as of baths !Ah, no, 'tis but a mockery of the sense.Idle and vain ! We are but where we were ;Still wandering in a City of the Dead !^^^ ^THE BAG OF GOLD.I DINE very often with the good old Cardinal * *and, I should add, with his cats ; for they always sitat his table, and are much the gravest of the company.His beaming countenance makes us forgethis age ; nor did I ever see it clouded till yesterday,when, as we were contemplating the sun-set from histerrace, he happened, in the course of our conversation,to allude to an affecting circumstance in hisearly life.He had just left the University of Palermo andwas entering the army, when he became acquaintedwith a young lady of great beauty and merit, a Sicilianof a family as illustrious as his own. Livingnear each other, they were ofi^n together; and, at anage like theirs, friendship soon turns to love. Buthis father, for what reason I forget, refused his consentto their union; till, alarmed at the declininghealth of his son, he promised to oppose it no longer,if, after a separation of three years, they continued asmuch in love as ever.Relying on that promise, he said, I set out on along journey ; but in my absence the usual arts wereresorted to. Our letters were intercepted ; and falserumours were spread — first of my indifference, thenof my inconstancy, then of my marriage with a richheiress of Sienna ; and, when at length I returnedto make her my own, I found her in a convent ofUrsuline Nuns. She had taken the veil ; and I, saidhe with a sigh — what else remained for me? — I wentinto the church.Yet many, he continued, as if to turn the conversation,very many have been happy though wewere not ; and, if I am not abusing an old man's privilege,let me tell you a story with a better catastrophe.It was told to me when a boy ; and you may not beunwilling to hear it, for it bears some resemblance tothat of the Merchant of Venice.We were now arrived at a pavilion that commandedone of the noblest prospects imaginable ; the mountains,the sea, and the islands illuminated by the lastbeams of day ; and, sitting down there, he proceededwith his usual vivacity; for the sadness, that had fiomeacross him, was gone.There lived in the fourteenth century, near Bologna,a Widow-lady of the Libertine Family,called Madonna Lucretia, who in a revolution ofthe State had known the bitterness of poverty, andhad even begged her bread ; kneeling day after dayHke a statue at the gate of the Cathedral ; her rosaryin her left hand and her right held out for charity ;her long black veil concealing a face that had onceadorned a Court, and had received the homage of asmany sonnets as Petrarch has written on Laura.But Fortune had at last relented ; a legacy from adistant relation had come to her relief; and she wasnow the mistress of a small inn at the foot of theApennines; where she entertained as well as shecould, and where those only stopped who were contentedwith a little. The house was still standing,when in my youth I passed that way; though thesign of the White Cross,* the Cross of the Hospitallers,was no longer to be seen over the door ; a signwhich she had taken, if we may believe the traditionthere, in honour of a maternal uncle, a grand-masterof that Order, whose achievements in Palestine shewould sometimes relate. A mountain-stream ranthrough the garden ; and at no great distance, wherethe road turned on its way to Bologna, stood a littlechapel, in which a lamp was always burning before apicture of the Virgin, a picture of great antiquity, thework of some Greek artist.Here she was dwelling, respected by all who knewher ; when an event took place, which threw her intoLa Croce Banco.the deepest affliction. It was at noon-day in Septemberthat three foot-travellers arrived, and, seatingthemselves on a bench under her vine-trellis, weresupplied with a flagon of Aleatico by a lovely girl, heronly child, the image of her former self. The eldestspoke like a Venetian, and his beard was short andpointed after the fashion of Venice. In his demeanourhe affected great courtesy, but his look inspiredlittle confidence ; for when he smiled, whichhe did continually, it was with his lips only, not withhis eyes ; and they were always turned from yours.His companions were bluff and frank in their manner,and on their tongues had many a soldier's oath. Intheir hats they wore a medal, such as in that age wasoften distributed in war; and they were evidentlysubalterns in one of those Free Bands which werealways ready to serve in any quarrel, if a service itcould be called, where a battle was little more thanamockery ; and the slain, as on an opera-stage, wereup and fighting tomorrow. Overcome with the heat,they threw aside their cloaks ; and, with their glovestucked under their belts, continued for some time inearnest conversation.At length they rose to go ; and the Venetian thusaddressed their Hostess. ' Excellent Lady, may weleave under your roof, for a day or two, this bag ofgold V ' You may,' she replied gaily. * But remember,we fasten only with a latch. Bars and bolts,we have none in our village ; and, if we had, wherewould be your security?' * In your word, Lady.'But what if I died to-night ? Where would itbe then V said she, laughing. * The money wouldgo to the Church ; for none could claim it.'Perhaps you will favour us with an acknowledgment.'If you will write it.'An acknowledgment was written accordingly, andshe signed it before Master Barton, the Village-physician,who had just called by chance to learn thenews of the day ; the gold to be delivered when appliedfor, but to be delivered (these were the words)not to one — nor to two — but to the three; wordswisely introduced by those to whom it belonged,knowing what they knew of each other. The goldthey had just released from a miser's chest in Perugia;and they were now on a scent that promisedmore.They and their shadows were no sooner departed,than the Venetian returned, saying, * Give me leaveto set my seal on the bag, as the others have done ;'and she placed it on a table before him. But in thatmoment she was called away to receive a Cavalier,who had just dismounted from his horse ; and, whenshe came back, it was gone. The temptation hadD Dproved irresistible ; and the man and the money hadvanished together.Wretched woman that I am!' she cried, as in anagony of grief she fell on her daughter's neck, * Whatwill become of us ? Are we again to be cast out intothe wide world ? . . Unhappy child, would that thouhadst never been born !' and all day long she lamented;but her tears availed her little. The others were notslow in returning to claim their due ; and there wereno tidings of the thief; he had fled far away with hisplunder. A Process against her was instantly begunin Bologna; and what defence could she make;how release herself from the obligation of the bond ?Wilfully or in negligence she had parted with thegold ; she had parted with it to one, when she shouldhave kept it for all ; and inevitable ruin awaited her !Go, GiANETTA,' said she to her daughter, * take thisveil which your mother has worn and wept under sooften, and implore the Counsellor Faltering to pleadfor us on the day of trial. He is generous, and willlisten to the Unfortunate. But, if he will not, go fromdoor to door; Donald cannot refuse us. Makehaste, my child; but remember the chapel as youpass by it. Nothing prospers without a prayer.'Alas, she went, but in vain. These were retainedagainst them ; those demanded more than they hadto give ; and all bad them despair. What was to bedone ? No advocate ; and the Cause to come on tomorrow!Now GiANETTA had a lover ; and he was a studentof the law, a young man of great promise, LorenzoMartel. He had studied long and diligentlyunder that learned lawyer, Giovanni Andrews,who, though little of stature, was great in renown,and by his contemporaries was called the Arch-doctor,the Rabbi of Doctors, the Light of the World.Under him he had studied, sitting on the same benchwith Petrarch; and also under his daughter Novella,who would often lecture to the scholars, when herfather was otherwise engaged, placing herself behinda small curtain, lest her beauty should divert theirthoughts ; a precaution in this instance at least unnecessary,Lorenzo having lost his heart to another. *To him she flies in her necessity ; but of whatassistance can he be ? He has just taken his placeat the bar, but he has never spoken ; and how standup alone, unpractised and unprepared as he is, againstan array that would alarm the most experienced? —Were I as mighty as I am weak,' said he, * myfears for you would make me as nothing. But I will• Ce pourroit etre, says Bayle, la matter dun joli problems:on pourroit examiner si cette fille avan9oit, ou si elle retardoit leprofit de ses auditeurs, en leur vacant son beau visage. II yadroit cent choses k dire pour et contre dessus.be there, Gianetta ; and may the Friend of theFriendless give me strength in that hour! Evennow my heart fails me ; but, come what will, while Ihave a loaf to share, you and your Mother shall neverwant. I will beg through the world for you.'The day arrives, and the court assembles. Theclaim is stated, and the evidence given. And nowthe defence is called for — but none is made ; not asyllable is uttered; and, after a pause and a consultationof some minutes, the Judges are proceeding togive judgment, silence having been proclaimed inthe court, when Lorenzo rises and thus addressesthem. * Reverend Signors. Young as I am, may Iventure to speak before you ? I would speak in behalfof one who has none else to help her; and I willnot keep you long. Much has been said ; much onthe sacred nature of the obligation — and we acknowledgeit in its full force. Let it be fulfilled, and to thelast letter. It is what we solicit, what we require.But to whom is the bag of gold to be delivered?What says the bond? Not to one — not to two — butto the three. Let the three stand forth and claim it.*From that day, (for who can doubt the issue?)none were sought, none employed, but the subtle,the eloquent Lorenzo. Wealth followed Fame;nor need I say how soon he sat at his marriage-feast,or who sat beside him.A CHARACTER.One of two things Montrioli may have,My envy or compassion. Both he cannot.Yet on he goes, numbering as miseries.What least of all he would consent to lose.What most indeed he prides himself upon.And, for not having, most despises me.At mom the minister exacts an hour ;At noon the king. Then comes the council-board ;And then the chasse, the supper. When, ah when,The leisure and the liberty I sigh for ?Not when at home ; at home a miscreant-crew.That now no longer serve me, mine the service.And then that old hereditary bore.The steward, his stories longer than his rent-roll,Who enters, quill in ear, and, one by one.As tho' I lived to write, and wrote to live.Unrolls his leases for my signature.'He clanks his fetters to disturb my peace.Yet who would wear them, and become the slaveOf wealth and power, renouncing willinglyHis freedom, and the hours that fly so fast.A burden or a curse when misemployed,But to the wise how precious — every dayA little life, a blank to be inscribedWith gentle deeds, such as in after-timeConsole, rejoice, whene'er we turn the leafTo read them ? All, wherever in the scale,Have, be they high or low, or rich or poor,Inherit they a sheep-hook or a sceptre.Much to be grateful for ; but most has he.Born in that middle sphere, that temperate zone.Where Knowledge lights his lamp, there most secure,And Wisdom comes, if ever, she who dwellsAbove the clouds, above the firmament.That Seraph sitting in the heaven of heavens.What men most covet, wealth, distinction, power.Are baubles nothing worth, that only serveTo rouse us up, as children in the schoolsAre roused up to exertion. The rewardIs in the race we run, not in the prize ;And they, the few, that have it ere they earn it,Having, by favour or inheritance.These dangerous gifts placed in their idle hands.And all that should await on worth well-tried,All in the glorious days of old reservedFor manhood most feature or reverend age,Know not, nor ever can, the generous prideThat glows in him who on himself relies,Entering the lists of life.Festum.They stand between the mountains and the sea ;Awful memorials, but of whom we know not !The seaman, passing, gazes from the deck.The buffalo-driver, in his shaggy cloak,Points to the work of magic and moves on.Time was they stood along the crowded street,Temples of Gods ! and on their ample stepsWhat various habits, various tongues besetThe brazen gates for prayer and sacrifice !Time was perhaps the third was sought for Justice;And here the accuser stood, and there the accused ;And here the judges sate, and heard, and judged.All silent now ! — as in the ages past,Trodden under foot and mingled, dust with dust.How many centuries did the sun go roundFrom Mount Albertus to the Tyrrhene sea.While, by some spell rendered invisible.Or, if approached, approached by him aloneWho saw as though he saw not, they remainedAs in the darkness of a sepulchre,Waiting the appointed time ! All, all withinProclaims that Nature had resumed her right,And taken to herself what man renounced ;No cornice, triglyph, or worn abacus,But with thick ivy hung or branching fern ;Their iron-brown o'erspread with brightest verdure!From my youth upward have I longed to treadThis classic ground — And am I here at last?Wandering at will through the long porticoes,And catching, as through some majestic grove,Now the blue ocean, and now, chaos-like,Mountains and mountain-gulfs, and, half-way up.Towns like the living rock from which they grew ?SoeA cloudy region, black and desolate,Where once a slave withstood a world in arms. *The air is sweet with violets, running wildMid broken friezes and fallen capitals ;Sweet as when Tully, writing down his thoughts.Those thoughts so precious and so lately lost,(Turning to thee, divine Philosophy,Ever at hand to calm his troubled soul)Sailed slowly by, two thousand years ago,For Athens ; when a ship, if north-east windsBlew from the PiESTAN gardens, slacked her course.On as he moved along the level shore,These temples, in their splendour eminentMid arcs and obelisks, and domes and towers.Reflecting back the radiance of the west.Well might he dream of Glory ! — Now, coiled up.The serpent sleeps within them ; the she-wolfSuckles her young : and, as alone I standIn this, the nobler pile, the elementsOf earth and air its only floor and covering,How solemn is the stillness! Nothing stirsSave the shrill-voiced cicala flitting roundOn the rough pediment to sit and sing ;Or the green lizard rustling through the grass,And up the fluted shaft with short quick spring,To vanish in the chinks that Time has made.Spartans. See Plutarch in the Life of Crassus.EEIn such an hour as this, the sun's broad diskSeen at his setting, and a flood of lightFilling the courts of these old sanctuaries,(Gigantic shadows, broken and confused.Athwart the innumerable columns flung)In such an hour he came, who saw and told,lied by the mighty Genius of the Place.Walls of some capital city first appeared,Half razed, half sunk, or scattered as in scorn ;And what within them ? what but in the midstThese Three in more than their original grandeur,And, round about, no stone upon another ?As if the spoiler had fallen back in fear.And, turning, left them to the elements.*Tis said a stranger in the days of old(Some say a Dorian, some a Sybarite ;But distant things are ever lost in clouds)'Tis said a stranger came, and, with his plough,Traced out the site ; and Posidonia rose.Severely great, Neptune the tutelar God ;A Homer's language murmuring in her streets,And in her haven many a mast from Tyre.Then came another, an unbidden guest.He knocked and entered with a train in arms ;And all was changed, her very name and language !The Tyrian merchant, shipping at his doorIvory and gold, and silk, and frankincense,Sailed as before, but, sailing, cried " For Festum !"And now a Virgil, now an Ovid sungP-Sstum's twice-blowing roses ; while, within.Parents and children mourned — and, every year,(''Twas on the day of some old festival)Met to give way to tears, and once again.Talk in the ancient tongue of things gone by. *At length an Arab climbed the battlements,Slaying the sleepers in the dead of night ;And from all eyes the glorious vision fled !Leaving a place lonely and dangerous,Where whom the robber spares, a deadlier foesStrikes at unseen — and at a time when joyOpens the heart, when summer-skies are blue,And the clear air is soft and delicate ;For then the demon works — then with that airThe thoughtless wretch drinks in a subtle poisonLulling to sleep ; and, when he sleeps, he dies.But what are These still standing in the midst?The Earth has rocked beneath ; the Thunder-stonePassed thro' and thro', and left its traces there ;Yet still they stand as by some Unknown Charter !Oh, they are Nature's own ! and, as alliedTo the vast Mountains and the eternal Sea,They want no written history ; theirs a voiceFor ever speaking to the heart of Man !Athens, xiv. f The Malaria.mk^-AMALFI.He who sets sail from Naples, when the windBlows fragrance from PosIlipo, may soon,Crossing from side to side that beautiful lake.Land underneath the cliff, where once amongThe children gathering shells along the shore.One laughed and played, unconscious of his fate ; *Tasso. Sorrento, his birth-place, is on the south-side of thegulf of Naples.His to drink deep of sorrow, and, thro' life,To be the scorn of them that knew him not.Trampling alike the giver and his gift.The gift a pearl precious, inestimable,A lay divine, a lay of love and war,To charm, ennoble, and, from age to age,Sweeten the labour, when the oar was pliedOr on the Adrian or the Tuscan sea.There would I linger — then go forth again,And hover round that region unexplored.Where to Salvator (when, as some relate,By chance or choice he led a bandit's life,Yet oft withdrew, alone and unobserved.To wander thro' those awful solitudes)Nature revealed herself Unveiled she stood,In all her wildness, all her majesty.As in that elder time, ere Man was made.There would I linger — then go forth again ;And he who steers due east, doubling the cape.Discovers, in a crevice of the rock.The fishing-town, Amalfi. Haply thereA heaving bark, an anchor on the strand.May tell him what it is ; but what it was,Cannot be told so soon.The time has been.When on the quays along the Syrian coast,*Twas asked and eagerly, at break of dawn,What ships are from Amalfi V when her coins,Silver and gold, circled from clime to clime ;From Alexandria southward to Senna,And eastward, thro' Damascus and CabalAnd Sam ARC AND, to thy great wall, Cathay.Then were the nations by her wisdom swayed ;And every crime on every sea was judgedAccording to her judgments. In her portProws, strange, uncouth, from Nile and Niger met,People of various feature, various speech;And in their countries many a house of prayer,And many a shelter, where no shelter was,And many a well, like Jacob's in the wild,Rose at her bidding. Then in Palestine,By the way-side, in sober grandeur stoodA Hospital, that, night and day, receivedThe pilgrims of the west ; and, when 'twas asked,Who are the noble founders ?' every tongueAt once replied, * The merchants of Amalfl'That Hospital, when Godfrey scaled the walls.Sent forth its holy men in complete steel ;And hence, the cowl relinquished for the helm.That chosen band, valiant, invincible,So long renowned as champions of the Cross,In Rhodes, in Malta.For three hundred yearsThere, approached but from the deep, they dwelt;Assailed for ever, yet from age to ageAcknowledging no master. From the deepThey gathered in their harvests ; bringing homeIn the same ship, relics of ancient Greece,That land of glory where their fathers lay.Grain from the golden vales of Sicily,And Indian spices. When at length they fell,Losing their liberty, they left mankindA legacy, compared with which the wealthOf Eastern kings — what is it in the scale ?The mariner's compass.They are now forgot.And with them all they did, all they endured,Struggling with fortune. When Ricardo stoodOn his high deck, his falchion in his hand,And, with a shout like thunder, cried, * Come forth.And serve me in Salerno !' forth they came,Covering the sea, a mournful spectacle ;The women wailing, and the heavy oarFalling unheard. Not thus did they return,The tant slain; tho* then the grass of yearsGrew in their streets.There now to him who sailsUnder the shore, a few white villages,Scattered above, below, some in the clouds.Some on the margin of the dark blue sea.And glittering thro' their lemon-groves, announceThe region of Amalfi. Then, half-fallen,A lonely watch-tower on the precipice.Their ancient land-mark, comes. Long may it last ;And to the seaman in a distant age,Tho' now he little thinks how large his debt,Serve for their monument !MONTE CASSINO.What hangs behind that curtain V — * Wouldst thoulearn ?1 1 ^^ou art wise, thou wouldst not. 'Tis by someBelieved to be His master-work, who lookedBeyond the grave, and on the chapel-wall,As tho' the day were come, were come and past,Drew the Last Judgment. * But the Wisest err.He who in secret wrought, and gave it life,For life is surely there and visible change.Life, such as none could of himself impart,(They who behold it, go not as they came.But meditate for many and many a day)Sleeps in the vault beneath. We know not much ;But what we know, we will communicate.Tis m an ancient record of the House ;And may it make thee tremble, lest thou fall !Once — on a Christmas-eve — ere yet the roofRung with the hymn of the Nativity,There came a stranger to the convent-gate,• Michael Angelo.F F21SAnd asked admittance ; ever and anon,As if he sought what most he feared to find,Looking behind him. When within the walls.These walls so sacred and inviolate,Still did he look behind him ; oft and long,With curling, quivering lip and haggard eye.Catching at vacancy. Between the fits.For here, 'tis said, he lingered while he lived.He would discourse and with a mastery,A charm by none resisted, none explained,Unfelt before ; but when his cheek grew pale.All was forgotten. Then, however employed.He would break off, and start as if he caughtA glimpse of something that would not be gone ;And turn and gaze, and shrink into himself.As tho' the Fiend was there, and, face to face.Scowled o'er his shoulder.Most devout he was ;Most unremitting in the Services ;Then, only then, untroubled, unassailed ;And, to beguile a melancholy hour.Would sometimes exercise that noble artHe learnt in Florence ; with a master's hand.As to this day the Sacristy attests.Painting the wonders of the Apocalypse.At length he sunk to rest, and in his cellLeft, when he went, a work in secret done.The portrait, for a portrait it must be,That hangs behind the curtain. Whence he drew,None here can doubt ; for they that come to catchThe faintest glimpse — to catch it and be gone,Gaze as he gazed, then shrink into themselves.Acting the self-same part. But why 'twas drawn,Whether, in penance, to atone for Guilt,Or to record the anguish Guilt inflicts.Or haply to familiarize his mindWith what he could not fly from, none can say,For none could learn the burden of his soul.*THE HARPER.It was a Harper, wandering with his harp,His only treasure ; a majestic man.By time and grief ennobled, not subdued ;Tho' from his height descending, day by day,^1And, as his upward look at once betrayed,Blind as old Homer. At a fount he sate.Well-known to many a weary ti-weller ;His little guide, a boy not seven years old,But grave, considerate beyond his years.Sitting beside him. Each had ate his crustIn silence, drinking of the virgin-spring ;And now in silence, as their custom was.The sun's decline awaited.But the childWas worn with travel. Heavy sleep weighed downHis eye-lids ; and the grandsire, when we came.Emboldened by his love and by his fear,His fear lest night o'ertake them on the road,Humbly besought me to convey them bothA little onward. Such small servicesWho can refuse — Not I ; and him who can,Blest tho' he be with every earthly gift,I cannot envy. He, if wealth be his.Knows not its uses. So from noon till night.Within a crazed and tattered vehicle.That yet displayed, in old emblazonry,A shield as splendid as the Bardi wear,*We lumbered on together ; the old manBeguiling many a league of half its length.When questioned the adventures of his life,• See Note.And all the dangers he had undergone ;His ship-wrecks on inhospitable coasts,And his long warfare.They were bound, he said.To a great fair at Reggio ; and the boy.Believing all the world were to be there,And I among the rest, let loose his tongue,And promised me much pleasure. His short trance.Short as it was, had, like a charmed cup.Restored his spirit, and, as on we crawled.Slow as the snail (my muleteer dismounting.And now his mules addressing, now his pipe.And now Luigi) he poured out his heart.Largely repaying me. At length the sunDeparted, setting in a sea of gold ;And, as we gazed, he bade me rest assuredThat like the setting would the rising be.Their harp — it had a voice oracular.And in the desert, in the crowded street.Spoke when consulted. If the treble chordTwanged shrill and clear, o'er hill and dale they went.The grandsire, step by step, led by the child ;And not a rain-drop from a passing cloudFell on their garments. Thus it spoke to-day ;Inspiring joy, and, in the young one's mind,Brightening a path already full of sunshine.,J«THE Felucca.Day glimmered ; and beyond the precipice,(Which my mule followed as in love with fear,Or as in scorn, yet more and more incliningTo tempt the danger where it menaced most)A sea of vapour rolled. Methought we wentAlong the utmost edge of this, our world ;But soon the surges fled, and we descried22^Nor dimly, tho' the lark was silent yet,Thy gulf, La Spezzia. Ere the morning-gun,Ere the first day-streak, we alighted there ;And not a breath, a murmur ! Every sailSlept in the offing. Yet along the shoreGreat was the stir ; as at the noontide hour.None unemployed. Where from its native rockA streamlet, clear and full, ran to the sea.The maidens knelt and sung as they were wont.Washing their garments. Where it met the tide.Sparkling and lost, an ancient pinnace layKeel upward, and the faggot blazed, the tarFumed from the cauldron ; while, beyond the fort.Whither I wandered, step by step led on.The fishers dragged their net, the fish withinAt every heave fluttering and full of life,At every heave striking their silver fins'Gainst the dark meshes. Soon a boatman's shoutRe-echoed ; and red bonnets on the beach.Waving, recalled me. We embarked and leftThat noble haven, where, when Genoa reigned,A hundred gallies sheltered — in the day,When lofty spirits met, and, deck to deck,Doria, Pisan fought ; that narrow fieldAmple enough for glory. On we went.Ruffling with many an oar the crystalline sea.On from the rising to the setting sun.In silence — underneath a mountain-ridge,Untamed, untameable, reflecting roundThe saddest purple ; nothing to be seenOf life or culture, save where, at the foot,Some village and its church, a scanty line,Athwart the wave gleamed faintly. Fear of 111Narrowed our course, fear of the hurricane.And that yet greater scourge, the craily Moor,Who, like a tiger prowling for his prey,Springs and is gone, and on the adverse coast,(Where Tripoli and Tunis and AlgiersForge fetters, and white turbans on the moleGather, whene'er the Crescent comes displayedOver the Cross) his human merchandizeTo many a curious, many a cruel eyeExposes, Ah, how oft where now the sunSlept on the shore, have ruthless scimitarsFlashed thro' the lattice, and a swarthy crewDragged forth, ere long to number them for sale,Ere long to part them in their agony.Parent and child! How oft where now we rodeOver the billow, has a wretched son.Or yet more wretched sire, grown grey in chains.Laboured, his hands upon the oar, his eyesUpon the land — the land, that gave him birth ;And, as he gazed, his forestall thro* his tearsFondly imagined ; when a Christian shipo GOf war appearing in her bravery,A voice in anger cried, * Use all your strength !'But when, ah when, do they that can, forbearTo crush the unresisting? Strange, that men,Creatures so frail, so soon, alas, to die,Should have the power, the will to make this worldA dismal prison-house, and life itself.Life in its prime, a burden and a curseTo him who never wronged them ? Who that breathesWould not, when first he heard it, turn awayAs from a tale monstrous, incredible ?Surely a sense of our mortality,A consciousness how soon we shall be gone.Or, if we linger — but a few short years —How sure to look upon our brother's grave,Should of itself incline to pity and love,And prompt us rather to assist, relieve.Than aggravate the evils each is heir to.At length the day departed, and the moonRose like another sun, illuminingWaters and woods and cloud-capt promontories,Glades for a hermit's cell, a lady's bower.Scenes of Elysium, such as Night aloneReveals below, nor often — scenes that fledAs at the waving of a wizard's wand.And left behind them, as their parting gift,A thousand nameless odours. All was still ;And now the nightingale her song poured forthIn such a torrent of heart-felt delight,So fast it flowed, her tongue so voluble,As if she thought her hearers would be goneEre half was told. 'Twas where in the north-west,Still unassailed and unassailable,Thy pharos, Genoa, first displayed itself.Burning in stillness on its craggy seat ;That guiding star so oft the only one.When those now glowing in the azure vault,Are dark and silent 'Twas where over the sea.For we were now within a cable's length,Delicious gardens hung ; green galleries.And marble terraces in many a flight.And fairy-arches flung from cliff' to cliffyWeltering, enchanting ; and, above them all,A Palace, such as somewhere in the East,In Zenastan or Araby the blest.Among its golden groves and fruits of gold.And fountains scattering rainbows in the sky.Rose, when Aladdin rubbed the wondrous lamp ;Such, if not fairer ; and, when we shot by,A scene of revelry, in long arrayAs with the radiance of a setting sun.The windows blazing. But we now approachedA City far-renowned ; * and wonder ceased.• Genoa.GENOA.This house was Andrea Doria's. Here he Heed;And here at eve relaxing, when ashore,Held many a pleasant, many a grave discourseWith them that sought him, walking to and froAs on his deck. 'Tis less in length and breadthThan many a cabin in a ship of war ;But 'tis of marble, and at once inspiresThe reverence due to ancient dignity.He left it for a better ; and 'tis nowA house of trade, the meanest merchandiseCumbering its floors. Yet, fallen as it is,'Tis still the noblest dwelling — even in Genoa !And hadst thou, Andrea, lived there to the last,Thou hadst done well ; for there is that without,That in the wall, which monarchs could not give.Nor thou take with thee, that which says aloud,It was thy Country's gift to her Deliverer.'Tis in the heart of Genoa (he who comes,Must come on foot) and in a place of stir ;Men on their daily business, early and late,Thronging thy very threshold. But when there,Thou wert among thy fellow-citizens.Thy children, for they hailed thee as their sire ;And on a spot thou must have loved, for there.Calling them round, thou gav'st them more than life,Giving what, lost, makes life not worth the keeping.There thou didst do indeed an act divine ;Nor couldst thou leave thy door or enter in,Without a blessing on thee.Thou art nowAgain among them. Thy brave mariners.They who had fought so often by thy side,Staining the mountain-billows, bore thee back;And thou art sleeping in thy funeral-chamber.Thine was a glorious course ; but couldst thou there,Clad in thy cere-cloth — in that silent vault.Where thou art gathered to thy ancestors —Open thy secret heart and tell us all.Then should we hear thee with a sigh confess,A sigh how heavy, that thy happiest hoursWere passed before these sacred walls were left,Before the ocean-wave thy wealth reflected.And pomp and power drew envy, stirring upThe ambitious man, * that in a perilous hourFell from the plank.• FiescaMARCO GriffinWar is a game at which all are sure to lose, sooneror later, play they how they will ; yet every nationhas delighted in war, and none more in their day thanthe little republic of Genoa, whose gallies, whileshe had any, were always burning and sinking thoseof the Pisans, the Venetians, the Greeks or theTurks ; Christian and Infidel alike to her.But experience, when dearly bought, is seldomthrown away altogether. A moment of sober reflectioncame at last; and after a victory the most splendidand ruinous of any in her annals, she resolved fromthat day and for ever to live at peace with all mankind;having in her long career acquired nothing butglory, and a tax on every article of life.Peace came, but with none of its blessings. Nostir in the harbour, no merchandise in the mart oron the quay ; no song as the shuttle was thrown orthe plough-share broke the furrow. The frenzy hadleft a languor more alarming than itself. Yet theburden must be borne, the taxes be gathered ; and,year after year, they lay like a curse on the land, theprospect on every side growing darker and darker.stillan old man entered the senate-house on hiscrutches and all was changed.Marco Griffin was the last of an ancient family,a family of royal merchants; and the richest citizen inGenoa, perhaps in Europe. His parents dying whileyet he lay in the cradle, his wealth had accumulatedfrom the year of his birth ; and so noble a use didhe make of it when he arrived at manhood, thatwherever he went, he was followed by the blessingsof the people. He would often say, * I hold it onlyin trust for others ;' but Genoa was then at her oldamusement, and the work grew on his hands. S strongas he was, the evil he had to struggle with, wasstronger than he. His cheerfulness, his alacrity lefthim ; and, having lifted up his voice for Peace, hewithdrew at once from the sphere of life he had movedin — to become, as it were, another man.From that time and for full fifty years he was seensitting, like one of the founders of his House, at hisdesk among his money-bags, in a narrow street nearthe Porto Franco ; and he, who in a famine had filledthe granaries of the State, sending to Sicily and evento Egypt, now lived only as for his heirs, thoughthere were none to inherit ; giving no longer to any,but lending to all — to the rich on their bonds andthe poor on their pledges; lending at the highestrate and exacting with the utmost rigour. No longerrelieving the miserable, he sought only to enrich himselfby their misery; and there he sat in his gown offrieze, till every finger was pointed at him in passingand every tongue exclaimed, " There sits the Miser!"But in that character and amidst all that obloquyhe was still the same as ever, still acting to the bestof his judgement for the good of his fellow-citizens ;and when the measure of their calamities was full,when Peace had come, but had come to no purpose,and the lesson, as he flattered himself, was gravendeep in their minds, then, but not till then, thoughhis hair had long grown grey, he threw off the maskand gave up all he had, to annihilate at a blow hisgreat and cruel adversaries, those taxes which, whenexcessive, break the hearts of the people ; a gloriousachievement for an individual, though a bloodless one,and such as only can be conceived possible in a smallcommunity like theirs.Alas, how little did he know of human nature!How little had he reflected on the ruling passion ofhis countrymen, so injurious to others and at lengthso fatal to themselves ! Almost instantly they grewarrogant and quarrelsome ; almost instantly they werein arms again ; and, before the statue was up, thathad been voted to his memory, every tax, if we maybelieve the historian, was laid on as before, to awakenvain regrets and wise resolutions.*-"'-t^''' --*-■'.■-»%■A FAREWELL.*And now farewell to Italy — perhapsFor ever ! Yet, methinks, I could not go,I could not leave it, were it mine to say,Farewell for ever !' Many a courtesy,That sought no recompense, and met with noneBut in the swell of heart with which it came,• Written at Susa, May 1, 1822.H HHave I experienced ; not a cabin-door,Go where t would, but opened with a smile ;From the first hour, when, in my long descent,Strange perfumes rose, rose as to welcome me,From flowers that ministered like unseen spirits ;From the first hour, when vintage-songs broke forth,A grateful earnest, and the Southern lakes,Dazzlingly bright, unfolded at my feet ;They that receive the cataracts, and ere longDismiss them, but how changed — onward to rollFrom age to age in silent majesty.Blessing the nations, and reflecting roundThe gladness they inspire.Gentle or rude,No scene of life but has contributedMuch to remember — from the Palestine,Where, when the south-wind blows, and clouds on cloudsGather and fall, the peasant freights his boat,A sacred ark, slung in his orchard-grove ;Mindful to migrate when the king of floods*Visits his humble dwelling, and the keel.Slowly uplifted over field and fence.Floats on a world of waters — from that low.That level region, where no Echo dwells.Or, if she comes, comes in her saddest plight.Hoarse, inarticulate — on to where the path♦ The Po.ii35Is lost in rank luxm^ance, and to breatheIs to inhale distemper, if not death ;Where the wild-boar retreats, when hunters chafe,And, when the day-star flames, the buffalo-herd,Afflicted, plunge into the stagnant pool.Nothing discerned amid the water-leaves.Save here and there the likeness of a head.Savage, uncouth ; where none in human shapeCome, save the herdsman, levelling his lengthOf lance with many a cry, or, Tartar-like,Urging his steed along the distant hillAs from a danger. There, but not to rest,I travelled many a dreary league, nor turned(Ah then least willing, as who had not been ?)When in the South, against the azure sky.Three temples rose in soberest majesty.The wondrous work of some heroic race. *But now a long farewell ! Oft, while I live.If once again in England, once againIn my own chimney-nook, as Night steals on.With half-shut eyes reclining, oft, methinks.While the wind blusters and the pelting rainClatters without, shall I recall to mindThe scenes, occurrences, I met with hereAnd wander in Elysium ; many a noteOf wildest melody, magician-like• The temples of Paestum.Awakening, such as the Calabria horn,Along the mountain-side, when all is still,Pours forth at folding-time ; and many a chant,Solemn, sublime, such as at midnight flowsFrom the full choir, when richest harmoniesBreak the deep silence of thy glens. La Cava ;To him who lingers there with listening earNow lost and now descending as from Heaven !NOTES.Page 2, line 7.As on that Sabbath-eve when He arrived,Arrive essouffl^, tout en nage j le coeur me bat, jevois de loin les soldats a leur poste j j'accours, je cried'une voix ^touffee. II ^toit trop tard.' See Les Confessions.L. 1.P. 2, 1. 15.'Tis not a tale that every hour brings with it.Lines of eleven syllables occur almost in every pageof Milton J but though they are not unpleasing, theyought not to be admitted into heroic poetry ; since thenarrow limits of our language allow us no other distinctionof epic and tragic measures." — Johnson.It is remarkable that he used them most at last. Inthe Paradise Regained they occur oftener than in theParadise Lost in the proportion of ten to one j and letit be remembered that they supply us with anotherclose, another cadence j that they add, as it were, astring to the instruct' i . } and, by enabling the Poet torelax at pleasure, to rise and fall with his subject, contributewhat is most wanted, compass, variety.Shakspeare seems to have delighted in them, and insome of his soliloquies has used them four and five timesin succession ; an example I have not followed in mine.As in the following instance, where the subject is solemnbeyond all others.To be, or not to be, &c.They come nearest to the flow of an unstudied eloquence,and should therefore be used in the drama j butwhy exclusively ? Horace, as we learn from himself,admitted the Musa Pedestrians in his happiest hours, inthose when he was most at his ease ; and we cannotregret her visits. To her we are indebted for morethan half he has left use nor was she ever at his elbowin greater dishabille, than when he wrote the celebratedJourney to Brundusium.P. 3, 1. 26.like him of oldTo admire or despise St, Bernard as he ought,"says Gibbon, " the reader, like myself, should havebefore the windows of his library, that incomparablelandscape4, 1. 2.That winds beside the mirror of all beauty.There is no describing in words ; but the followinglines were written on the spot, and may serve perhapsto recall to some of my readers what they have seen inthis enchanting country.I love to watch in silence till the SunSets ; and Mont Blanc, arrayed in crimson and gold.Flings his broad shadow half across the Lake 3That shadow, tho' it comes thro' pathless tractsOf Ether, and o'er Alp and desert drear.Only less bright, less glorious than himself.But, while we gaze, 'tis gone ! And now he shinesLike burnished silver j all, below, the Night's.Such moments are most precious. Yet there areOthers, that follow fast, more precious still jWhen once again he changes, once againClothing himself in grandeur all his own ;When, like a Ghost, shadowless, colourless.He melts away into the Heaven of Heavens }Himself alone revealed, all lesser thingsAs the' they were not !P. 4,1. 18.TTuit dungeon-fortressThe Castle of Jour.P. 5, 1. 14.As now thy Chartreuse and thy bowers, Ripaille;The retreat of Amadeus, the first Duke of Savoy.Voltaire thus addresses it from his windows :Ripaille, Je te vols. O bizarre Amedee, &c.P. 14,1.23.Whose can it he, hut his who never erred 9Alluding to Barri, a dog of great renown in his day.His skin is stuffed, and preserved in the Museum ofBerne.P. 15, 1. 4.St. Bruno's once —The Grande Chartreuse. It was indebted for itsfoundation to a miracle j as every guest may learn therefroma little book that lies on the table in his cell, thecell allotted to him by the fathers.In this year the Canon died, and, as all believed, inthe odour of sanctity : for who in his life had been soholy, in his death so happy ? But false are the judgmentsof men ; as the event sheweth. For when thehour of his funeral had arrived, when the mourners hadentered the church, the bearers set down the bier, andevery voice was lifted up in the Miserere, suddenly andas none knew how, the lights were extinguished, theanthem stopt ! A darkness succeeded, a silence as ofthe grave ; and these words came in sorrowful accentsfrom the lips of the dead. ' I am summoned before aJust God ! - - A Just God judge me ! I am condemnedby a Just God!' "In the church," says the legend, " there stood ayoung man with his hands clasped in prayer, who fromthat time resolved to withdraw into the desert. It washe whom we now invoke as St. Bruno."P. 15,1. 15.that house so rich of old.So courteous,The words of Ariosto.Sicca — e cortes a cinque vi vena.The valley was formerly called Aqua Bella.P. 15,1. 16.and by two, that passed that way,Ariosto and Milton. Milton was there at the fall ofthe leaf.P. 16,1. 6.Bread to the hungry.In the course of the year they entertain from thirty tothirty-five thousand travellers. — Le Pere Biselx, Prieur.P. 21,1. 22.And gathered from above, below, around.The Author of Alla Rooks, a Poet of such singularfelicity as to give a lustre to all he touches, has writtena song on this subject, called the Crystal-hunters.P. 21, 1. 23.Once, nor long before,M. Rebel mentions an escape almost as miraculous.Lean 1790, Christian Born, proprietary de Aubergedu Grindelwald, eut le malheur de se jeterdans une fence du glacier, en le traversant avec untroupeau de moutons qu'il ramenoit des pasturage deBaniseck. Heureusement qu'il tomba dans le voisinagedu grand torrent qui coule dans I'interieur, il en suivitle lit par-dessous les votes de glace, et arriva au pieddu glacier avec un bras casse. Cet homme est actuellementencore en vie." — Manuel du Voyageur.P. 26,1. 11.a wondrous monumentAlmost every mountain of any rank or condition hassuch a bridge. The most celebrated in this country ison the Swiss-side of St. Goddard.P. 31,1. 10.gazing and shuddering onJ'aime beaucoup ce tournoiement, pourvu que je soisen siiret^. — J, J, Rousseau, Les Confessions. L. iv.P. 31, 1. 18.just where the Abbot fell,Ou il y a environ dix ans, que Crabbe de St. Maurice,Mods. Cicatrix, a ^t^ precipice avec sa voiture, seaIIchevaux, sa cuisiniere, et son cocher. — Rescript. duValais.P. 38, 1. 24.Before the great LastingMartin de la Scala, the Lord of Verona. Cortusio,the embassador and historian, saw him so surrounded.L. 6.This house had been always open to the unfortunate.In the days of Can Grande all were welcome j Poets,Philosophers, Artists, Warriors. Each had his apartment,each a separate table ; and at the hour of dinnermusicians and jesters went from room to room. Dante,as we learn from himself, found an asylum there.Lo primo tuo rifugio, el primo estellaSara la cornelia del grand Lombards,Chien su la scala porta il santo uccello.Their tombs in the public street carry us back intothe times of barbarous virtue ; nor less so do those ofthe Carrara Princes at Padua, though less singular andstriking in themselves. Francis Carrara, the Elder,used often to visit Petrarch in his small house at Aqua,and followed him on foot to his grave.P. 39, 1. 26.My omelet, and a flagon of hill-wine,Originally thus.My omelet, and a trout, that, as the sunShot his last ray thro' Zanga's leafy grove.Leaped at a golden fly, had happilyFled from all eyes jZanga is the name of a beautiful villa near Bergamo,fmin which Tasso finished his tragedy of Torrismoudo. Itstill belongs to his family.P. 40, 1. 4.Bartering my bread and salt for empty praise.After 1. 4, in the MS.That evening, tended on with verse and song,I closed my eyes in heaven, but not to sleep jA Columbine, my nearest neighbour there.In her great bounty, at the midnight-hourBestowing on the world two Harlequins.Chapelle and Bachauraont fared no better at Salon,^ cause d'une obedience, qui slavish d'accoucher dedeux petits comedies.P. 41, 1. 3.And shall I sup where Juliet at the MasqueThe old Palace of the Cappelletti, with its uncouthbalcony and irregular windows, is still standing in alane near the Market-place -, and what Englishman canbehold it with indifference ?mien we enter Verona, we forget ourselves, and arealmost inclined to say with Dante,Vient a veer Montecchi, e Cappelletti.P. 41,1. 6.Such questions hourly do I ask myself;It has been observed that in Italy the memory seesmore than the eye. Scarcely a stone is turned up thathas not some historical association, ancient or modern;that may not be said to have gold under it.P. 41,1. 18.Would they had loved thee less, or feared thee more!From the sonnet of Filicaja. Italia ! Italia ! &c.P. 41,1. 19.Tv)ice hast thou lived already }Twice shone among the nations of the world,All our travellers, from Addison downward, have diligentlyexplored the monuments of her former existence jwhile those of her latter have, comparatively speaking,escaped observation. If I cannot supply the deficiency,I will not follow their example j and happy should I be,if by an intermixture of verse and prose, of prose illustratingthe verse and verse embellishing the prose, Icould furnish my countrymen on their travels with apocket-companion.P. 43, 1. 1.In this neglected mirrorThis is the only instance, with which I am acquainted,of a Ghost in Italy since Brutus sat in his tent.P. 46, 1. 9.She was walled up within the Castle-wall.Murat was a technical word for this punishment,P. 46, 1. 23.Issuing forth.An old huntsman of the family met her in the hazeof the morning, and never went out again.She is still known by the name of Madonna Bianca.P. 48, 1. 8.Still glowing with the richest hues of art,Several were painted by Giorgione and Titian j as.for instance, those of the Monaco de' Tedeschi and theCa' Grimace. See Vasari.P. 48, 1. J 5.the tower of Ezzelin —Now an Observatory. On the wall there is a longinscription : " Pins carteret asperity lacrymal," &c.Ezzelino is seen by Dante in the river of blood.P. 48,1. 18.Him or his horoscope;Bonatti was the great astrologer of that day ; and allthe little Princes of Italy contended for him. It wasfrom the top of the tower of Forti that he gave his signalsto Guido Novello. At the first touch of a bell theCount put on his armour j at the second he mounted hishorse, and at the third marched out to battle. Hisvictories were ascribed to Bonatti j and not perhapswithout reason. How many triumphs were due to theSooth-sayers of old Rome !P. 48, 1. 24.Careless and full of mirth;Douze personnes,tant acteurs qu'actrices,un souffleur,un machines, un garde du raagasin, des enfant de toutage, des chiens, des chats, des singes, des perroquets;c'etoit Marche de Noe. — Ma predilection pour les sou-betterm'arreta sur Madame Saccharine. — Goldoni.P. 49, 1. 5.the lagging mules;the passage-boats are drawn up and down the Breuta.P. 49, 1. 9.That child of fun and frolic, Arlecchino.A pleasant instance of his wit and agility was exhibitedsome years ago on the stage at Venice.The stutterer was in an agony j the word was inexorable.It was to no purpose that Harlequin suggestedanother and another. At length, in a fit ofdespair, he pitched his head full in the dying man'sstomach, and the word bolted out of his mouth to themost distant part of the house." — See Moore s View ofSociety in Italy.P. 50, 1. 12.A vast Metropolis,I love," says a traveller, " to contemplate, as I floatalong, that multitude of palaces and churches, which arecongregated and pressed as on a vast raft." — 'rand whocan forget his walk through the Mercers, where thenightingales give you their melody from shop to shop,so that, shutting your eyes, you would think yourself insome forest-glade, when indeed you are all the while inthe middle of the sea ? Who can forget his prospectfrom the great tower, which once, when gilt, and whenthe sun struck upon it, was to be descried by ships afaroff J or his visit to St. Mark's church, where you seenothing, tread on nothing, but what is precious j thefloor all agate, jasper 3 the roof mosaic 3 the aisle hungwith the banners of the subject cities j the front and itsfive domes affecting you as the work of some unknownpeople? Yet all this will presently pass away 5 thewaters will close over it ; and they, that come, row aboutin vain to determine exactly where it stood."P. 54, 1. 3.Playing at MoraA national game of great antiquity, and most probablythe ' micare digits* of the Romans.P. 58, 1. 4.The brass is gone, the porphyry remains,They were placed in the floor as memorials. Thebrass was engraved with the words addressed by thePope to the Emperor, ' Super aside et basilicaambulabis,' &c. Thou shalt tread upon the asp and thebasilisk : the lion and the dragon shalt thou trampleunder foot.P. 58, 1. 7.Of the proud Pontiff —Alexander III. He fled in disguise to Venice, andis said to have passed the first night on the steps ofSan Salvatore. The entrance is from the Mercers,near the foot of the Rialto; and it is thus recorded,under his escutcheon, in a small tablet at the door.Alexandre III. Pont. Max. pernoctanti.P. 58,1. 18.Surely those aged limbs have need of rest!"See Geoffrey de Villehardouin, in Script. Byzant.T. XX.P. 59, 1. 1.resounding with their Feet,See Petrarch's description of them and of the tournament.Rer. Senile. 1. 4. ep. 2.P. 59, 1. 12.some of fair renownFrom England,Recent victoria exultantes, says Petrarch -, alluding,no doubt, to the favourable issue of the war in France.This festival began on the 4th of August, 1364.P. 59, 1. 24.And to, the madness of the Carnival,Among those the most followed, there was always amask in a magnificent habit, relating marvellous adventuresand calling himself Messer Marco Millions. millionswas the name given by his fellow-citizens in hislife-time to the great traveller, Marco Polo. '^ I haveseen him so described," says Ramus, " in the Recordsof the Republic j and his house has, from that time tothis, been called La Cortes del Millions," the palace ofthe rich man, the millionnaire. It is on the canal ofS. Giovanni Chrysostom j and, as long as he lived, wasmuch resorted to by the curious and the learned.P. 60, 1. 3.the Archangel,In otto di car la benediction, says Sansovino ; andperforming the same ofl&ce as the Triton on the towerof the winds at Athens.P. 60,1. 11.the marble stairsLa Scala de' Gigantic.P. 60,1. 16.A brief inscription on the Doge's chairLed to another on the wall as brief;Marin Falter della bella moglie : altri la gode edeli la mantinea.Locus Marine Faletri decapitated pro criminals.P. 61, 1. 2.Carmagnola.II Conte, entrance in origine, disuse: Veto benechi'o son morton, e grasse un grande sospiro. — M. Santo.P. 62, 1. 1.the Canal Orfano,A deep channel behind the island of S. GiorgioMaggiore.P. 62, 1. 6.Yet what so gay as Venice ?"How fares it with your world?" says his Highnessthe Devil to Quevedo, on their first interview in thelower regions. "Do I prosper there?" — "Much asusual, I believe." — "But tell me truly. How is mygood City of Venice ? Flourishing ?" — " More thanever." — " Then I am under no apprehension. All mustgo well."P. 62,1. 17.Who were the Six we supped with Yesternight P'An allusion to the Supper in Candide. c. xxvi.P. 62, 1. 20.Who answered me just now 9See Schiller's Ghost-seer. c. i.K KP. 62, 1. 24.But who moves there, alone among them all?*See the history of Bragadino, the Alchymist, as relatedby Daru. Hist, de Venise. c. 28.The person, that follows, was yet more extraordinary,and is said to have appeared there in 1687. See Redivi\Tis.Those, who have experienced the advantages whichall strangers enjoy in that City, will not be surprisedthat one who went by the name of Signor Gualdi wasadmitted into the best company, though none knew whoor what he was. He remained there some months jand three things were remarked concerning him — thathe had a small but inestimable collection of pictures,vt^hich he readily shewed to any body — that he spokeon every subject with such a mastery as astonished allwho heard him — and that he never wrote or receivedany letter, never required any credit or used any billsof exchange, but paid for every thing in ready money,and lived respectably, though not splendidly.This gentleman being one day at the coffee-house,a Venetian nobleman, who was an excellent judge ofpictures, and who had heard of Signor Gualdi's collection,expressed a desire to see them 3 and his requestwas instantly granted. After contemplating and admiringthem for some time, he happened to cast his eyesover the chamber door, where hung a portrait of theStranger. The Venetian looked upon it, and then uponhim. ' This is your portrait. Sir,' said he to Signorvivaldi. The other made no answer but by a low bow.Yet you look,' he continued, * like a man of fifty; andI know this picture to be of the hand of Titian, whohas been dead one hundred and thirty years. How isthis possible V * It is not easy said Signer Gualdigravely, ' to know all things that are possible ; but thereis certainly no crime in my being like a picture ofTitian's.' The Venetian perceived that he had givenoffence, and took his leave.*' In the evening he could not forbear mentioningwhat had passed to some of his friends, who resolved tosatisfy themselves the next day by seeing the picture.For this purpose they went to the coffeehouse aboutthe time that Signor Gualdi was accustomed to comethere j and, not meeting with him, inquired at his lodgings,where they learnt that he had set out an hourbefore for Vienna. This affair made a great stir at thetime."P. 63, 1. 26.All eye, all ear, no where and every where,A Frenchman of high rank, who had been robbed atVenice and had complained in conversation of thenegligence of the Police, saying that they were vigilantonly as spies on the stranger, was on his way back tothe Terra Firma, when his gondola stopped suddenlyin the midst of the waves. He inquired the reason 3and his gondoliers pointed to a boat with a red flag,that had just made them a signal. It arrived j and hewas called on board. " You are the Prince de Creon >Were you not robbed on Friday-evening ? — I was. — Ofwhat ? — Of five hundred ducats. — And where were they?In a green purse. — Do you suspect any body ? — I doaservant. — Would you know him again? — Certainly."The Interrogator with his foot turned aside an old cloakthat lay there ; and the Prince beheld his purse in thehand of a dead man. " Take it j and remember thatnone set their feet again in a country where they havepresumed to doubt the wisdom of the government."P. 66,1. 19.Those Porches.In the Piazzetta. D'etat sous les portiques de Saint-marcque les patricians se reunissaient tons les jours.Le nom de cette promenade indiquait sa destination ^on Appellant il Broglie. Daru.P. Q7, 1. 5.Then in close converse,I am indebted for this thought to some unpublishedtravels by the Author of Vathek.P. Q7, 1. 20.and he sung,As in the time when Venice was herself,Goldoni, describing his excursion with the Passalac-qua, has left us a lively picture of this class of men.We were no sooner in the middle of that great lagoonwhich encircles the City, than our discreet Gondolierdrew the curtain behind us, and let us float at the willof the waves. — At length night came on, and we couldnot tell where we were. " What is the hour ?" said Ito the Gondolier. — " I cannot guess. Sir ; but, if I amnot mistaken, it is the lover's hour." — "Let us go home,"I replete and he turned the prow homeward, singing,as he rowed, the twenty-sixth strophe of the sixteenthcanto of the Jerusalem Delivered.25SP. 68,1. 16.Nor sought my threshold yAt Venice, if you have la alva in casa, you step fromyour boat into the hall. See Rose's Letters from theNorth of Italy.P. 68,1. 18.The young Bia^cx found her father's door,Bianca Capelle. It had been shut, if we may believethe Novelist Malespini, by a baker's boy, as he passedby at day-break ; and in her despair she fled with herlover to Florence, where he fell by assassination. Herbeauty, and her love-adventure as here related, hermarriage afterwards with the Grand Duke, and thatfatal banquet at which they were both poisoned by theCardinal, his brother, have rendered her history aromance.P. 69,1. 1.It was St. Mary's Eve,This circumstance took place at Venice on the firstof February, the eve of the feast of the Purification ofthe Virgin, A. D. 944, Pietro Canadian, Doge.P. 70,1. 16.Such splendour or such beauty.El costume era, che tutti le novice con tutti la dotelord venissero alia delta Chest, dov 'era il vescovo contutti la chieresia. — A. Navagiero.P. 70, 1. 25.Her veil, transparent as the gossamer,Among the Habit Antioch, in that admirable bookof wood-cuts ascribed to Titian, (A. D. 1590,) there isone entitled Sposa Venetian a Castella. It was takenfrom an old painting in the Schola di S. Giovanni evangelists,and by the Writer is believed to represent oneof the Brides here described.P. 71,1. 5.That venerable structureSan Pietro di Castella, the Patriarchal Church ofVenice.P. 72,1. 16.Well are they known, the galliot and the galley,Una galena e una galeotta. — M. Santo.P. 73, 1. 16.They had surprised the Corsairs where they layIn the lagoons of Carlo. The creek is still called// Porto delle Donzelle,P. 74, 1. 4.Laid at his feet;They are described by Evelyn and La Lande ; andwere to be seen in the Treasury of St. Mark very lately.P. 74, 1.11.And thro the city, in a stately largeLe quali con trionfo si conducessero supra una piattape' canal di Venezia con suoni e cant. — M. Santo.P. 74, 1. 22.the RialtoAn English abbreviation. Rialto is the name, notof the bridge, but of the island from which it is called jand the Venetians say il ponte di Rialto, as we sayWestminster-bridge.In that island is the exchange j and I have oftenwalked there as on classic ground. In the days ofAntonio and Bassanio it was second to none. * I sotto-portico,'says Sansovino, writing in 1580, ' sono agnigiorno frequently da i merchants Florentine, Genoese,Milanese, Spagnuoli, Turchi, e d'altre nation diversedel monde, i quali vi concurrent in tanta copia, chequest piazza e annoverata fra le prime dell' universe.'It was there that the Christian held discourse with theJew J and Shylock refers to it, when he says.Signer Antonio, many a time and oft,In the Rialto you have rated me —Animo a Rialto' — ' L'ora di Rialto' — were on everytongue J and continue so to the present day, as we learnfrom the comedies of Goldoni, and particularly from hisMerchants.There is a place adjoining, called Rialto Nuovo ; and80 called, according to Sansovino, perche fu fabricatedoo il vecchio.P. 75, 1. 4.Twenty are sitting as in judgment there;The Council of Ten and the Giunta, nel quale, saysSanuto, fii messer lo doge. The Giunta at the firstexamination consisted of ten Patricians, at the last oftwenty.This story and the tragedy of the Two Foscari werepublished, within a few days of each other, in November1821.P. 78, 1. 7.That maid at once the noblest, fairest, best.She was a Contains a name coeval with the Republic,and illustrated by eight Doges. On the occasionof their marriage the Biicentaur came out in itssplendour; and a bridge of boats was thrown across theCanal Grande for the Bridegroom and his retinue ofthree hundred horse. Sanuto dwells with pleasure onthe costliness of the dresses and the magnificence of theprocessions by land and water. The tournaments inthe place of St. Mark lasted three days, and were attendedby thirty thousand people.P. 79, 1. 5.To him whose name, among the greatest now,Francesco Sforza. His father, when at work in thefield, was accosted by some soldiers and asked if hewould enlist. ^'Let me throw my mattock on that oak,"he replied, '' and, if it remains there, I will." It remainedthere ; and the peasant, regarding it as a sign,enlisted. He became soldier, general, prince ; and hisgrandson, in the palace at Milan, said to Paulus Jovius,'^ You behold these guards and this grandeur. I oweevery thing to the branch of an oak, the branch thatheld my grandfather's mattock."P. 79, 1. 10./ have transgressed, offended wilfully;It was a high crime to solicit the intercession of anyForeign Prince.P. 80, 1. 16.Obey. Thy Country wills it,Va e ubbidisci a quelle che vole la terra, e non acercar iii outre.P. 81, 1. 14.the Invisible Three !The State Inquisitors. For an account of theirAuthority, see Page 63.P. 82, 1. 24.It found him on his knees before the Cross,He was at mass. — M. Sanuto.P. 83, 1. 17.He wrote it on the tombVeneno subtus. The tomb is in the Church of St.Elena.P. 83,1. 19.Among the debtors in his leger-bookA remarkable instance, among others in the annals ofVenice, that her princes were merchants, her merchantsprinces.P. 84, 1. 4.the Pisan,Ck)unt Ugolino. Inferno, 32.P. 89,1. 11.And from that hour have kindred spirits flockedI visited once more,* says Alfieri, ' the tomb of ourmaster in love, the divine Petrarch j and there, as atRavenna, consecrated a day to meditation and verse.'He visited also the house j and in the Album therewrote a sonnet worthy of Petrarch himself.O Cameretta, che gii in te cbiudestiQuel Grande alia cui fama e august il monde, &c.L LP. 90, 1. 10.Neglect the place where, in a graver mood,This village, says Boccaccio, hitherto almost unknowneven at Padua, is soon to become famous throughthe World J and the sailor on the Adriatic will prostratehimself, when he discovers the Euganean hills. "Amongthem," will he say, " sleeps the Poet who is our glory.Ah, unhappy Florence ! You neglected him — You deservedhim not."P. 90,1. 14.Half-way upHe built his house,I have built, among the Euganean hills, a smallhouse, decent and proper ; in which I hope to pass therest of my days, thinking always of my dead or absentfriends." Among those still having, was Boccaccio jwho is thus mentioned by him in his Will. " To DonGiovanni of Certaldo, for a winter-gown at his evening-studies,I leave fifty golden florins j truly little enoughfor so great a man."When the Venetians over-ran the country, Petrarchprepared for flight. " Write your name over your door,"said one of his friends, " and you will be safe." " Iam not so sure of that," replied Petrarch, and fled withhis books to Padua. His books he left to the Republicof Venice, laying, as it were, a foundation for the libraryof St. Mark j but they exist no longer. His legacy toFrancis Carrara, a Madonna painted by Giotto, is stillpreserved in the cathedral of Padua.^9P. 92, 1. 4.in its chain it hangsAffirming itself to be the very bucket which Tassoin his mock heroics has celebrated as the cause of warbetween Bologna and Modena five hundred years ago.P. 93, 1. 3.*Tis of a Lady in her earliest j/ottth,This story is, I believe, founded on fact ; though thetime and place are uncertain. Many old houses inEngland lay claim to it.Except in this instance and another (p. 217) I haveevery where followed history or tradition j and I wouldhere disburden my conscience in pointing out these exceptions,lest the reader should be misled by them.P. 102, 1. 3.and what a light broke forth,Among other instances of her ascendancy at the closeof the thirteenth century, it is related that Florencesaw twelve of her citizens assembled at the Court ofBoniface the eighth, as Embassadors from different partsof Europe and Asia. Their names are mentioned inToscana Illustrate.P. 102,1.8.In this chapel wroughtA chapel of the Holy Virgin in the church of theCarmelite. It is adorned with his paintings, and allthe great artists of Florence studied there j Leonardoda Vinci, Fra Bartolommeo, Andrea del Sarto, MichaelAngelo, Raphael, &c.He bad no stone, no inscription, says one of his biographers,for he was thought little of in his ife-time.Se alcan carcase il mario, o 11 nome mio,La Chest 6 il mario, una cappella ^ il nome.It was there that Michael Angelo received the blowin his face. — See Vasari, and Cellini.P. 103,1. 11.The seat of stone that runs along the wall,It exists no longer, the wall having been taken down jbut enough of him remains elsewhere. Boccaccio deliveredhis lectures on the Divine Commedia in thechurch of S. Sterno.P. 103,1. 12.the belfry-tower.It was designed by Giotto 3 as we read in his epitaph.P. 103,1. 19.Many a transgressor sent to his account.Inferno, 33. A more dreadful vehicle for satire cannotwell be conceived.P. 104, 1. 3.That they might serve to be the gates of Heaven,A saying of Michael Angelo. They are the work ofLorenzo Ghiberti.P. 104,1. 17.Nor then forget that Chamber of the Dead,The Chapel de' Deposit j in which are the tombs ofthe Medici, by Michael Angelo.P. 104,1. 25.That is the Duke Lorenzo. Mark him well.He died early j living only to become the father ofCatherine de Medicis. Had an Evil Spirit assumedthe human shape to propagate mischief, he could nothave done better.The statue is larger than the life, but not so large asto shock belief. It is the most real and unreal thingthat ever came from the chisel.P. 105,1. 7.On that thrice-hallowed day,The day of AU Souls. II di de' Morte.P. 105, 1. 14.// must he known — the writing on the wallExoriare aliquis nostrils ex osseous ultor!Perhaps there is nothing in language more affectingthan his last testament. It is addressed " To God, theDeliverer," and was found steeped in his blood.P. 108,1.9.she who bore them both.Of the Children that survived her, one fell by a brother,one by a husband, and a third murdered his wife.But that family was soon to become extinct. It is some'consolation to reflect that their Country did not go unrevengedfor the calamities which they had broughtupon her. How many of them died by the hands ofeach other! — See p. 124.P. 109, 1. 23.drawn on the wallBy Vasari who attended him on this occasion.J. A. Thanks de Vita suL i.P. 110, 1. 1.From the sad looks of him who could have told,It was given out that they had died of a contagiousfever J and funeral orations were publicly pronounced intheir honour.Alfieri has written a tragedy on the subject j if it maybesaid so, when he has altered so entirely the storyand the characters.P. 111,1.2.CiMABUE.He was the father of modern painting, and the masterof Giotto, whose talent he discovered in the wayhere alluded to.Cimabue stood still, and, having considered the boyand his work, he asked him, if he would go and livewith him at Florence ? To which the boy answeredthat, if his father was willing, he would go with all hisheart." — Vasari.Of Cimabue little now remains at Florence, excepthis celebrated Madonna, larger than the life, in SantaMaria Novella. It was painted, according to Vasari, inagarden near Porta S. Piero, and, when finished, wascarried to the church in solemn procession with trumpetsbefore it. The garden lay without the walls j andsuch was the rejoicing there on the occasion, that thesuburb received the name of Borgo Allegro, a name itstill bears, though now a part of the city.P. 111,1. 11.Beautiful Florence,It is somewhere mentioned that Michael Angelo,when he set out from Florence to build the dome of St.Peter's, turned his horse round in the road to contemplateonce more that of the cathedral, as it rose in thegray of the morning from among the pines and cypressesof the city, and that he said after a pause, " Come te nonvoglio! Meglio di te non posset"* He never indeedspoke of it but with admiration j and, if we may believetradition, his tomb by his own desire was to be so placedin the Santa Croce as that from it might be seen, whenthe doors of the church stood open, that noble work ofBmneleschi.P. 112,1.4.Came out into the meadows;Once, on a bright November-morning, I set out andtraced them, as I conceived, step by step ; beginning andending in the Church of Santa Maria Novella. It wasa walk delightful in itself, and in its associations.P. 112,1.11.Round the green hill they went,I have here follow ed Baldelli. It has been said thatBoccaccio drew from his imagination. But is it likely,when he and his readers were living within a mile or twoof the spot ? Truth or fiction, it furnishes a pleasantpicture of the manners and amusements of the Florentinesin that day.P. 1 13, 1. 2.The morning 'hanqiiet by the fountain-side,At three o'clock. Three hours after sun-rise, accordingto the old manner of reckoning.P. 114,1. 12.his lowly roof and scanty farm.Now belonging by inheritance to the Rangoon, aModenese family.• Like thee I will not build one. Better than thee I cannotP. 114,1. 20.'Tis his own sketch — he drew it from himselfSee a very interesting letter from Machiavel to FrancescoVector, dated the 10th of December, 1513.P. 115,1. 6.sung of OldFor its green wine ;La Verde. It is celebrated by Rinuccini, Red,and most of the Tuscan Poets 3 nor is it unnoticed bysome of ours.Say, he had been at Rome, and seen the relics,Drunk your Verdea-wiiie, &e. — Beaumont and Fletcher.P. 115, 1. 9.Seven years a prisoner at the city-gate,Galileo came to Arcetri at the close of the year 1 633 jand remained there, while he lived, by an order of theInquisition. It is without the walls, near the PortaRomana.He was buried with all honour in the church of theSanta Croce.P. 115,1. 11.His villa (justly was it called The Jewel! JII Giojello.P. 116,1.4.There, unseen,Milton went to Italy in 1638. " There it was," sayshe, " that I found and visited the famous Galileo grownold, a prisoner to the Inquisition." '' Old and blind,"he might have said. Galileo, by his own account, becameblind in December, 1637. Milton, as we learnfrom the date of Sir Henry Wotton's letter to him, hadnot left England on the 1 8th of April following. — SeeTirahoschi, and Wotton Remains.P. 116,1.24.So near the yellow Tiber's —They rise within thirteen miles of each other.P. 117,1. 11.Hands, clad in gloves of steel, held up imploring;It was in this manner that the first Sforza went down,when he perished in the Pescara.P. 118,1.27.And la, an atom on that dangerous sea,Petrarch, as we learn from himself, was on his way toIncised whither his mother was retiring. He was sevenmonths old at the time.A most extraordinary deluge, accompanied by signsand prodigies, happened a few years afterwards. " Onthat night," says Giovanni Villany, " a hermit, being atprayer in his hermitage above Vallombrosa, heard afurious trampling as of many horses 3 and, crossing himselfand hurrying to the wicket, saw a multitude of infernalhorsemen, all black and terrible, riding by at fullspeed. When in the name of God he conjured someof them to tell him their purpose, they replied, *' Wearegoing, if it be his pleasure, to drown the city ofFlorence for its wickedness." — " This account," sayshe, " was given me by the Abbot of Vallombrosa, whohad questioned the holy man himself." xi. 2.P. 119,1. U.Reclined beside thee,O ego quintus era, gelid cum stratus ad AmiMurmura, &c. — Epitaphiutn Damon.M Mp. 119,1.27.PowerlessThere were the ' Nobile di Torre' and the * Nobile diLoggia.'P. 121,1. 13.At the bridge-foot ;Giovanni Buondelmonte was on the point of marryingan Amice, when a widow of the Donati family madelira break his engagement in the manner here described.The Amice washed away the affront with his blood,attacking him, says G. Villany, at the foot of the PonteVecchio, as he was coming leisurely along in his whitemantle on his white palfrey 3 and hence many years ofslaughter.O Buondelmonte, quanto mal suggestivenozzle sue, per gli altrui consort! — Dante.P. 122,1. 2.It had been well, hadst thou slept on, Imelda,The story is Bolognese, and is told by CherubimGhiradacci in his history of Bologna. Her lover wasof the Guelph party, her brothers of the Libelling ;and no sooner was this act of violence made knownthan an enmity, hitherto but half suppressed, broke outinto open war. The Great Place was a scene of battleand blood-shed for forty successive days 3 nor was areconciliation accomplished till six years afterwards,when the families and their adherents met there onceagain, and exchanged the kiss of peace before the CardinalLegate j as the rival families of Florence hadalready done in the Place of S. Maria Novella. Everyhouse on the occasion was hung with tapestry and garlandsof flowers.26:p. 122, 1. 8.-from the woundSucking the poison.The Saracens had introduced among them the practiceof poisoning their daggers.P. 122,1. 10.Yet, when Slavery came,Worse followed.It is remarkable that the noblest works of humangenius have been produced in times of tumult j whenevery man was his own master, and all things were opento all. Homer, Dante, and Milton appeared in suchtimes 3 and we may add Virgil.*P. 123,1.4.In every Palace was The Laboratory yAs in those of Cosmo I. and his son, Francis. — Sismondi,xvi. 205.P. 123, 1. 12.CrWC/ To PH AN A JA Sicilian, the inventress of many poisons j the mostcelebrated of which, from its transparency, was calledAcquetta, or Aqua Tophana.• The Augustan Age, as it is called, what was it but a dyingblaze of the Common-wealth ? When Augustus began to reign,Cicero and Lucretius were dead, Catullus had written his satiresagainst Caesar, and Horace and Virgil were no longer intheir first youth. Horace had served under Brutus; and Virgilhad been pronounced to beMagnae spes altera Rogue.P. 123,1. 14.A sign infallible of coming ill.The Cardinal, Ferdinand de' Medici, is said to havebeen preserved in this manner by a ring which he woreon his finger J as also Andrea, the husband of Giovanni,Queen of Naples.P. 12.3,1. 21.One in the floor — now left, alas, unlocked.II Trabocchetto. See Vocal. degli Academy. dellaCrusca. See also Diet, de 1' Academic Francoise. Art.Oubliettes.P. 124, 1. 3.There, at Casino,Pog^o-Cai'ano, the favourite villa of Lorenzo j wherehe often took the diversion of hawking. Pulci sometimeswent out with him ; though, it seems, with littleardour. See La Caccia col Falconer, where he is describedas missing J and as gone into a wood, to rhymethere.P. 124, 1.6.With his wild lay —The Morgan te Maggiore. He used to recite it atthe table of Lorenzo in the manner of the ancientRhapsodists.P. 124,1. 20.Of that old den far up among the hills,Caffaggi61o, the favourite retreat of Cosmo, " thefather of his country." Leonora di Toledo was stabbedthere on the 1 th of July, 15/6, by her husband Pietrode' Medici -, and on the 1 6th of the same month Isabellade' Medici was strangled by hers, Paolo G' irdanoOrsini, at his villa of Ccrreto. They were at Florence,when they were sent for, each in her tum Isabellaunder the pretext of a hunting-party j and each in herturn went to die.Isabella was one of the most beautiful and accomplishedwomen of the Age. In the Latin, French, andSpanish languages she spoke not only with fluency, butelegance -, and in her own she excelled as an Improvisatrice,accompanying herself on the lute. On herarrival at dusk, Paolo presented her with two beautifulgreyhounds, that she might make a trial of their speedin the morning j and at supper was gay beyond measure.When he retired, he sent for her into his apartment jand, pressing her tenderly to his bosom, slipped a cordround her neck. She was buried in Florence with greatpomp ; but at her burial, says Varchi, the crime divulgeditself. Her face was black on the bier.Leonora appears to have had a presentiment of herfate. She went when required 5 but, before she setout, took leave of her son, then a child ; weeping longand bitterly over him.P. 124,1.26.But loy the Sun is setting;I have here endeavoured to describe an Italian sunsetas I have often seen it. The conclusion is borrowedfrom that celebrated passage in Dante,Era gi Torn, &c.P. 127,1. 1.It was an hour of universal joy.Before!. 1. in the MS.The sun ascended, and the eastern skyFlamed like a furnace, while the western glowedAs if another day was dawning there.P. 127,1. 15.when armies met.The Roman and the Carthaginian. Such was theanimosity, says Livy, that an earthquake, which turnedthe course of rivers and overthrew cities and mountains,was felt by none of the combatants, xxii. 5.P. 127,1. 20.And hy a brookA tradition. It has been called from time immemorial,II Sanguineous.P. 131,1.9.Such the dominion of thy mighty voice ,An allusion to the Cascade delle Marre, a celebratedfall of the Velino near Terni.P. 132, 1. 5.no hush or green or dry,A sign in our country as old as Shakspeare, andstill used in Italy. ' Une branche d'arbre, attached aune maison rustique, nous annonce les moyens de nousrefraichir. Nous y trouvons du lait et des oeufs fraisjnous voila content.' Mem. de Goldoni.There is, or was very lately, in Florence a smallwine-house with this inscription over the door, Al burnvino non bologna franca. Good wine needs no bush. Itwas much frequented by Salvator Rosa who drew aportrait of his hostess.P. 132, 1. 23.A narrow glade unfolded, such as SpringThis upper region, a country of dews and dewy lights,as described by Virgil and Pliny, and still, I believe,called La Rosa, is full of beautiful scenery. Who doesnot wish to follow the footsteps of Cicero there, tovisit the Retire Tempe and the Seven Waters ?P. 133, 1. 8.a sumpter-muleMany of these circumstances were suggested by alandscape of Hannibal Carrack, now in the Louvre.P. 134, 1. 26.Filling the land with splendour —Perhaps the most beautiful villa of that day was theVilla Madame. It is now a ruin 3 but enough remainsof the plan and the grotesque-work to justify Vasari'saccount of it.The Pastor Fido, if not the Aminta, used to be oftenrepresented there 3 and a theatre, such as is here described,was to be seen in the gardens very lately.P. 135, 1. 3.Fair forms appeared, murmuring melodious verse,A fashion for ever reviving in such a climate. Inthe year 1 783, the Nina of Paesiello was performed inasmall wood near Caserta.P. 139, 1. 15.the Appian,The street of the tombs in Pompeii may serve to27^give us some idea of the Via Appian, that Regina Via-rum,in its splendour. It is perhaps the most strikingvestige of Antiquity that remains to us.P. 139, 1. 22.Horace himself —And Augustus in his litter, coming at a still slowerrate. He was borne along by slaves j and the gentlemotion allowed him to read, write, and employ himselfas in his cabinet. Though Tivoli is only sixteen milesfrom the City, he was always two nights on the road.—Suetonius.P. 140,1.5.Where his voice falteredAt the words * Tu Marcellus eris.' The story is sobeautiful, that every reader must wish it to be true.P. 140, 1. 14.the centre of their UniverseFrom the golden pillar in the Forum the ways ran tothe gates, and from the gates to the extremities of theEmpire.P. 141,1.5.To the twelve tables,The laws of the twelve tables were inscribed on pillarsof brass, and placed in the most conspicuous partof the Forum. Dion. Hal.P. 141,1. 8.And to the shepherd on the Alban mountAmplitude tanta est, ut conspirator ^ Lothario Jove.C. Plain. XXXIV. 7.P. 141, 1. 25.A thousand torches, turning night to dais,An allusion to Caesar in his Gallic triumph. Ad-scentCapitoline ad lumina, &c. Suetonius.P. 142,1. 6.On those so young, well-pleased with all they see,In the triumph of JEmilius, nothing affected theRoman people like the children of Perseus. Many wept jnor could any thing else attract notice, till they weregone by. Plutarch.P. 143,1. 11.and she who said,Taking the fatal cup between her hands,Sophonisba. The story of the marriage and thepoison is well-known to every reader.P. 148, 1. 5.His last great work;The Transfiguration -, la quale opera, nel videre ilcorps morton, e quelle viva, faceva scoppiare Anima dicolore a agni uno, che quivi guardava. — Vasari.P. 153,1. I.Have none appeared as tillers of the ground,The Author of the Letters to Julia has writtenadmirably on this subject.All sad, all silent ! O'er the earNo sound of cheerful toil is swelling.Earth has no quickening spirit here,Nature no charm, and Man no dwelling!Not less admirably has he described a Roman Beauty;such as ' weaves lier spells beyond the Tiber.'Methinks the Furies with their snakes,Or Venus with her zone might gird her;Of fiend and goddess she partakes,And looks at once both Love and Miu-der.P. 153,1.4.From this Seat,Mons Albans, now called Monte Cave. On thesummit stood for many centuries the temple of JupiterLatiaris. ' Tuque ex tuo editor monte Latiaris, sanctiJupiter,' &c. — Cicero.P. 154, 1. 13.Two were so soon to wander and be slain,Nisus and Euryalus. La scene des six derniers livresde Virgil ne comprend queene lieue de terrain. —Bonstetten.P. 154, 1.17.How many realms, pastoral and warlike, layForty Seven, according to Dionys. Halifax. 1. IV.P. 155,1. 15.Here is the sacred field of the Horatio.Horatius qua vires sacer campus. Mart.P. 155,116.There are the Quintilian meadows.Quae prate Quintus vocantur. Livy.P. 157,1.21.Wander like strangersIt was not always so. There were once within herwalls ' more erected spirits.'Let me recall to your mind," says Petrarch in aletter to old Stephen Colonia, " the walk we took togetherat a late hour in the broad street that leads fromyour palace to the Capitol. To me it seems as yesterday,though it was ten years ago. mien we arrivedwhere the four ways meet, we stopped j and, none interruptingus, discoursed long on the fallen fortunes ofyour House. Fixing your eyes steadfastly upon meand then turning them away full of tears, " I have nothingnow," you said, " to leave my children. But astill greater calamity awaits me — I shall inherit fromthem all." You remember the words, no doubt j wordsso fully accomplished. I certainly dos and as distinctlyas the old sepulchre in the corner, on which we wereleaning with our elbows at the time." Epist. Family.VIII. 1.The sepulchre here alluded to, must have been thatof Bibulusj and what an interest it derives from thisanecdote ! Stephen Colonia was a hero worthy of antiquity;and in his distress was an object, not of pity,but of reverence. When overtaken by his pursuers andquestioned by those who knew him not, " I am StephenColonia," he replied, " a citizen of Rome!" and, whenin the last extremity of battle a voice cried out to him,Where is now your fortress, Colonia ?" " Here !"he answered gaily, laying his hand on his heart.P. 159, 1. 6.Music and painting, sculpture, rhetoric,Music J and from the loftiest strain to the lowliest,from a Miserere in the Holy Week to the shepherd'shumble offering in Advent -, the last, if we may judgefrom its effects, not the least subduing, perhaps themost so.Once, as I was approaching Frescati in the sunshineof a cloudless December-morning, I observed arustic group by the road-side, before an image of theVirgin, that claimed the devotions of the passengerfrom a niche in a vineyard-wall. Two young men fromthe mountains of the Abruzzi, in their long browncloaks, were playing a Christmas-carol. Their instrumentswere a hautboy and a bagpipe j and the air, wildand simple as it was, was such as she might accept withpleasure. The ingenuous and smiling countenances ofthese rude minstrels, who seemed so sure that she heardthem, and the unaffected delight of their little audience,all younger than themselves, all standing uncovered andmoving their lips in prayer, would have arrested themost careless traveller.P. 159, 1. 7.And dazzling light and darkness visible,Whoever has entered the Church of St. Peter's orthe Pauline chapel, during the Exposition of the HolySacrament there, will not soon forget the blaze of thealtar, or the dark circle of worshippers kneeling insilence before it.P. 159,1. 12.Ere they came.An allusion to the prophecies concerning Antichrist.See the Interpretations of Mede, Newton, Clarke, &c. jnot to mention those of Dante and Petrarch.P. 163,1. 19.And from the latticed gallery came a chantOf psalms, most saint-like, most angelical,There was said to be in the choir, among others ofthe Sisterhood, a daughter of Cimarosa.P. 164,1. 13.'Twas in her utmost need; nor, while she lives,Her back was at that time turned to the people j butinhis countenance might be read all that was passing.The Cardinal, who officiated, was a venerable old man,evidently unused to the ceremony and much affectedby it.P. 165,1. 14.the black pall, the requiem.Among other ceremonies a pall was thrown over her,and a requiem sung.P. 166,1.4.Unsheathed his wingsHe is of the beetle-tribe.P. 167,1. 1.Blazing by Fits as from excess of Joy,For, in that upper clime, effulgence comesOf gladness — Cry's Dante.P. 167,1.9.Singing the nursery-song he learnt so soon;There is a song to the lucciola in every dialect ofItaly j as for instance in the Genoese.Cabala, regni a base;Ti dato un cure de lette.The Roman is in a higher strain.Bella regina, &c.P. 167,1. 10.And the young nymph, preparing for the dancelo piglio, quando il di giunge al confine,Le lucciole ne' prate ampj ridotto,E, come gemme, le compared al crime;Poi fra Sombre da' rai vii interrogateMi present ai Pastor, e ognun mi dice :Clori ha le stella al crin come ha la Note.Varano.P. 167,1. 19.Those trees, religious once and always green,Pliny mentions an extraordinary instance of longevityin the ilex. ' There is one says he, ' in the Vatican,older than the City itself. An Etruscan inscription inletters of brass attests that even in those days the treewas held sacred :' and it is remarkable that there is atthis time on the Vatican mount an ilex of great antiquity.It is in a grove just above the palace-garden.P. 167,1.24.(So some aver, and who would not believe ?JI did not tell you that just below the first fall, on theside of the rock, and hanging over that torrent, arelittle ruins which they shew you for Horace's house, acurious situation to observe thePrinceps Anno, et Tibumi lucas, et budaMobilibus maria rives.Grays Letters,P. 178,1.6.When they that robbed, were men of better faithAlluding to Alfonso Piccolomini. Stupid ciascunoche, centre un bandits osservava rigorosamente la suaparole, il Papa non averse ribrezzo di manage alia propria.Galluzzi. II. 364.He was hanged at Florence, March 16, 1591.P. 178,1. 18.When along the shore,Tasso was returning from Naples to Rome, and hadarrived at Mole di Greta, when he received this tributeof respect. The captain of the troop was Marco diSierra. See Manse. Vita del Tasso. Ariosto had asimilar adventure with Filippo Machine. See Baruffaldi.P. 179,1. 11.^5 by a spell they start up in array,Cette race de bandits a ses racines dans la populationmeme du pays. La police ne sait ou les trouver. —Lettres de Chateauvieux.P. 183, 1.1.Three days they lay in ambush at my gate,This story was written in the year 1 820, and is foundedon the many narratives which at that time were circulatingin Rome and Naples.P. 207,1. 1.They stand between the mountains and the sea;The temples of Paestum are three in number j andhave survived, nearly nine centuries, the total destructionof the city. Tradition is silent concerning them jbut they must have existed now between two and threethousand years.P. 209, 1. 3.J^ air is sweet with violets, running wildThe violets of Paestum were as proverbial as the roses.Martial mentions them with the honey of Hybla.P. 209, 1. 6.Those thoughts so precious and so lately lost,The introduction to his treatise on Glory. Cic. adMatt. xvi. 6. For an account of the loss of that treatise,see Petrarch, Epist. Rer. Senilium. xv. i. and Bayle,Diet, in Alcyonius.P. 210, 1. 15.*T?5 said a stranger in the days of oldThey are said to have been discovered by accidentabout the middle of the last century.P. 210,1. 19.and PosiDONiA rose,Originally a Greek City under that name, and afterwardsa Roman City under the name of Paestum. SeeMilford's Hist, of Greece, chap. x. sect. 2. It wassurprised and destroyed by the Saracens at the beginningof the tenth century.P. 213,1.21.The fishing-town, Amalfi.Amalfi fell after three hundred years of prosperity jbut the poverty of one thousand fishermen is yet dignifiedby the remains of an arsenal, a cathedral, and thepalaces of royal merchants. Gibbon.P. 214,1. 16.A Hospital, that, night and day, receivedThe pilgrims of the west;It was dedicated to Saint John.P. 215, 1. 6.Grain from the golden vales of Sicily,There is at this day in Syracuse a street called LaStrata degli Amalfitani.P. 215, 1. 20.Not thus did they return,The tyrant slain;It was in the year 839. See Curator. Art. ChronicAmalphitani Fragmenta.P. 216, 1. 6.Serve for their monument!By degrees, says Giannone, they made themselvesfamous through the world. The Tarini Amalfitani werea coin familiar to all nations ; and their maritime coderegulated every where the commerce of the sea. Manychurches in the East were by them built and endowed jby them was first founded in Palestine that most renownedmilitary Order of St. John of Jerusalem ; and who doesnot know that the Mariner's compass was invented bya citizen of Amalfi?P. 217, 1. 1.What hangs behind that curtain fThis story, if a story it can be called, is fictitious;and I have done little more than give it as I received it.It has already appeared in prose j but with many alterationsand additional circumstances.The abbey of Monte Cassino is the most ancient andvenerable house of the Benedictine Order. It is situatedwithin fifteen leagues of Naples on the inland-road toRome 3 and no house is more hospitable.P. 217, 1.8.For life is surely there and visible change.There are many miraculous pictures in Italy; buto onone, I believe, were ever before described as malignantin their influence.At Arezzo in the church of St. Angelo there is indeedover the great altar a fresco-painting of the Fall ofthe Angels, which has a singular story's belonging to it.It was painted in the fourteenth century by SpinelloAretino, who has there represented Lucifer as changedinto a shape so monstrous and terrible, that it is said tohave haunted the Artist in his dreams, and to havehastened his death, deranging him in mind and body.In the upper part St. Michael is seen in combat withthe dragon : the fatal transformation is in the lower partof the picture. Vasari.P. 221, 1. 21.Within a crazed and tattered vehicle,Then degraded, and belonging to a Venturing.P. 221,1. 23.A shield as splendid as the Bardi wear,A Florentine family of great antiquity. In the sixty-thirdnovel of Franco Sacchetti we read, that a stranger,suddenly entering Giotto's study, threw down a shieldand departed, saying, "Paint me my arms in that shield j"and that Giotto, looking after him, exclaimed, ' Who ishe ? What is he ? He says. Paint me my arms, as ifhe was one of the Bardi ! M'hat arms does he bear ?'P. 224, 1. 24.DORIA, PisansPaganism Doria, Nicol Pisan j those great seamen,who balanced for so many years the fortunes of Genoaand Venice.P. 224, 1. 26.RirffUng with many an oar the crystalline sea,The Felucca is a large boat for rowing and sailing,much used in the Mediterranean.P. 225,1.21.How oj\ where now we rodeEvery reader of Spanish Poetry is acquainted withthat affecting romance of Sonora,Amarrado al duro banco, &c.Lord Holland has translated it in his Life of Lope deVega.P. 228,1. 1.Here he lived;The Piazza Doria, or, as it is now called, the Piazzadi San Matter, insignificant as it may be thought, is tomethe most interesting place in Genoa. It was therethat Doria assembled the people, when he gave themtheir liberty, (Sigonii Vita Dorian) ; and on one side ofit is the church he lies buried in, on the other a house,originally of very small dimensions, with this inscription :S. C. Andrea de Aura Patriae Liberator Munus Publicum.The streets of old Genoa, like those of Venice, wereconstructed only for foot-passengers.P. 228, 1. 3.Held many a pleasant, many a grave discourseSee his Life by Signior.P. 228, 1. 10.A house of trade,When I saw it in 1822, a basket-maker lived on theground-floor, and over him a seller of chocolate.P. 229, 1. 22.Before the ocean-wave thy wealth reflected,Alluding to the Palace which he built afterwards, andin which he twice entertained the Emperor Charles theFifth. It is the most magnificent edifice on the bay ofGenoa.P. 229, 1. 24.The ambitious man, that in a perilous hourFell from the plank.For an account of the Conspiracy of Fresco, see Robertson'sHistory of the Emperor Shades the Fifth.P. 232, 1. 26.the historian,Who he is, I have yet to learn. The story was toldto me many years ago by a great reader of the oldannalists; but I have searched every where for it inTHE END.LCtNDON :PRINTED BY THOMAS DAVISON, WHrTEFRIARS.