TREATISE V.ANIMAL AND VEGETABLE PHYSIOLOGY, ConsideredWITH REFERENCE TO NATURAL THEOLOGY.BY PETER MARK ROGET, M. D.SEC. R. S. ETC.IN TWO VOLUMES.VOL. ILAnd there are diversities of operations, but it is the sameGod which worketh all in all." 1 Cor. xii. 6.ANIMALAinVEGETABLEPHYSIOLOGY,CONSIDERED WITH REFERENCETOWATCRAIi Theology.BY ^PETER MARK ROGET, M. D.SKCRBTART TO THE ROYAL SOCIETY, FULLERIAK PROFESSOR OF PHYSIOLOGY IN THB RoyalInstitution OF GREAT BRITAIN, VICE PRESIDENT OF THE SOCIETY OF ARTS,FELLOW OF THE ROYAL COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS, CONSULTING PHYSICIAN TO THE QOEEMCHARLOTTE'S Lying-in HOSPITAL, AND TO THB NORTHERNDISPENSARY, ETC. ETC.VOL. II.PHILADELPHIA:CAREY, LEA & Blanchard.1836.FRANK B. PETRIE, M. D.211 • onNWALL ST.SAN FRANCISCO. CALIF,Briggs & CO., PRINTERS.CO]\TEWTSOF THE SECOND VOLUME.PART n.— THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.PageChapter I. — Objects of Nutrition - - - - - 9Chapter n. Nutrition ITS VEGETABLES - - - - 19§ 1. Food of Plants - - 192. Absorption of Nutriment by Plants - - - 213. Exhalation - - - - - - 274. Aeration of the Sap - 285. Return of the Sap - - - - - 326. Secretion in Vegetables - - - - 387. Excretion in Vegetables - - i - - 43Chapter III. — Animae Nutrition is general . 47§1. Food of Animals - - - - . - 472. Series of Vital Functions - - - - 55Chapter IV. — Nutrition in the lower orders of Animals - 58Chapter V. — Nutrition is the higher orders of Animals - 80Chapter VI. — Preparations of Food - - - - 86§ 1. Prehension of Liquid Food - - - . 862. Prehension of Solid Food - - - - 893. Mastication by means of Teeth - . . 1044. Formation and Development of the Teeth - . 1145. Trituration of Food in Internal Cavities - - 1226. Deglutition . . 1277. Receptacles for retaining Food . 130Chapter Vn. — Digestion 132Chapter Veni. — Ratification - 148^070 sVI CONTENTS.PageChaptek IX. — Lacteal Absorption - 164Chaptek X. — CiiicuiiA.TiO]sr - 167§ 1. Diffused Circulation - - - - - 1672. Vascular Circulation - 1703. Respiratory Circulation - 1914. Distribution of Blood Vessels - - - 201Chapter XI. — Respiration 208§ 1. Respiration in general - - - . 2082. Aquatic Respiration - 2103. Atmospheric Respiration - - - - 2214. Chemical Changes effected by Respiration - - 236Chaptek XII. — Secretion . - - 243Chapter XIII. — Absorption . - - 250Chapter. XIV. — Nervous Power 252PART III. —THE SENSORIAL Functions.Chapter I. — Sensation . - 258Chapter II.— Touch 268Chapter III.— Taste - - - - - - 279Chaster IV. — Smell - . 281Chapter V. — Hearing -. 294§ 1. Acoustic Principles - - - - - 2942. Physiology of Hearing in Man - - - . 2983. Comparative Physiology of Hearing - - - 308Chapter VI. — vision . . 315§ 1. Object of the Sense of Vision - - . 3152. Modes of accomplishing the objects of Vision - - 3183. Structure of the Eye - - - - . 3254. Physiology of Perfect Vision - - - - 3325. Comparative Physiology of Vision - • . - 337Chapter VII. — Perception-.- . 353CONTENTS, ViiPageChapter 'VTH.^^OICPABATTVE PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NeRVOTTS SySTEM 378§ 1. Nervous System of Vertebrates Animals - - 3782. Nervous System of Vertebrated Animals - - - 3883. Functions of the Brain 3954. Comparative Physiology of Perception - - - 398PART IV.— THE REPRODUCTIVE FUNCTIONS.Chapter I. — Reproduction . 408Chapter II. — OfiGAinc Development 420Chapter HI. — Declare of the System . - . . 433Chapter IV.— Unity OF Design - - - . . 437IhSXX 4^gANIMAL AND VEGETABLEPHYSIOLOGY.PART II.THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.CHAPTER I.OBJECTS OP NUTRITION.The mechanical structure and properties of the organizedfabric, which have occupied our attention in the precedingvolume, are necessary for the maintenance of life, and theexercise of the vital powers. But, however artificially that'fabric may have been constructed, and however admirablethe skill and the foresight that have been displayed in ensuringthe safety of its elaborate mechanism, and in preservingthe harmony of its complicated movements, it yet ofnecessity contains within itself the elements of its own dissolution.The animal machine, in common with every othermechanical contrivance, is subject to wear and deteriorateby constant use. Not only in the greater movements of thelimbs, but also in the more delicate actions of the internalorgans, we may trace the operation of many causes inevitablyleading to their ultimate destruction. Continued frictionmust necessarily occasion a loss of substance in the harderVol. H. 210 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.parts of the frame, and evaporation is constantly tending toexhaust the fluids. The repeated actions of the muscles inducecertain changes in these organs, both in their mechanicalproperties and chemical composition, which impairtheir powers of contraction, and which, if suffered to continue,would, in no long time, render them incapable of exercisingtheir proper functions: and the same observationapplies also to the nerves, and to all the other systems oforgans. Provision must accordingly be made for remedyingthese constant causes of decay by the supply of thosepeculiar materials, which the organs require for recruitingtheir declining energies.It is obvious that the development of the organs, and generalgrowth of the body, must imply the continual additionof new particles from foreign sources. Organic increaseconsists not in the mere expansion of a texture previouslycondensed, and the filling up of its interstices by inorganicmatter; but the new materials that are added must, for thispurpose, be incorporated with those which previously existed,and become identified with the living substance. Thus,we often find structures forming in the bodies of animals ofa nature totally different from that of the part from whichthey arise.In addition to these demands, a store of materials is alsowanted for the reparation of occasional injuries, to which,in the course of its long career, the body is unavoidably exposed.Like a ship fitted out for a long voyage, and fortifiedagainst the various dangers of tempests, of icebergs, andof shoals, the animal system, when launched into existence,should be provided with a store of such materials as may bewanted for the repair of accidental losses, and should alsocontain within itself the latent source of those energies,which may be called into action when demanded by the exigenciesof the occasion.Any one of the circumstances above enumerated wouldof itself be sufficient to establish the necessity of supplies ofnourishment for the maintenance of life. But there areOBJECTS OP NUTRITION. 11other considerations, equally important in a physiologicalpoint of view, and derived from the essential nature of organization,which also produce a continual demand for thesesupplies; and these I shall now endeavour briefly to explain.Constant and progressive change appears to be one of theleading characteristics of life; and the materials which areto be endowed with vitality must therefore be selected andarranged with a view to their continual modification, correspondentsthese ever varying changes of condition. Theartificer, whose aim is to construct a machine for permanentuse, and to secure it as much as possible from the deteriorationarising from friction or other causes of injury,would, of course, make choice for that purpose of the mosthard and durable materials, such as the metals, or the denserstones. In constructing a watch, for instance, he wouldform the wheels of brass, the spring and the barrel-chain ofsteel; and for the pivot, where the motion is to be incessant,he would employ the hardest of all materials, — thediamond. Such a machine, once finished, being exemptfrom almost every natural cause of decay, might remain foran indefinite period in the same state. Far different are theobjects which must be had in view in the formation of organizedstructures. In order that these may be qualifiedfor exercising the functions of life, they must be capable ofcontinual alterations, displacements, and adjustments, varyingperpetually, both in kind and in degree, according tothe progressive stages of their internal development, and tothe different circumstances which may arise in their externalcondition. The materials which nature has employedin their construction, are, therefore, neither the elementarybodies, nor even their simpler and more permanent combinations;but such of their compounds as are of a more plasticnature, and which allow of a variable proportion of ingredients,and of great diversity in the modes of their combination.So great is the complexity of these arrangements,that although chemistry is fully competent to the analysisof organized substances into their ultimate elements, no husTHE VITAL FUNCTIONS.man art is adequate to effect their reunion in the same stateas that in which they had existed in those substances; for itwas by the refined operations of vitality, the only powerthat could produce this adjustment, that they have beenbrought into that condition.We may take as an example one of the simplest of organicproducts, namely, Sugar; a substance which has beenanalyzed with the greatest accuracy by modern chemists:yet to reproduce this sugar, by the artificial combination ofits simple elements, is a problem that has hitherto baffled allthe efforts of philosophy. Chemistry, notwithstanding theproud rank it justly holds among the physical sciences, andthe noble discoveries with which it has enriched the arts;notwithstanding it has unveiled to us many of the secret operationsof nature, and placed in our hands some of her mostpowerful instruments for acting upon matter; and notwithstandingit is armed with full powers to destroy, cannot, inany one organic product, rejoin that which has been oncedissevered. Through the medium of chemistry we are enabled,perhaps, to form some estimate of the value of whatwe find executed by other agencies; but the imitation ofthe model, even in the smallest part, is far beyond our power.No means which the laboratory can supply, no process,which the most inventive chemist can devise, jive ever yetapproached those delicate and refined operations which naturesilently conducts in the organized texture of livingplants and animals.The elements of organic substances are not very numerous;the principal of them being oxygen, carbon, hydrogen,nitrogen, sulphur, and phosphorus, together with a few ofthe alkaline, earthy, and metallic bases. These substancesare variously united, so as to form certain specific compounds,which, although they are susceptible, in differentinstances, of endless modifications, yet possess such a generalcharacter of uniformity, as to allow of their being arrangedin certain classes; the most characteristic substancein each class constituting what is called a proximate 07'ga-ORGANIC CHEMISTRY. 13flic principle. Thus, in the vegetable kingdom we haveLignin, Tannin, Mucilage, Oil, Sugar, Fecula, &c. Theanimal kingdom, in like manner, furnishes Gelatin, Mhu-^men. Fibrin, Mucus, Entomology, Learn, Stearin, andmany others.The chemical constitution of these organic products,formed, as they are, of but few primary elements, is strikinglycontrasted with that of the bodies belonging to the mineralkingdom. The catalogue of elementary, or simplebodies, existing in nature, is, indeed, more extensive thanthe list of those which enter into the composition of animalor vegetable substances. But in the mineral world theyoccur in simpler combinations, resolvable, for the most part,into a few definite*ingredients, which rarely comprise morethan two or three elements. In organized products, on theother hand, although the total number of existing elementsmay be smaller, yet the mode of combination in each separatecompound is infinitely more complex, and presents incalculablediversity. Simple binary compounds are rarelyever met with; but, in place of these, we find three, four,five, or even a greater number of constituent elements existingin very complicated states of union.This peculiar mode of combination gives rise to a remarkablecondition, which attaches to the chemical properties oforganic compounds. The attractive forces, by which theirseveral ingredients are held together, being very numerous,require to be much more nicely balanced, in order to retainthem in combination. Slight causes are sufficient to disturb,or even overset, this Equipoise of affinities, and often producerapid changes of form, or even complete decomposition.The principles, thus retained in a kind of forcedunion, have a constant tendency to react upon one another,and to produce, from slight variations of circumstances, a totallynew order of combinations. Thus, a degree of heat,which would occasion no change in most mineral substances,will at once effect the complete disunion of the elements ofan animal or vegetable body. Organic substances are, in14 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.like manner, unable to resist the slower, but equally destructiveagency of water and atmospheric air; and they are alsoliable to various spontaneous changes, such as those constitutingfermentation and putrefaction, which occur when theirvitality is extinct, and when they are consequently abandonedto the uncontrolled operation of their natural chemicalaffinities. This tendency to decomposition may, indeed,be regarded as inherent in all organized substances, and asrequiring for its counteraction, in the living system, thatperpetual renovation of materials which is supplied by thepowers of nutrition.It would appear that, during the continuance of life, theprogress of decay is arrested at its very commencement; andthat the particles, which first undergo changes unfitting themfor the exercise of their functions, and which, if suffered toremain, would accelerate the destruction of the adjoiningparts, are immediately removed, and their place supplied byparticles that have been modified for that purpose, andwhich, when they afterwards lose these salutary properties,are, in their turn, discarded and replaced by others. Hence,the continued interchange and renewal of particles whichtake place in the more active organs of the system, especiallyin the higher classes of animals. In the fabric of thoseanimals which possess an extensive system of circulatingand absorbing vessels, the changes that are effected are soconsiderable and so rapid, that even in the densest textures,such as the bones, scarcely any portion of the substancewhich originally composed them is permanently retained intheir structure. To so great an extent is this renovation ofmaterials carried on in the human system, that doubts mayvery reasonably be entertained as to the identity of any portionof the body after the lapse of a certain time. The periodassigned by the ancients for this entire change of thesubstance of the body, was seven or eight years: but moderninquiries, which show us the rapid reparation that takesplace in injured parts, and the quick renewal of the bonesthemselves, tend to prove that even a shorter time than thisORGANIC CHEMISTRY. 15is adequate to the complete renovation of every portion ofthe living fabric*Imperfect as is our knowledge of organic chemistry, wesee enough to convince us that a series of the most refinedand artificial operations is required, in order to bring aboutthe complicated and elaborate arrangements of elementswhich constitute both animal and vegetable products. Thus,in the very outset of this, as of every other inquiry in Physiology,we meet with evidences of profound intention andconsummate art, infinitely surpassing not only the power andresources, but even the imagination of man.Much as the elaborate and harmonious mechanism of ananimal body is fitted to excite our admiration, there can beno doubt that a more extended knowledge of that series ofsubtle processes, consisting of chemical combinations and decompositionswhich are continually going on in the organiclaboratory of living beings, would reveal still greater wonders,and would fill us with a more fervent admiration ofthe infinite art and prescience which are even now manifestedto us in every department both of the vegetable and animaleconomy.The processes by which all these important purposes arefulfilled, comprise a distinct class of functions, the final objectof which may be termed Nutrition, that is, the reparationof the waste of the substance of the organs, their maintenancein the state fitting them for the exercise of theirrespective offices, and the application of properly preparedmaterials to their development and growth.The functions subservient to nutrition may be distinguishedaccording as the processes they comprise relate to sevenprincipal periods in the natural orders of their succession.The first series of processes has for its objects the receptionof the materials from without, and their preparation andgradual conversion into proper nutriment, that is, into matterhaving the same chemical properties with the substanceSee the article " Agb " in the Encyclopaedia of Practical Medicine, whereI have enlarged upon this subject.16 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.of the organs with which it is to be incorporated; and theirpurpose being to assimilate the food as much as possibleto the nature of the organic body it is to nourish, all thesefunctions have been included under the term Assimilation.The second series of vital functions comprise those whichare designed to convey the nutritive fluids thus elaborated,to all the organs that are to be nourished by them. In themore developed systems of organization this purpose is accomplishedby means of canals, called vessels fXhroxx^ whichthe nutritive fluids move in a kind of circuit: in this case thefunction is denominated the Circulation.It is not enough that the nutritive juices are assimilated:another chemical process is still required to perfect their animalization,and to retain them in their proper chemical conditionfor the purposes of the system. This third object isaccomplished by the function of Respiration.Fourthly, several chemical products, which are wanted indifferentparts of the economy, are required to be formedby a peculiar set of organs, of which the intimate structureeludes observation; although we may perceive that in manyinstances among the higher orders of beings, a special apparatusof vessels sometimes spread over the surface of amembrane, at other times collected into distinct masses, isprovided for that purpose. These specific organs are termedglands f and the office performed by them, as well as by thesimpler forms of structure above mentioned, is termed Secretion.Fifthly, similar processes of secretion are also employedto carry off" from the blood such animal products as mayhave been formed or introduced into it, and may possess orhave acquired noxious properties. The elimination of thesematerials, which is the office of the secretaries, constitutesthe function of Excretion.Sixthly, changes may take place in various parts of thebody, both solid and fluid, rendering them unfit to remainin their present situation, and measures must be taken forPOWERS OP ASSIMILATION. 17the removal of these useless or noxious materials, by transferringthem to the general mass of circulating blood, so aseither to be again usefully employed, or altogether discardedby excretion from the system. This object is accomplishedby a peculiar set of vessels; and the function theyperform is termed absorption,Lastly, the conversion of the fluid nutriment into thesolids of the body, and its immediate application to thepurposes o( the development of the organs, of their preservationin the state of health and activity, and of the repairof such injuries as they may chance to sustain, as far as thepowers of the system are adequate to such reparation, arethe objects of a seventh set of functions, more especiallycomprised under the title of Nutrition, which closes thislong series of chemical changes, and this intricate but harmonioussystem of operations.Although the order in which the constituent elements oforganized products are arranged, and the mode in whichthey are combined, are entirely unknown to us, we can neverthelessperceive that in following them successively fromthe simplest vegetables to the higher orders of the animalkingdom, they acquire continually increasing degrees ofcomplexity, corresponding, in some measure, to the greaterrefinement and complication of the structures by which theyhave been elaborated, and of the bodies to which they areultimately assimilated. Thus, plants derive their nourishmentfrom the crude and simple materials which they absorbfrom the earth, the waters, and the air that surroundthem; materials which consist almost wholly of water, witha small proportion of carbonic acid, and a few saline ingredients,of which that water is the vehicle. But these, afterhaving been converted by the powers of vegetable assimilation,into the substance of the plant, acquire the characteristicproperties of organized products, though they are stillthe simplest of that class. In this state, and when the fabricthey had composed is destroyed, and they are scatteredover the soil, they are fitted to become more highly nutri-VoL. 11. 318 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.time to other plants, which absorb them, and with more facilityadapt them to the purposes of their own systems.Here they receive a still higher degree of elaboration; andthus the same materials may pass through several successiveseries of modifications, till they become the food of animals,and are then made to undergo still farther changes. Newelements, and in particular nitrogen, is added to the oxygen,hydrogen and carbon, which are the chief constituentsof vegetable substances:* and new properties are acquired,from the varied combinations tito which their elements aremade to enter by the more energetic powers of assimilationappertaining to the animal system. The products whichresult are still more removed from their original state ofinorganic matter: and in this condition they serve as theappropriate food of carnivorous animals, which generallyhold a higher rank in the scale of organization, than thosethat subsist only on vegetables.Thus has each created being been formed in reference, notmerely to its own welfare, but also to that of multitudes ofothers which are dependent on it for their support, their preservation,— nay, even for their existence. In contemplatingthis mutual relationship, this successive subordination of thedifferent races to one another, and this continual tendencyto increased refinement, we cannot shut our eyes to the magnificentunfolding of the great scheme of nature for the progressiveattainment of higher objects ; until, in the perfect system,and exalted endowments of man, we behold the last resultthat has been manifested to us of creative power.Nitrogen, however, frequently enters into the composition of vegetables:though, in general, in a much smaller proportion than into the substanceof animals, of which last it always appears to be an essential constituent.19 )CHAPTER II.NUTRITION IN VEGETABLES.§1. Food of Plants.The simplest kind of nutrition is that presented to us bythe vegetable kingdom, where water may be considered asthe general vehicle of the nutriment received. Before thediscoveries of modern chemistry, it was very generally believedthat plants could subsist on w-ater alone ; and Boyle,and Van Helmont, in particular, endeavoured to establish, byexperiment, the truth of this opinion. The latter of thesephysiologists planted a willow in a certain quantity of earth,the weight of which he had previously ascertained with greatcare ; and, during five years, he kept it moistened with rainwateralone, which he imagined was perfectly pure. At theend of this period, he found that the earth had scarcely diminishedin weight, while the willow had grown into a tree,and had acquired an additional weight of one hundred andfifty pounds : whence he concluded that the water had beenthe only source of its nourishment. But it does not seem tohave been, at that time, known, that rain-water always containsatmospheric air, and frequently, also, other substances,and that it cannot, therefore, be regarded as absolutely purewater: nor does it appear that any precautions were taken toascertain that the water actually employed was wholly freefrom foreign matter, which, it is easy to conceive, it mighthave held in solution. In an experiment of Duhamel, on theother hand, a horse-chesnut tree and an oak, exposed to theopen air, and watered with distilled water alone, the formerfor three, and the latter for eight years, were kept alive, indo, THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.deed, but they were exceedingly stinted in their growth, andevidently derived little or no sustenance from the water withwhich they were supplied. Experiments of a similar naturewere made by Bonnet, and with the like result. When plantsare contained in closed vessels, and regularly supplied withwater, but denied all access to carbonic acid gas, they aredeveloped only to 'a very limited extent, determined by thestore of nutritious matter which had been already collected ineach plant when the experiment commenced, and which, bycombining with the water, may have afforded a temporarysupply of nourishment.But the water which nature furnishes to the vegetable organsis never perfectly pure; for, besides containing air, inwhich there is constantly a certain proportion of carbonicacid gas, it has always acquired by percolation through thesoil various earthy and saline particles, together with materialsderived from decayed vegetable or animal remains.Most of these substances are soluble, in however minute aquantity, in water: and others, finely pulverized, may besuspended in that fluid, and carried along with it into thevegetable system. It does not appear, however, that purecarbon is ever admitted; for Sir H. Davy, on mixing charcoal,ground to an impalpable powder, with the water intowhich the roots of mint were immersed, could not discoverthat the smallest quantity of that substance had been, in anycase, absorbed.* But in the form of carbonic acid, this elementis received in great abundance, through the medium ofwater, which readily absorbs it: and a considerable quantityof carbon is also introduced into the fluids of the plant, derivedfrom the decomposed animal and vegetable materials,which the water generally contains. The peculiar fertilityof each kind of soil depends principally on the quantity ofthese organic products it contains in a state capable of beingabsorbed by the plant, and of contributing to its nourishment.• Elements of Agricultural Chemistry, Lcct. VI. p. 234.FOOD OF PLANTS. 21The soil is also the source whence plants derive their saline,earthy, and metallic ingredients. The silica they oftencontain is, in like manner, conveyed to them by the water,which it is now well ascertained, by the researches of berzelius,is capable of dissolving a very minute quantity of thisdense and hard substance. It is evident that, however smallthis quantity may be, if it continue to accumulate in theplant, it m^y in time constitute the whole amount of thatwhich is found to be so copiously deposited ten the surface,or collected in the interior of many plants, such tis the bamboo,and various species of grasses. The small degree ofsolubility of many substances thus required for the constructionof the solid vegetable fabric, is, probably, one ofthe reasons why plants require so large a supply of waterfor their subsistence.§ 2. Absorption of Nutriment hy Plants.The greater number of cellular plants absorb water withnearly equal facility from, every part of their surface: this isthe case with the ./^/^a?,for instance, which are aquatic plants.In Lichens on the other hand, absorption takes place morepartially; but the particular parts of the surface where it occursare not constantly the same, and appear to be determinedmore by-mechanical causes than by any peculiarityof structure: some, however, are found to be provided incertainparts of the surface with stomata, which De Candollesupposes may act as sacking orifices. Many mushroomsappear to be capable of absorbing fluids from all partsof their surface indiscriminately; and some species, again,are furnished at their base with a kind of radical fibrils forthat purpose.In plants having a vascular structure, which is the case inby far the greater number, the roots are the special organsto which this office of absorbing nourishment is assigned:but it occasionally happens that, under certain circumstances,the leaves, or the stems of plants are found to absorb THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.ture, which they have been supposed to do by the stoixiatainterspersed on their surface. This, however, is not theirnatural action; and they assume it only in forced situations,when they procure no water by means of the roots, eitherfrom having been deprived of these organs, or from theirbeing left totally dry. Thus, a branch separated from thetrunk, may be preserved from withering for a long time, ifthe leaves be immersed in water: and when the soil has beenparched by a long drought, the drooping plants will be veryquickly revived by a shower of rain, or by artificial watering,even before any moisture can be supposed to have penetratedto the roots.It is by the extremities of the roots alone, or rather bythe spangles which are there situated, that absorption takesplace: for the surface of the root, being covered in everyother part by a layer of epidermis, is incapable of performingthis office. It was long ago remarked by Duhamel, thattrees exhaust the soil only in those parts which surround theextremities of the roots: but the fact that absorption is effectedonly at those points has been placed beyond a doubt bythe direct experiments of Sennebier, who, taking two carrotsof equal size, immersed In water the whole root of theone, while only the extremity of the other was made to dipinto the water, and found that equal quantities were absorbedin both cases; while, on immersing the whole surface of anothercarrot in the fluid, with the exception of the extremityof the root, which, was raised so as to be above the surface,^0 absorption whatever took place. Plants having a fusiform,or spindle-shaped root, such as the carrot and theradish, are the best for these experiments.In the natural progress of growth, the roots are constantlyshooting forwards in the direction they have first taken,whether horizontally, or vertically, or at any other inclination.Thus, they continually arrive at new portions of soil,of which the nutritive matter has not yet been exhausted;and as a constant relation is preserved between their lateralextension and the horizontal spreading of the branches, theVEGETABLE ABSORPTION. 23greater part of the rain which falls upon the tree, is made todrop from the leaves at the exact distance from the trunk,where, after it has soaked through the earth, it will be receivedby the extremities of the roots, and readily suckedin by the spongioles. We have here a striking instance ofthat beautiful correspondence, which has been establishedbetween processes belonging to different departments of nature,and which are made to concur in the production of remoteeffects, that could never have been accomplished withoutthese preconceived and harmonious adjustments.The spongioles, or absorbing extremities of the roots, areconstructed of ordinary cellular or spongy tissue: and theyimbibe the fluids, which are in contact with them, partly bycapillary action, and partly, also, by what has been termeda hygroscopic .power. But though, these principles maysufficiently account for the simple entrance of the fluidsthey are inadequate to explain its continued ascent throughthe substance of the root, or along the stem of the plant.The most probable explanation of this phenomenon is, thatthe progressive movement of the fluid is produced by alternatecontractions and dilatations of the cells themselves,which compose the texture of the plant: these actions beingthemselves referable to the vitality of the organs.The absorbent power of the spongioles is limited by thediameter of their pores, so that fluids which are of too viscidor glutinous a consistence to pass readily through themare liable to obstruct or entirely block up these passages.Thus, if the spongioles be surrounded by a thick solution ofgum, or even of sugar, its pores will be clogged up, scarcelyany portion of the fluid will be absorbed, and the plant willwither and perish: but if the same liquids be more largelydiluted, the watery portion will find its way through thespongioles,'and become available for the sustenance of theplant, while the greater part of the thicker material will beleft behind. The same apparent power of selection is exhibitedwhen the saline solutions of a certain strength are presentedto the roots: the water of the solution, with only a24 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.small proportion of the salts, being taken up, and the remainingpart of the fluid being found to be more strongly-impregnatedwith the salts than before this absorption hadtaken place. It would appear, however, that all this ismerely the result of a mechanical operation, and that it furnishesno evidence of any discriminating faculty in thespongiole: for it is found that, provided the material presentedbe in a state of perfect solution and timidity, it issucked in with equal avidity, whether its qualities be deleteriousor salubrious. Solutions of sulphate of copper, whichis a deadly poison, are absorbed in large quantities by theroots of plants, which are immersed in them: and waterwhich drains from a bed of manure, and is consequentlyloaded with carbonaceous particles, proves exceedingly injuriouswhen admitted into the system of the plant, fromthe excess of nutriment it contains. But in the ordinarycourse of vegetation, no danger can arise from this generalpower of absorption, since the fluids which nature suppliesare always such as are suitable to the organs that are to receivethem.The fluid, which is taken up by the roots, and which, aswe have seen, consists chiefly of water, holding in solutionatmospheric air, together with various saline and earthy ingredientsnecessary for the nourishment of the plant, is inaperfectly crude state. It rises in the stem of the plant, undergoingscarcely any perceptible change in its ascent; andis in this state conducted to the leaves, where it is to experiencevarious important modifications. By causing theroots to imbibe coloured liquids, the general course of thesap has been traced with tolerable accuracy, and it is foundto traverse principally the ligneous substance of the stem:in trees, its passage is chiefly through the alburnum, or morerecently formed wood, and not through the bark, as was atonetime believed.The course of the sap, however, varies under differentcircumstances, and at different epochs of vegetation. Atthe period when the young buds are preparing for their de-vegetableABSORPTION. 25velopment, which usually takes place when the genialwarmth of spring has penetrated beyond the surface, andexpanded the fibres and vessels of the plant, there arises anurgent demand for nourishment, which the roots are activelyemployed in supplying. As the leaves are not yet completed,the sap is at first applied to purposes somewhat differentfrom those it is destined to fulfil at a more advancedperiod, when it has to nourish the fully expanded organs:this fluid has, accordingly, received a distinct appellation,being termed the nursling sap. Instead of rising throughthe alburnum, the nursling sap ascends through the innermostcircle of wood, or that which is immediately contiguousto the pith, and is thence transmitted, by unknownchannels, through the several layers of wood, till it reachesthe buds, which it is to supply with nourishment. Duringthis circuitous passage, it probably undergoes a certain degreeof elaboration, fitting it for the office which it has toperform: it apparently combines with some nutriment, whichhad been previously deposited in the plant, and which itagain dissolves; and thus becoming assimilated, is in a stateproper to be incorporated with the new organization that isdeveloping. This nursling sap, provided for the nourishmentof the young buds, has been compared to the milk ofanimals, which is prepared for a similar purpose at thosetimes only wien nutriment is required for the rearing oftheir young.Several opinions have been entertained with regard to thechannels through which the sap is conveyed in its ascentalong the stem, and in its passage to its ultimate destination.Many observations tend to show, that, in ordinary circumstances,it is not transmitted through any of the distinguishablevessels of the plant : for most of these, in their naturalstate, are found to contain only air. The sap must, therefore,either traverse the cells themselves, or pass along the intercellularspaces. That the latter is the course it takes, is theopinion of De Candolle, who adduces a variety of argumentsin its support. The sap, he observes, is found to rise equallyVol. II. 426 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.well in plants whose structure is wholly cellular ; a fact whichproves the vessels are not, in all cases, necessary for its conveyance.In many instances, the sap is known to deviatefrom its usual rectilinear path, and to pursue a circuitouscourse, very different from that of any of the known vesselsof the plant. The diffusion of the sap in different directions,and its subsidence in the lowest parts, on certain occasions,are facts irreconcilable with the supposition that it is confinedin these vessels.Numerous experiments have been made to discover the velocitywith which the sap rises in plants, and the force it exertsin its ascent. Those of Hales are well known : by loppingoff the top of a young vine, and applying to the truncated extremitya glass tube, which closed round it, he found that thefluid in the tube rose to a height, which, taking into accountthe specific gravity of the fluid, was equivalent to a perpendicularcolumn of water of more than forty-three feet ; and,consequently, exerted a force of propulsion considerably greaterthan the pressure of an additional atmosphere. The velocity,as well as the force of ascent, must, however, be liableto great variation ; being much influenced by evaporation,and other changes, which the sap undergoes in the leaves.Various opinions have been entertained as to the agency bywhich the motion of the sap is effected ; but, although it seemslikely to be resolved into the vital movements of the cellularstructure already mentioned, the question is still enveloped inconsiderableobscurity. There is certainly no evidence toprove that it has any analogy to a muscular power ; and thesimplest supposition we can make is that these actions takeplace by means of a contractile property belonging to the vegetabletissue, and exerted, under certain circumstances, andin conformity to certain laws, which we have not yet succeededin determining.VEGETABLE EXHALATION. 27§ 3. Exhalation.The nutrient sap, which, as we have seen, rises in thestem, and is transmitted to the leaves without any change inits qualities or composition, is immediately, by the medium ofthe stomata, or orifices which abound in the surface of thoseorgans, subjected to the process of exhalation. The proportionof water which the sap loses by exhalation in the leaves,is generally about two-thirds of the whole quantity received;so that it is only the remaining third that returns to nourishthe organs of the plant. It has been ascertained that thewater thus evaporated is perfectly pure ; or, at least, does notcontain more than a 10,000,000th part of the foreign matterwith which it was impregnated when first absorbed bythe roots. The water thus exhaled, being dissolved by theair the moment it escapes, passes off in the form of invisiblevapour. Hales made an experiment with a sun-flower, threeieei high, enclosed in a vessel, which he kept for fifteen days:and inferred from it that the daily loss of the plant by exhalationwas twenty ounces ; and this, he computes, is a quantityseventeen times greater than that lost by insensible perspirationfrom an equal portion of the surface of the humanbody.The comparative quantities of fluid exhaled by the sameplant, at different times, are regulated, not so much by temperature,as by the intensity of the light to which the leavesare exposed. It is only during the day, therefore, that thisfunction is in activity. De Candolle has found that the artificiallight of lamps produces on the leaves an effect similarto that of the solar rays, and in a degree proportionate to itsintensity.* As it is only through the stomata that exhalationproceeds, the number of these pores in a given surface mustconsiderably influence the quantity of fluid exhaled.By the loss of so large a portion of the water which, in therising sap, had held in solution various foreign materials, these• Physiologic Vegetate, i. 112.2S THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.substances are rendered more disposed to separate from thefluid, and to become consolidated on the sides of the cells orvessels, to which they are conducted from the leaves. This,then, is the first modification in the qualities of the sap whichit undergoes in those organs.§ 4. Aeration of the Sap.A CHEMICAL change much more considerable and importantthan the preceding is next effected on the sap by theleaves, when they are subjected to the action of light. Itconsists in the decomposition of the carbonic acid gas, whichis either brought to them by the sap itself, or obtained directlyfrom the surrounding atmosphere. In either case itsoxygen is separated, and is disengaged in the form of gas;while its carbon is retained, and composes an essential ingredientof the altered sap, which, as it now possesses one ofthe principal elements of vegetable structures, may be consideredas having made a near approach to its complete assimilation,using this term in the physiological sense alreadypointed out.The remarkable discovery that oxygen gas is exhaledfrom the leaves of plants during the day time, was made bythe great founder of pneumatic chemistry, Dr. Priestley: toSennebier we are indebted for the first observation that thepresence of carbonic acid is required for the disengagementof oxygen in this process, and that the oxygen is derivedfrom the decomposition of the carbonic acid, and these latterfacts have since been fully established by the researchesof Mr. Workhouse, of Pennsylvania, Mr. Theodore de Saussure,and Mr. Palmer. They are proved in a very satisfactorymanner by the following experiment of De Candolle.Two glass jars were inverted over the sane water-bath; theone filled with carbonic acid gas, the other filled with water,containing a sprig of mint; the jars communicating below bymeans of the water-bath, on the surface of which some oilwas poured, so as to intercept all communication betweenRelation OF THE SAP. 29the water and the atmosphere. The sprig of mint was exposedto the light of the sun for twelve days consecutively:at the end of each day the carbonic acid was seen to diminishin quantity, the water rising in the jar to supply theplace of what was lost, and at the same time the plant exhaleda quantity of oxgyen, exactly equal to that of the carbonicacid which had disappeared. A similar sprig of mint,placed in ajar of the same size, full of distilled water, but withouthaving access to carbonic acid, gave out no oxygen gas,and soon perished. When, in another experiment, conductedby means of the same apparatus as was used in the first, oxygengas was substituted in the first jar instead of carbonicacid gas, no ^s was disengaged in the other jar, whichcontained a sprig of mint. It is evident, therefore, that theoxygen gas obtained from the mint in the first experimentwas derived from the decomposition, by the leaves of themint, of the carbonic acid, which the plant had absorbedfrom the water.Solar light is an essential agent in effecting this chemicalchange; for it is never found to take place at night, norwhile the plant is kept in the dark. The experiments ofSennebier would tend to show that the violet, or most refrangibleof the solar rays have the greatest power in determiningthis decomposition of carbonic acid: but the experimentsare of so delicate a nature, that this result requires tobe confirmed by a more rigid investigation, before it can beadmitted as satisfactorily established.That the carbon resulting from this decomposition of carbonicacid is retained by the plant, has been amply provedby the experiments of M. Theodore de Saussure, who foundthat this process is attended with a sensible increase in thequantity of carbon which the plant had previously contained.It is in the green substance of the leaves alone that thisprocess is conducted: a process, which, from the strong analogythat it bears to a similar function in animals, may beconsidered as the respiration of vegetables. The effect THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.pears to be proportionate to the number of stomata whichthe plant contains. It is a process which takes place onlyin a living plant; for if a leaf be bruised so as to destroy itsorganization, and consequently its vitality, its substance isno longer capable either of decomposing carbonic acid gasunder the influence of solar light, or of absorbing oxygen inthe dark. Neither the roots, nor the flowers, nor any otherparts of the plant, which have not this green substance attheir surface, are capable of decomposing carbonic acid gas:they produce, indeed, an effect which is in some respectsthe opposite of this; for they have a tendency to absorb oxygen,and to convert it into carbonic acid, by uniting it withthe carbon they themselves contain. This is also the casewith the leaves themselves, whenever they are not underthe influence of light: thus, during the whole of the night,the same leaves, which had been exhaling oxygen duringthe day, absorb a portion of that element. The oxygenthus absorbed enters immediately into combination with thecarbonaceous matter in the plant, forming with it carbonicacid: this carbonic acid is in part exhaled; but the greaterportion either remains attached to the substance of the leaf,or combines with the fluids which constitute the sap: in thelatter case it is ready to be again presented to the leaf, whendaylight returns, and when a fresh decomposition is againeffected.This reversal at night of what was done in the day may,at first sight, appear to be at variance with the unity of plan,which we should expect to find preserved in the vegetableeconomy: but a more attentive examination of the processwill show that the whole is in perfect harmony, and thatthese contrary processes are both of them necessary, in orderto produce the result intended.The water which is absorbed by the roots generally carrieswith it a certain quantity of soluble animal or vegetablematerials, which contain carbon. This carbon is transmittedto the leaves, where, during the night, it is made tocombine with the oxygen they have absorbed. It is thusAERATION OF THE SAP. 31converted into carbonic acid, which, when daylight prevails,is decomposed; the oxygen being dissipated, and thecarbon retained. It is evident that the object of the wholeprocess is to obtain carbon in that precise state of disintegration,to which it is reduced at the moment of its separationfrom carbonic acid by the action of solar light on thegreen substance of the leaves; for it is in this state alonethat it is available in promoting the nourishment of theplant, and not in the crude condition in which it exists whenit is pumped up from the earth, along with the water whichconveys it into the interior of the plant. Hence the necessityof its having to undergo this double operation of firstcombining with oxygen, and then being precipitated fromits combination in the manner above described. It is notthe whole of the carbon introduced into the vegetable system,in the form of carbonic acid, which has to undergo thefirst of these changes, a part of that carbon being already inthe condition to which that operation would reduce it, andconsequently in a state fit to receive the decomposing actionof the leaves. The whole of these chemical changes maybeincluded under the general term Operation.Thus the great object to be answered by this vegetableaeration is exactly the converse of that which we shall afterwardssee is effected by the respiration of animals: in theformer it is that of adding carbon, in an assimilated state, tothe vegetable organization; in the latter, it is that of dischargingthe superfluous quantity of carbon from the animalsystem. The absorption of oxygen, and the partial disengagementof carbonic acid, which constitute the nocturnalchanges effected by plants, must have a tendency to deterioratethe atmosphere with respect to its capability of supportinganimal life; but this effect is much more than compensatedby the greater quantity of oxygen given out bythe same plants during the day. On the whole, therefore,the atmosphere is continually receiving from the vegetablekingdom a large accession of oxygen, and is, at the sametime, freed from an equal portion of carbonic acid gas, both32 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.of which effects tend to its purification and to its remainingadapted to the respiration of animals. Nearly the whole ofthe carbon accumulated by vegetables is so much taken fromthe atmosphere, which is the primary source from whichthey derive that element. At the season of the year whenvegetation is most active, the days are longer than the nights;so that the diurnal process of purification goes on for a greaternumber of hours than the nocturnal process by which theair is vitiated.The oxygen given out by plants, and the carbonic acidresulting from animal respiration, and from the various processesof combustion which are going on in every part ofthe world, are quickly spread through the atmosphere, notonly from the tendency of all gases to uniform diffusion, butalso from the action of the winds, which are continually agitatingthe whole mass, and promoting the thorough minglingof its different portions, so as to render it perfectly homogeneousin every region of the globe, and at every elevationabove the surface.Thus are the two great organized kingdoms of the creationmade to co-operate in the execution of the same design;each ministering to the other, and preserving that due balancein the constitution of the atmosphere, which adapts itto the welfare and activity of every order of beings, andwhich would soon be destroyed, were the operations of anyoneof them to be suspended. It is impossible to contemplateso special an adjustment of opposite effects without admiringthis beautiful dispensation of Providence, extendingover so vast a scale of being, and demonstrating the unity ofplan on which the whole system of organized creation hasbeen devised.§ 5. Return of the Sap.The sap, which, during its ascent from the roots, containsbut a small proportion of nutritious particles, diluted with aRETURN OF THE SAP. 33large quantity of water, after undergoing in the leaves, as inachemical laboratory, the double processes of exhalation andaeration, has become much more highly charged with nutriment;and that nutriment has been reduced to those particularforms and states of composition which render it applicableto the growth of the organs, and the other purposes ofvegetable life. This fluid, therefore, corresponds to theblood of animals, which, like the elaborated sap, may be regardedas fluid nutriment, perfectly assimilated to that particularkind of organization, with which it is to be afterwardsincorporated. From the circumstance of its being sent backfrom the leaves for distribution to the several organs whereits presence is required, it has received the name of the returningsap, that it might be distinguished from the crudefluid which arrives at the leaves, and which is termed theascending sap.The returning sap still contains a considerable quantityof water, in its simple liquid form; which was necessary inorder that it might still be the vehicle of various nutritivematerials that are dissolved in it. It appears, however, thata large proportion of the water, which was not exhaled bythe leaves, has been actually decomposed, and that its separatedelements, the oxygen and the hydrogen, have beencombined with certain proportions of carbon, hydrogen, nitrogenand various earths, metals and salts, so as to form theproximate vegetable products, which are found in the returningsap.The simplest, and generally the most abundant of theseproducts, is that which is called Gums From the universalpresence of this substance in the vegetable juices, and moreAccording to the investigations of Dr. Prout, 1000 grains of gum arecomposed of 586 grains of the elements of water, that is, of oxygen andhydrogen, in the exact proportions in which they would have united toform 586 grains of water; together with 414 of carbon, or the base of carbonicacid. This, according to the doctrine of chemical equivalents, correspondsto one molecule of water, and one molecule of carbon. Phil. Trans.1827, 584.Vol. II. 534 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.especially in the returning sap, of all known plants, from itsbland and irritating qualities, from its great solubility inwater, and from the facility with which other vegetableproducts are conversable into this product. Gum may befairly assumed to be the principal basis of vegetable nutriment;and its simple and definite composition points it outas being the immediate result of the chemical changeswhich the sap experiences in the leaves. During the descentof the sap, however, this fluid undergoes, in variousparts of the plant, a farther elaboration, which gives riseto other products. We are now, therefore, to follow it in itsprogress through the rest of the vegetable system.The returning sap descends from the leaves through twodifferent structures: in exogenous plants the greater portionfinds a ready passage through the liber, or innermost layerof bark, and another portion descends through the alburnum,or outermost layer of the wood. With regard to the exactchannels through which it passes, the same degree of uncertaintyprevails as with regard to those which transmitthe ascending sap. De Candolle maintains that, in eithercase the fluids find their way through the intercellularspaces: other physiologists, however, are of opinion, that particularvessels are appropriated to the office of transmittingthe descending sap. The extreme minuteness of the organsof vegetables has hitherto presented insuperable obstacles tothe investigation of this important question: and consequentlyour reasonings respecting it can be founded only on indirectevidence. The processes of the animal economy,where the channels of distribution, and the organs of propulsionare plainly observable, afford but imperfect analogiesto guide us in this intricate inquiry: for although it is truethat in the higher classes of animals the circulation of thenutrient fluid, or blood, through distinct vessels, is sufficientlyobviouSyyetin the lower departments of the animal kingdomand in the embryo condition even of the more perfectspecies, the nutritious juices are distributed without beingconfined within any. visible vessels; and they either perme-returnOF THE SAP. 35ate extensive cavities in the interior of the body, or penetratethrough the interstices of a cellular tissue. That thislatter is the mode of transmission adopted in the vegetablesystem has been considered probable, from the circumstancethat the nutritious juices are diffused throughout those plantswhich contain no vessels whatsoever with the same facilityas throughout those which possess vessels; from which ithas been concluded that vessels are not absolutely necessaryfor the performance of this function. The nature of theforces which actuate the sap in its descent from the leaves,and its distribution to different parts, is involved in equalobscurity with the nature of the powers which contributeto its motion upwards along the stem, from the roots to theleaves. In endogenous plants the passage of the sap in itsdescent, is, in like manner, through those parts which havebeen latest formed; that is, through the innermost layers oftheir structure. ,The returning sap, while traversing these several parts ofthe plant, deposits in each the particular materials whichare requisite for their growth, and for their maintenance inahealthy condition. That portion which flows along the libernot meeting with any ascending stream of fluid, descendswithout impediment to the roots, to the extension of which,after it has nourished the inner layer of bark, it particularlycontributes: that portion, on the other hand, which descendsalong the alburnum, meets with the stream of ascending sap,which, during the day at least, is rising with considerableforce. A certain mixture of these fluids probably now takesplace, and new modifications are, in consequence, produced,which, from the intricacies of the chemical processes thusconducted in the inner recesses of vegetable organization,we are utterly baffled in our attempts to follow. All thatwe are permitted to see are the general results, namely, thegradual deposition of the materials of the future alburnumand liber. These materials are first deposited in the formof a layer of glutinous substance, termed the Cambium; asubstance which appears to consist of the solid portion of the36 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.sap, precipitates fr m it by the separation of (he greater partof the water li. ;1(1 it in solution. The cambium becomes,in process of ti , more and more consolidated, and acquiresthe organization )roper to the plant of which it now formsan integrant jjuiui it constitutes two layers, the one, belongingto the wood, being the alburnum; the other, belongingto the bark, being the liber.The alburnum and the liber, which have been thus constructed,perform an important part in inducing ulteriorchanges on the nutrient materials which the returning sapcontinues to supply. Their cells absorb the gummy substancefrom the surrounding fluid, and by their vital pow-erseffect a still farther elaboration in its composition; convertingit either into starch, or sugar, or lignin, according to themode in which its constituent elements are arranged. Althoughthese several principles possessed different sensibleproperties, yet they are found to differ but very slightly in theproportions of their ingredients; and we may infer that thereal chemical alterations, which are required in order to effectthese conversions, are comparatively slight, and mayreadily take place in the simple cellular tissue.*In the series of decompositions which are artificially effectedin the laboratory of the chemist, it has been foundthat gum and sugar are intermediate products, or states oftransition between various others; and they appear to be peculiarlycalculated, from their great solubility, for being easilyconveyed from one organ to another. Starch and lignin,on the other hand, are compounds of a more permanentcharacter, and especially adapted for being retained in theorgans. Starch, which, though solid, still possesses consistAccording to the analyses of Dr. Front, the following is the compositionof these substances: 1000 parts ofPure Gum Arabic consist of 586 of oxygen and hydrogen, united in theproportions in which they exist in water, and 414 of carbon.Dried Starch, or Fecula, of 560 water, and 440 - - -Pure crystallized Sugar, - - 572 - - - 428 .Lignin from Boxwood, - - - 500 - - - 500 - - -RETURN OF THE SAP. 37durable solubility, is peculiarly fitted for being applied tothe purposes of nourishment: it is accordingly hoarded inmagazines, with a view to future employment, being to vegetables,what the fat is to animals, a resource for the exigenciesthat may subsequently arise. With this intention,it is carefully stored in small cells, the coats of which protectit from the immediate dissolving action of the surroundingwatery sap, but allow of the penetration of this fluid, andof its solution, when the demands of the system require it.The tuberous root of the potato, that invaluable gift of Providenceto the human race, is a remarkable example of amagazine of nutritive matter of this kind.The lignin, on the contrary, is deposited with the intentionof forming a permanent part of the vegetable structure,constituting the basis of the woody fibre, and giving mechanicalsupport and strength to the whole fabric of the plant.These latter structures may be compared to the bones of animals,composing, by their union, the solid frame work, orskeleton of the organized system. The woody fibres do notseem to be capable of farther alteration in the living vegetable,and are never, under any circumstances, taken up andremoved to other parts of the system, as is the case with nutritivematter of a more convertible kind.The sap holds in solution, besides carbonaceous matter,some saline compounds and a few earthy and metallic bases:bodies which, in however minute a quantity they may bepresent, have unquestionably a powerful influence in determiningcertain chemical changes among the elements of organicproducts, and in imparting to them peculiar properties;for it is now a well ascertained fact that a scarcelysensible portion of any one ingredient is capable of producingimportant differences in the properties of the wholecompound. An example occurs in the case of gold, theductility of which is totally destroyed by the presence of aquantity of either antimony or lead, so minute as barely toamount to the two thousandth part of the mass; and eventhe fumes of antimony, when in the neighbourhood of meltsTHE VITAL FUNCTIONS.ed gold, have the power of destroying its ductility.* In theexperiments made by Sir John Herschel on some remarkablemotions excited in fluid conductors by the transmissionof electric currents, it was found that minute portions ofcalcareous matter, in some instances less than the millionthpart of the whole compound, are sufficient to communicatesensible mechanical motions, and. definite properties to thebodies with which they are mixed, tAs Silica is among the densest and least soluble of theearths, we might naturally expect that any quantity of ittaken into the vegetable system in a state of solution, wouldvery early be precipitated from the sap, after the exhalationof the water which held it dissolved; and it is found, accordingly,that the greater portion of this silica is actuallydeposited in the leaves, and' the parts adjacent to them.When once deposited, it seems incapable of being againtaken up, and transferred to other parts, or ejected from thesystem: and hence, in course of time, a considerable accumulationof silicious particles takes place, and by cloggingup their cells and vessels, tends more and more to obstructthe passage of nourishment into these organs. This changehas been assigned as a principal cause of the decay and ultimatedestruction of the leaves: their foot-stalks, more especiallysuffering from this obstruction, perish, and occasionthe detachment of the leaves, which thus fall off at the endof each season, making way for those that are to succeedthem in the next.§ 6. Secretion in Vegetables.While the powers of the simpler kinds of cells are adequateto produce in the returning sap the modificationsabove described, by which it is converted into gummy, saccharine,amylaceous, or ligneous products; there are othercellular organs, endowed with more extensive powers of• Hatchet. f Philosophical Transactions for 1824, p. 162.VEGETABLE SECRETION. 39chemical action, which effect still greater changes. The natureof the agents by which these changes are produced areunknown, and are therefore referred generally to the vitalenergies of vegetation; but the process itself has been termedSecretion, and the organs in which it is conducted, andwhich are frequently very distinguishable as separate andpeculiar structures, are called Glands. When the productsof secretion are chemically analyzed, the greater numberare found to contain a large quantity of hydrogen, in additionto that which is retained in combination with oxygenas the representative of water: this is the case with all theoily secretions, whether they be fixed or volatile, and alsowith those secretions which are of a resinous quality. Some,on the contrary, are found to have an excess of oxygen; andthis is the condition of most of the acid secretions; whileothers, again, appear to have acquired an addition of nitrogen.All these substances have their respective uses, althoughit may frequently be difficult to assign them correctly. Someare intended to remain permanently enclosed in the vesicleswhere they were produced; others are retained for the purposeof being employed at some other time; while those belongingto a third class are destined to be thrown off fromthe system as being superfluous or noxious: these latter substances,which are presently to be noticed, are specially designatedas excretions. Many of these fluids find their wayfrom one part of the plant to another, without appearing tobe conducted along any definite channels, and others areconveyed by vessels, which appear to be specially appropriatedto this office.The following are examples of the uses to which the peculiarsecretions of plants are applied. Many lichens, whichfix themselves on calcareous rocks, such as the Pateliariaimmerse, are observed, in process of time, to sink deeperand deeper beneath the surface of the rock, as if they hadsome mode of penetrating into its substance, analogous tothat which many marine worms are known to possess. The40 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.agent appears in both instances to be an acid, which here isprobably the oxalic, acting upon the carbonate of lime, andproducing the gradual excavation of the rock. This view isconfirmed by the observation that the same species of lichen,when attached to the rocks which are not calcareous, remainsalways at the surface, and does not penetrate below it.A caustic liquor is sometimes collected in vesicles, situatedat the base of slender hairs, having a canal which conductsthe fluid to the point. This is the case with the Nettle.The slightest pressure made by the hand on the hairs growingon the leaves of this plant, causes the fluid in their vesiclesto pass out from their points, so as to be instilled intothe skin, and occasion the well known irritation which ensues.M. De Candolle, junior, has ascertained, by chemicaltests, that the stinging fluid of the nettle is of an alkaline nature.In some species of this genus of plants, the hairs areso large that the whole mechanism above described is visibleto the naked eye. This apparatus bears a striking resemblanceto that which exists in the poisonous teeth ofserpents, and which is hereafter to be described.As the resinous secretions resist the action of water, wefind them often employed by nature as a means of effectuallydefending the young buds from the injurious effectsof moisture; and for a similar purpose we find the surface ofmany plants covered with a varnish of wax, which is anothersecretion belonging to the same class: thus, the Ceroxylon,and the Iriartea have a thick coating of wax, covering thewhole of their stems. Sometimes the plant is strewed overwith a bluish powder, possessing the same property of repellingwater: the leaves of the Mes em.br y ant hemiim, orFig-marigold, of the Atriplex^ or Orache, and of the Brassica,or Cabbage, may be given as examples of this curiousprovision. Such plants, if completely immersed in water,may be taken out without being wetted in the slightest degree;thus presenting us with an analogy to the plumage ofthe cygnet, and other aquatic birds, which are rendered completelywater-proof by an oily secretion spread over theirCIRCULATION IN PLANTS. 41surface. Many aquatic plants, as the Batrachospermum,are, in like manner, protected by a viscid layer, which rendersthe leaves slippery to the feel, and which is impermeableto water.Several tribes of plants contain liquids that are opaque,and of a white milky appearance: this is the case with thePoppy, the Fig-tree, the Convolvulus, and a multitude ofother genera; and a similar kind of juice, but of a yellowcolour, is met with in the C he I idoniiim, or Celandine. Allthese juices are of a resinous nature, and usually highlyacrid, and even poisonous in their qualities; and their opacityis occasioned by the presence of a great number of minuteglobules, visible with the microscope. The vessels in whichthese fluids are contained are of a peculiar kind, and exhibitramifications and junctions, resembling those of the bloodvessels of animals. We may also discover, by the aid ofthe microscope, that the fluids contained in these vessels aremoving in currents with considerable rapidity, as appearsfrom the visible motions of their globules; and they present,therefore, a remarkable analogy with the circulation of theblood in some of the inferior tribes of animals. This curiousphenomenon was first observed in the Chelidonium bySchultz, in the year 1S20; and he designated it by the termCyclops, in order to distinguish it from a real circulation,if, on farther inquiry, it should be found not to be entitledto the latter appellation.*The circular movements which have been thus observedin the milky juices of plants, have lately attracted muchattention among botanists: but considerable doubt stillprevails whether these appearances afibrd sufficient evidenceof the existence of a general circulation of nutrientjuices in the vegetable systems of those plants which exhibitthem; for it would appear that in reality the observedmotions of the fluid, are, in every case, partial, and"Die Nature der lebendigen Plane." See, also, Annales des SciencesNaturelles, xxiii. 75.Vol. II. 6THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.the extent of the circuit very limited. The cause of thesemotions is not yet known; but probably they are ultimatelyreferable to a vital contraction of the vessels; for they ceasethe moment that the plant has received an injury, and aremore active in proportion as the temperature of the atmosphereis higher.These phenomena are universally met with in all plantsthat contain milky juices; but they have also been observedin many plants of which the juices are nearly transparent,and contain only a few floating globules, such as the Clara,or stone-wort, the Caulinafragilis, &c.,* where the doublecurrents are beautifully seen under the microscope, performinga complete circulationwithin the spaces of the stemthat lie between two adjacentknots or joints; andwhere, by the proper adjustmentof the object, it is easyto see at one view both theascending and descendingstreams passing on oppositesides of the stem. Fig. 239shows this circulation in thecells of the Caulinia fragalisvery highly magnified, thedirection of the streams being indicated by the arrows. Fig.240 represents the circulation in one of the jointed hairs,projecting from the cuticle of the calyx of the Tradescantiavirginian in each cell of which the same circulatory motionof the fluids is perceptible.• Amici, Annales des Sciences Naturelles, ii. p. 41.f Fig. 239 is taken from Amici, and Fig. 240 from that given by Mr.Slack, Trans. Soc. Arts, vol. xlix.VEGETABLE EXCRETIONS. 43§ 7. Excretion in Vegetables.It had long been conjectured by De Candolle, that thesuperfluous or noxious particles contained in the returningsap are excreted or thrown out by the roots. It is evidentthat if such a process takes place, it will readily explain whyplants render the soil where they have long been cultivatedless suitable to their continuance in a vigorous condition,than the soil in the same spot was originally; and also whyplants of a different species are frequently found to flourishremarkably well in the same situation where this apparentdeterioration of the soil has taken place. The truth of thissagacious conjecture has been established in a very satisfactorymanner by the recent experiments of M. Macaire.*The roots of the Chondrilla miiralis were carefully cleaned,and immersed in filtered rain water: the water was changedevery two days, and the plant continued to flourish, and putforth its blossoms: .at the end of eight days, the water hadacquired a yellow tinge, and indicated, both by the smelland taste, the presence of a bitter narcotic substance, analogousto that of opium; a result which was farther confirmedby the application of chemical tests, and by the reddishbrown residuum obtained from the water by evaporation.M. Macaire ascertained that neither the roots nor the stemsof the same plants, when completely detached, and immersedin water, could produce this effect, which he thereforeconcludes is the result of an exudation from the roots,continually going on while the plant is in a state of healthyvegetation. By comparative experiments on the quantityof matter thus excreted by the roots of the French bean{Phaseolus vulgaris) during the night and the day, he found -it to be much more considerable at night; an effect which itis natural to ascribe to the interruption in the action of theleaves when they are deprived of light, and when the coreAn account of these experiments was first published in the fifth volumeof the " Memoires de la Society de Physique et d'Hlstoire Naturelle de geneva,"and repeated in the " Annates des Sciences Naturelles," xxviii. 402,44 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.responding absorption by the roots is also suspended. Thiswas confirmed by the result of some experiments he madeon the same plants by placing them, during day time, in thedark, under which circumstances the excretion from theroots was found to be immediately much augmented: but,even when exposed to the light, there is always some exudation,though in small quantity, going on from the roots.That plants are able to free themselves, by means of thisexcretory process, from noxious materials, which they mayhappen to have imbibed through the roots, was also provedby another set of experiments on the Mercurial annualthe Senecio vulgaris, and Brassica campestris, or commoncabbage. The roots of each specimen, after being thoroughlywashed and cleaned, were separated into two bunches, oneof which was put into a diluted solution of acetate of lead,and the other into pure water, contained in a separate vessel.After some days, during which the plants continuedto vegetate tolerably well, the water in the latter vesselbeing examined, was found to contain -a very perceptiblequantity of the acetate of lead. The experiment was variedby first allowing the plant to remain with its rootsimmersed in a similar solution, and then removing it,after carefully washing, in order to free the roots fromany portion of the salt that might have adhered to theirsurface, into a vessel with rain water; after two days,distinct traces of the acetate of lead were afforded by thewater. Similar experiments were made with lime-waterand with a solution of common salt, instead of the acetateof lead, and were attended with the like results. DeCandolle has ascertained, that certain maritime plants whichyield soda, and which flourish in situations very distantfrom the coast, provided they occasionally receive breezesfrom the sea, communicate a saline impregnation to thesoil in their immediate vicinity, derived from the salt whichthey doubtless had imbibed by the leaves.Although the materials which are thus excreted by theroots are noxious to the plant which rejects them, and wouldconsequently be injurious to other individuals of the sameVEGETABLE EXCRETIONS. 45Species, it does not therefore follow that they are incapableof supplying salutary nourishment to other kinds ofplants: thus, it has been observed that the Salicaria flourishesparticularly in the vicinity of the willow, and the Orobanche,or broom-rape, in that of hemp. This fact has alsobeen established experimentally by M. Macaire, who foundthat the water in which certain plants had been kept wasnoxious to other specimens of the same species, while, onthe other ha*id, it produced a more luxuriant vegetation inplants of a diflferent kind.This fact is of great importance in the theory of agriculture,since it perfectly explains the advantage derived froma continued rotation of different crops in the same field, in increasingthe productiveness of the soil. It also gives a satisfactoryexplanation of the curious phenomenon oi fairy rings,as they are called, that is, of circles of dark green grass, occurringin old pastures: these Dr. Wollaston has traced to thegrowth of successive generations oi CQTi^m fungi, or mushroomsspreading from a central point* The soil, which hasonce contributed to the support of these fungi, becomes exhaustedor deteriorated with respect to the future crops ofthe same species, and the plants, therefore, cease to be producedon those spots: the second year's crop consequentlyappears in the space of a small ring, surrounding the originalcentre of vegetation; and in every succeeding year, thedeficiency of nutriment on one side necessarily causes thenew roots to extend themselves solely in the opposite direction,and occasions the circle of fungi continually to proceedby annual enlargement from the centre outwards. An appearanceof luxuriance of the grass follows as a natural consequence;for the soil of an interior circle will always beenriched and fertilized with respect to the culture of grass,by the decayed roots of fungi of the preceding years growth.It often happens, indeed, during the growth of these fungi,that they so completely absorb all nutriment from the soilbeneath, that the herbage is for a time totally destroyed,• PhiL Trans, for 1807, p. 133.46 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.giving rise to the appearance of a ring bare of grass, surroundingthe dark ring; but after the fungi have ceased toappear, the soil where they had grown becomes darker, andthe grass soon vegetates again with peculiar vigour. Whentwo adjacent circles meet and interfere with each other'sprogress, they not only do not cross each other, but bothcircles are invariably obliterated between the points of contact:for the exhaustion occasioned by each obstructs the progressof the other, and both are starved. It would appearthat different species of fungi often require the same kind ofnutriment; for, in cases of the interference of a circle ofmushrooms with another of puff-balls, still the circles do notintersect one another, the exhaustion produced by the onebeing equally detrimental to the growth of the other, as ifit had been occasioned by the previous vegetation of itsown species.The only final cause we can assign for the series of phenomenaconstituting the nutritive functions of vegetables isthe formation of certain organic products calculated to supplysustenance to a higher order of beings. The animalkingdom is altogether dependent for its support, and evenexistence, on the vegetable world. Plants appear formedto bring together a certain number of elements derived fromthe mineral kingdom, in order to subject them to the operationsof vital chemistry, a power too subtle for humanscience to detect, or for human art to imitate, and by whichthese materials are combined into a variety of nutritive substances.Of these 'substances, so prepared, one portion isconsumed by the plants themselves in maintaining theirown structures, and in developing the embryos of thosewhich are to replace them; another portion serves directlyas food to various races of animals; and the remainder iseither employed in fertilizing the soil, and preparing it forsubsequent and more extended vegetation, or else, buried inthe bosom of the earth, it forms part of that vast magazineof combustible matter, destined to benefit future communitiesof mankind, when the arts of civilization shall have developedthe mighty energies of human power.47 )CHAPTER III.ANIMAL NUTRITION IN GENERAL.§ 1. Food of Animals.Nutrition constitutes no less important a part of theanimal, than of the vegetable economy. Endowed withmore energetic powers, and enjoying a wider range of action,animals, compared with plants, require a considerablylarger supply of nutritive materials for their sustenance, andfor the exercise of their various and higher faculties. Thematerials of animal nutrition must, in all cases, have previouslybeen combined in a peculiar mode; which the powersof organization alone can effect. In the conversion of vegetableinto animal matter, the principal changes in chemicalcomposition which the former undergoes, are, first, the abstractionof a certain proportion of carbon; and secondly, theaddition of nitrogen.* Other changes, however, less easilyappreciable, though perhaps as important as the former,take place in greater quantity, with regard to the proportionsof saline earthy, and metallic ingredients; all of which,and more especially iron exist in greater quantity in animalthan in vegetable bodies. The former also contain alarger proportion of sulphur and phosphorus than the latter.The recent researches of Messrs. Macaire and Market tend to establishthe important fact that both the chyle and the blood of herbivorous and ofcarnivorous quadrupeds are identical in their chemical composition, in asfar, at least, as concerns their ultimate analysis. They found, in particular,the same proportion of nitrogen in the chyle, whatever kind of food the animalhabitually consumed: and it was also the same in the blood, whether ofcarnivorous or herbivorous animals; although this last fluid contains morenitrogen than the chyle. {Mimoirts de la Societe de Physique et d'JBUtoireNaiurdk de Geneva v. 389.)48 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.The equitable mode in which nature dispenses to her innumerableoffspring the food she has provided for their subsistence,apportioning to each the quantity and the kindmost consonant to enlarged views of prospective beneficence,is calculated to excite our highest wonder and admiration.While the waste is the smallest possible, we findthat nothing which can afford nutriment is wholly lost.There is no part of the organized structure of an animal orvegetable, however dense its texture, or acrid its qualities,that may not, under certain circumstances, become the foodof some species of insect, or contribute in some mode to thesupport of animal life. The more succulent parts of plants,such as the leaves, or softer stems, are the principal sourcesof nourishment to the greater number of larger quadrupeds,to multitudes of insects, as well as to numerous tribes ofother animals. Some plants are more particularly assignedas the appropriate nutriment of particular species, whichwould perish if these ceased to grow: thus the silkwormsubsists almost exclusively upon themselves of the mulberrytree; and many species of caterpillars are attached each to aparticular plant which they prefer to all others. There areat least fifty different species of insects that feed upon thecommon nettle; and plants, of which the juices are mostaerial and poisonous to the generality of animals, such asEuphorhium^ Henbane and Nightshade, afford a wholesomeand delicious food to others. Innumerable tribes ofanimals subsist upon fruits and seeds, while others feastupon the juices which they extract from flowers, or otherparts of plants; others, again, derive their principal nourishmentfrom the hard fibres of the bark or wood.Still more general is the consumption of animal matter byvarious animals. Every class has its carnivorous tribes,which consume living prey of every denomination; somebeing formed to devour the flesh of the larger species, whetherquadrupeds, birds, or fish; others feeding on reptilesor mollusca, and some satisfying their appetite with insectsalone. The habits of the more diminutive tribes are notECONOMY OF NUTRITIVE MATTER. 49less predatory and voracious than those of the larger quadrupeds;for the spiders on the land, and the Crustacea in thesea, are but representatives of the lions and tigers. of the forest,displaying an equally ferocious and insatiable rapacity.Other families, again, generally of still smaller size, are designedfor a parasitic existence, their organs being fitted onlyfor imbibing the blood or juices of other animals.No sooner is the signal given, on the death of any largeanimal, than multitudes of every class hasten to the spot,eager to partake of the repast which nature has prepared.If the carcass be not rapidly devoured by rapacious birds, orcarnivorous quadrupeds, it never fails to be soon attacked byswarms of insects, which speedily consume its softer textures,leaving only the bones.* These, again, are the favouritefood of the Hyena, whose powerful jaws are peculiarlyformed for grinding them into powder, and whosestomach can extract from them an abundant portion of nutriment.No less speedy is the work of demolition amongthe inhabitants of the waters, where innumerable fishesCrustacea, angelica, and mollusca, are on the watch, to devourall dead animal matter which may come within theirreach. The consumption of decayed vegetables is not quiteso speedily accomplished; yel these, also, afford an amplestore of nourishment to hosts of minuter beings, less conspicuous,perhaps, but performing a no less important part inthe economy of the creation. It may be observed that mostof the insects which feed on decomposing materials, whetheranimal or vegetable, consume a much larger quantity thanSo strongly was Linnaeus impressed with the immensity of the scale onwhich these \i0bks of demolition by insects are earned on in nature, that heused to maintain that the carcass of a dead horse would not be devoured withthe same celerity by a lion, as it would by three flesh flies (Musca victoria)and their immediate progeny: for it is known that one female fly will givebirth to at least 20,000 young larvae, each of which will, in the course of aday, devour so much food, and grow so rapidly, as to acquire an increase oftwo hundred times its weight: and a few days are sufficient to the productionof a third generation.Vol. II. 750 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.they appear to require for the purposes of nutrition. Wemay hence infer that, in their formation, other ends werecontemplated, besides their own individual existence. Theyseem as if commissioned to act as the scavengers of organicmatter, destined to clear away all those particles, of whichthe continued accumulation would have tainted the atmosphere,or the waters, with infection, and spread a wide extentof desolation and of death.In taking these general surveys of the plans adopted bynature for the universal subsistence of the objects of herbounty, we cannot help admiring how carefully she has providedthe means for turning to the best account every particleof each product of organic life, whether the material beconsumed as food by animals, or whether it be bestowedupon the soil, reappearing in the substance of some plant,and being in this way made to contribute, eventually, to thesame ultimate object, namely, the support of animal life.But we may carry these views still farther, and followingthe ulterior destination of the minuter and unheeded fragmentsof decomposed 'organizations, which we might conceivehad been cast away, and lost to all useful purposes, wemay trace them as they are swept down by the rains, anddeposited in pools and lakes* amidst waters collected fromthe soil on every side. Here we find them, under favourablecircumstances, again partaking of animation, and investedwith various forms of infusory animalcules, which sport, incountless myriads, their ephemeral existence, within theample regions of every drop. Yet, even these are still qualifiedto fulfil other objects in a more distant and far widersphere; for, borne along, in the course of time, by the riversinto which they pass, they are at length convened into thesea, the great receptacle of all the particles that are detachedfrom the objects on land. Here, also, they float not uselesslyin the vast abyss, but contribute to maintain in existenceincalculable hosts of animal beings, which people every portionof the wide expanse of ocean, and which rise, in regulargradation, from the microscopic monad, and scarcely vi-economyOF NUTRITIVE MATTER. 51bible medusa,* through endless tribes of mollusca, and offishes, up to the huge Leviathan of the deep.Not even are these portions of organic matter, which, inthe course of decomposition, escape in the form of gases,and are widely diffused through the atmosphere, whollylost for the uses of living nature: for, in course of time,they, also, as we have seen, re-enter into the vegetable system,resuming the solid form, and reappearing as organicproducts, destined again to run through the same never endingcycle of vicissitudes and transmutations.The diffusion of animals over wide regions of the globeis a consequence of the necessity which prompts them tosearch for subsistence wherever food is to be met with.Thus while the vegetation of each different climate is regulatedby the seasons, herbivorous animals are in the winterforced to migrate from the colder to the milder regions,where they may find the pasturage they require: and thesemigrations occasion corresponding movements among thepredaceous tribes which subsist upon them. Thus are continualinterchanges produced, contributing to colonize theearth, and extend its animal population over every habitabledistrict But in all these changes we may discern the ultimaterelation they ever bear to the condition of the vegetableworld, which is placed as an intermediate and necessarylink between the mineral and flie animal kingdoms. Allthose regions which are incapable of supporting an extensivevegetation, are, on that account, unfitted for the habitationof animals. Such are the vast continents of ice, whichspread around the poles; such are the immense tracts ofsnow and of glaciers, which occupy the summits of thehighest mountain chains; and such is the wide expanse ofsand, which covers the largest portions both of Africa andThe immensity of the numbers of these microscopic medusae, which peopleevery region of the ocean, may be judged of from the phenomenon ofthe phosphorescent light which is so frequently exhibited by tl.e sea, whenagitated, and which, as 1 have already observed, is found to arise from thepresence of an incalculable multitude of these minute animals.52 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.of Asia: and often have we heard of the sunken spirits of thetraveller through the weary desert, from the appalling silencethat reigns over those regions of eternal desolation;hut no sooner Is his eye refreshed by the reappearance ofvegetation, than he again traces the footsteps and haunts ofanimals, and welcomes the cheering sound of sensitive beings.The kind of food which nature has assigned to each particularrace of animals has an important influence, not merelyon its internal organization, but, also, on its active powersand disposition; for the faculties of animals, as well as theirstructure, have a close relation to the circumstances connectedwith their subsistence, such as the abundance of itssupply, the facility of procuring it, the dangers incurred inits search, and the opposition to be overcome before it canbe obtained. In those animals whose food lies generallywithin their reach, the active powers acquire but little development:such, for instance, is the condition of herbivorousquadrupeds, whose repast is spread every where in richprofusion beneath their feet; and it is the chief business oftheir lives to crop the flowery mead, and repose on the samespot which affords them the means of support. Predaceousanimals, on the contrary, being prompted by the calls of appetiteto wage war with living beings, are formed for a moreactive and martial career; flieir muscles are more vigorous,their bones are stronger, their limbs more robust, their sensesmore delicate and acute. What sight can compare with thatof the eagle and the lynx; what scent can be more exquisitethan that of the wolf and the jackal? All the perceptionsof carnivorous animals are more accurate, their sagacity embracesa greater variety of objects, and, in feats of strengthand agility, they far surpass the herbivorous tribes. A tigerwill take a spring of fifteen or twenty feet, and, seizing upona buffalo, will carry it with ease on its back through a-denseand tangled thicket: with a single blow of its paw it willbreak the back of a bull, or tear open the flanks of an elephantINFLUENCE OP THE DEMAND FOR FOOD. 53While herbivorous animals are almost constantly employedin eating, carnivorous animals are able to endure abstinencefor a great length of time, without any apparent diminutionof their strength: a horse or an ox would sink under the exhaustionconsequent upon fasting for two or three days,whereas, the wolf and the martin have been known to livefifteen days without food, and a single meal will suffice themfor a whole week. The calls of hunger produce on each ofthese classes, of animals the most opposite effects. Herbivorousanimals are rendered weak and faint by the want offood, but the tiger is roused to the full energy of his powersby the cravings of appetite; his strength and courage are neverso great as when he is nearly famished, and he rushesto the attack, reckless of consequences, and undismayed bythe number or force of his opponents. From the time hehas tasted blood, no education can soften the native ferocityof his disposition: he is neither to be reclaimed by kindness,nor subdued by the fear of punishment. On the other hand,the elephant, subsisting upon the vegetable productions ofthe forest, superior in size and even in strength to the tiger,and armed with as powerful weapons of offence, which itwants not the courage to employ, when necessary, is capableof being tamed with the greatest ease, is readily broughtto submit to the authority of man, and requites with affectionthe benefits he receives.On first contemplating this extensive destruction of animallife, by modes the most cruel and revolting to all ourfeelings, we naturally recoil with horror from the sanguinaryscene; and cannot refrain from asking how all this is consistentwith the wisdom and benevolence so conspicuouslymanifested in all ot.iier parts of the creation. The best theologianshave been obliged to confess that a difficulty doeshere exist,* and that the only plausible solution which it admitsof, is to consider the pain and suffering thus created, asone of the necessary consequences of those general laws• See, in particular, Paley's Natural Theology, chap. xxvi.54 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.which secure, on the whole, the greatest and most permanentgood. There can be no doubt that the scheme, by whichone animal is made directly conducive to the subsistence ofanother, leads to the extension of the benefit of existenceto an infinitely greater number of beings than could otherwisehave enjoyed them. This system, besides, is the springof motion and activity in every part of nature. While thepursuit of its prey forms the occupation, and constitutes thepleasure of a considerable part of the animal creation, theemployment of the means they possess of defence, of flight,and of precaution, is also the business of a still larger part.These means are, in a great proportion of instances, successful;for, wherever nature has inspired sagacity in the perceptionof danger, she has generally bestowed a proportionatedegree of ingenuity in devising the means of safety. Someare taught to deceive the enemy, and to employ stratagemwhere force or swiftness would have-been unavailing; manyinsects, when in danger, counterfeit death, to avoid destruction;others, among the myriapoda, fold themselves into thesmallest possible compass, so as to escape detection. Thetortoise, as we have already seen, retreats within its shell,as within a fortress; the hedge-hog rolls itself into a ball,presenting bristles on every side; thediodon inflates its globularbody for the same purpose, and floats on the sea, armedat all the points of its surface; the cuttle-fish screens itselffrom pursuit by espousing an intensely dark coloured ink,which renders the surrounding waters so black and turbidas to conceal the animal, and favour its escape; the torpedodefends itself from molestation by reiterated discharges fromits electric battery; the butterfly avoids capture by its irregularmovements in the air, and the hare puts the hounds atfault by her mazy doubling. Thus does the animated creationpresent a busy scene of activity and employment: thusare a variety of powers called forth, and an infinite diversityof pleasures derived from their exercise; and existence is, onthe whole, rendered the source of incomparably higher degrees,as well as of a larger amount of enjoyment, than ap-seriesOF VITAL FUNCTIONS. 55pears to have been compatible with any other imaginablesystem.§ 2. Series of Vital Functions,In the animal economy, as in the vegetable, the vital, ornutritive functions are divisible into seven kinds, namely,Assimilation, Circulation, Respiration, Secretion, Excretion,Absorption, 3nd Nutrition; some of which even admit offarther subdivision. This is the case more particularlywith the processes of assimilation, which are generally numerous,and require a very complicated apparatus for actingon the food in all the stages of its conversion into blood, afluid which, like the returning sap of plants, consists of nutrimentin its completely assimilated state. It will be necessary,therefore, to enter into a more particular examinationof the objects of these different processes.In the more perfect structures belonging to the higherorders of animals, contrivances must be adopted, and organsprovided for seizing the appropriate food, and conveying itto the mouth. A mechanical apparatus must there be placedfor effecting that minute subdivision, which is necessary toprepare it for the action of the chemical agents to which itis afterwards to be subjected. From the mouth, after it hasbeen sufficiently masticated, and softened by fluid secretionsprepared by neighbouring glands, the food must be conveyedinto an interior cavity, called the Stomach, whereasin a chemical laboratory, it is made to undergo the particularchange which results from the operation termed Digestion,The digested food must thence be conducted intoother chambers, composing the intestinal tube, where it isconverted into Chyle, which is a milky fluid, consistingwholly of nutritious matter. Vessels are then provided,which, like the roots of plants, drink up this prepared fluid,and convey it to other cavities, capable of imparting to it apowerful impulsive force, and of distributing it through appropriatechannels of circulation, not only to the respiratory56 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.organs, where its elaboration is completed by the influenceof atmospheric air, but also to all other parts of the system,where such a supply is required for their maintenance inthe living state. The objects of these subsequent functions,many of which are peculiar to animal life, have alreadybeen detailed.*This subdivision of the assimilate processes occurs onlyin the higher classes of animals, for in proportion as we descendin the scale, we find them more and more simplified,by the concentration of organs, and the union of many officesin a single organ, till we arrive, in the very lowest orders,at little more than a simple digestive cavity, performingat once the functions of the stomach and of the heart;without any distinct circulation of nutrient juices, withoutvessels, — nay, without any apparent blood. Long after allthe other organs, such as the skeleton, whether internal orexternal, the muscular and nervous systems, the glands, vessels,and organs of sense, have one after another disappeared,we still continue to find the digestive cavity retained, as ifit constituted the most important, and only indispensableorgan of the whole system.The possession of a stomach, then, is the peculiar characteristicof the animal system as contrasted with that ofvegetables. It is a distinctive criterion that applies even tothe lowest orders of zoophytes, which, in other respects, areso nearly allied to plants. It extends to all insects, howeverdiminutive; and even to the minutest of the microscopicanimalculesThe mode in which the food is received into the body is,in general, very different in the two organized kingdoms ofnature. Plants receive their nourishment by a slow, but• See the first chapter of this volume, p. 23.f In some species of animals belonging to the tribe of medusae, as theEudora, Terence, Scythia, Fannia, Lymnoria, and Germania, no centralcavity corresponding to a stomach has been discovered: they appear, therefore,to constitute an exception to the general rule. See Person, Annales deMuseum, xiv. 227 and 326.INFLUENCE OF THE DEMAND FOR FOOD. 57nearly constant supply, and have no receptacle for collectingit at its immediate entry; the sap, as we have seen, passingat once into the cellular tissue of the plant, where the processof its gradual elaboration is commenced. Animals, onthe other hand, are capable of receiving at once large suppliesof food, in consequence of having an internal cavity,adapted for the immediate reception of a considerable quantity.A vegetable may be said to belong to the spot fromwhich it imbibes its nourishment, and the surrounding soil,into which its absorbing roots are spread on every side,may almost be considered as a part of its system. But ananimal has all its organs of assimilation within itself, andhaving receptacles in which it can lay in a store of provisions,it may be said to be nourished from within; for it isfrom these interior receptacles that the lacteals, or absorbingvessels corresponding in their office to the roots of vegetables,imbibe nourishment. Important consequencesflow from this plan of structure; for since animals are thusenabled to subsist for a certain interval without needing anyfresh supply, they are independent of local situation, andmay enjoy the privilege of moving from place to place.Such a power of locomotion was, indeed, absolutely necessaryto beings which have their subsistence to seek. It isthis necessity, again, which calls for the continued exerciseof their senses, intelligence, and more active energies; andthat lead, in a word, to the possession of all those higherpowers which raise them so far above the level of the vegetablecreation.Vol. IL58 )CHAPTER IV.Nutrition in the lower Orders of Animals.The animals which belong to the order of polypi presentus with the simplest of all possible forms of nutritive organs.The hydra, for instance, which may be taken as the type ofthis formation, consists of a mere stomach, provided with thesimplest instruments for catching food, — and nothing more.A simple sac, or tube, adapted to receive and digest food, isthe only visible organ of the body. It exhibits not a traceof either brain, nerves, or organs of sense, nor any partcorresponding to lungs, heart, or evenvessels of any sort; all these organs, soessential to the maintenance of life in otheranimals, being here dispensed with. Inthe magnified view of the hydra, exhibitedin Fig. 241, the cavity into which the foodis received and digested is laid open by alongitudinal section, so as to show thecomparative thickness of the walls of thiscavity. The structure of these walls must be adapted notonly to prepare and pour out the fluids by which the food isdigested, but also to allow of the transudation through itssubstance, probably by means of invisible pores, of the nutritiousparticles thus extracted from the food, for the purposeof its being incorporated and identified with the gelatinouspulp, of which the body appears wholly to consist.The thinness and transparency of the walls of this cavityallow of our distinctly following these changes by the aid ofthe microscope. Tremble watched them with unwearied]perseverance for days together, and has given the followingNUTRITION IN POLYPI. 59account of his observations. The hydra, though it does notpursue the animals on which it feeds, yet devours with avidityall kinds of living prey that come within the reachof its tentacula, and which it can overcome and introduceinto its mouth. The larvae of insects, aides, and otheraquatic worms, minute Crustacea, and even small fishes, areindiscriminately laid hold of, if they happen but to touchany part of the long filaments which the animal spreads out,in different directions, like a net in search of food. Thestruggles of the captive which finds itself entangled in thefolds of these tentacula, are generally ineffectual, and the hydra,like the boa constrictor, contrives, by enormously expandingits mouth, slowly to draw into its cavity animalsmuch larger than its own body. Worms longer than itselfare easily swallowed by being previously doubled togetherby the tentacula. Fig. 242 shows a hydra in the act of devouringthe vermiform larva of a Tipula, which it has encircledwith its tentacula, to which it has applied its expandedmouth, and of which it is absorbing the juice, beforeswallowing it. Fig. 243 shows the same animal, after it hassucceeded, though not without a severe contest, in swallowinga minnow, or other small fish, the form of which is stillvisible through the transparent sides of the body, which arestretched to the utmost. It occasionally happens, whentwo of these animals have both seized the same object by60 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.its different ends, that a struggle between them ensues, andthat the strongest, having obtained the victory, swallows ata single gulp, not only the object of contention, but its antagonistalso. The scene is represented in Fig. 244, wherethe tail of the hydra, of which the body has been swallowedby the victor, is seen protruding from the mouth of the latter.It soon, however, extricates itself from this situation,apparently without having suffered the smallest injury. Thevoracity of the hydra is very great, especially after long fasting;and it will then devour a great number of insects, one afteranother at one meal, gorging itself till it can hold no more,and its body becoming dilated to an extraordinary size: andyet the same animal can continue to live for more than fourmonths without any visible supply of food.On attentively observing the changes induced upon thefood by the action of the stomach of these animals, they appearto consist of a gradual melting down of the softer parts,which are resolved into a kind of jelly, leaving unalteredonly a few fragments of the harder and less digestible parts.These changes are accompanied by a kind of undulation ofthe contents of the stomach, backwards and forwards,throughout the whole tube, apparently produced by thecontraction and dilatation of its different portions. The undigestedmaterials being collected together and rejected bythe mouth, the remaining fluid is seen to contain opaqueglobules of various sizes, some of which are observed to penetratethrough the sides of the stomach, and enter into thegranular structure which composes the flesh of the animal.Some portion of this opaque fluid is distributed to the tenta-cela,into the tubular cavities of which it may be seen enteringby passages of communication with the stomach. Bywatching attentively the motions of the globules, it will beperceived that they pass backwards and forwards throughthese passages, like ebbing and flowing tides.All these phenomena may be observed with greater distinctnesswhen the food of the animal contains colouringmatter, capable of giving a tinge to the nutritious fluid, andNUTRITION IN POLYPI. 61allowing of its progress being traced into the granules whichare dispersed throughout the substance of the body. Trembleis of opinion that these granules are vesicular, and thatthey assume the colour they are observed to have, fromtheir becoming filled with the coloured particles containedin the nourishment. The granules which are nearest to thecavity of the stomach are those which are first tinged, andwhich therefore first imbibe the nutritious juices: the othersare coloured successively, in an order determined by theirdistance from the surface of the stomach. Trembleyy ascertainedthat a living hydra introduced into the stomach ofanother hydra, was not in any degree acted upon by thefluid secretions of that organ, but came out uninjured. Itoften happens that a hydra, in its eagerness to transfer itsvictim into its stomach, swallows several of its own tenta-cela,which had encircled it: but these tentacula always ultimatelycame out of the stomach, sometimes after havingremained there twenty-four hours, without the least detrimentThe researches of Trembleyy have brought to light theextraordinary fact that not only the internal surface of thestomach of the polypus is endowed with the power of digestingfood, but that the same property belongs also to theexternal surface, or what we might call the skin of the animal.He found that by a dexterous manipulation, the hydramay be completely turned inside out, like the finger ofa glove, and that the animal, after having undergone thissingular operation, will very soon resume all its ordinaryfunctions, just as if nothing had happened. It accommodatesitself in the course of a day or two to the transformation,and resumes all its natural habits, eagerly seizing animalculeswith its tentacula, and introducing them into itsnewly formed stomach, which has for its interior surfacewhat before was the exterior skin, and which digests themwith perfect ease. When the discovery of this curious phenomenonwas first made known to the world, it excitedgreat astonishment, and many naturalists were incredulous62 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.as to the correctness of the observations. But the researchesof Bonnet and of Spallanzani, who repeated the experimentsof Trembleyy, have borne ample testimony to their accuracy,which those of every subsequent observer have farther contributedto confirm.The experiments of Trembleyy have also proved that everyportion of the hydra possesses a wonderful power of repairingall sorts of injuries, and of restoring parts whichhave been removed. These animals are found to bear withimpunity all sorts of mutilations. If the tentacula be cutoff,they grow again in a very short time: the whole of thefore part of the body is, in like manner, reproduced, if theanimal be cut asunder; and from the head which has beenremoved there soon sprouts forth a new tail. If the headof the hydra be divided by a longitudinal section, extendingonly half way down the body, the cut portions will unite attheir edges, so as to form two heads, each having its separatemouth, and set of tentacula. If it be 'split into six orseven parts, it will become a monster with six or sevenheads; if each of these be again divided, another will beformed with double that number. If any of the parts of thiscompound polypus be cut off, as many new ones will springup to replace them; the mutilated heads at the same timeacquiring fresh bodies, and becoming as many entire polypi.Fig. 245 represents a hydra with seven heads, the resultof several operations of this kind. The hydra willsometimes of its own accord split into two; each divisionbecoming independent of the other, and growing to thesame size as the original hydra. Trembleyy found that differentportions of one polype might be ingrafted on another,by cutting their surfaces, and pressing them together;for by this means they quickly unite, and become a corn-poundanimal. When the body of one hydra is introducedinto the mouth of another, so that their heads are kept incontact for a sufficient length of time, they unite and formbut one individual. A number of heads and bodies maythus be joined together artificially, so as to compose livingNUTRITION IN POLYPI. 63monsters more complicated than the wildest fancy has conceived.Still more complicated are the forms and economy of thosemany-headed monsters, which prolific nature has spread incountless multitudes over the rocky shores of the ocean, inevery part of the globe. These aggregated polypi grow inimitation of plants, from a common stem, with widely extendedflowering branches. Myriads of mouths open uponthe surface of the animated mass; each mouth being surroundedwith one or more circular rows of tentacula, whichare extended to catch their prey: but as the stationary conditionof these polypes prevents them from moving in searchof food, their tentacula are generally furnished with a multitudeof cilia, which, b}^ their incessant vibrations, determinecurrents of water to flow towards the mouth, carryingwith them the floating animalcules on which the entire polypussubsists.teach mouth leads into a separate stomach; whence thefood, after its digestion, passes into several channels, generallyfive in number, which proceed in different directionsfrom the cavity of each stomach, dividing it into manybranches, and being distributed over all the surrounding portionsof the flesh. These branches communicate with similarchannels proceeding from the neighbouring stomachs: sothat the food which has been taken in by one of the mouths,contributes to the general nourishment of the whole massof aggregated polypi. Cuvier discovered this structure inthe Veretilla, which belongs to this order of polypi: he alsofound it in the Pennatula, and it is probably similar in allthe others. Fig. 246 represents three of the polypes of theVeretilla, with their communicating vessels seen below.The prevailing opinion among naturalists is, that each polypusis an individual animal, associated with the rest in a sortof republic, where the labours of all are exerted for the commonbenefit of the whole society. But it is, perhaps, moreconsonant with our ideas of the nature of vitality, to considerthe extent of the distribution of nutritive fluid in any organicTHE VITAL FUNCTIONS,system, as the criterion of the individuality of that systemaview which would lead us to consider the entire polypus,or mass composed of numerous polypes, as a single individualanimal; for there is no more inconsistency in supposingthat an individual animal may possess any number of mouths,than that it may be provided with a multitude of distinctstomachs, as we shall presently find is actually exemplifiedin many of the lower animals.Some of the Entozoa, or parasitic worms, exhibit a generaldiffusion, or circulation of nourishment through numerouschannels of communication, into which certain absorbing247 ^.c^vessels convey it from a great number of external orifices, ormouths, as they may be called. This is the case with theTxnia, or tape worm, which is composed of a series of flatjointed portions, of which two contiguous segments are seen,highly magnified, in Fig. 247, exhibiting round the marginof each portion, a circle of vessels (v,) which communicatewith those of the adjoining segments; each circle being providedwith a tube (o,) having external openings for imbibingnourishment from the surrounding fluids. Although eachsegment is thus provided with a nutritive apparatus, completewithin itself, and so far, therefore, independent of therest, the individuality of the whole animal is sufficiently determinedby its having a distinct head at one extremity, providedwith instruments for its attachment to the surfaces itinhabits.NUTRITION IN Medusa. 65The Hydatid, (Fig. 248,) is another parasitic worm, ofthe simplest possible construction. It has a head (o,) ofwhich H is a magnified representation, furnished with foursuckers, and a tubular neck, which terminates in a globularsac. When this sac, which is the stomach, is fully distendedwith fluid, its sides are stretched, so as to be reduced toa very thin transparent membrane, having a perfectly sphericalshape; after. this globe has become swollen to a verylarge size, the-neck yields to the distention, and disappears;and the head can then be distinguished only as a small pointon the surface of the globular sac. It is impossible to conceivea more simple organic structure than this, which may,in fact, be considered as an isolated living stomach. TheCoenurus, which is found in the brain of sheep, has a structurea little more complicated; for, instead of a single head,there is a great number spread over the surface, opening intothe same general cavity, and when the sac is distended, appearingonly as opaque spots on its surface.The structure of the Sponge has been already fully described;and the course of the minute channels pointed out,in which a kind of circulation of sea water is carried on forthe nourishment of the animal. The mode by which nutrimentis extracted from this circulating fluid, and made tocontribute to the growth of these plant-like structures, isentirely unknown.The apparatus for nutrition possessed by animals belongingto the tribe of Medusae is of a peculiar kind. I havealready described the more ordinary form of these singularanimals, which resembles a mushroom, from the hemisphericalform of their bodies, and their central foot-stalk, or pedicle.In the greater number of species there exists at theextremity of this pedicle, a single aperture, which is the beginningof a tube leading into a large central cavity in theinterior of the body, and which may, therefore, be regardedas the mouth of the animal: but in those species which haveno pedicle, as the Equorea, the mouth is situated at thecentre of the under surface. The aperture is of sufficientVol. II. 966 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.width to admit of the entrance of prey of considerable size,as appears from the circumstance that fishes of some inchesin length are occasionally found entire in the stomachs ofthose medusae which have a single mouth. The central cavity,which is the stomach of the animal, does not appear topossess any proper coats, but to be simply scooped out ofthe soft structure of the body. Its form varies in differentspecies; having generally, however, more or less of a starlikeshape, composed of four curved rays, which might almostbe considered as constituting four stomachs, joined ata common centre. Such, indeed, is the actual structure inthe Medusa aiirita, in which Gaede found the stomach toconsist of four spherical sacs, completely separated by partitions.These arched cavities, or sacs, taper as they radiatetowards the circumference, and are continued into a canal,from which a great number of other canals proceed, generally,at first, by successive bifurcations of the larger trunks,but afterwards branching off more irregularly, and againuniting by lateral communications so as to compose a complicatednet-work of vessels. These ramifications at lengthunite to form an annular vessel, which encircles the marginof the disk. It appears, also, from the observations of Gaede,that a farther communication is established between this lattervessel, and others which permeate the slender filaments,or tentacula, that hang like a fringe all round the edge ofthe disk, and which, in the living animal, are in perpetualmotion. It is supposed that the elongations and contractionsof these filaments are effected by the injection or recessionof the fluids contained in those vessels.* Here, then, wesee not only a more complex stomach, but also the commencementof a vascular system, taking its rise from thatcavity, and calculated to distribute the nutritious juices toevery part of the organization.There are other species of Medusae, composing the genusRhizostoma of Cuvier, which, instead of having onlyJournal de Physique, Lxxxix. 146.NUTRITION IN Medusa.one mouth, are provided with a great number of tubes whichserve that office, and which bear a great analogy to the rootsof a plant.* The pedicle terminates below in a great numberof fringed processes, which, on examination, are foundto contain ramified tubes, with orifices opening at the extremityof each process. In this singular tribe of animalsthere is properly no mouth or central orifice, the only avenuesto the stomach being these elongated canals, whichcollect food from every quarter where they extend, andwhich, uniting into larger and larger trunks as they proceedtowards the body, form one central tube, or oesophagus,which terminates in the general cavity of the stomach. TheMedusa pulmo, of which a figure was given in Vol. i., page142, belongs to this modern genus, and is now termed theRhizostoma Cuvier.The course of these absorbent vessels is most convenientlytraced after they have been filled with a dark colouredliquid. The appearances they present in the RhizostomaIt is from this circumstance that the genus has received the name it nowbears, and which is derived from two Greek woi-ds, signifying root-likemouths.THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.Cuvier, after being thus injected, are represented in theannexed figures; the first of which (Fig. 249,) shows theunder surface of that animal, after the pedicle has been removedby a horizontal section, at its origin from the hemisphericalbody, or cupola, as it may be termed, where it hasasquare prismatic form, so that its section presents thesquare surface, q, q. Fig. 252 is a vertical section of thesame specimen; both figures being reduced to about one-halfof the natural size. The dotted line, h, h, in the latterfigure, shows the plane where the section of the pedicle wasmade in order to give the view of the base of the hemispherepresented in Fig. 249. On the other hand, the dottedline V, V, in Fig. 249, is that along which the verticalsection of the same animal, represented in Fig. 252, wasmade, four of the arms (a, a, a, a,) descending from the pediclebeing left attached to it. In these arms, or tentacula.NUTRITION IN MEDUSA. 69may be seen the canals, marked by the dark lines (c, c, c,)which arise from numerous orifices in the extremities andfringed surface of the tentacula, and which, gradually unitinglike the roots of a plant, converge towards the centre of thepedicle, and terminate by a common tube, which may beconsidered as the oesophagus (o,) in one large central cavity,or stomach (s,) situated in the upper part of the cupola. Thesection of this oesophagus is visible at the centre of Fig. 249,where its cavky has the form of a cross. The stomach hasaquadrangular shape, as in the ordinary medusae, and fromeach of its four corners there proceed vessels, which are continuouswith its cavity, and are distributed by endless ramificationsover the substance of the cupola, extending even tothe fringed margin, all round its circumference. The modeof their distribution, and their numerous communications bylateral vessels, forming a complete vascular net-work, is seenin Fig. 251, which represents, on a larger scale, a portion ofthe marginal part of the disk. The two large figures (249and 252) also show the four lateral cavities (r, r. Fig. 252,)which are contiguous to the stomach, but separated from itby membranous partitions: these cavities have, by some,been supposed to perform an office in the system of the Medusa,corresponding to respiration; an opinion, however,which is founded rather on analogy than on any direct experimentalevidence. The entrances into these cavities areseen open at e, in Fig. 249, and at e, e, in the section Fig.252. A transverse section of one of the arms is given inFig. 253, showing the form of the absorbent tube in thecentre: and a similar section of the extremity of one of thetentacula is seen in Fig. 254, in which, besides the centraltube, the cavities of some of the smaller branches (b, b,)which are proceeding to join it, are also visible.The regular gradation which nature has observed in thecomplexity of the digestive cavities and other organs, of thevarious species of this extensive tribe, is exceedingly remarkable:for while some, as the Eudora, have, to all appearance,no internal cavity corresponding to a stomach, and70 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.are totally unprovided with either pedicle, arms, or tenta-cela;others, furnished with these latter appendages, areequally destitute of such a cavity; and those belonging to athird family possess a kind of pouch, or false stomach, atthe upper part of the pedicle, apparently formed by themere folding in of the integument. This is the case withthe Verona, depicted in Fig. 250, whose structure, in thisrespect, approaches that of the Hydra, already described,where the stomach consists of an open sac apparently formedby the integuments alone. Thence may a regular progressionbe followed, through various species, in which the apertureof this pouch is more and more completely closed, andwhere the tube which enters it branches out into ramificationsmore or less numerous, as we have seen in the Rhizos-tom.* It is difficult to conceive in what mode nutritionis performed in the gastric tribes, or those destitute of anyvisible stomach; unless we suppose that their nourishment isimbibed by direct absorption from the surface.Ever since the discovery of the animalcule of infusions,naturalists have been extremely desirous of ascertaining thenature of the organization of these curious beings: but as nomode presented itself of dissecting objects of such extrememinuteness, it was only from the external appearances theypresent under the microscope that any inferences could bedrawn with regard to the existence and form of their internalorgans. In most of the larger species, the opaque globules,seen in various parts of the interior, were generallysupposed to be either the ova, or the future young, lodgedwithin the body of the parent. In the Rotifer, or wheelanimalcule of Spallanzani,t a large central organ is plainlyperceptible, which was, by some, imagined to be the heart;but which has been clearly ascertained, by Bonnet, to be areceptacle for food. Muller, and several other observers,have witnessed the larger animalcules devouring the smaller;and the inference was obvious, that, in common with allSee Person, Annales du Museum, xiv. 330.fool. J. p.58, Fi. 1.NUTRITION IN THE INFUSORIA. 71other animals, they also must possess a stomach. But, as nosuch structure had been rendered visible in the smallest speciesof infusoria, such as monads, it was too hastily concludedthat these species were formed upon a diflferent and a simplermodel. Lanark characterized them as being, throughout,of a homogeneous substance, destitute of mouth and digestivecavity, and nourished simply by means of the absorptionof particles through the external surface of theirbodies.The nature and functions of these singular beings longremained involved in an obscurity which appeared to beimpenetrable; but at length a new light has been thrownupon the subject by Professor Ehrenberg, whose researcheshave recently disclosed fresh scenes of interest and of wonderin microscopic worlds, peopled with hosts of animatedbeings, almost infinite in number as in minuteness.* In endeavouringto render the digestive organs of the infusoriamore conspicuous, he hit upon the fortunate expedient ofsupplying them with coloured food, which might communicateits tinge to the cavities into which it passed, and exhibittheir situation and course. Obvious as this method mayappear, it was not till after a labour of ten years that Ehren-berg succeeded in discovering the fittest substances, and inapplying them in the manner best suited to exhibit the phenomenasatisfactorily. We have already seen that Trembleyyhad adopted the same plan for the elucidation of the structureof the hydra. Gretchen also had made similar attemptswith regard to the infusoria; but, in consequence of hishaving employed metallic or earthy colouring materials,The results of Ehrenberg-'s labours were first communicated to the BerlinAcademy; they have since been published in two works in German: thefirst of which appeared at Berlin in 1830, under the title of " Organisation,Systematic und Geographical Verh'dltniss der InfusioTisihierchenJ' Thesecond work appeared in 1832, and is entitled *' Sur Erkenntniss der Organisationin der Righting des leinster Rabies" Both are in folio, with plates.An able analysis of the contents of the former of these works, by Dr. Gardner,is given in The Edinburgh New Philosophical Journal for 1831, p. 201,of which I have availed myself largely in the account which follows.72 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.which acted as poisons, instead of those which might serveas food, he failed in his endeavours. Equally unsuccessfulwere the trials made by Ehrenberg with the indigo and gum-lacof commerce, which are always contaminated with a certainquantity of white lead, a substance highly deleterious toall animals; but, at length, by employing an indigo whichwas quite pure, he succeeded perfectly.* The moment aminute particle of a highly attenuated solution of this substanceis applied to a drop of water in which are some pedunculatedvorticella, occupying the field of the microscope,the most beautiful phenomena present themselves to the eye.Currents are excited in all directions by the vibrations ofthe cilia, situated round the mouths of these animalcules,and are readily distinguished by the motions of the minuteparticles of indigo which are carried along with them; thecurrents generally all converging towards the orifice of themouth. Presently the body of the vorticella, which hadbeen hitherto quite transparent, becomes dotted with a numberof distinctly circular spots, of a dark blue colour, evidentlyproduced by particles of indigo accumulated in thosesituations. In some species, particularly those which havea contracted part, or neck, between the head and the body,as the Rotifer vulgaris, these particles can be traced in acontinuous line in their progress from the mouth to theseinternal cavities.In this way, by the employment of colouring matters, Eh-rendersucceeded in ascertaining the existence of a system ofdigestive cavities in all the known genera of this tribe ofanimals. There is now, therefore, no reason for admittingthat cuticular absorption of nutritive matter ever takes placeThe colouring matters proper for these experiments are such as do notchemically combine with water, but yet are capable of being diffused in astate of very minute division. Indigo, sap, green, and carmine, answer theseconditions, and being also easily recognised under the microscope, are welladapted for these observations. Great care should be taken, however, thatthe substance employed is free from all admixture of lead, or other metallicimpurity.NUTRITION IN THE INFUSORIA.among this order of beings. Whole generations of thesetransparent gelatinous animalcules may remain immersedfor weeks in an indigo solution, without presenting any colouredpoints in their tissue, except the circumscribed cavitiesabove described.Great variety is found to exist in the forms, situations,and arrangement of the organs of digestion in the Infusoria.They differ also in their degree of complication, but withoutany obvious relation to the magnitude of the animalcule.The Monas atoms, the minutest of the whole tribe, exhibitsa number of sacs, opening by as many separate orifices,from a circumscribed part of the surface. In others, as inthe Leucophra paula, of which Fig. 2^5 represents the ap 5"pearce under the microscope, there is a long alimentary255-canal, traversing the greater part of the body, taking severalspiral turns, and furnished with a great number of blindpouches, or caeca, as sacs of this description, proceeding laterallyfrom any internal canal, and having no other outlet,are technically termed. These cavities become filled withcoloured particles immediately after their entrance into thealimentary canal; and must, therefore, be considered as somany stomachs provided for the digestion of the food whichthey receive.* But they are not all filled at the same time,Ehrenberg terms these Polygastric infusoria from the Greek, signifyingwith many stomachs.Vol. II. 1074 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.for some continue long in a contracted state, so as not to bevisible; while, at another time, they readily admit the colouredfood. It is, therefore, only by dint of patient watchingthat the whole extent of the alimentary tube, and itsapparatus of stomachs, can be fully made out. Fig. 255,above referred to, exhibits the Ltucophra paula of Ehren-berg,* with a few of its stomachs filled with the opaque particles:but Fig. 2^^ shows the whole series of organs as itwould appear if it could be taken out of the body, and placedin the same relative situation with the eye* of the observer,as they are seen in the first figure. In some species, fromone to two hundred of these sacs may be counted, connectedwith the intestinal tube. Many of the larger species, as theHydatina senta, exhibit a greater concentration of organs,having only a single oval cavity of considerable size, situatedin the fore part of the body. In the Rotifer vulgaris thealimentary canal is a slender tube, considerably dilated nearits termination. In some Vorticella, the intestine, fromwhich proceed numerous caeca, makes a complete circularturn, ending close to its commencement: Ehrenberg formsof these the tribe of Cyclocsela, of which the Vorticella cit-ring,and the Stentor polymorphus, are examples. Thusdo we discover the same diversity in the structure of thedigestive organs of the several races of these diminutive beings,as is found in the other classes of animals.The Hydatina senta, one of the largest of the infusoria,was found by Ehrenberg to possess a highly developedstructure with respect to many systems of organs, which weshould never have expected to meet with so low in thescale of animals. As. connected with the nutritive functions,it may here be mentioned that the head of this animalculeis provided with a regular apparatus for mastication,consisting of serrated jaws, each having from two tosix. teeth. These jaws are seen actively opening and shuttingwhen the animal is taking its food, which consists ofTrichoda paula. ISIuUer.NUTRITION IN THE ACTINIA. 75particles brought within reach of the mouth by means ofcurrents excited by the motions of the cilia.Such are the simple forms assumed by the organs of assimilationamong the lowest orders of the animal creation;namely, digesting cavities, whence proceed various canals,which form a system for the transmission of the preparednourishment to different parts; but all these cavities and canalsbeing simply hollowed out of the solid substance of thebody. As \\^ ascend a step higher in the scale, we findthat the stomach and intestinal tube, together with theirappendages, are distinct organs, formed by membranes andcoats proper to each, and that they are themselves containedin an outer cavity, which surrounds them, and which receivesand collects the nutritious juices after their elaborationin these organs. The tdcfinia, or Sea anemones forexample, resembles a polypus in its general form, having amouth, which is surrounded with tentacula, and which leadsinto a capacious stomach, or sac, open below, and occupyingthe greater part of the bulk ofthe animal; but while, in thepolypus, the sides of the stomachconstitute also those ofthe body, the whole being onesimple sac; in the actinia, spacesintervene between the coats ofthe stomach, and the skin of theanimal. As the stomach is not"b" a closed sac, but is open below,these cavities are, in fact, continuous with that of the stomach:they are divided by numerous membranous partitionspassing vertically between the skin, and the membraneof the stomach, and giving support to that organ. Fig. 257,representing a vertical section of the Actinia coinage, displaysthis internal structure, b is the base, or disk, bywhich the animal adheres to rocks: i is the section of thecoriaceous integument, showing its thickness: m is the centralaperture of the upper surface, which performs the officeTHE VITAL FUNCTIONS.of a mouth, leading to s, the stomach, of which the lowerorifice is open, and which is suspended in the general cavity,by means of vertical partitions, of which the cut edgesare seen below, uniting at a central point, c, and passing betweenthe stomach and the integument. These muscularpartitions are connected above with three rows of tentacula,of which the points are seen at t. The ovaries (o) are seenattached to the partition; and also the apertures in the lowerpart of the stomach, by which they communicate with itscavity.If we considered the medusa as having four stomachs, wemight in like manner regard the Asturias or star-fish, ashaving ten, or even a greater number. The mouth of thisradiated animal is at the centre of the under surface; it leadsinto a capacious bag, situated immediately above it, andwhich is properly the stomach. From this central sac thereproceed ten prolongations, or canals, which occupy in pairsthe centre of each ray, or division of the body, and subdivideinto numerous minute ramifications. These canals,with their branches, are exhibited at c, c. Fig. 258, whichrepresents one of the rays of the Asterias, laid open fromthe upper side. The canals are supported in their positionsby membranes, connecting them with the sides of the cavityin which they are suspended.In the various species of Echini, we find that the alimentarytube has attained a more perfect development; forinstead of constituting merely a blind pouch, it passes entirelythrough the body of the animal. We here find anoesophagus or narrow tube, leading from the mouth to theNUTRITION IN THE Asturias. 77stomach; and the stomach continued into a regular intestine,which takes two turns in: the cavity of the body, before itterminates.The alimentary tube in the lower animals frequently exhibitsdilatations in different parts: these, if situated in thebeginning of the canal, may be considered as a successionof stomachs; while those that occur in the advanced portionsare more properly denominated the great intestine,by way of distinction from the middle portions of the tube,which are generally narrower, and are termed the small intestine.We often see blind pouches, or caeca, projectingfrom different parts of the canal; this is the case with theintestine of the Aphrodite aculeata, or sea-mouse. The intestinebeing generally longer than the body, is obliged tobe folded many times within the cavity it occupies, and totake a winding course. In some cases, on the other hand,the alimentary tube passes in nearly a straight line throughthe body, with scarcely any variation in its diameter; thisis the case with the Discards, whichis a long cylindric worm; andnearly so with the Lumhricusterrestris, or earth-worm. In theNais, on the contrary, as shownin Fig. 259, the alimentary tubepresents a series of dilatations,which, from the transparency of the skin, may be easily seenin the living animal. The food taken in by these wormsis observed to be transferred from the one to the other of itsnumerous stomachs, backwards and forwards many times,before its digestion is accomplished.The stomach of the Leech is very peculiar in its structure:its form, when, dissected off, and removed from thebody, is shown in Fig. 260. It is of great capacity, occupyingthe larger part of the interior of the body; and its cavityis expanded by folds of its internal membrane into severalpouches (c, c, c.) Mr. Newport, who has latelyTHE VITAL FUNCTIONS.examined its structure with great care, finds that each of the262 ten portions into which it is divided,sends out, on the part most remotefrom the oesophagus (o,) two lateralpouches, or caeca; which, as they aretraced along the canal, become bothwider and longer, so that the tenth pairof caeca (a) extends to the hinder extremityof the animal; the intestine (i,)260 M^^^^ which is very short, lying betweenthem.* It has long been known, thatif, after the leech has fastened on theskin, a portion of the tail be cut off, theanimal will continue to suck blood foran indefinite time: this arises from thecircumstance, that the caecal portions ofthe stomach are laid open, so that theblood received into that cavity flowsout as fast as it is swallowed.A structure very similar to that ofthe leech is met with in the digestive organs of the Glosstuber cit lata, (Hirudo complaint,Linn.) of which Fig.263 represents a magnified viewfrom the upper side. Whenseen from the under side, as isshown in Fig. 264, the cavityof the stomach is distinctlyseen, prolonged into severalcells, divided by partitions, andThe two last of these cells (c c)Weidirected towards the tail.• This figure was engraved from a drawing made, at my request, by Mr.Newport, from a specimen which he dissected, and which he was so obligingas to show me. Fig. 261 represents the mouth, within which are seen thethree teeth; and Fig. 262, one of the teeth detached. A paper, descriptiveof the structure of the stomach of the leech, by Mr. Newport, was lately readNUTRITION IN THE Angelina. 79are much longer than the rest, and terminate in two blindsacs, between which is situated a tortuous intestinal tube.*at a meeting of the Royal Society. See the abstracts of the proceedings inthe Society, for June, 1833.• In both these figures, t is the tubular tongue, projected from the mouth.In Fig. 263, e are the six eyes, situated on the extremity which correspondsto the head; and a double longitudinal row of white tubercles is also visible,extending along the back of the animal, e, in Fig. 264, is the entrance intoa cavity', or pouch, provided for the reception of the young. See Johnson,Phil. Trans, for 1S17, p. 343.'#.so )CHAPTER V.Nutrition in the higher orders of Animals.In proportion as we rise in the animal scale, we find thatthe operations of Nutrition become still farther multiplied,and that the organs which perform them are more numerousand more complicated in their structure. The long seriesof processes requisite for the perfect elaboration of nutriment,is divided into different stages; each process is thework of a separate apparatus, and requires the influence ofdifferent agents. We no longer find that extreme simplicitywhich we noticed as so remarkable in the hydra and themedusa, where the same cavity performs, at once, the functionsof the stomach and of the heart. The manufacture ofnutriment, if we may so express it, is, in these lower zoophytes,conducted upon a small scale, by less refined methods,and with the strictest economy of means; the apparatusis the simplest, the agents the fewest possible, and manydifferent operations are carried on in one and the same place.As we follow the extension of the plan in more elevatedstages of organic development, we find a farther division oflabour introduced. Of this we have already seen the commencementin the multiplication of the digesting cavities ofthe Leech and other Annelida: but, in animals which occupya still higher rank, we observe a more complete separationof offices, and a still greater complication of organs. Theprinciple of the division of labour is carried to a much greaterextent than in the inferior departments of the animalcreation. Besides the stomach, or receptacle for the unassimilatedfood, another organ, the heart, is provided for theCOMPLEX APPARATUS FOR NUTRITION.SIuniform 'distribution of the nutritious fluids elaborated bythe organs of digestion. This separation of functions, again,leads to the introduction of another system of canals or vessels,for transmitting the fluids from the organs which preparethem to the heart, as into a general reservoir. In thehigher orders of the animal kingdom, all these processes areagain subdivided and varied, according to the species of food,the habits and mode of life, assigned by nature to each individualspecies. For the purpose of conveying clearer notionsof the arrangement of this extensive system of vitalorgans, I have drawn the annexed plan (Fig. 265,) whichexhibits them in their natural order of connexion, and asthey might be supposed to appear in a side view of the interiorof a quadruped. To this diagram I shall make frequentreference in the following description of this system.The food is, in the first place, prepared for digestion byseveral mechanical operations, which loosen its texture anddestroy its cohesion. It is torn asunder and broken downby the action of the jaws and of the teeth; and it is, at thesame time, softened by an admixture with the fluid secretionsof the mouth. It is then collected into a mass, by theaction of the muscles of the cheek and tongue, and swaleII.82 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.lowed by the regulated contractions of the different parts ofthe throat. It now passes along a muscular tube, calledthe (Esophagus, (represented in the diagram by the lettero,) into the stomach, (s,) of which the entrance (c) is calledthe cardia.In the stomach the food is made to undergo various chemicalchanges; after which it is conducted through the aperturetermed the pylorus (p,)#into the canal of the intestine(i I,) where it is farther subjected to the action of severalfluid secretions derived from large glandular organs situatedin the neighbourhood, as the liver (l) and the pancreas andelaborated into the fluid which is termed Chyle.The Chyle is taken up by a particular set of vessels, calledthe Lacteals, which transmit it to the heart (h.) Thesevessels are exceedingly numerous, and arise by open orificesfrom the inner surface of the intestines, whence they absorb,or drink up the chyle. They may be compared tointernal roots, which unite as they ascend along the mesentery(m,) or membrane connecting the intestines with theback; forming larger and larger trunks, till they terminatein an intermediate reservoir (r,) which has been named theReceptacle of the Chyle. From this receptacle there proceedsa tube, which, from its passing through the thorax, iscalled the Thoracic duct (t;) it ascends along the side ofthe spine, which protects it from compression, and opensat V, into the large veins which are pouring their contentsinto the auricle, or first cavity of the heart (u.) whence itimmediately passed's into the ventricle, or second cavity ofthat organ (h.) Such, in the more perfect animals, is thecircuitous and guarded route, which every particle of nourishmentmust take before it can be added to the generalmass of circulating fluid.By its admixture with the blood already contained inthese vessels, and its purification by the action of the air inthe respiratory organs (b,) the chyle becomes assimilated,and is distributed by the heart through appropriate'channelsof circulation called arteries (of which the common trunk,COMPLEX APPARATUS FOR NUTRITION. S3or Jiorta^ is seen at A,) to every part of the system; thencereturning by the veins (v, v, v,) to the heart. The variousmodes in which these functions are conducted in the sevenof animals will be described hereafter. It will besufficient for our present purpose to state, by way of completingthe outline of this class of functions, that, like thereturning sap of plants, the blood is made to undergo farthermodifications in the minute vessels through which itcirculates; new arrangements of its elements take placeduring its passage through the subtle organization of theglands, which no microscope has yet unravelled: new productsare here formed, and new properties acquired, adaptedto the respective purposes which they are to serve in theanimal economy. The whole is one vast Laboratory, wheremechanism is subservient to Chemistry, where Chemistryis the agent of the higher powers of Vitality, and wherethese powers themselves minister to the more exalted facultiesof Sensation and of Intellect.The digestive functions of animals, however complex andvaried, and however exquisitely contrived to answer theirparticular objects, yet afford less favourable opportunities oftracing distinctly the adaptation of means to the respectiveends, than the mechanical functions. This arises from thecircumstance that the processes they effect imply a refinedchemistry, of which we have as yet but a very imperfectknowledge; and that we are also ignorant of the nature ofthe vital agents concerned in producing each of the chemicalchanges which the food must necessarily undergo duringits assimilation. We only know that all these changes areslowly and gradually effected; the materials having to passthrough a great number of intermediate stages before theycan attain their final state of elaboration.Hence we are furnished with a kind of scale, whereby,whenever we can ascertain the degrees of difference existingbetween the chemical condition of the substance takeninto the body, and that of the product derived from it, wemay estimate the length of the process required, and theS4 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.amount of power necessary for its conversion into that product.It is obvious, for example, that the chemical changeswhich vegetable food must be made to undergo, in order toassimilate it to blood, must be considerably greater thanthose required to convert animal food into the same fluid,because the latter is itself derived, with only slight modification,immediately from the blood. We accordingly findit to be an established rule, that the digestive organs of animalswhich feed on vegetable materials are remarkable fortheir size, their length, and their complication, when comparedwith those of carnivorous animals of the same class.This rule applies, indeed, universally to Mammalia, Birds,Reptiles, Fishes, and also to Insects: and below these wecan scarcely draw the comparison, because nearly all theinferior tribes subsist wholly upon animal substances. Manyof these latter animals have organs capable of extractingnourishment from substances which we should hardly imaginecontained any sensible portion. Thus, on examiningthe stomach of the earth-worm, we find it always filled withmoist earth, which is devoured in large quantities, for thesake of the minute portion of vegetable and animal materialsthat happen to be intermixed with the soil; and this slendernutriment is sufficient for the subsistence of that animal.Many marine worms, in like manner, feed apparentlyupon sand alone; but that sand is generally intermixed withfragments of shells, which have been pulverized by the continualrolling of the tide and the surge; and the animal mattercontained in these fragments, affords them a supply ofnutriment adequate to their wants. It is evident, that whenasin the preceding instances, large quantities of indigestiblematerials are taken in along with such as are nutritious, thestomach and other digestive cavities must be rendered morethan usually capacious. It is obvious also that the structureof the digestive organs must bear a relation to the mechanicaltexture, as well as the chemical qualities of the food;and this we find to be the case in a variety of instances,which will hereafter be specified.COMPLEX APPARATUS FOR NUTRITION. 85The activity of the digestive functions and the structureof the organs, will also Be regulated by a great variety ofother circumstances in the condition of the animal, independentlyof the mechanical or chemical nature of the food.The greater the energy with which the more peculiarlyanimal functions of sensation and muscular action are exercised,the greater must be the demand for nourishment, inorder to supply the expenditure of vital force created bythese exertions. Compared with the torpid and sluggishreptile, the active and vivacious bird or quadruped requiresand consumes a much larger quantity of nutriment. Thetortoise, the turtle, the toad, the frog, and the chameleon,will, indeed, live for months without taking any food.Fishes, which, like reptiles, are cold-blooded animals, althoughat all times exceedingly voracious when suppliedwith food, yet can endure long fasts with impunity.The rapidity of development has also great influenceon the quantity of food which an animal requires. Thus,the caterpillar, which grows very quickly, and must repeatedlythrow off its integuments, during its continuancein the larva state, consumes a vast quantity of food comparedwith the size of its body; and hence we find it providedwith a digestive apparatus of considerable size.S6CHAPTER VI.PREPARATION OF FOOD.§ 1. Prehension of Liquid Food.In studying the series of processes which constitute assimilation,our attention is first to be directed to the mode inwhich the food is introduced into the body, and to the mechanicalchanges it is made to undergo before it is subjectedto the chemical action of the digestive organs. The natureof these preliminary processes will, of course, vary accordingto the texture and mechanical condition of the food.Where it is already in a fluid state, mastication is unnecessary,and the receiving organs consist simply of an apparatusfor suction. This is the case very generally with theEntozoa, which subsist upon the juices of other animals,and which are all provided with one or more sucking orifices,often extended in the form of a tube or proboscis.*The Hydatid, for instance, has four sucking apertures disposedround the head of the animal: the Taenia has orificesof this kind in each of its jointed segments: the Ascaris andthe Earth-ioorm have each a simple mouth. The marginof the mouth is often divided, so as to compose lips; of thesethere are generally two, and in the leech there are three.In some rare cases, as in the Planaria, there is, besides the• Some species of Fasciolas, or flukes, are furnished with two, three, six,or more sacking disks, by which they adhere to surfaces: to these animalsthe names Distoma, Trisioma, Hexasioma, and Poly stoma have been given;but these denominations, implying" a plurality of mouths, are evidently incorrect,since the sucking disks are not perforated, and do not perform theoffice of mouths; and the true mouth for the reception of food is single.Cuvier discovered an animal of this class furnished with above a hundred ofthese cup-shaped sucking organs. See Edinburgh Philos. Journal, xx. 101.PREHENSION OF LIQUID FOOD. 87ordinary mouth, a tube also provided for suction, in a differentpart of the body, and leading into the same stomach.*When the instrument for suction extends for some lengthfrom the mouth, it is generally termed a proboscis: such isthe apparatus of the butterfly, the moth, the gnat, the housefly, and other insects that subsist on fluid aliment The proboscisof the Lepidoptera, (Fig. 266,) is a double tube, constructedby the tyo edges being rolledlongitudinally till they meet in themiddle of the lower surface, thus forminga tube on each side, but leavingalso another tube, intermediate to thetwo lateral ones. This middle tube isformed by the junction of two grooves,which, by the aid of a curious apparatusof hooks, resembling those of thelaminae of a feather already described,!lock into each other, and can be eitherunited into an air tight canal, or be instantly separated atthe pleasure of the animal. Reaumur conceives that thelateral tubes are intended for the reception of air, while thecentral canal is that which conveys the honey, which theinsect sucks from flowers, by suddenly unrolling the spiralcoil, into which the proboscis is usually folded, and dartingit into the nectary. JIn the Hemiptera, the proboscis is a tube, either straightor jointed, guarded by a sheath, and acting like a pump.The Litera have a more complicated instrument for suction,consisting of a tube, of which the sides are strong andfleshy, and moveable in every direction, like the trunk ofan elephant: it has at its extremity a double fold, resemblinglips, which are well adapted for suction. The gnat, andother insects which pierce the skin of animals, have, for thispurpose, instruments, termed, from their shape and office,• Phil. Trans, for 1822, 442.t Volume i. p. 393.\ Kirby and Spence's Entomology, vol. ii. p. 390.88 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.lancets.'^ In the gnat, they are five or six in number, finerthan a hair, exceedingly sharp, and generally barbed on oneside. In the Tabanus, or horse-fly, they are flat like theblade of a knife. These instruments are sometimes constructedso as to form, by their union, a tube adapted forsuction. In the flesh-fly, the proboscis is folded like theletter Z, the upper angle pointing to the breast, and thelower one to the mouth. In other flies there is a singlefold only.Those insects of the order ZTywcnojo/era, which, like thebee, suck the honey of flowers, have, together with regularjaws, a proboscis formed by the prolongation of the lowerlip, which is folded so as to constitute a tube: this tube isprotected by the mandibles: and is projected forwards bybeing carried on a pedicle, which can be folded back whenthe tube is not in use. The youths of the Acephalous Molluscaare merely sucking apertures, with folds like lips, andwithout either jaws, tongue, or teeth, but having often ten-maculaarising from their margins.Among fishes, we meet with the family of Cyclostomata,so called from their having a circular mouth, formed forsuction. The margin of this mouth is supported by a ringof cartilage, and is furnished with appropriate muscles forproducing adhesion to the surfaces to which it is applied;the mechanism and mode of its attachment being similar tothat of the leech. To this family belong the Myxine andthe Lamprey. So great is the force of adhesion exerted bythis sucking apparatus, that a lamprey has been raised outof the water with a stone, weighing ten or twelve pounds,adhering to its mouth.Humming birds have a long and slender tongue, whichcan assume the tubular form, like that of the butterfly or thebee, and for a similar purpose, namely, sucking the juices offlowers. Among the mammalia, the Vampire Bat affordsanother instance of suction by means of the tongue, whichKirby and Spence's Entomology, vol. iii. p. 467.PREHENSION OP SOLID FOOD. 39is said to be folded into a tubular shape for that purpose.But suction among the mammalia is almost always performedby the muscles of the lips and cheeks, aided by the movementsof the tongue, which, when withdrawn to the back ofthe cavity, acts like the piston of a pump. In the lampreythis hydraulic action of the tongue is particularly remarkable.Many quadrupeds, however, drink by repeatedly dippingtheir tongue into the fluid, and quickly drawing it intothe mouth.§ 2. Prehension of Solid Food.When the food consists of solid substances, organs mustbe provided; first, for their prehension and introduction intothe mouth; secondly, for their detention when so introduced;and thirdly, for their mechanical division into smaller fragments.Of those instruments of prehension which are not portionsof the mouth itself, and which form a series of variouslyconstructed organs extending from the tentacula of the polypusto the proboscis of the elephant, and to the human armand hand, some account has already been given in the historyof the mechanical functions: but, in a great number ofinstances, prehension is performed by the mouth, or theparts which are extended from it, and may be considered asits appendices. The prehensile power of the mouth is derivedprincipally from the mechanical form and action ofthe jaws, which open to receive, and close to detain thebodies intended as food; and to this latter purpose, the teeth,when the mouth is furnished with them, likewise materiallycontribute, although their primary and more usual office isthe mechanical division of the food, by means of mastication,an action in which the jaws, in their turn, co-operate. Anotherprincipal purpose effected by the jaws is that of givingmechanical power to the muscles, which, by acting uponthe sides of the cavity of the mouth, tend to compress andVol. II. 1290 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.propel the contained food. We find, accordingly, that allanimals of a highly developed structure are provided withjaws.Among the animals which are ranked in the class of Zoophytesthe highest degrees of development are exhibitedby the Echinodermata, and in them we find a remarkableperfection in the organs of mastication. The mouth ofthe Echinus is surrounded by a frame-work of shell, consistingof five converging pieces, each armed with a longtooth; and for the movement of each part there are providedseparate muscles, of which the anatomy has been minutelydescribed by Cuvier. In the shells of the echini that arecast on the shore, this calcareous frame is usually found entirein the inside of the outer case; and Aristotle havingnoticed its resemblance to a lantern, it has often gone by thewhimsical name of the lantern of aristotle.In all articulated animals which subsist on solid aliment,the apparatus for the prehension and mastication of the food,situated in the mouth, is exceedingly complicated, and admitsof great diversity in the different tribes; and, indeed,the number and variety of the parts of which it consists isso great, as hardly to admit of being comprehended in anygeneral description. In most insects, also, their minutenessis an additional obstacle to the accurate observation of theiranatomy, and of the mechanism of their action. The researches,however, of Savigny,'^ and other modern entomologists,have gone far to prove, that, amidst the infinite variationsobservable in the form and arrangement of the severalparts of these organs, there is still preserved, in thegeneral plan of their construction, a degree of uniformityquite as great as that which has been remarked jn the fabricof the vertebrated classes. Not only may we recognise, inevery instance, the same elements of structure, but we mayalso trace regular chains of gradation, connecting forms ap-seehis "Th<Joric des Organes de la bouche cs Animaux interfere's etarticles," which forms the first part of the' "Memoires sur ks Animauxsans vertebrates'* Paris, 1816.JAWS OF THE ECHINUS. 91parents most remote, and organs destined for widely differentuses: so that even when there has been a completechange of purpose, we still perceive the same design followed,the same model copied, and the same uniformity ofplan preserved in the construction of the organs of everykind of mastication; and there prevails in them the sameunity of system as is displayed in so marked a manner inthe conformation of the organs of progressive motion. Thejaws, which, in one tribe of insects, are formed for breakingdown and grinding the harder kinds of food, are, in another,fitted for tearing asunder the more tough and fibrous textures;they are fashioned, in a third, into instruments fortaking up the semi-fluid honey prepared by flowers; while,again, in a fourth, they are prolonged and folded into a tubularproboscis, capable of suction, and adapted to the drinkingof fluid aliment. Pursuing the examination of these organsin another series of articulated animals, we find themgradually assuming the characters, as well as the uses, ofinstruments of prehension, of weapons for warfare, of pillarsfor support, of levers for motion, or of limbs for quick progression.Some of thes remarkable metamorphoses of organshave already attracted our attention, in a former partof this treatise.* Jaws pass into feet, and feet into jaws,through every intermediate form; and the same individualoften exhibits several steps of these transitions; and is sometimesprovided also with supernumerary organs of each description.In the Arachnida, in particular, we frequentlymeet with supernumerary jaws, together with various appendices,which present remarkable analogies of form withthe antennae, and the legs and feet of the Crustacea.The principal elementary parts which enter into the compositionof the mouth of an insect, when in its most perfectstate of development, are the seven following: a pair of upperjaws, a pair of lower jaws, an upper and a lower lip, anda tongue These parts in the Locusts vlridissbna, or com-vol.i. p. 206.t All these parts, taken together, were termed by Patricius indrumcnlaTHE VITAL FUNCTIONS,mon grasshopper, are delineated in their relative situationsbut detached from one another, in Fig. 267. The upperjaws, (m,) which are termed the mandibles, are those principallyemployed for the mastication of hard substances;they are, accordingly, of greater strength than the lowerjaws, and their edges are generally deeply serrated, so as toact like teeth in dividing and bruising the food. Some ofthese teeth are pointed, others wedge-shaped, and othersbroad, like grinders; their form being, in each particularcase, adapted to the mechanical texture of tl^ substances towhich they are designed to be applied. Thus, the mandiblesof some Melolonthx have a projection, rendered roughby numerous deep transverse furrows, converting it into afile for wearing down the dry leaves, which are their naturalfood.* In most cases, indeed, we are, in like manner, enabled,from a simple inspection of the shape of the teeth, tosiberia; and upon llieir varieties of structure he founded his celebrated systemof entomological classification. Kirby and Spence have denominatedthem trophy. See their introduction to Entomology, vol. iii. p. 417. Tothe seven elements above enumerated, Savigny adds, in the Hemiptera, aneighth, which he terms the Epighssa.Enoch, quoted by Kirby.JAWS OP INSECTS. 93form tolerably accurate ideas of the kind of food on whichthe insect naturally subsists.*Above, or rather in front of the mandibles, is situated theharum, or upper lip (u.) It is usually of a hard or hornytexture, and admits of some degree of motion: but its formand direction are exceedingly various in different tribes ofinsects. The lower pair of jaws (j,) or maxillse^ as theyhave been termed, are behind the mandibles, and betweenthem is situated the labium, or lower lip (l,) which closesthe mouth below, as the harum does above. In the grasshopper,each maxilla consists of an outer and an inner plate(o and I.) The jaws of insects are confined, by their articulationswith the head, to motions in a horizontal planeonly, so that they open and close by a lateral movement, andnot vertically upwards and downwards, as is the case withthe jaws of vertebrated animals. The maxilla are, in mostcases, employed principally for holding the substances onwhich the dividing or grinding apparatus of the mandiblesis exerted. A similar use may be assigned also to the organsdenominated Palpi, or Jintennulx (p, q,) which arejointed filaments, or processes, attached to different parts ofthe mouth, and most usually to the maxillae and the labium;the former (p) being termed the maxillary, and the latter(q) the labial palpi. In addition to these parts, another,which, from its supposed use, has been denominated Glossa,or tongue (g,) is also generally found.For an account of the various modifications which theseparts receive in different tribes and species, I must refer toworks which treat professedly of this branch of comparativeanatomy. I shall content myself with giving a single exampleof the conversion of structure here alluded to, in that ofthe rostrum, or proboscis of the Cimex nigricornis. Thisinsect belongs to the order Hemiptera, which has beenusually characterized as being destitute of both mandiblesSee a memoir by Marcel des Serres, in the Annates dii Museum desist.Nat. xiv. 56.THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.and jaws, and as having, instead of these parts, an apparatusof very different construction, designed to pierce the skin ofanimals, and suck their juices. But Savigny, on applyingthe principles of his theory, has recognised, in the proboscisof the Cimex, the existence of all the constituent elementsthat are found in the mouth of insects formed for the masticationof solid food. This proboscis consists of four elongatedfilaments, contained in a kind of sheath: these filamentsare represented in Fig. 268, separatedto a little distance from eachother, in order that their respectiveorigins may be distinctly seen; the oneset (q) being prolongations of the mandibles(j,) and the other set (p) being,in like manner, prolongations of themaxilla? (m.) Between these filaments,and near their commencement, is seena pointed cartilaginous body (g,) whichis the glossa, or tongue; and the apertureseen at its root is the passage intothe oesophagus. The sheath is merelythe elongated labium, of which thebase is seen at l, in Fig. 268; but isrepresented, in its whole length, inFig. 269 J where the groove for ]\q ij/ training the filaments above described,I \ is apparent.I 1 In the mouths of the Annelida weoften meet with hard bodies, which serve the purposes ofjaws and of teeth. The'retractile proboscis of the aphrodite,or sea-mouse, is furnished with four teeth of this description.The Leech has, immediately within its lips,three semi-circular teeth, with round and sharp cuttingedges: they are delineated in Fig. 2Q2, in their relative positions;and Fig. 263 represents one of the teeth detachedfrom the rest. It is with these teeth that the leech piercesthe skin of the animals whose blood it sucks and, as soon asJAWS OF INSECTS. 95the wound is inflicted, the teeth, being moveable at theirbase, fall back, leaving the opening of the mouth free forsucking. The wound thus made is of a peculiar form, beingcomposed of three* lines, radiating from a centre, where thethree teeth had penetrated.Most of the Mollusca which inhabit univalve shells areprovided with a tubular organ, of a cylindric or conicalshape, capable of elongation and contraction, by circular andlongitudinal muscular fibres, and serving the purpose of aproboscis, or organ of prehension, for seizing and conveyingfood into the mouth. These tubes are of great size in theBuccinum, the Min^ex, and the Volta, as also in theDoris which, though it has no shell, is likewise a gastroIn those mollusca of this order which have not aproboscis, as the Limaxx, or slug, the Helix, or snail, andthe ^djilysia, or sea-hare, the mouth is furnished with broad270 lips, and is supported by an internal cartilage,'having several tooth-like projections, which assistin laying hold of the substances taken as food.That of the snail is represented in Fig. 270.All the Sepise, or cuttle fish tribe, are furnished, at theentrance of the mouth, with two horny jaws, having a remarkableresemblance to the bill of a parrot; excepting thatthe lower piece is the larger of the two, and covers the upperone, which is the reverse of what takes place in theparrot. These constitute a powerful instrument for breakingthe shells of the mollusca and Crustacea, which composethe usual prey of these animals.Fishes almost always swallow their food entire, so thattheir jaws and teeth are employed principally as organs ofprehension and detention; and the upper jaw, as well as thelower one, being moveable upon the cranium, they are capableof opening to a great width. The bony pieces whichcompose the jaws are more numerous than the correspondingbones in the higher classes of vertebrata, and they appear,therefore, as if their development had not proceeded96 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.sufficiently far to effect their consolidation into more compactstructures.*Fishes which live upon other animals of the same classhaving a soft texture, are furnished with teeth constructedmerely for seizing their prey, and perhaps also for slightly dividingit, so as to adapt it to being swallowed. These teethare of various shapes, though usually sharp at the points, andeither conical or hooked at the extremity, with the points alwaysdirected backwards, in order to prevent the escape of theanimal which has been seized. Those fishes which subsist ontestaceous mollusca have teeth with grinding surfaces, andtheir jaws are also adapted for mastication. Every part of themouth, tongue, and even throat, may afford lodgement forteeth in this class of animals. Almost the whole cavity of themouth of the Jinarrhichas lupus, or wolf-fish, may be said tobe paved with teeth, a triple row being implanted on eachside; so that this fish exerts great power in breaking shells.The Shark has numerous rows of sharp teeth, with serratedmargins: these, at first sight, appear to be formidable instruments;but as the teeth in the opposite jaws do not meet, itis evident that they are not intended for cutting, like theincisors of mammalia.Among Reptiles we find the Batrachia almost wholly destituteof teeth. Frogs, indeed, exhibit two rows of very finepoints; the one in the upper jaw, and the other passing transverselyacross the palate: they may be considered as teethexisting in a rudimental state; for they are not sufficientlydeveloped to be useful in mastication. There are aboutforty of these minute teeth on each side in the frog. In theSalamander, there are sixty above and below; and also thirtyon each side of the palate.The tongue of the frog is of great length; its root is attachedclose to the fore part of the lower jaw, while its point,• Attempts have been made to trace analogies between the different segmentsof the jaws of fishes and corresponding parts of the mouths of Crustaceaand of insects: but the justness of these analogies is yet far from beingsatisfactorily proved.JAWS OP BIRDS. 97which is cloven, is turned backwards, extending into thethroat and acting like a valve in closing the air passage intothe lungs. If, when this animal has approached within acertain distance of the insect it is about to seize, we watchit with attention, we are surprised to observe the insectsuddenly disappear, without our being able to perceive whathas become of it This arises from the frog having dartedout its tongue upon its victim with such extreme quickness,and with draw nit vvith the insect adhering to it, so rapidly,that it is scarcely possible for the eye to follow it in its motion.The Chameleon also has a very long and slendertongue, the extremity of which is dilated into a kind ofclub or spoon, and covered with a glutinous matter: withthis instrument the animal catches insects from a considerabledistance, by a similar manoeuvre to that practised by thefrog.*Serpents and Lizards have generally curved or conicalteeth, calculated rather for tearing and holding the food, thanfor masticating it: like those of fishes, they are affixed partlyto the jaws, and partly to the palate. The Chelonian reptileshave no teeth, their office being supplied by the sharpcutting edges of the horny portion of the jaws.Birds as well as serpents have a moveable upper jaw; butthey are also provided with beaks of various forms, in whichwe may trace an exact adaptation to the kind of food appropriatedto each tribe; thus, predaceous birds, as the eagle andthe hawk tribe, have an exceedingly strong hooked beak,for tearing and dividing the flesh of the animals on whichthey prey; while those that feed on insects, or on grain,have pointed bills, adapted to picking up minute objects.Aquatic birds have generally flattened bills, by which theycan best select their food among the sand, the mud, or theweeds at the bottom of the water; and their edges are frequentlyserrated, to allow the fluid to filter through, while• Mr. Houston has given a description of the structure of this organ, andof the muscles by which it is moved, in a paper contained in the Transactionsof the Royal Irish Academy, vol. xv. p. 177.Vol. II. 13nfl TllK VITAL FUNCTIONS.tho Hold portions nrr rclaliuHl in \\w imnilli. 'Vic duck affordsnn inntftnco of this structure; which is, however, stillutero strongly marking in this ^vnus Afcf\ii((s\ or Mcrgnnsor,where the whole length of the nuu'gin of the hill is besetwith small sh;u-|) pointed teiMh, directed backwards: they arcparticularly eonsj)ienons in the AIeri(t(s scrnt/or, or red-breastedMerganser. The object of the barbs and fringedproccssoji which are appended to the tongue in many birds,such OS that of the 7oKcan and the Pan^akeef, appears inlike manner, to be the detention of substances introducedinto the mouth.The beak of the Hn'matopuffy or Oyster-catcher, has awedge shape, and arts like an oyster-knife for opening bivalveshells.In the Loxia n/mrovf/m, or Cross-bill, the upper andlower maiulihles cross each tether when the month is closed,u structure which enables this bird to tear open the cones ofthe pine and fir, and pick out the seeds, by insinuating thebill between the scales. It can split cherry stones with theutmost ease, and in a wvy short time, by means of this peculiarlyshaped hill.*ITirds which dive for the purpose of catching fish havet)ften a bill of eonsidtMahle length, which enables them toS(M*nn> their prey, ami changes its position till it is a(lai)ledfor swallowing.The /i^/ij/nchops^ or black Skinner, has a very singularlyformed beak; it is very slender, but the lower mandiblevery much exceeds in length the upper one, so that whileskinning the waves in its flight, it cuts the writer like aplough-share, catching the ]prey which is on the surface ofthe sea.The woodpecker is furnished with a singular apparatusfor enabling It to dart out with great velocity its long andpointed tongue, and transfix the insects on which it principallyfeeds; and these motions are performed so quickly• See » ]>!nier on tltc meduinisiu of tl»c lain of tlu«» K\nl by Mr. Hamlini\\t t,iH>\o^'w»\ Jtnirnnl. h. 4.V)Porous of tkk wooDrucKmtu 99that the eye caa scarcely follow them. This remarkablemechanism is delineated in Fi;^ 271, which represent thehead of the woodpecker, with the skin removed, and theparts tittered. 'I*he tone itself (t) is a slender sharp-pointedhorny cylinder, having its extremity (b) beset withbarbs, of which the points are directed backwards: it is supportedon a slender O^ HyoideM^ or lingual bone, to theposterior end of which the extremities of two very long andnarrow cartilaginous processes are articulated.* The oneon the right side is shown in the figure, nearly in the wholeextent of its course, at c, d, e, p, and a small portion of theleft cartilage is seen at l. The two cartilages form, at theirjunction with the tongue, a v^ty acute angle, slightly divergingas they proceed backwards; until, bending downwards(at c,) they pass obliquely round the sides of thenext connected by % membrane (>c;) then, being again inflectedupwards, they eooFerge towards the back of thehead, where they meet, and, being enclosed in a commonsheath, are conducted together along a groove, which extendsforwards, along the middle line of the cranium (e,)till it ;arrives betwwn tlir- f^vf^s Frrir»i fl.'v ra\\f\\ fTi«» grooveate ioioed to the oc bfoiilei, to vfctit aie called the fliTMib ff Ikkw of tit100 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.and the two cartilages it contains, which are now moreclosely conjoined, are deflected towards the right side, andterminate at the edge of the aperture of the right nostril (r,)into which the united cartilages are finally inserted. Inorder that their course may be seen more distinctly, thesecartilages are represented in the figure (at d,) drawn out ofthe groove provided to receive and protect them.* A longand slender muscle is attached to the inner margin of eachof these cartilages, and their actions conspire to raise thelower and most bent parts of the cartilages, so that theircurvature is diminished, and the tongue protruded to a considerabledistance, for the purpose of catching insects. Assoon as this has been accomplished, these muscles beingsuddenly relaxed, another set of fibres, passing in front ofthe anterior portion of the cartilages nearly parallel to them,are thrown into action, and as suddenly retract the tongueinto the mouth, with the insect adhering to its barbed extremity.This muscular effort is, however, very materiallyassisted by the long and tortuous course of these archedcartilages, which are nearly as elastic as steel springs, andeffect a considerable saving of muscular powers This wasthe more necessary, because, while the bird is on the tree,it repeats these motions almost incessantly, boring holes inthe bark, and picking up the minutest insects, with the utmostcelerity and precision. On meeting with an ant-hill,the woodpecker easily lays it open by the combined effortsof its feet and bill, and soon makes a plentiful meal of theants and their eggs.Among the Mammalia which have no teeth, the Myrme-cophaga, or Ant-eater, practises a remarkable manoeuvrefor catching its prey. The tongue of this animal is verylong and slender, and has a great resemblance to an earthworm:that of the two-toed ant-eater is very nearly one-thirdof the length of the whole body; and at its base isS is the large salivary gland on the right side.f An account of this mechanism is given by Mr. Waller, in the Phil.Trans, for 1716, p. 509.TONGUE OF THE Ant-eater. 101scarcely thicker than a crow-quill. It is furnished with along and powerful muscle, which arises from the sternum,and is continued into its substance, affording the means of aquick retraction, as well as lateral motion; while its elongationand other movements are effected by circular fibres,which are exterior to the former. When laid on the groundin the usual track of ants, it is soon covered with these insects,and being suddenly retracted, transfers them into themouth; and as,*from their minuteness, they require no mastication,they are swallowed undivided, and without therebeing any necessity for teeth.The lips of quadrupeds are often elongated for the moreready prehension of food, as we see exemplified in the Rhinoceros,whose upper lip is so extensible as to be capable ofperforming the office of a small proboscis. The Sorexx rtios-hiatus, or musk shrew, whose favourite food is leeches, haslikewise a very moveable snout, by which it gropes for, andseizes its prey from the bottom of the mud. More frequently,however, this office of prehension is performed bythe tongue, which for that purpose is very flexible and muchelongated, as we see in the Cameleopard, where it acts likea hand in grasping and bringing down the branches of atree.*In the animals belonging to the genus Fells, each of thepapillae of the tongue is armed with a horny sheath terminatingin a sharp point, which is directed backwards, so asto detain the food and prevent its escape. These pricklesare of great size and strength in the larger beasts of prey,as the Lion and the Tiger; they are met with also in theOpossum, and in many species of bats, more especially thosebelonging to the genus Pteropiis: all these horny productionshave been regarded as analogous to the lingual teethof fishes, already noticed.The mouth of the Ornithorhyncus has a form of constructionintermediate between that of quadrupeds and• Home, Lectures, &c. vi. Plate 32.THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.birds; being furnished, like the former, with grinding teethat the posterior part of both the upper and lower jaws, butthey are of a horny substance; and the mouth is terminatedin front by a horny bill, greatly resembling that of the duck,or the spoon-bill.The Whale is furnished with a singular apparatus designedfor filtration on a large scale. The palate has theform of a concave dome, and from its sides there descendsvertically into the mouth, a multitude of thin plates set parallelto each other, with one of their edges directed towardsthe circumference, and the other towards the middle of thepalate. These plates are known by thename of whalebone, and their generalform and appearance, as they hang fromthe roof of the palate, are shown inFig. 272, which represents only six ofthese plates.* They are connected tothe bone by means of a white ligamentoussubstance, to which they are immediatelyattached, and from whichthey appear to grow: at their innermargins, the fibres, of which their textureis throughout composed, cease toadhere together; but being loose anddetached, form a kind of fringe, calculatedto intercept, as in a sieve, all solidor even gelatinous substances thatmay have been admitted into the cavityof the mouth, which is exceedingly capacious;for as the plates of whalebonegrow only from the margins of the upperjaw, they leave a large space within,which, though narrow anteriorly, is wider as it extendsbackwards, and is capable of holding a large quantity ofIn the Piked Whale the plates of whalebone are placed very near together,not being a quarter of an inch asunder; and there ai-e above threehundred plates in the outer rows on each side of the mouth.MOUTH OF THE Whale 103water. ^ Thus, the whale is enabled to collect a whole shoalof mollusca, and other srr.all prey, by taking into its mouththe sea water which contains these animals, and allowing itto drain off through the sides, after passing through the intersticesof the net work formed by the filaments of thewhalebone. Some contrivance of this kind was even necessaryto this animal, because the entrance into its oesophagusis too narrow to admit of the passage of any prey of considerablesize; and it is not furnished with teeth to reduce thefood into smaller parts. The principal food of the BananaMysticetus, or great whalebone whale of the Arctic Seas, isthe small Clio Borealis, which swarms in immense numbersin those regions of the ocean; and which has been alreadydelineated in Fig. 120.*These remarkable organs for filtration entirely supersedethe use of ordinary teeth; and, accordingly, no traces ofteeth are to be discovered either in the upper or lower* jaw.Yet a tendency to conform to the type of the mammalia ismanifested in the early conformation of the whale; for rudimentsof teeth exist in the interior of the lower jaw beforebirth, lodged in deep sockets, and forming a row on eachside. The development of these imperfect teeth proceedsno farther; they even disappear at a very early period, andthe groove which contained them closes over, and, after ashort time, can no longer be seen. For the discovery ofthis curious fact we are indebted to Geoffrey St. HilaireIn connexion \tith this subject, an analogous fact, which hasbeen noticed in the parrot, may here be mentioned. Theyoung of the parrot, while still in the egg, presents a row oftubercles along the edge of the jaw, in external appearanceexactly resembling the rudiments of teeth, but without beingimplanted into regular sockets in the maxillary bones: theyare formed, however, by a process precisely similar to thatof dentition; that is, by deposition from a vascular pulp,connected with the jaw. These tubercles are afterwards• Vol. i. p. 186.f Cuvier, Siemens Fossiles, 3me edition, torn. v. p. 360.104 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.consolidated into one piece in each jaw, forming, by theirunion, the beak of the parrot, in a manner perfectly analogousto that which leads to the construction of the compoundtooth of the elephant, and which I shall presently describe.The original indentations are obliterated as the beak advancesin growth; but they are permanent in the bill of theduck, where the structure is very similar to that above describedin the embryo of the parrot.§ 3. Mastication by means of Teeth.The teeth, being essential instruments for seizing andholding the food, and effecting that degree of mechanical divisionnecessary to prepare it for the chemical action of thestomach, perform, of course, a very important part in theeconomy of most animals; and in none more so than in themammalia, the food of which generally requires considerablepreparation previously to its digestion. There exist, accordingly,the most intimate relations between the kind offood upon which each animal of this class is intended by natureto subsist, and the form, structure, and position of theteeth; and these relations may, indeed, be also traced in theshape of the jaw, in the mode of its articulation with thehead, in the proportional size and distribution of the muscleswhich move the jaw, in the form of the head itself, inthe length of the neck, and its position on#the trunjc, and,indeed, in the whole conformation of the skeleton. Butsince the nature of the appropriate food is at once indicatedby the structure and arrangement of the teeth, it is evidentthat these latter organs, in particular, will afford to the naturalistmost important characters for establishing a systematicclassification of animals, and more especially of quadrupeds,where the differences among the teeth are very considerable;and these differences have, accordingly, been theobjects of much careful study. To the physiologist theypresent views of still higher interest, by exhibiting mostOFFICES OF THE TEETH. 105striking evidences of the provident care with which everypart of the organization of animals has been constructed, inexactreference to their respective wants and destinations.The purposes answered by the teeth are principally thoseof seizing and detaining whatever is introduced into themouth, of cutting it asunder, and dividing it into smallerpieces, of loosening its fibrous structure, and of breakingdown and grinding its harder portions. Occasionally, someparticular teeth are much enlarged, in order to serve asweapons of attack or defence; for which purpose, they extendbeyond the mouth, and are then generally denominatedtusks; this we see exemplified in the Elephant, she Narwhal,the Walrus, the Hippopotamus, the Boar, and the Babiroussa.Four principal forms have been given to teeth, which accordinglymay be distinguished into the conical, the sharp-edged,the flat and the tuberculated teeth; though we occasionallyfind a few intermediate modifications of these forms.It is easy to infer the particular functions of each class ofteeth, from the obvious mechanical actions to which, bytheir form, they are especially adapted. The conical teeth,which are generally also sharp-pointed, are principally employedin seizing, piercing, and holding objects: such arethe offices which they perform in the Crocodile, and otherSaurian reptiles, where all the teeth are of this structure;and such are also their uses in most of the Cetacea, wheresimilar forms and arrangements of teeth prevail. All theDolphin tribe, such as the Porpus, the Grampus, and theDolphin, are furnished with a uniform row of conical teeth,set round both jaws, in number amounting frequently to twohundred. Fig. 273, which represents the jaws of the Corpus,shows the form of these simply prehensile teeth.The Cachalot has a similar row of teeth, which are, however,confined to the lower jaw. All these animals subsistupon fish, and their teeth are therefore constructed verymuch on the model of those offish; while those Cetacea, onthe other hand, which are herbivorous, as the Manatee andVol. II. 14106 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.the Dygong, or Indian Walrus, have teeth very differentlyformed. The tusks of animals must necessarily, as respectstheir shape, be classed among the conical teeth.The sharp-edged teeth perform the office of cutting anddividing the yielding textures presented to them; they actindividually as wedges or chisels, but when co-operatingwith similar teeth in the opposite jaw, they have the powerof cutting like shears or scissors. The flat teeth, of whichthe surfaces are generally rough, are used in conjunctionwith those meeting them in the opposite jaw for grindingdown the food by a lateral motion, in a manner* analogousto the operation of mill-stones in a mill. The tuberculatedteeth, of which the surfaces present a number of roundedeminences, corresponding to depressions in the teeth opposedto them in the other jaw, act more by their directpressure in breaking down hard substances, and poundingthem, as they would be in a mortar.The position of the teeth in the jaws has been anotherground of distinction. In those Mammalia which exhibitthe most complete set of teeth, the foremost in the row havethe sharp-edged or chisel shape, constituting the blades of acutting instrument; and they are accordingly denominatedincisors. The incisors of the upper jaw are always implantedin a bone, intermediate between the two upper jawbones,and called the intermaxillary bones The conicalThose teeth of the lower jaw which correspond with the incisors of theupper jaw, are also considered as incisors. In Man, and in the species ofquadrant that most nearly resemble him, the sutures which divide the intermaxillaryfrom the maxillary bones are obliterated before birth, and leavein the adult no trace of their former existence.TEETH OF GET ACE A^ 107teeth, immediately following the incisors, are called cuspi-date or canine teeth, from their being particularly conspicuousin dogs; as they are, indeed, in all the purely carnivoroustribes. In the larger beasts of prey, as the lion and thetiger, they become most powerful weapons of destruction:in the boar they are likewise of great size, and constitute thetusks of the animal. All the teeth that are placed fartherback in the jaw are designated by the general name of molarteeth or grinders, but it is a class which includes severaldifferent forms of teeth. Those teeth which are situatednext to the canine teeth, partake oTthe conical form, havingpointed eminences; these are called the false molar teeth,and, also, from their having generally two points, or cusps,the bicuspidate teeth. The posterior molar teeth are differentlyshaped in carnivorous animals, for they are raised intosharp and often serrated ridges, having many of the propertiesof cutting teeth. In insectivorous and frugivorous animalstheir surface presents prominent tubercles, either pointedor rounded, for pounding the food; while in quadrupedsthat feed on grass or grain they are flat and rough, for thepurpose simply of grinding.The apparatus for giving motion to the jaws is likewisevaried according to the particular movements required to actupon the food in the different tribes. The articulation of thelower jaw with the temporal bone of the skull, approachesto a hinge joint; but considerable latitude is allowed to itsmotions by the interposition of a moveable cartilage betweenthe two surfaces of articulation, a contrivance admirably answeringthe intended purpose. Hence, in addition to theprincipal movements of opening and shutting, which aremade in a vertical direction, the lower jaw has also some degreeof mobility in a horizontal or lateral direction, and islikewise capable of being moved backwards or forwards, toa certain extent The muscles which effect the closing ofthe jaw are principally the temporal and the masseter muscles;the former occupying the hollow of the temples, thelatter connecting the lower angle of the jaw with the zygo-108 lyre VITAL FUNCTIONS.magic arch. The lateral motions of the jaw are effected bymuscles placed internally between the sides of the jaw andthe basis of the skull.In the conformation of the teeth and jaws, a remarkablecontrast is presented between carnivorous and herbivorousanimals. In the former, of which the Tiger, Fig. 274, maybetaken as an example, the whole apparatus for masticationis calculated for the destruction of life, and for tearing anddividing the fleshy fibres. The molar teeth are armed withpointed eminences, which correspond in the opposite jawsso as exactly to lock into one another, like wheel-work, whenthe mouth is closed. All the muscles which close the jaware of enormous size and strength, and they imprint thebones of the skull with deep hollows, in which we tracemarks of the most powerful action. The temporal musclesoccupy the whole of the sides of the skull (t, t;) and by thecontinuance of their vigorous exertions, during the growthof the animal, alter so considerably the form of the bones,that the skulls of the young and the old animals are oftenwith difficulty recognised as belonging to the same species.*The process of the lower jaw (seen between t and t,) towhich this temporal muscle is attached, is large and prominent;and the arch bone (z,) from which the masseter arises,takes a wide span outwards, so as to give great strength toThis is remarkably the case with the Heart the skull of which exhibits,in old animals, a large vertical crest, not met with at an early period of life.JAWS AND TEETH OP HERBIVORA. 109the muscle. The condyle, x)r articulating surface of the jaw(c) is received into a deep cavity, constituting a strictlyhinge joint, and admitting simply the motions of openingand shutting.In herbivorous animals, on the contrary, as may be seenin the skull of the Antelope, Fig. 275, the greatest force isbestowed, not so much on the motions of opening and shutting,as on those which are necessary for grinding, andwhich act in a lateral direction. The temporal muscles, occupyingthe space t, are comparatively small and feeble;the condyles of the jaw are broad and rounded, and moreloosely connected with the skull by ligaments; the musclesin the interior of the jaw, which move it from side to side,are very strong and thick; and the bone itself is extendeddownwards, so as to afford them a broad basis of attachment.The surfaces of the molar teeth are flattened and of greatextent, and they are at the same time kept rough, like thoseof mill-stones, their office' being in fact very similar to thatperformed by these implements for grinding. All thesecircumstances of difference are exemplified in the mostmarked manner, in comparing together the skulls of thelarger beasts of prey, as the tiger, the wolf, or the bear, withthose of the antelope, the horse, or the ox.The Rodentia, or gnawing quadrupeds, which I have alreadyhad occasion to notice, compose a well-marked familyof Mammalia. These animals are formed for subsisting on110 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.dry and tough materials, from which but little nutrimentcan be extracted; such as the bark, and roots, and even thewoody fibres of trees, and the harder animal textures, whichwould appear to be most difficult of digestion. They areall animals of diminutive stature, whose teeth are expresslyformed for gnawing, nibbling,and wearing away by continuedattrition, the harder texturesof organized bodies.The Rat whose skull is delineatedin Fig. 276, belongsto this tribe. They are allfurnished with two incisor teeth in each jaw, generally verylong, and having the exact shape of a chisel; and the molarteeth have surfaces irregularly marked with raised zig zaglines, rendering them very perfect instruments of trituration.The zygomatic arch is exceedingly slender and feeble;and the condyle is lengthened longitudinally to allowof the jaw being freely moved forwards and backwards,which is the motion for which the muscles are adapted, andby which the grinding operation is performed. The Beaver,the Bat, the Marmot, and the Porcupine, present examplesof this structure, among the omnivorous rodentia: andthe Hare, the Rabbit, the Shrew, among those that areprincipally herbivorous.The Quadrant, or Monkey tribes, approach nearestto' the human structure in the conformation of their teeth,which appear formed for a mixed kind of food, but areespecially adapted to the consumption of the more esculentfruits. The other orders of Mammalia exhibit intermediategradations in the structure of their teeth to those above described,corresponding to greater varieties in the nature oftheir food. Thus, the teeth and jaws of the Hyena areformed more especially for breaking down bones, and in sodoing exert prodigious force; and those of the Sea Otterhave rounded eminences, which peculiarly fit them forbreaking shells.STRUCTURE OP TEETH.IllThe teeth, though composed of the same chemical ingredientsas the ordinary bones, differ from them by having agreater density and compactness of texture, whence theyderive that extraordinary degree of hardness which they requirefor the performance of their peculiar office. The substancesof which they are composed are of three differentkinds: the first, which is the basis of the rest, constitutingthe solid nucleus of the tooth, has been considered as thepart most analogous in its nature to bone, but from itsmuch greater density, and from its differing from bone inthe mode of its formation, the name of ivory has been generallygiven to it. Its earthy ingredient consists almostentirely of phosphate of lime, the proportion of the carbonateof that earth entering into its composition being verysmall; and the animal portion is albumen, with a small quantityof gelatin.A layer of a still harder substance, termed the namelyusually covers the ivory, and, in teeth of the simplest structure,forms the whole of their outer surface: this is theease with the teeth of man and of carnivorous quadrupeds.These two substances, and the direction of their layers, areseen in Fig. 277, which is the section of a simple tooth, eis the outer case of enamel, o the osseous portion, and p thecavity where the vascular pulp which formed it was lodged.The enamel is composed almost wholly of phosphate oflime, containing no albumen, and scarcely a trace of gelatin;112 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.it is the hardest of all animal substances, and is capable ofstriking fire with steel. It exhibits a fibrous structure, approachingto a crystalline arrangement, and the direction ofits fibres, as shown by the form of its fragments when broken,is every where perpendicular to the surface of the ivoryto which it is applied. The ends of the fibres are thus aloneexposed to the friction of the substances on which the teethare made to act; and the effect of that friction in wearing theenamel is thus rendered the least possible.In the teeth of some quadrupeds, as of the Rhinoceros,the Hippopotamus, and most of the Rodentia, the enamel isintermixed with the ivory, and the two so disposed as toform jointly the surface for mastication. In the progress oflife, the layers of enamel, being the hardest, are less worndown by friction than those of the ivory, and thereforeform prominent ridges on the grinding surface, preservingit always in that rough condition, which best adapts it forthe bruising and comminuting of hard substances.The incisors of the rodentia are guarded by a plate of enamelonly on their anterior convex surfaces, so that by thewearing down of the ivory behind this plate, a wedge-likeform, of which the enamel constitutes the fine cutting edge,is soon given to the tooth, and is constantly retained as longas the tooth lasts (Fig. 2S0.) This mode of growth is admirablycalculated to preserve these chisel teeth fit for useduring the whole lifetime of the animal, an object of greaterconsequence in this description of teeth than in others, whichcontinue to grow only during a limited period. The samearrangement, attended with similar advantages, is adoptedin the structure of the tusks of the Hippopotamus.In teeth of a more complex structure, a third substance isfound, uniting the vertical plates of ivory and enamel, andperforming the office of an external cement. This substancehas received various names, but it is most commonly knownby that of the Crusta petrosa: it resembles ivory both inits composition and its extreme hardness; but is generallymore opaque and yellow than that substance.STRUCTURE OF TEETH. 113Other herbivorous quadrupeds, as the horse, and animalsbelonging to the ruminant tribe, have also complex teeth composedof these three substances; and their grinding surfacespresent ridges of enamel intermixed in a more irregularmanner with the ivory and crusta petrosa; but still givingthe advantage of a very rough surface to the trituration.Fig. 278 represents the grinding surface of the tooth of ahorse, worn down by long mastication, e is the enamel,marked by transverse lines, showing the direction of itsfibres, and enclosing the osseous portion (o,) which is shadedby interrupted lines. An outer coating of enamel (e) is alsovisible, and between that and the inner coat, the substancecalled crusta petrosa (c,) marked by waving lines, is seen.On the outside of all there is a plate of bone, which has beenleft white. In ruminants, the plates of enamel form crescents,which are convex outwardly in the lower, and inwardlyin the upper jaw; thus providing for the crossing ofthe ridges of the two surfaces, an arrangement similar tothat which is practised in constructing those of mill-stones.The teeth of the lower jaw fall within those of the upperjaw, so that a lateral motion is required in order to bringtheir surfaces opposite to each other alternately on both sides.Fig. 279 shows the grinding surface of the tooth oi 2iSheepywhere the layers of bone are not apparent, there being onlytwo layers of enamel (e,) and one of crusta petrosa (c.)These three component parts are seen to most advantagein a vertical and longitudinal section of the grinding toothof the elephant, in which they are more completely andequally intermixed than in that of any other animal. Fig.281 presents a vertical section of the grinding tooth of theAsiatic elephant, in the early stage of its growth^and highlypolished, so as to exhibit more perfectly its three componentstructures. The enamel, marked e, is formed of transversefibres; the osseous, or innermost structure is composed oflongitudinal plates. The general covering of crusta petrosa,c, is less regularly deposited, p is the cavity whichhad been occupied by the pulp. In this tooth, which is stillVol. II. 15THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.in a growing state, the fangs are not yet added, but they are,at one part, beginning to be formed. The same tooth, in itsJ'^^^t^usual state, as worn by mastication, gives us a natural andhorizontal section of its interior structure, in which the platesof white enamel are seen forming waved ridges. These constitute,in the Asiatic Elephant, a series of narrow transversebards, (Fig. 283,) and in the African Elephant, a series oflozenge-shaped lines, (Fig. 282,) having the ivory on theirinterior, and the yellow crusta petrosa on their outer sides;which latter substance also composes the whole circumferenceof the section.§ 4. Formation and Development of the Teeth.Few processes in animal development are more remarkablethan those which are employed to form the teeth; forthey are, by no means, the same as those by which ordinarybone is constructed; and being commenced at a very earlyperiod, they afford a signal instance of Nature's providentanticipation of the future necessities of the animal. Theteeth, being the hardest parts of the body, require a peculiarDENTITION. 115system of operations for giving them this extraordinarydensity, which no gradual consolidation could have imparted.The formation of the teeth is, in some respects, analogousto that of shell; inasmuch as all their parts, when oncedeposited, remain as permanent structures, hardly ever admittingof removal or of renewal by the vital powers. Unlikethe bones, which contain within their solid substancevessels of different kinds, by which they are nourished, modified,and occasionally removed, the closeness of the textureof the teeth is such as to exclude all vessels whatsoever.This circumstance renders it necessary that they should originallybe formed of the exact size and shape which they areever after to possess: accordingly, the foundation of the teeth,in the young animal, are laid at a very early period of itsevolution, and considerable progress has been made in theirgrowth even prior to birth, and long before they can comeinto use.A tooth of the simplest construction is formed from blood-vessels,which ramify through small masses of a gelatinousappearance; and each of these pulpy masses is itself enclosedin a delicate transparent vesicle, within which it grows tillit has acquired the exact size and shape of the future tooth.Each vascular pulp is farther protected by an investingmembrane of greater strength, termed its capsule, which islodged in a small cavity between the two bony plates of thejaw. The vessels of the pulp begin at an early period todeposite the calcareous substance, which is to compose theivory, at the most prominent points of that part of the vesicle,which corresponds in situation to the outer layer of thecrown of the tooth. The thin scales of ivory thus formedincrease by farther depositions made on their surfaces nextto the pulp, till the whole has formed the first, or outerlayer of ivory: in the mean time, the inner surface of thecapsule, which is in immediate contact with this layer, secretesthe substance that is to compose the enamel, and depositedit in layers on the surface of the ivory. This doubleoperation proceeds step by step, fresh layers of ivory being116 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.deposited, and building up the body of the tooth, and in thesame proportion encroaching upon the cavity occupied bythe pulp, which retires before it, until it is shrunk into asmall compass, and fills only the small cavity which remainsin the centre of the tooth. The ivory has by this time receivedfrom the capsule a complete coating of enamel, whichconstitutes the whole outer surface of the crown; after whichno more is deposited, and the function of the capsule havingceased, it shrivels and disappears. But the formation ofivory still continuing at the part most remote from thecrown, the fangs are gradually formed by a similar processfrom the pulp; and a pressure being thereby directed againstthe bone of the socket at the part where it is the thinnest,that portion of the jaw is absorbed, and the progress of thetooth is only resisted by the gum; and the gum, in its turn,soon yielding to the increasing pressure, the tooth cuts itsway to the surface. This process of successive depositionis beautifully illustrated by feeding a young animal at differenttimes with madder; the teeth which are formed atthat period exhibiting, in consequence, alternate layers ofred and of white ivory. '^The formation of the teeth of herbivorous quadrupeds,which have three kinds of substance, is conducted in a stillmore artificial and complicated manner. Thus, in the elephant,the pulp which deposits the ivory is extended in theform of a number of parallel plates; while the capsule whichinvests it, accompanies it in all its parts, sending down duplicatesof membrane in the intervals between the plates.Hence the ivory constructed by the pulp, and the enameldeposited over it, are variously intermixed; but besides this,the crusta petrosa is deposited on the outside of the enamel.Cuvier asserts that this deposition is made by the same capsulewhich has formed the enamel, and which, previouslyto this change of function, has become more spongy andvascular than before. But his brother, M. Frederic Cuvier,Cuvier. Dictionnaire des Sciences Meditates, t. viii. p. 320.DENTITION. 117represents the deposite of crusta petrosa, as performed by athird membrane, wholly distinct from the two others, andexterior to them all, although it follows them in all theirfolds. In the horse and the ox, the projecting processes ofthe pulp, have more of a conical form, with undulatingsides; and hence the waved appearance presented by theenamel, on making sections of the teeth of these animals.The tusks of the elephant are composed of ivory, and areformed precisely in the same manner as the simple conicalteeth already described, excepting that there is no outer capsule,and therefore no outer crust of enamel. The whole ofthe substance of the tusk is constructed by successive depositedof layers, having a conical shape, from the pulp whichoccupies the axis of the growing tusk; just as happens in theformation of a univalve shell which is not turbinated, as, forinstance, the patella. Hence, any foreign substance, a bullet,for example, which may happen to get within the cavityoccupied by the pulp, becomes, in process of time, encrustedwith ivory, and remains embedded in the solid substance ofthe tusk. The pulp, as the growth of the tusk advances, retiresin proportion as its place is occupied by the fresh depositedof ivory.The young animal requires teeth long before it has attainedits full stature; and these teeth must be formed of dimensionsadapted to that of the jaw, while it is yet of small size.But, as the jaw enlarges, and the teeth it contains admit notof any corresponding increase, it becomes necessary thatthey should be shed to make room for others of larger dimensions,formed in a more capacious mould. Provision ismade for this necessary change at a very early period of thegrowth of the embryo. The rudiments of the human teethbegin to form four or five months before birth: they arecontained in the same sockets with the temporary teeth, thecapsules of both being connected together. As the jaw enlarges,the second set of teeth gradually acquire their fulldimensions, and then, by their outward pressure, occasion118 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.the absorption of the fangs of the temporary teeth, and, pushingthem out, occupy their placesAs the jaw bone, during its growth, extends principallybackwards, the posterior portion, being later in forming, iscomparatively of a larger size than either the fore or the lateralparts; and it admits, therefore, of teeth of the full size,which, consequently, are permanent. The molar teeth,which are last formed, are, for want of space, rather smallerthan the others, and are called the wisdom-teeth, becausethey do not usually make their appearance above the gumtill the person has attained the age of twenty. In the negro,however, where the jaw is of greater length, these teeth havesufficient room to come into their places, and are, in general,fully as large as the other molars.The teeth of carnivorous animals are, from the nature oftheir food, less liable to be worn, than those of animalsliving on grain, or on the harder kinds of vegetable substances;so that the simple plating of enamel is sufficient topreserve them, even during a long life. But in many herbivorousquadrupeds we find that, in proportion as the frontteeth are worn away in mastication, other teeth are formed,and advance from the back of the jaw to replace them. Thishappens, in a most remarkable manner, in the elephant, andis the cause of the curved form which the roots assume; for,in proportion as the front teeth are worn away, those immediatelybehind them are pushed forwards by the growth ofa new tooth at the back of the jaw; and this process goes oncontinually, giving rise to a succession of teeth, each ofwhich is larger than that which has preceded it, during thewhole period that the animal lives. A similar succession ofteeth takes place in the wild boar, and, also, though to a lessextent, in the Sus (Ethiopians This mode of dentition• It is stated by Rousseau that the shedding of the first molar tooth bothof the Guinea-pig, and the Capibara, and its replacement by the permanenttooth, take place a few days before bii-tli. Anatomic Compared du systemdentau'e, p. 164.f Home, Phil. Trans, for 1799, p. 237; and 1801, p. 319.DENTITION. 119appears to be peculiar to animals of great longevity, andwhich subsist on vegetable substances containing a large proportionof tough fibres, or other materials of great hardness;and requiring for their mastication teeth so large as not toadmit of both the old and new tooth being contained, at thesame time, in the alveolar portion of the jaw.An expedient of a different kind has been resorted to inthe Rodentia, for the purpose of preserving the long chisel-shapedincisors in a state fit for use. By the constant andsevere attrition to which they are exposed, they wear awayvery rapidly, and would soon be entirely lost, and the animalwould perish in consequence, were it not that naturehas provided for their continued growth, by elongation fromtheir roots, during the whole of life. This growth proceedsin the same manner, and is conducted on the same principles,as the original formation of the simple teeth alreadydescribed: but, in order to effect this object, the roots ofthese teeth are of great size and length, and are deeply embeddedin the jaw, in a large bony canal provided for thatpurpose; and their cavity is always filled with the vascularpulp, from which the continued secretion and deposition offresh layers, both of ivory and enamel, take place. Thetusks of the Elephant and of the Hippopotamus exhibit thesame phenomenon of constant and uninterrupted growth.In the Shark, and some other fishes, the same object isattained in a different manner. Several rows of teeth arelodged in each jaw, but one only of these rows projects andis in use at the same time; the rest lying flat, but ready torise in order to replace those that have been broken or worndown. In some fishes, the teeth advance in proportion asthe jaw lengthens, and as the fore teeth are worn away: inother cases, they rise from the substance of the jaw, whichpresents on its surface an assemblage of teeth in differentstages of growth: so that, in this class of animals, the greatestvariety occurs in the mode of the succession of the teeth.The teeth of thb Crocodile, which are sharp-pointed THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.low cones, composed of ivory and enamel, are renewed bythe new tooth (as is shown at a, in Fig. 284,) being formedin the cavity of the one (b) which it isto replace, and not being enclosed in anyseparate cavity of the jaw bone (c.) Asthis new tooth increases in size, it pressesagainst the base of the old one, andentering its cavity, acquires the sameconical form; so that when the latter isshed, it is already in its place, and fitfor immediate use. This succession ofteeth takes place several times duringthe life of the animal, so that they are sharp and perfect atall ages.The fangs of serpents are furnished, like the stings ofnettles, with a receptacle at their base for a poisonous liquor,which is squeezed out by the pressure of the tooth, atthe moment it inflicts the wound, and conducted along acanal, opening near the extremity of the tooth. Each fangis lodged in a strong bony socket, and is, by the interventionof a connecting bone, pressed forwards whenever thejaw is opened sufficiently wide; and the fang is thus madeto assume an erect position. As these sharp teeth are veryliable to accidents, others are ready to supply their placeswhen wanted: for which purpose there are commonly providedtwo or three half-grown fangs, which are connectedonly by soft parts with the jaw, and are successively movedforwards into the socket to replace those that were lost.*The tube through which the poison flows is formed bythe folding in of the edges of a deep longitudinal groove,extending along the greater part of the tooth; an intervalbeing left between these edges, both at the base and extremityof the fang, by which means there remain apertures atboth ends for the passage of the fluid poison. This structurewas discovered by Mr. T. Smith in the Colder naiadHome, Lectures, &c. I. 33o«PANGS OP SERPENTS.or, Cobra de Capelle and is shown in Fig. 285, whichrepresents the full grown tooth, where the slight furrow, indicatingthe junction of the two sides of the original groove,may be plainly seen; as also the two apertures (a and b)above mentioned. This mode of formation of the tube isfarther illustrated by Fig. 2S6J which shows a transversesection of the same tooth, exhibiting the cavity (p) whichcontains the pulp of the tooth, and which surrounds that ofthe central tube in the form of a crescent. Figures 287 and288 are delineations of the same tooth in different stages ofgrowth, the bases of which, respectively, are shown inFigures 289 and 290. Figures 291 and 292 are magnifiedrepresentations of sections of the fangs of another species ofserpent, resembling the rattle-snake. Fig. 291 is a sectionof the young fang taken about the middle: in this stage ofgrowth, the cavity which contains the pulp, almost entirelysurrounds the poison tube, and the edges of the depression,which form the suture, are seen to be angular, and presentso large a surface to each other, that the suture is completelyfilled up, even in this early stage of growth. Fig. 292is a section of a full-grown fang of the same species of serpent,at the same part as the preceding; and here the cavity• Philosophical Transactions, 1818,-p. 471.Vol. II. 16THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.of the pulp is seen much contracted from the more advancedstage of growth.It is a remarkable circumstance, noticed by Mr. Smith,that a similar longitudinal furrow is perceptible on everyoneof the teeth of the same serpent; and that this appearanceis most marked on those which are nearest to the poisonousfangs: these furrows, however, in the teeth that arenot venomous, are confined entirely to the surface, and donot influence the form of the internal cavity. No trace ofthese furrows is discernible in the teeth of those serpentswhich are not armed with venomous fangs.Among the many instances in which teeth are convertedto uses widely different from mastication, may be noticedthat of the Sqiialns priests, or Saw-fish, where the teeth areset horizontally on the two lateral edges of the upper jaw,which is prolonged in the form of a snout (seen in a. Fig.293,) constituting a most formidable weapon of offence, bis a more enlarged view of a portion of this instrument, seenfrom the under side.§. 5. Trituration of Food in Internal Cavities,The mechanical apparatus, provided for triturating theharder kinds of food, does not belong exclusively to theGASTRIC TEETH.mouth, or entrance into the alimentary canal, for in many-animalswe find this office performed by interior organs.294 Among the inferior classes, wefind examples of this conformationin the Crustacea, the Mollusca,and above all in Insects.Thus, there is found in the stomachof the Lobster, a cartilaginousframe-work, in which areimplanted hard calcareous bodies,having the form, and performing the functions of teeth.They are delineated in Fig. 294, which presents a view ofthe interior of the stomach of that animal. The tooth a issituated in the middle of this frame, has a rounded conicalshape, and is smaller than the others (b, c,) which are placedone on each side, and which resemble in their form broadmolar teeth. When these three teeth are brought togetherby the action of the surrounding muscles, they fit exactlyinto each other, and are capable of grinding and completelypulverizing the shells of the mollusca introduced into thestomach. These teeth are the result of a secretion of calcareousmatter from the inner coat of that organ, just as theouter shell of the animal is a production of the integument:and at each casting of the shell, these teeth, togetherwith the whole cuticular lining of the stomach to whichthey adhere, are thrown off, and afterwards renewed by afresh growth of the same material. In the Craw-fish, thegastric teeth are of a different shape, and are more adapted todivide than to grind the food.Among the gasteropodous Mollusca, severalspecies of Bullae have stomachs armedwith calcareous plates, which act as cuttingor grinding teeth. The Bulla aperta hasthree instruments of this description, asmay be seen in Fig. 295, which shows theinterior of the stomach of that species.Similar organs are found in the Bulla litheVITAL FUNCTIONS.maria. The Jiplysia has a considerable number of these gastricteeth. An apparatus of a still more complicated kindis provided in most of the insects belonging to the order ofOrthoptera; but I shall not enter at present in their description,as it will be more convenient to include themin the general account of the alimentary canal of insects,which will be the subject of future consideration.The internal machinery for grinding is exemplified onthe largest scale in granivorous birds; where it forms partof the stomach itself, and is termeda Gizzard, It is shown in Fig.298, representing the interior ofthe stomach of a Swan. Both thestructure and the mode of operationof this organ bear a striking analogyto a mill for grinding corn, forit consists of two powerful muscles(g,) of a hemispherical shape,with their flat sides applied to eachother, and their edges united by astrong tendon, which leaves a vacantspace of an oval or quadrangular form between theirtwo surfaces. These surfaces are covered by a thick anddense horny substance, which, when the gizzard is in action,performs an office similar to that of mill-stones. Inmostbirds, there is likewise a sac, or receptacle, termedthe Craw, (represented laid open at c) in which the foodis collected for the purpose of its being dropped, in smallquantities at a time, into the gizzard, in proportion as thelatter gradually becomes emptied Thus, the analogy betweenthis natural process and the artificial operation of acorn-mill is preserved even in the minuter details; for whilethe two flat surfaces of the gizzard act as mill-stones, thecraw supplies the place of the hopper, the office of which isThe gastric glands, which are spread over the greater part of the internalsurface of the craw, and which prepare a secretion for macerating" thegrain, are also seen in this part of the figure.ACTION OF THE GIZZARD. 125to allow the grain to pass out in small quantities into theaperture of the upper mill-stone, which brings it within thesphere of their action.Innumerable are the experiments which have been made,particularly by Reaumur and Spallanzani, with a view toascertain the force of compression exerted by the gizzardon its contents. Balls of glass, which the bird was made toswallow with its food, were soon ground to powder: tintubes, introducer' into the stomach, were flattened, and thenbent into a variety of shapes; and it was even found thatthe points of needles and of lancets fixed in a ball of lead,where blunted and broken off by the power of the gizzard,while its internal coat did not appear to be in the slightestdegree injured. These results were long the subject of admirationto physiologists; and being echoed from mouth tomouth, were received with a sort of passive astonishment,till Hunter directed the powers of his mind to the inquiry,and gave the first rational explanation of the mechanism bywhich they are produced. He found that the motion of thesides of the gizzard, when actuated by its muscles, is lateral,and at the same time circular; so that the pressure it exerts,though extremely great, is directed nearly in the plane ofthe grinding surfaces, and never perpendicularly to them;and thus the edges and points of sharp instruments are eitherbent or broken off by the lateral pressure, without theirhaving an opportunity of acting directly upon those surfaces.Still, however, it is evident that the effects we observeproduced upon sharp metallic points and edges, couldnot be accomplished by the gizzard without some assistancefrom other sources; and this assistance is procured in a verysingular, and, at the same time, very effectual manner.On opening the gizzard of a bird, it is constantly foundto contain a certain quantity of small pebbles, which musthave been swallowed by the animal. The most natural reasonthat can be assigned for the presence of these stones, is,that they aid the gizzard in triturating the contained food,and that they, in fact, supply the office of teeth in that THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.ration. Spallanzani, however, has called in question thesoundness of this explanation, and has contended that thepebbles found in the gizzard are swallowed merely by accident,or in consequence of the stupidity of the bird, whichmistakes them for grain. But this opinion has been fullyand satisfactorily refuted both by Fordyce and by Hunter,whose observations concur in establishing the truth of thecommon opinion, that in all birds possessing gizzards, thepresence of these stones is essential to perfect digestion. Agreater or less number of them is contained in every gizzard,when the bird has been able to meet with the requisitesupply, and they are never swallowed but along withthe food. Several hundred were found in the gizzard of aturkey; and two thousand in that of a goose: so great anaccumulation could never have been the result of mere accident.If the alleged mistake could ever occur, we shouldexpect it to take place to the greatest extent in those birdswhich are starving for want of food; but this is far from beingthe case. It is found that even chickens, which havebeen hatched by artificial heat, and which could never havebeen instructed by the parent, are yet guided by a naturalinstinct in the choice of the proper materials for food, andfor assisting its digestion: and if a mixture of a large quantityof stones with a small proportion of grain be set beforethem, they will at once pick out the grain, and swallowalong with it only the proper proportion of stones. Thebest proof of the utility of these substances may be derivedfrom the experiments of Spallanzani himself, who ascertainedthat grain is not digested in the stomachs of birds,when it is protected from the effects of trituration.Thus, the gizzard may, as Hunter remarks, be regardedas a pair of jaws, whose teeth are taken in occasionally toassist in this internal mastication. The lower part of thegizzard consists of a thin muscular bag, of which the officeis to digest the food which has been thus triturated.Considerable differences are met with in the structure ofthe gizzards of various kinds of birds, corresponding to diffAPPARATUS. 127terence in the texture of their natural food. In the Turkey,the two muscles which compose the gizzard are of unequalstrength, that on the left side being considerably larger thanthat on the right; so that while the principal effort is madeby the former, a smaller force is used by the latter to restorethe parts to their situation. These muscles produce, bytheir alternate action, two effects; the one a constant trituration,by a rotatory motion: the other a continued, but oblique,pressure of the 'contents of the cavity. As this cavity is ofan oval form, and the muscle swells inwards, the oppositesides never come into contact, and the interposed materialsare triturated by their being intermixed with hard bodies.In the Goose and Swan, on the contrary, the cavity is flattened,and its lateral edges are very thin. The surfaces appliedto each other are mutually adapted in their curvatures,a concave surface being every where applied to one whichis convex: on the left side, the concavity is above: but onthe right side, it is below. The horny covering is muchstronger, and more rough, than in the turkey, so that thefood is ground by a sliding, instead of a rotatory motion, ofthe parts opposed, and they do not require the aid of anyintervening hard substances of a large size. This motionbears a great resemblance to that of the grinding teeth ofruminating animals, in which the teeth of the under jawslide upwards, within those of the upper, pressing the foodbetween them, and fitting it, by this peculiar kind of trituration,for being digested.*§ 6. Deglutition.The great object of the apparatus which is to prepare thefood for digestion, is to reduce it into a soft pulpy state, soas to facilitate the chemical action of the stomach upon it:for this purpose, solid food must not only be subjected tomechanical trituration, but it must also be mixed with a cereHome, Phil. Trans, for 1810, p. 188.128 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.tain proportion of fluid. Hence, all animals that masticatetheir food are provided with organs which secrete a fluid,called the Saliva, and which pour this fluid into the mouthas near as possible to the grinding surfaces of the teeth.These organs are glands, placed in such a situation as to becompressed by the action of the muscles which move thejaw, and to pour out the fluid they secrete in greatest quantity,just at the time when the food is undergoing mastication.Saliva contains a large quantity of water, togetherwith some salts and a little animal matter. Its use is notonly to soften the food, but also to lubricate the passagethrough which it is to be conveyed into the stomach; andthe quantity secreted has always a relation to the nature ofthe food, the degree of mastication it requires, and the modein which it is swallowed. In animals which subsist on vegetablematerials, requiring more complete maceration thanthose which feed on flesh, the salivary glands are of largesize: they are particularly large in the Rodentia, which feedon the hardest materials, requiring the most complete trituration;and in these animals we find that the largest quantityof saliva is poured out opposite to the incisor teeth, whichare those principally employed in this kind of mastication.In Birds and Reptiles, which can hardly be said to masticatetheir food, the salivary glands are comparatively ofsmall size; the exceptions to this rule occurring chiefly inthose tribes which feed on vegetables, for in these the glandsare more considerable.* In Fishes there is no structure ofthis kind provided, there being no mastication performed:and the same observation applies to the Cetacea. In thecephalopodous and gasteropodous Mollusca, we find a salivaryapparatus of considerable size: Insects, and the *Bnne-lida,^ also, generally present us with organs which appearto perform a similar office.The large salivary g-land in the woodpecker, is seen at s, Fig. 271, page99.f The bunch of filaments, seen at s, Fig. 260 (p. 78) are the salivary organsof the leech.DEGLUTITION. 129The passage of the food along the throat is facilitated bythe mucous secretions, which are poured out from a multitudeof glands interspersed over the whole surface of themembrane lining that passage. The Camel, which is formedfor traversing dry and sandy deserts, where the atmosphereas well as the soil is parched, is specially provided with aglandular cavity placed behind the palate, and which furnishesa fluid for the express purpose of moistening and lubricatingthe throat.In the structure of the (Esophagus, which is the name ofthe tube along which the food passes from the mouth to thestomach, we may trace a similar adaptation to the particularkind of food taken in by the animal. When it is swallowedentire, or but little changed, the oesophagus is a very widecanal, admitting of great dilatation. This is the case withmany carnivorous birds, especially those that feed on fishes,where its great capacity enables it to hold, for a considerabletime, the large fish which are swallowed entire, andwhich could not conveniently be admitted into the stomach.Blumenbach relates that a sea-gull, which he kept alive formany years, could swallow bones of three or four inches inlength, so that only their lower ends reached the stomach,and were digested, while their upper ends projected into theoesophagus, and descended gradually, in proportion as theformer were dissolved. Serpents, which swallow animalslarger than themselves, have, of course, the oesophagus, aswell as the throat, capable of great dilatation, and the foodoccupies a long time in passing through it, before it reachesthe digesting cavity. The turtle has also a capacious oesophagus,the inner coat of which is beset with numerous firmand sharp processes, having their points directed towardsthe stomach; these are evidently intended to prevent the returnof the food into the mouth. Grazing quadrupeds, who,while they eat, carry their heads close to the ground, havea long oesophagus, with thick muscular coats, capable of exertingconsiderable power in propelling the food in the directionof the stomach, which is contrary to that of gravity.Vol. II. 17130 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.§ 7. Receptacles for retaining Food.Provision is often made for the retention of the undigestedfood in reservoirs, situated in different parts of the mouth,or the oesophagus, instead of its being immediately introducedinto the stomach. These reservoirs are generally employedfor laying in stores of provisions for future consumption.Many quadrupeds have cheek pouches for this purpose:this is the case with several species of Monkeys and Baboons;and, also, with the Miss cricetus,ov Hamster. TheMus busarius, or Canada rat, has enormous cheek pouches,which, when distended with food, even exceed the bulk ofthe head. Small cheek pouches exist in that singular animal,the Ornithorhyncus. The Scours palmar, orpalm squirrel, is also provided with a pouch for laying in astore of provisions. A remarkable dilatation, in the lowerpart of the mouth and throat, answering a similar purpose,takes place in the Pelican; a bird which displays great dexterityin tossing about the fish with which it has loaded thisbag, till it is brought into the proper position for being swallowed.The Whale has also a receptacle of enormous size,extending from the mouth to a considerable distance underthe trunk of the body.Analogous in design to these pouches are the dilatationsof the Oesophagus of birds, denominated crops. In most birdswhich feed on grain, the crop is a capacious globular sac,placed in front of the throat, and resting on the circular bone.The crop of the Parrot is represented at c, Fig. 299; wherealoes indicates the cardiac portion of the stomach, and g thegizzard, of that bird. The inner coat of the crop is furnishedv^^ith numerous glands, which pour out considerable quantitiesof fluid for macerating and softening the dry and hard textureof the grain, which, for that purpose, remains there for aconsiderable time. Many birds feed their young from thecontents of the crop; and, at those seasons its glands areRECEPTACLES FOR RETAINING POOD.much enlarged, and very active in preparing their peculiarsecretions: this is remarkably the case in the Pigeon (Fig.300,) which, instead of a singlesac, is provided with two (seenat c, c, Fig. 300,) one on eachside of the oesophagus (o.) Thepouting pigeon has the facultyof filling these cavities withair, which produces that distendedappearance of the throat fromwhich it derives its name. Birdsof prey have, in general, verysmall crops, their food not requiringany previous softening;but the Vulture, which gorges large quantities of fleshat a single meal, has a crop of considerable size, forming,when filled, a visible projection in front of the chest.Birds which feed on fish have no separate dilatation for thispurpose, probably because the great width of the oesophagus,and its having the power of retaining a large mass of food,render the farther dilatation of any particular part of thetube unnecessary. The lower portion of the oesophagus appearsoften, indeed, in this class of animals, to answer thepurpose of a crop, and to effect changes in the food whichmay properly be considered as a preliminary stage of thedigestive process.132 )CHAPTER VII.Digestion.All the substances received as food into the stomach,whatever be their nature, must necessarily undergo manychanges of chemical composition before they can gain admissioninto the general mass of circulating fluids; but theextent of the change required for that purpose will, of course,be in proportion to the difference between the qualities ofthe nutritive materials in their original, and in their assimilatedstate. The conversion of vegetable into animal matternecessarily implies a considerable modification of properties;but even animal substances, however similar may betheir composition to the body which they are to nourish,must still pass through certain processes of decomposition,and subsequent recombination, before they can be broughtinto the exact chemical state in which they are adapted tothe purposes of the living system.The preparatory changes we have lately been occupied inconsidering, consist chiefly in the reduction of the food to asoft consistence, which is accomplished by destroying the cohesionof its parts, and mixing them uniformly with the fluidsecretions of the mouth; effects which may be considered aswholly of a mechanical nature. The first real changes in itschemical state are produced in the stomach, where it is convertedinto a substance termed Chyme; and the process bywhich this first step in the assimilation of the food is produced,constitutes what is properly termed Digestion.Nothing has been discovered in the anatomical structureof the stomach, tending to throw any light on the means bywhich this remarkable chemical change is induced on theDIGESTION. 133materials it contains. The stomach is, in most animals, asimple sac, composed of several membranes, enclosing thinlayers of muscular fibres, abundantly supplied with blood-vesselsand with nerves, and occasionally containing structureswhich appear to be glandular. The human stomach,which is delineated in Fig. 301, exhibits one of the simplestmforms of this organ; c being the cardiac portion, or partwhere the oesophagus opens into it; and p the pi/loric portionor that which is near its termination in the intestine.At the pylorus itself, the diameter of the passage is muchconstricted, by a fold of the inner membrane, which is surroundedby a circular band of muscular fibres, performingthe office of a sphincter, and completely closing the lowerorifice of the stomach, during the digestion of its contents.The principal agent in digestion, as far as the ordinarychemical means are concerned in that operation, is a fluidsecreted by the coats of the stomach, termed the Gastricjuice. This fluid has, in each animal, the remarkable propertyof dissolving, or, at least, reducing to a pulp, all thesubstances which constitute the natural food of that particularspecies of animal; while it has comparatively but littlesolvent power over other kinds of food. Such is the conclusionwhich has been deduced from the extensive researcheson this subject, made by that indefatigable experimentalist,Spallanzani, who found, in numberless trials, thatthe gastric juice taken from the stomach, and put into glass154 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.vessels, produced, if kept at the usual temperature of theanimal, changes, to all appearance, exactly similar to thosewhich take place in natural digestion.* In animals whichfeed on flesh, the gastric juice was found to dissolve onlyanimal substances, and to exert no action on vegetable matter;while, on the contrary, that taken from herbivorous animals,acted on grass and other vegetable substances, withoutproducing any effect on flesh; but in those animals, which,like man, are omnivorous, that is, partake indiscriminatelyof both species of aliment, it appeared to be fitted equallyfor the solution of both. So accurate an adaptation of thechemical powers of a solvent to the variety of substancesemployed as food by different animals, displays, in the moststriking manner, the vast resources of nature, and the refinedchemistry she has put in action for the accomplishmentof her different purposes.In the stomachs of many animals, as also in the human, itis impossible to distinguish with any accuracy the organizationby which the secretion of the gastric juice is effected:but where the structure is more complex, there may be observeda number of glandular bodies interspersed in variousparts of the internal coats of the stomach. These, whichare termed the Gastric glands, are distributed in variousways in different instances: they are generally found ingreatest number, and often in clusters, about the cardiac orificeof the stomach; and they are frequently intermixed withglands of another kind, which prepare a mucilaginous fluid,serving to protect the highly sensible coats of the stomachfrom injurious impressions. These latter are termed the• The accuracy of this conclusion has been lately contested by M. DeMontague, whose report of the effects of the gastric juice of animals out ofthe body, does not accord with that of Spallanzani; but the difference of circumstancesin which his experiments were made, is quite sufficient to accountfor the discrepancy in the results? and those of M. De Montague, therefore,by no means, invalidate the general facts stated in the text, which havebeen established by the experiments, not only of Spallanzani, but also ofReaumur, Stevens, Leuret, and Lassaigne. See Alison's Outlines of Physiologyand Pathology, p. 170.DIGESTION.mucous glands, and they are often constructed so as topour their contents into intermediate cavities, or small sacs,which are denominated follicles, where the fluid is collectedbefore it is discharged into the cavity of the stomach. Thegastric glands of birds are larger and more conspicuous thanthose of quadrupeds: but, independently of those which aresituated in the stomach, there is likewise found, in almostall birds, at the lower termination of the oesophagus, a largeglandular organ, which has been termed the bulbous glansIn the Ostrich, this organ is of so great a size asto give it the appearance of a separate stomach. A view ofthe internal surface of the stomach of the African ostrich isgiven in Fig. 302; where c is the cardiac cavity, the coatsof which are studded with numerous glands; g, g, are thetwo sides of the gizzard. Fig. 303 shows one of the gastricglands of the African ostrich; Fig. 304, a gland fromthe stomach of the American ostrich, and Fig. 305, a sectionof a gastric gland in the beaver, showing the branchingof the ducts, which form three internal openings. In birdsthat live on vegetable food, the structure of the gastricglands is evidently different from that of the correspondingglands in predaceous birds; but as these anatomical detailshave not as yet tended to elucidate in any degree the THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.poses to which they are subservient in the process of digestion,I pass them over as being foreign to the object of ourpresent inquiry.*It is essential to the perfect performance of digestion, thatevery part of the food received into the stomach should beacted upon by the gastric juice; for which purpose provisionis made that each portion shall, in its turn, be placedin contact with the inner surface of that organ. This is themore necessary, as many facts render it probable, as will benoticed more particularly hereafter, that, besides the chemicalaction of tie gastric juice, an influence, derived from thenerves, essentially contributes to the accomplishment of thechemical changes which the food undergoes in the stomach.For this reason it is that the coats of the stomach are providedwith muscular fibres, passing, some in a longitudinal,others in a transverse, or circular direction; while a thirdset have an oblique, or even spiral course When thegreater number of these muscles act together, they exert aconsiderable pressure upon the contents of the stomach; apressure which, no doubt, tends to assist the solvent actionof the gastric juice. When different portions act in succession,they propel the food from one part to another, andthus promote the mixture of every portion with the gastricjuice. We often find that the middle transverse bands contractmore strongly than the rest, and continue contractedfor a considerable time. The object of this contraction,which divides the stomach into two cavities, appears to beto separate its contents into two portions, so that each maybesubjected to different processes; and, indeed, the differencesin structure, which are often observable between thesetwo portions of the stomach, would lead to the belief thattheir functions are in some respects different.• These structures have been examined M'ith great care and minutenessby Sir Everard Home, who has given the results of his inquiries in a seriesof papers, read from time to time to the Royal Society, and published intheir Transactions.t See Fig. 51, vol. i. p. 106, and its description, p. 107.DIGESTION, 137During digestion the exit of the food from the stomachinto the intestine is prevented by the pylorus being closedby the action of its sphincter muscle. It is clear that thefood is required to remain for some time in the stomach inorder to be perfectly digested, and this closing of the pylorusappears to be one means employed for attaining thisend; and another is derived from the property which thegastric juice possesses of coagulating, or rendering solid,every animal or vegetable fluid susceptible of undergoingthat change. This is the case with fluid albumen; the whiteof an egg, for instance, which is nearly pure albumen, isvery speedily coagulated when taken into the stomach; thesame change occurs in milk, which is immediately curdledby the juices that are there secreted, and these effects takeplace quite independently of any acid that may be presentThe object of this change from fluid to solid appears to beto detain the food for some time in the stomach, and thusto allow of its being thoroughly acted upon by the digestivepowers of that organ. Those fluids which pass quicklythrough the stomach, and thereby escape its chemical action,however much they may be in themselves nutritious,are very imperfectly digested, and consequently afford verylittle nourishment. This is the case with oils, with jelly,and with all food that is much diluted.* Hunter ascertainedA diet consisting of too large a proportion of liquids, although it maycontain much nutritive matter, yet if it be incapable of being coagulated bythe stomach, will not be sufficiently acted upon by that organ to be properlydigested, and will not only afford comparatively little nourishment, but beveiy liable to produce disorder of the alimentary canal. Thus, soups willnot prove so nutritive when taken alone, as when they are united with acertain proportion of solid food, capable of being detained in the stomach,during a time sufficiently long to allow of the whole undergoing the processof digestion. I was led to this conclusion, not only from theory, butfrom actual observation of what took place among the prisoners in the Mil-bankPenitentiary, in 1823, when on the occasion of the extensive prevalenceof scorbutic dysentery in that prison, Dr. P. M. Latham and myselfwere appointed to attend the sick, and inquire into the origin of the disease.Among the causes which concur-red to produce this formidable malady, oneof the most prominent appeared to be an impoverished diet, consisting of aVol. II. IS138 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.that this coagulating power belongs to the stomach of everyanimal which he examined for that purpose, from the mostperfect down to reptiles;* and Sir E. Home has prosecutedthe inquiry with the same result, and ascertained that thisproperty is possessed by the secretion from the gastricglands, which communicates it to the adjacent membranes.!The gastric juice has also the remarkable property of correctingputrefaction. This is particularly exemplified inanimals that feed on carrion, to whom this property is ofgreat importance, as it enables them to derive wholesomenourishment from materials which would otherwise taintthe whole system with their poison, and soon prove destructiveto life.It would appear that the fy'st changes which constitutedigestion take place principally at the cardiac end of thestomach, and that the mass of food is gradually transferredtowards the pylorus, the process of digestion still continuingas it advances. In the Rabbit it has been ascertained thatfood newly taken into the stomach is always kept distinctfrom that which was before contained in it, and which hasbegun to undergo a change: for this purpose the new foodis introduced into the centre of the mass already in the stomach;so that it may come in due time to be applied to thecoats of that organ, and be in its turn digested, after thesame change has been completed in the latterAs the flesh of animals has to undergo a less considerablechange than vegetable materials, so we find the stomachsof all the purely carnivorous tribes consisting only of a membranousbag, which is the simplest form assumed by this or-largeproportion of soups, on which the prisoners had subsisted for the precedingeight months. A very full and perspicuous account of that diseasehas been di-awn up, with great ability, by my friend Dr. P. M. Latham, andpublished under the title of " An account of the disease lately prevalent inthe General Penitentiary." London, 1825.Observations on the Animal Economy, p. 172.■j- Phil. Trans, for 1813, p. 96.\ See Dr. Philip's Experimental Inquiry into the Laws of the Vital Functions,3d edition, p. 122.STOMACHS OP MAMMALIA.gan. But in other cases, as we have already seen, the stomachexhibits a division into two compartments by meansof a slight contraction; a condition which, as Sir E. Homehas remarked, is sometimes found as a temporary state ofthe human stomach;* while, in other animals, it is the naturaland permanent conformation. The Rodentia furnishmany examples of this division of the cavity into two distinctportions, which exhibit even differences in their structure:this is seen in the Dormouse, (Fig. 306) the Beaver,the Hare, the Rabbit, and the cape Hyrax, (Fig. 307.) Thefirst or cardiac portion is often lined with cuticle, while thelower portion is not so lined; as is seen very conspicuouslyin the stomachs of the Solipeda. The stomach of the Horse,in particular, is furnished at the cardia, with a spiral fold ofthe inner, or cuticular membrane, which forms a completevalve, offering no impediment to the entrance of foodfrom the oesophagus, but obstructing the return of any partof the contents of the stomach into that passage.! ThisThe figure given of tile human stomach, p. 18&, shows it in the state ofpartial contraction here described.•j- The total inability of a horse to vomit is probably a consequence of theimpediment presented by this valve. See Mem. du Museum desist. Nat. viii.111.THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.valve is shown in Fig. .311, which represents an inner viewof the cardiac portion of the stomach of the horse; o beingthe termination of the oesophagus.The stomach of the WaterRat is composed of two distinctcavities, having a narrowpassage of communication:the first cavity is lined withcuticle, and is evidently intendedfor the maceration ofthe food before it is submittedto the agents which are toeffect its digestion; a processwhich is completed in the secondcavity, provided, for thatpurpose, with a glandular surface.In proportion as nature allows of greater latitude in diet, wefind her providing great complication in the digestive apparatus,and subdividing the stomach into a greater number of cavities,each having probably a separate office assigned to it,though concurring in one general effect. A gradation in thisrespect may be traced through a long line of quadrupeds,such as the Hog, the Peccary, the Porcupine, (Fig, 308,) andthe Hippopotamus, where we find the number of separatepouches for digestion amounting to four or five. Next tothese we may rank the very irregular stomach of the ,(Fig. 309) composed of a multitude of cells, in whichthe food probably goes through several preparatory processes:and still greater complication is exhibited by the stomachsof the Cetacea, as, for example, in that of the Porpus (Fig.310.) As the fishes upon which this animal feeds are swallowedwhole, and have large sharp bones, which would injureany surface not defended by cuticle, receptacles are provided,in which they may be softened and dissolved, and even convertedinto nourishment, by themselves, and without interferingwith the digestion of the soft parts. The narrow com-stomachsOF MAMMALIA.munitions between these several stomachs of the cetaceaare probably intended to ensure the thorough solution of theircontents, by preventing the exit of all such portions as havenot perfectly undergone that process.Supernumerary cavities of this kind, belonging to thestomach, are more especially provided in those animalswhich swallow food either in larger quantity«than is immediatelywanted, or of a nature which requires much preparationprevious to digestion. The latter is more particularlythe case with the horned ruminant tribes that feed on theleaves or stalks of vegetables, a kind of food, which, in proportionto its bulk, affords but little nutriment, and requires,therefore, a long chemical process, and a complicated digestiveapparatus, in order to extract from it the scanty nutritiousmatter it contains, and prepare it for being applied tothe uses of the system. This apparatus is usually consideredas consisting of four stomachs; and, in order to convey adistinct idea of this kind of structure, I have selected for representation,in Fig. 312, that of the Sheep, of which thefour stomachs are marked by the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, respectively,in the order in which they occur, when tracedfrom the oesophagus (c) to the intestine (p.)142 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.The grass, which is devoured in large quantities by theseanimals, and which undergoes but little mastication in themouth, is hastily swallowed, and is received into a capaciousreservoir, marked 1 in the figure, called ih^ paunch. Thiscavity is lined internally with a thick membrane, beset withnumerous flattened papillae, and is often divided into pouchesby transverse contractions. While the food remains in thisbag, it continues in rather a dry state; but the moisture withwhich it is surrounded contributes to soften it, and to prepareit for a second mastication; which is effected in the followingmanner. Connected with the paunch is another, butmuch smaller sac (2,) which is considered as the second stomach;and, from its internal membrane being thrown intonumerous irregular folds, forming the sides of polygonalcells, it has been called the honeycomb stomach, or reticule.Fig. 313 exhibits this reticulated appearance of the innersurface of this cavity. A singular connexion exists betweenthis stomach and the preceding; for, while the oesophagus appearsto open naturally into the paunch, there is, on eachside of its termination, a muscular ridge, which projects fromthe orifice of the latter, so that the two together form a channelleading into the second stomach; and thus the food canreadily pass from the oesophagus into either of these cavities,according as the orifice of the one or the other is opento receive it.It would appear, from the observations of Sir E. Home,that liquids drank by the animal pass at once into the secondstomach, the entrance into the first being closed. The foodcontained in the paunch is transferred, by small portions ata time, into this second, or honey-comb stomach, in whichthere is always a supply of water for moistening the portionof food introduced into it. It is in this latter stomach, then,that the food is rolled into a ball, and thrown up, throughthe oesophagus, into the mouth, where it is again masticatedat leisure, and while the animal is reposing; a process whichis well known by the name of chewing the cud, or rumination.STOMACHS OF RUMINANTS. 143When the mass, after being thoroughly ground down bythe teeth, is again swallowed, it passes along the oesophagusinto the third stomach (3,) the orifice of which is broughtforward by the muscular bands, forming the two ridges alreadynoticed, which are continued from the second stomach,and which, when they contract, effectually preventany portion of the food from dropping into either of the precedingcavities. In the ox, this third stomach is describedby Sir E. Home, as having the form of a crescent, and ascontaining twenty-four septa, or broad folds of its innermembrane. These folds are placed parallel to one another,like the leaves of a book, excepting that they are of unequalbreadths, and that a narrower fold is placed between each ofthe broader ones. Fig. 314 represents this plicated structurein the interior of the third stomach of a bullock. Whateverfood is introduced into this cavity, which is named,from its foliated structure, the many-plies stomach, mustpass between these folds, and describe three-fourths of a circle,before it can arrive at the orifice leading to the fourthstomach, which is so near that of the third, that the distancebetween them does not exceed three inches. There is, however,a more direct channel of communication between theoesophagus and the fourth stomach (4,) along which milktaken by the calf, and which does not require to be eitheror ruminated, is conveyed directly from the oesophagusto this fourth stomach; for, at that period, the foldsof the many-plies stomach are not yet separated, and adhereclosely together; and, in these animals, rumination does nottake place, till they begin to eat solid food. It is in thisfourth stomach, which is called the reed, that the proper digestionof the food is performed, and it is here that the coagulationof the milk takes place; on which account the coatsof this stomach are employed in dairies, under the name ofrennet, to obtain curd from milk.A regular gradation in the structure of ruminating stomachsmay be traced in the different genera of this familyof quadrupeds. In ruminants with horns, as the bullock144 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.and the sheep, there are two .preparatory stomachs for retainingthe food previous to rumination, a third for receivingit after it has undergone this process, and a fourth for effectingits digestion. Ruminants without horns, as the Camel,Dromedary, and Lama, have only one preparatory stomachbefore rumination, answering the purpose of the two first stomachsof the bullock; a second, which I shall presently notice,and which takes no share in digestion, being employedmerely as a reservoir of water; a third, exceedingly small,and of which the office has not been ascertained; and a fourth,which both receives and digests the food after rumination.Those herbivorous animals which do not ruminate, as thehorse and ass, have only one stomach; but the upper portionof it is lined with cuticle, and appears to perform some preparatoryoffice, which renders the food more easily digestibleby the lower portion of the same cavity.*The remarkable provision above alluded to in the Namelyan animal which nature has evidently intended as the inhabitantof the steril and arid regions of the East, is that ofreservoirs of water, which, when once filled, retain theircontents for a very long time, and may minister not only tothe wants of the animal that possesses it, but, also, to thoseof man. The second stomach of the Camel has a separatecompartment, to which is attached a series of cellular appendages;(exhibited, on a small scale, in Fig. 315:) in thesethe water is retained by strong muscular bands, which closethe orifices of the cells, while the other portions of the stomachare performing their usual functions. By the relaxationof these muscles, the water is gradually allowed to mixwith the contents of the stomach, and thus the Camel is enabledto support long marches across the desert, without receivingany fresh supply. The Arabs, who traverse thoseextensive plains, accompanied by these useful animals, are,it is said, sometimes obliged, when faint, and in danger ofperishing from thirst, to kill one of their camels, for the sake♦ Home, Phil. Trans. svo. 1806, p. 370.DIGESTION. 145of the water contained in these reservoirs, which they alwaysfind to be pure and wholesome. It is stated by thosewho have travelled in Egypt, that camels, when accustomedto go journeys, during which they are for a long time deprivedof water, acquire the power of dilating the cells, soas to make them contain a more than ordinary quantity, asasupply for their journey.*When the Elephant, while travelling in very hot weather,is tormented by insects, it has been observed to throw outfrom its proboscis, directly upon the part on which the fliesfix themselves, a quantity of water, with such force as todislodge them. The quantity of water thrown out is in proportionto the distance of the part attacked, and is commonlyhalf a pint at a time: and this, Mr. Pierced, who residedmany years in India, has known the elephant to repeat eightor ten times within the hour. The quantity of water at theanimal's command for this purpose, observes Sir E. Home,cannot, therefore, be less than six quarts. This water is notonly ejected immediately after drinking, but six or eighthours afterwards. Upon receiving this information. Sir E.Home examined the structure of the stomach of that animal,and found in it a cavity, like that of the camel, perfectlywell adapted to afford this occasional supply of water, whichmay, at other times, be employed in moistening dry food forthe purposes of digestion.*In every series of animals belonging to other classes, acorrespondence may be traced, as has been done in the Mammalia,between the nature of their food and the conformationof their digestive organs. The stomachs of birds, reptiles,and fishes, are, with certain modifications, formed very muchupon the models of those already described, according as thefood consists of animal or of vegetable materials, or presentsmore or less resistance from the cohesion of its texture. Asit would be impossible, in this place, to enter into all the desHome, Lectures on Comparative Anatomy, vol. i. p. 171.t Supplement to Sir E. Home's Lectures on Comparative Anatomy, vol.vi. p. 9.Vol. II. 19146 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.tails necessary for fully illustrating this proposition, I mustcontent myself with indicating a few of the most general resultsof the inquiry.*As the food of birds varies, in different species, from thesoftest animal matter to the hardest grain, so we observeevery gradation in their stomachs, from the membranoussac of the carnivorous tribes, which is one extreme, to thetrue gizzard of granivorous birds, which occupies the otherextremity of the series. This gradation is established bythe muscular fibres, which surround the former, acquiring,in different tribes, greater extent, and forming stronger muscles,adapted to the corresponding variations in the food,more especially as it partakes of the animal or vegetable> character.■ In all the cold-blooded vertebrata, where digestion is notassisted by any internal heat, that operation proceeds moreslowly, though in the end not less effectually, than in animalswhere the contents of the stomach are constantly maintainedat a high temperature. They almost all rank as carnivorousanimals, and have accordingly stomachs, which,however they may vary in their form, are alike simplymembranous in their structure, and act by means of the solventpower of their secretions. Among reptiles, only a fewexceptions occur to this rule. The common sea-turtle thatis brought to our tables, is one of these; for it is found tofeed exclusively on vegetable diet, and chiefly on the seaweedcalled nostra maritima, and the structure of its stomachcorresponds exactly to the gizzard of birds. Sometortoises, also, which eat grass, make an approach to thesame structure.In fishes, indeed, although the membranous structure ofThe comparative anatomy of the stomach has been investigated withgreat diligence by the late Sir E. Home, and the results recorded in the papershe communicated, from time to time, to the Royal Society, and whichhave been republished in his splendid work, entitled " Lectures on ComparativeAnatomy," to which it will be seen that I have been largely indebted forthe fcicls and observations relating to this subject, detailed in the text.DIGESTION IN FISHES. 147the stomach invariably accompanies the habit of preyingupon other fish, yet there is one species of animal food,namely, shell-fish, which requires to be broken down bypowerful means before it can be digested. In many fish,which consume food of this kind, its trituration is effectedby the mouth, which is, for this purpose, as I have alreadynoticed in the wolf-fish, armed with strong grinding teeth.But in others, an apparatus similar to that of birds is employed;the office of mastication being transferred to thestomach. Thus, the Mullet has a stomach endowed with adegree of muscular power, adapting it, like the gizzard ofbirds, to the double piece of mastication and digestion; andthe stomach of the Gillaroo trout, a fish peculiar to Ireland,exhibits, though in a less degree, the same structure. Thecommon trout, also, occasionally lives upon shell-fish, andswallows stones to assist in breaking the shells.Among the invertebrated classes we occasionally meetwith instances of structures exceedingly analogous to a gizzard,and probably performing the same functions. Suchis the organ found in the Senna; the earth-worm has both acrop and a gizzard; and insects offer numerous instances,presently to be noticed, of great complexity in the structureof the stomach, which is often provided, not only with amechanism analagous to a gizzard, but also with rows ofgastric teeth.14S )CHAPTER VIII.Certification.The formation of Chyle, or the fluid which is the immediateand exclusive source of nutriment to the system, takesplace in the intestinal tube, into which the chyme preparedby the stomach is received, and where farther chemicalchanges are effected in its composition. The mode in whichthe conversion of chyme into chyle is accomplished, andindeed the exact nature of the changes themselves, being,as yet, very imperfectly known, it is consequently impossibleto trace distinctly the correspondence which, in allcases, undoubtedly exists between the objects, to be answeredand the means employed for their attainment. No doubtcan be entertained of the importance of the functions thatare performed by structures so large and so complicated asare those composing the alimentary canal, and its variousappendages. We plainly perceive that provision is madein the interior of that canal, for subjecting its contents tothe action, first, of an extensive vascular and nervous surface;and secondly, of various fluid secretions, derived fromdifferent sources, and exercising powerful chemical agencieson the digested aliment; that a muscular power is supplied,by means of the layers of circular and longitudinal fibres,contained between the outer and inner coats of the intestine,*for exerting a certain pressure on their contents, andfor propelling them forwards by a succession of contractions,which constitutes what is termed their peristaltic motion;and lastly, that contrivances are at the same time resortedto for retarding the progress of the aliment in its passage• See vol. i. p. 106.CHYLIFICATION. 149along the canal, so that it may receive the full action ofthese several agents, and yield the utmost quantity of nutrimentit is capable of affording.The total length of the intestinal tube differs much in differentanimals, being in general, as already stated, smaller inthe carnivorous tribes, than those which feed on substancesof difficult die sion, or affording but little nourishment. Inthese latter animals, the intestine is always of great length,exceeding that-nf the body many times; hence it is obligedto be folded into a spiral or serpentine course, forming manyconvolutions in the abdominal cavity. Sometimes, probablyfor greater convenience of package, instead of these numerousconvolutions, a similar effect of increasing the surfaceof the inner membrane is obtained by raising it into a greatnumber of folds, which project into the cavity. These foldsare often of considerable breadth, contributing not only to theextension of the surface for secretion and absorption, but alsoto the detention of the materials, with a view to their morecomplete elaboration. Remarkable examples of this kind ofstructure occur in most of the cartilaginousfishes, when the inner coat of the large intestineis expanded into a broad fold, which,as is seen in fig. 316, representing this structurein the interior of the intestine of theshark, takes a spiral course; and this is continuednearly the whole length of the canal,so that the internal surface is much augmentedwithout any increase in the length of theintestine.*When the nature of the assimilate processis such as to require the complete detention of the food,for a certain time, in particular situations, we find this objectprovided for by means of caeca, or separate pouchesStructures of this description have a particular claim to attention, fromthe light they throw on the nature of several fossil remains, lately investigatedwith singular success by Dr. Auckland.150 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.opening laterally from the cavity of the intestine, and havingno other outlet. Structures of this description have alreadybeen noticed in the infusoria and they are met with, indeed,in animals of every class, occurring in various parts of thealimentary tube, sometimes even as high as the pyloric portionof the stomach, and frequently at the commencementof the small intestine. Their most usual situation, however,is lower down, and especially at the part where the tube, afterhaving remained narrow in the first half of its course, isdilated into a wider cavity, which is distinguished from theformer by the appellation of the great intestine, and whichis frequently more capacious than the stomach itself. It isexceedingly probable that these two portions of the canalperform different functions in reference to the assimilationof the food : but hitherto no clew has been discovered to guideus through the intricacies of this difficult part of physiology;and we can discern little more than the existence alreadymentioned, of a constant relation between the nature of thealiment and the structure of the intestines, which are longer,more tortuous, and more complicated, and are furnished withmore extensive folds of the inner membrane, and withlarger and more numerous caeca, in animals that feed on vegetablesubstances, than in carnivorous animals of the sameclass.The class of insects supplies numberless exemplificationsof the accurate adaptation of the structure of the organs of assimilationto the nature of the food which is to be convertedinto nutriment, and of the general principle that vegetablealiment requires longer processes and a more complicatedapparatus for this purpose, than that which has been alreadyanimalized. In the herbivorous tribes, we find the oesophaguseither extremely dilatable, so as to serve as a crop, orreceptacle for containing the food previous to its digestion, orhaving a distinct pouch appended to it for the same object:to this there generally succeeds a gizzard, or apparatus forPage 73, of this volume.Qualification. 151trituration, furnished, not merely with a hard cuticle, as inbirds, but also with numerous rows of teeth, of various forms,answering most effectually the purpose of dividing, or grindinginto the minutest fragments, all the harder parts of thefood, and thus supplying any deficiency of power in the jawsfor accomplishing the same object. Thence the aliment,properly prepared, passes into the cavity appropriated forits digestion, which constitutes the true stomach.* In thelower part of th's organ a peculiar fluid secretion is often intermixedwith it, which has been supposed to be analogousto the bile of the higher animals. It is prepared by thecoats of slender tubes, termed hepatic vessels, which areoften of great length, and sometimes branched or tufted, orbeset, like the fibres of a feather, with lateral rows of filaments,and which float loosely in the general cavity of thebody, attached only at their termination, where they openinto the alimentary canal. t In some insects, these tubes areof larger diameter than in others: and in many of the orthoptera,as we shall presently see, they open into large receptacles,sometimes more capacious than the stomach itself,which have been supposed to serve the purpose of reservoirsof the biliary secretion, pouring it into the stomach on thoseoccasions only when it is particularly wanted for the completionof the digestive process. J• It is often difficult to distinguish the portions of the canal, which correspondin their functions to the stomach, and to the first division of the intestines,or duodenum; so that different naturalists, according to the viewsthey take of the peculiar office of these parts, have applied to the same cavitythe term of chyliferous stomachy or of duodenum. See the memoir ofLeon Dufour, in the Annales des Sciences Naturelles, ii. 473.j- The first trace of a secreting* structure, corresponding to hepatic vessels,is met with in the AsfcriaSf where the double row of minute lobes attachedto the csecal stomachs of those animals, and discharging their fluid into thesecavities, are considered by Cams, as performing a similar office. The flocculenttissue which surrounds the intestine of the Holoihuriat is probably,also, an hepatic apparatus.^ A doubt is suggested, by Leon Dufour, whether the liquid found inthese pouches is real bile, or merely aliment in the progress of assimilation.Ann. Sc. Nat. ii. 478,152 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.The distinction into small and great intestine is more orless marked, in different insects, in proportion to the quantitiesof food consumed, and to its vegetable nature; and inherbivorous tribes, more especially, the dilatations in thelower part of the canal are most conspicuous, as well as theduplicates of the inner membrane, which constitute imperfectvalves for retarding the progress of the aliment. 'Itis generally at the point where this dilatation of the canalcommences, that a second set of hepatic vessels is inserted,having a structure essentially the same as those of the firstset, but generally more slender, and uniting into a smallnumber of ducts before they terminate. The number andcomplication of both these sets of hepatic vessels, appear tohave some relation to the existence and development of thegizzard, and consequently, also, to the nature and bulk ofthe food. Vessels of this description are, indeed, constantlyfound in insects; but it is only where a gizzard exists, thattwo sets of these secreting organs are provided; and in somelarvae, remarkable for their excessive voracity, even threeorders of hepatic vessels are met with.*A muscular power has also been provided, not only forthe strong actions exerted by the gizzard, but, also, for thenecessary propulsion, in different directions, of the contentsboth of the stomach and intestinal tubes. The muscularfibres of the latter are distinctly seen to consist of two sets,the one passing in a transverse or circular, and the other inalongitudinal direction. Glandular structures, analogous tothe mucous follicles of the higher animals, are also plainlydistinguishable in the internal coat of the canal, more especiallyof herbivorous insects The whole tract of the alimentarycanal is attached to the sides of the containing cavityby a fine membrane, ov peritoneum ^ containing numerousair-vessels, or tracheae.XSee the Memoirs of Marcel les Serres, in the Annales du Museum,XX. 48.•j- Lyonet.4 It has been stated by Malpighi and by Swammerdam, and the statementDIGESTIVE ORGANS OF INSECTS.To engage in a minute description of the endless variationsin the structure of the digestive organs, presented inthe innumerable tribes which compose this class of animals,would be incompatible with the limits of this treatise. Ishall content myself, therefore, withgiving a few illustrations of their principalvarieties, selected from those inwhich the leading characters of structureare most strongly marked. I shall,with this view, exhibit first one of thesimplest forms of the alimentary organs,as they occur in the Mantis relUgiosa, (Linn.) which is a purely carnivorousinsect, belonging to the order ofOrthoptera. Fig 317 represents thoseof this insect, freed from their attachments,and separated from the body.The whole canal, as is seen, is perfectlystraight: it commences by an oesophagus(o,) of great length, which issucceeded by a gizzard (g;) at the lowerextremity of this organ the upperhepatic vessels (b, b,) eight in number,and of considerable diameter, are inserted:then follows a portion of the canal (d,) which mayberegarded either as a digesting stomach, or a chyliferousduodenum: farther downwards, the second set of hepaticvessels (h h,) which are very numerous, but as slender ashairs, are received: and after a small contraction (n) thereis again a slight dilatation of the tube (c) before it terminates.has been repeated by every succeeding anatomist; that almost all the insectsbelonging to the tribe of Grylli, possessed the faculty of ruminating theirfood; but this error has been refuted by Marcel des Serres, who lias offeredsatisfactory' evidence that in no insect is the food subjected to a true rumination,or second mastication, by the organs of the mouth. See Annales du Museum,XX. 51 and 364.Vol. II. 20THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.The alimentary canal of the Cicindela campestris, (Lin.)which preys on other insects, is represented in Fig. 31S;where we see that the lower part of the oesophagus (o,) isdilated into a crop (p,) succeeded by a small gizzard (g,)which is provided for the purpose of bruising the elytra,and other hard parts of their victims: but, their mechanicaldivision being once effected, we again find the true digestingstomach (s) simply membranous, and the intestine (i) veryshort, but dilated, before its termination, into a large colon(c.) The hepatic vessels (h,) of which, in this insect, thereis only one set, terminate in the cavity of the intestine byfour ducts, at the point where that canal commences.A more complicated structure is exhibited in the alimentarytube of the Meloloniha vulgaris, or common cock-chaffed,which is a vegetable feeder, devouring great quantitiesof leaves of plants, and consequently requiring a longDIGESTIVE ORGANS OP INSECTS.and capacious canal for their assimilation; as is shown inFig. 319, which represents them prepared in a similar mannerto the former. In this herbivorous insect, the oesophagus(o) is, as might be expected, very short, and is soon lated into a crop (p;) this is followed by a verylong, wide, and muscular stomach (s,) ringedlike an earth-worm, and continued into a longand tortuous intestine (i, i,) which presentsin its course several dilatations (c, c,) and receivesvery elongated, convoluted, and ramifiedhepatic vessels (heh.) Fig. 320 is a highlymagnified view of a small portion of one ofthese vessels, showing its branched form.In the alimentary canal (Fig. 321*) of the Acrid altera(Stephens,) which is a species of grasshopper,feeding chiefly on the dewberry,we observe a long oesophagus (o,) whichis very dilatable, enlarging occasionallyinto a crop (i,) and succeeded by a roundedor heart-shaped gizzard (g,) of very325 complicated structure, and connected withtwo remarkably large biliary pouches fband b,) which receive, at their anteriorextremity, the upper set of hepatic vessels(v V.) A deep furrow in the pouch(b,) which, in the horizontal position ofthe body, lies underneath the gizzard,divides it apparently into two sacs. Theintestinal canal is pretty uniform in itsdiameter, receives in its course a great^^ number of hepatic vessels (h h,) by separateopenings, and after making oneconvolution, is slightly constricted at n,and is dilated into a colon (c,) on the• The figures relating to this insect were engraved from the drawings ofMr. Newport, who was also kind enough to supply me with the descriptionof the parts they represent. Fig, 321 Is twice the nati-al size.156 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.coats of which the longitudinal muscular bands are very distinctlyseen. Fig. 322 is a magnified view of the gizzardlaid open, to show its internal structure. It is furnishedwith six longitudinal rows of large teeth, and six intermediatedouble rows of smaller teeth; the total number of teethbeing 270. One of the rows of large teeth is seen, detached,and still more magnified, in Fig. 323; it contains at the upperpart, five small hooked teeth (f,) succeeded below byfour broad teeth (d,) consisting of quadrangular plates, andtwelve tricuspid teeth (t;) that is, teeth having three cusps,or points at their edges. Fig. 324 shows the profile of oneof these teeth; a, being tl|§ sharp point by which the anterioracute angle of the base terminates. Fig. 325 exhibitsthe base of the same tooth seen from below, e, e, e, beingthe three cusps, and m, the triangular hollow space for theinsertion of the muscles which move them, and which composepart of the muscular apparatus of the gizzard. Thesmaller teeth, which are set in double lines between eachof the larger rows, consist of twelve small triangular teethin each row. All the teeth contained in this organ are of abrown colour and horny texture, resembling tortoise shell.J^he same insect, as we have seen, often exhibits, at differentperiods of its existence, the greatest contrast, not onlyin external form, but also in its habits, instincts, and modesof subsistence. The larva is generally remarkable for itsvoracity, requiring large supplies of food to furnish the materialsfor its rapid growth, and frequently consuming enormousquantities of fibrous vegetable aliment: the perfect insect,on the other hand, having attained its full dimensions,is sufficiently supported by small quantities of a more nutritiousfood, consisting either of animal juices, or of thefluids prepared by flowers, which are generally of a saccharinequality, and contain nourishment in a concentratedform. It is evident that the same apparatus, which is necessaryfor the digestion of the bulky food taken in duringthe former period, would not be suited to the assimilation ofthat which is received during the latter; and that in orderDIGESTIVE ORGANS OP INSECTS.to accommodate it to this altered condition of its function,considerable changes must be made in its structure. Hence,it will be interesting to trace the gradual transitions in theconformation of the alimentary canal, during the progressivedevelopment of the insect, and more especially while it isundergoing its different metamorphoses.These changes are most conspicuous in the Lepidoptera,where we may observe the successive contractions whichtake place in the immensely voluminous stomach of the caterpillar,while passing into the state of chrysalis, and thenceinto that of the perfect insect, in which its form is so changedthat it can hardly be recognised as the same organ. I havegiven representations of these three different states of the entirealimentary canal of the Sphinx ligustri, or Privet Hawk-moth,in Figures 326, 327, and 32S;* the first of whichThese figures also have been engraved from the drawing of Mr. Newport,which he was so obliging as to make for me, from preparations of hisown, the result of very careful dissections.158 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.is that of the caterpillar; the second, that of the chrysalis;and the third, that of the moth. The whole canal and itsappendages, have been separated from their attachments, andspread out so as to display all their parts; and they are delineatedof the natural size, and in each case, so as to showtheir comparative dimensions in these three states. In allthe figures, a is the oesophagus; b, the stomach; c, the smallintestine; d, the caecal portion of the canal; and e, the colon,or large intestine. The hepatic vessels are shown at r; andthe gizzard, which is developed only in the moth, at g. Fig.32S.It will be seen that in the caterpillar, (Fig. 326,) the stomachforms by far the most considerable portion of the alimentarytube, and that it bears some resemblance in its structureand capacity to the stomachs of the Annelida, alreadydescribed.* This is followed by a large, but short, and perfectlystraight intestine. These or-guns in the pupa (Fig.327) have undergone considerable modifications, the wholecanal, but more especially the stomach, being contracted bothin length and width the shortening of the intestine notbeing in proportion to that of the whole body, obliges it tobe folded upon itself for a certain extent. In the moth,Fig. 328,) the contraction of the stomach has proceededmuch farther; and an additional cavity, which may be consideredas a species of crop or gizzard (g,) is developed: thesmall intestine takes a great many turns during its course,and a large pouch, or caecum has been formed at the partwhere it joins the large intestine.The hepatic vessels are exceedingly numerous in the Crustacea,occupying a very large space in the general cavity;and they compose by their union an organ of considerablesize, which may be regarded as analogous in its functions toSee the figures and description of those of the Nais and the Leech, p.102 and 103. /f Cams states that he found the stomach of a pupa, twelve days after ithad assumed that state, scarcely half as long, and only one-sixth as wide asit had been in the caterpillar.DIGESTIVE ORGANS OF MOLLUSCA.the Liver of the higher classes of animals. This organ acquiresstill greater size and importance in the Mollusca,where it frequently envelops the stomach, pouring the bileinto its cavity by numerous ducts.* As the structure andcourse of the intestinal canal varies greatly in different tribesof Mollusca, they do not admit of being comprised in anygeneral description. The only examples I think it necessaryto give, in this class, are those of thePatella, or Limpet, and of the PleuraThe intestinal tube of thePatella is delineated in Fig. 329; whereM is the mouth; t, the tongue foldedback; o, the oesophagus; and s, the stomach,from which the tortuous intestinaltube is seen to be continued. All theconvolutions of this tube, as well as thestomach itself, are enclosed, or ratherimbedded, in the substance of the liver,which is the largest organ of the body.The Pleiirobranchus Peronii (Cuv.) is remarkable forthe number and complication 'of its organs ofdigestion. They are seen laid open in Fig.330; where c is the crop; g, the gizzard; p, aplicated stomach, resembling the third stomachof ruminant quadrupeds; and d, a fourth cavity,being that in which digestion is completed.A canal of communication is seen atT, leading from the crop to this last cavity: bis the point where the biliary duct enters.In the Cephalopoda, the structure of theseorgans is very complicated; for they are providedwith a crop, a muscular gizzard, and acaecum, which has a spiral form. In theseanimals we also discover the rudiment of another auxiliaryTransparent crystalline needles, the nature and uses of which are quiteunknown, are frequently found in the biliary ducts of this class of animals.166 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.organ, namely, the Pancreas, which secretes a fluid contributingto the assimilation of the food. This organ becomesmore and more developed as we ascend in the scale of animals,assuming a glandular character, and secreting a wateryfluid, which resembles the saliva, both in its sensible andchemical properties. It has been conjectured that many ofthe vessels, which are attached to the upper portion of thealimentary canal of insects, and have been termed hepatic,may, in fact, prepare a fluid having more of the qualities ofthe pancreatic than of the biliary secretion.The alimentary canal of fishes is in general characterizedby being short; and the continuity of the stomach with theintestines is often such as to osier no well marked line ofdistinction between them. The caeca are generally large andnumerous; and a number of tubular organs, connected moreespecially with the pyloric appendices, are frequentlymet with, resembling a cluster of worms, and having someanalogy, in situation at least, to the hepatic or pancreaticvessels of insects. Their appearance in the Salmon is representedat p, in Fig. 331. The pancreasitself is only met with, in this class of animals,in the order of cartilaginous fishes, andmore especially in the Ray and the Sharktribes. A distinct gall-bladder, or reservoir,is also met with in some kinds of fish, but isby no means general in that class.In the class both of Fishes and of Reptiles,which are cold-blooded animals, the processes of digestionare conducted more slowly than in the more energetic systemsof Birds and of Mammalia; and the comparativelength of the canal is, on the whole, greater in the formerthan in the latter: but the chief differences in this respectdepend on the kind of food which is consumed, the canalbeing always shortest in those tribes that are most carnivorous.*As the Frog, in the different stages of its growth,See Home, Lectures, &c. I. 401.DIGESTIVE ORGANS OP MAMMALIA. 161lives upon totally different kinds of food, so we find thatthe structure of its alimentary canal, like that of the moth,undergoes a material change during these metamorphoses.The intestinal canal of the tad-pole is of great length, andis collected into a large rounded mass, composed of a greatnumber of coils, which may easily be distinguished, by theaid of la magnifying glass, through the transparent skin.During its gradual transformation into a frog, this canal becomesmuch reduced in its length; so that when the animalhas attained its perfect form, it makes but a single convolutionin the abdominal cavity.A similar correspondence exists between the length ofthe canal, and the nature of the food in the class of Birds.At the termination of the small intestine there are usuallyfound two caeca, which, in the gallinaceous and the aquaticfowls, are of great length: those of the ostrich contain intheir interior a spiral valve. Sir E. Home is of opinionthat in these animals the functions of the pyloric portion ofthe stomach are performed by the upper part of the intestine.In the intestines of the Mammalia contrivances are employedwith the apparent intention of presenting their contentsfrom passing along too hastily: these contrivances aremost effectual in animals whose food is vegetable, and containslittle nourishment, so that the whole of what the foodis capable of yielding is extracted from them. Sir E. Homeobserves that the colon, or large intestine of animals whichlive upon the same species of food, is of greater length, inproportion to the scantiness of the supply. Thus, the lengthof the colon of the Elephant, which inhabits the fertile woodsof Asia, is only 26^ feet; while, in the Dromedary, whichdwells in the arid deserts of Arabia, it is 42. This contrastis still more strongly marked in birds. The Cassowaryof Java, which lives amidst a most luxuriant supply offood, has a colon of one foot in length, and two caeca, eachof which is six inches long, and one quarter of an inch inVol. H. 21162 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.diameter. The African ostrich, on the other hand, whichinhabits a country where the supply of food is very scanty,has the colon forty-five feet long; each of the caeca is twofeet nine inches in length, and, at the widest part, threeinches in diameter; in addition to which, there are broadvalves in the interior of both these cavities.*On comparing the structure of the digestive organs ofMan with those of other animals belonging to the class Mammalia,we find them holding a place in the series intermediatebetween those of the purely carnivorous, and exclusivelyherbivorous tribes, and, in some measure, uniting the charactersof both. The powers of the human stomach do not,indeed, extend to the digestion either of the tough woodyfibres of vegetables, on the one hand, or the compact textureof bones on the other; but, still, they are competent to extractnourishment from a wider range of alimentary substances,than the digestive organs of almost any other animal.This adaptation to a greater variety of food may also be inferredfrom the form and disposition of the teeth, whichcombine those of different kinds more completely than inmostmammalia, excepting, perhaps, the Quadrant, inwhich, however, the teeth do not form, as in man, an uninterruptedseries in both jaws. In addition to these peculiarities,we may also here observe, that the sense of taste,in the human species, appears to be affected by a greatervariety of objects than in the other races of animals. Allthese are concurring indications that nature, in thus renderingman omnivorous, intended to qualify him for maintaininglife wherever he could procure the materials of subsistence,whatever might be their nature, whether animal orvegetable, or a mixture of both, and in whatever soil or• Lectures, &c. I. 470. In the account above given of the digestive organsI have purposely omitted all mention of the spleen; because, althoughit is probably in some way related to digestion, the exact nature of its functionshas not yet been determined with any certainty.DIGESTIVE ORGANS OF MAN. 163climate they may be produced; and for endowing him withthe power of spreading his race, and extending his dominionover every accessible region of the globe. Thus, then,from the consideration of the peculiar structure of the vital,as well as the mechanical organs of his frame, may be derivedadditional proofs of their being constructed with referenceto faculties of a higher and more extensive rangethan those of any, even the most favoured species of thebrute creations164 )CHAPTER IX,LACTEAL ABSORPTION.The Chyle, of which we have now traced the formation,is a fluid of uniform consistence, perfectly bland and irritatingin its properties, the elements of which have beenbrought into that precise state of chemical composition whichrenders them fit to be distributed to every part of the systemfor the purposes of nourishment. In all the lower ordersof animals it is transparent; but the chyle of mammaliaoften contains a multitude of globules, which give it a whitecolour, like milk. Its chemical composition appears to bevery analogous to that of the blood into which it is afterwardsconverted. From some experiments made by my late muchvalued friend Dr. Marcet, it appears that the chyle of dogs,fed on animal food alone, is always milky, whereas, in thesame animals, when they are limited to a vegetable diet, itis nearly transparent and colourless.*The chyle is absorbed from the inner surface of the intestinesby the Lacteals, which commence by very minute orifices,in incalculable numbers, and unite successively intolarger and larger vessels, till they form trunks of considerablesize. They pass between the folds of a very fine anddelicate membrane, called the mesentery, which connectsthe intestines to the spine, and which appears to be interposedin order to allow them that degree of freedom of motion,which is so necessary to the proper performance oftheir functions. In the mesentery, the lacteals pass throughseveral glandular bodies, termed the mesenteric glands,where it is probable that the chyle undergoes some modification,preparatory to its conversion into blood.• Medico-Chirurgical Transactions, vi. 630.LACTEAL ABSORPTION. 165The mesenteric glands of the Whale contain large sphericalcavities, into which the trunks of the lacteals open, andwhere the chyle is probably blended with secretions properto those cavities; but no similar structure can be detected interrestrial mammalia.It is only among the Vertebrata that lacteal vessels aremet with. Those of Fishes are simple tubes, either whollywithout valves, or if there be any, they are in a rudimentalstate, and not "sufficiently extended to prevent the free passageof their fluid contents in a retrograde direction. Thelacteals of the Turtle are larger and more distinct than thoseof fishes, but their valves are still imperfect, though theypresent some obstruction to descending fluids. In Birdsand in Mammalia these valves are perfectly effectual, and areexceedingly numerous, giving to the lacteals, when distendedwith fluid, the appearance of strings of beads. The effectof these flood-gates, placed at such short intervals, is thatevery external pressure made upon the tube, assists in thepropulsion of the fluid in the direction in which it is intendedto move. Hence it is easy to understand how exercisemust tend to promote the transmission of the chyle.The glands are more numerous and concentrated in theMammalia, than in any other class.From the mesenteric glands the chyle is conducted, bythe continuation of the lacteals, into a reservoir, which istermed the receptacle of the chyle; whence it ascends throughthe thoracic duct,* which passes along the side of the spine,in a situation affording the best possible protection from injuryor compression, and opens into the great veins leadingdirectly into the heart.In invertebrated animals having a circulatory system ofvessels, the absorption of the chyle is performed by veinsinstead of lacteal vessels.The sanguification of the chyle, or its conversion intoblood, takes place, during the course of the circulation, andThis duct is occasionally double.166 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.is principally effected by the action of atmospheric air incertainorgans, hereafter to be described, where that Action,or aeration as it may be termed, in common with ananalogous process in vegetables, takes place. In all vertebratedanimals the blood has a red colour, and it is also redin most of the Annelida; but in all other invertebrated animals,it is either white or colourless.* We shall, for thepresent, then, consider it as having undergone this change,and proceed to notice the means employed for its distributionand circulation throughout the system.• Vauquelinhas observed that the chyle has often a red tinge in animals.167 )CHAPTER X.Circulation.§ 1. Diffused Circulation,Animal life, implying mutual actions and reactions betweenthe solids and fluids of the body, requires for itsmaintenance the perpetual transfer of nutritive juices fromone part to another, corresponding in its activity to the extentof the changes which are continually taking place inthe organized system. For this purpose we almost constantlyfind that a circulatory motion of the nutrient fluidsis established; and the function which conducts and regulatestheir movements is emphatically denominated the Circulation,Several objects of great importance are answeredby this function; for in the first place, it is through the circulationthat every organ is supplied with the nutritiveparticles necessary for its development, its growth and themaintenance of its healthy condition; and that the glands, inparticular, as well as the other secreting organs, are furnishedwith the materials they require for the elaboration ofthe products, which it is their peculiar office to prepare. Asecond essential object of the circulation, is to transmit thenutritive juices to certain organs, where they are to be subjectedto the salutary influence of the oxygen of the atmosphere;a process which in all warm-blooded animals, combinedwith the rapid and extensive distribution of the blood,diffuses and maintains throughout the system the high temperaturerequired by the greater energy of their functions.Hence it necessarily follows that the particular mode inwhich the circulation is conducted in each respective tribe.168 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.must influence every other function of the economy, andmust, therefore, constitute an essential element in determiningthe physiological condition of the animal. We find,accordingly, that among the characters on which systematiczoologists have founded their great divisions of the animalkingdom, the utmost importance is attached to those derivedfrom differences of structure in the organs of circulation.A comprehensive survey of the different classes of animalswith reference to this function, enables us to discernthe existence of a regular gradation of organs, increasing incomplexity as we ascend from the lower to the higher orders;and showing that here, as in other departments of theeconomy of nature, no change is made abruptly, but alwaysby slow and successive steps. In the very lowest tribes ofZoophytes, the modes by which nutrition is accomplishedcan scarcely be perceived to differ from those adopted in thevegetable kingdom, where, as we have already seen, the nutritivefluids, instead of being confined in vessels, appear topermeate the cellular tissue, and thus immediately supplythe solids with the materials they require; for, in the simplerkinds of Polypi, of Infusoria, of Medusae, and of Entozoa,the nourishment which has been prepared by the digestivecavities is apparently imbibed by the solids, afterhaving transmuted through the sides of these organs, andwithout its being previously collected into other, and moregeneral cavities. This mode of nutrition, suited only to thetorpid and half vegetative nature of zoophytes, has been denominatednourishment by imbibition,m contradistinctionto that by circulation; a term, which, as we have seen, implies,not merely a system of canals, such as those existingin Medusae, where there is no evidence of the fluids reallycirculating, but an arrangement of ramified vessels, composedof membranous coats, through which the nutrient fluid movesin a continued circuit.The distinction which has thus been drawn, however, isone on which we should be careful not to place undue relicCIRCULATION. 169ance, for it is founded, perhaps, more on our imperfect meansof investigation, than on any real differences in the proceduresof nature relative to this function. When the juices,either of plants, or of animals, are transparent, their motionsare imperceptible to the eye, and can be judged of only byother kinds of evidence; but when they contain globules,differing in their density from that of the fluid, and thereforecapable of reflecting light, as is the case with the sap ofthe Chara and Caulinia, we have ocular proof of the existenceof currents, which, as long as the plant is living andin health, pursue a constant course, revolving in a regularand defined circuit; and all plants which have milky juicesexhibit this phenomenon. Although the extent of each ofthese vegetable currents is very limited, compared with theentire plant, it still presents an example of the tendencywhich the nutrient fluids of organized structures have tomove in a circuit, even when not confined within vessels ornarrow channels; for this movement of rotation, or cyclops,as it has been termed,* whatever may be its cause, appearsalways to have a definite direction. The current returnsinto itself, and continues without intermission, in a mannermuch resembling the rotatory movements occasionally producedin fluids by electro-magnetism. tMovements, very similar in their appearance and characterto those of vegetable cyclops, have been recently discoveredin a great number of ponderous Zoophytes, by Mr.Lister, who has communicated his observations in a paperwhich was lately read to the Royal Society, and of whichthe following are the principal results. In a specimen ofthe Tuhularia indivisa, when magnified one hundredtimes, a current of particles was seen within the tubularstem of the polype, strikingly resembling, in the steadinessand continuity of its stream, the vegetable circulation in the• See pages 41 and 42 of this volume.f So great is this resemblance, that it has led several physiologists to ascribethese movements to the agency of electricity; but there does not, asyet, appear to be any substantial foundation for this hypothesis.Vol. II. 22170 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.Chara. Its general course was parallel to the slightly spirallines of irregular spots on the surface of the tube, ascendingon the one side, and descending on the other; each of theopposite currents occupying one-half of the circumferenceof the cylindric cavity. At the knots, or contracted partsof the tube, slight eddies were noticed in the currents; andat each end of the tube the particles were seen to turn round,and pass over to the other side. In various species of the stream does not flow in the same constant direction;but, after a time, its velocity is retarded, and itthen either stops, or exhibits irregular eddies, previous toits return in an opposite course; and so on alternately, likethe ebb and flow of the tide. If the currents be designedlyobstructed in any part of the stem, those in the branchesgo on without interruption, and independently of the rest.The most remarkable circumstance attending these streamsof fluid is that they appear to traverse the cavity of the stomachitself, flowing from the axis of the stem into that organ,and returning into the stem without any visible causedetermining these movements. Similar phenomena wereobserved 1^ Mr. Lister in Campanularix and Plumula-rise.In some of the minuter species of Crustacea the fluidshave been seen, by the aid of the microscope, moving withinthe cavities of the body, as if by a spontaneous impulse,without the aid of a propelling organ, and apparently withoutbeing confined in membranous channels, or tubes of anysort. This kind of diffused circulation is also seen in theembryos of various animals, at the earliest periods of theirdevelopment, and before any vessels are formed.§ 2. Vascular Circulation.The next step in the gradation of structures consists inthe presence of vessels, within which the fluids are confined,and by which their course and their velocity are regulated;VASCULAR CIRCULATION. 171and, in general, these vessels form a complete circuit. Thefirst rudiments of a vascular organization are those observedand described by Tiedemann, in the %/Ssteri3e, which are situatedhigher in the animal scale than Medusae; but whetherany actual circulation takes place in the channels constitutedby these vessels, which communicate both with the cavityof the intestine, and with the respiratory organs, is not yetdetermined with any certainty. The Holothurix, whichalso belong to4,he order of Echinodermata,are furnished witha complex apparatus of vessels, of which the exact functionsare still unknown. In those species of Entozoa which exhibita vascular structure, the canals appear rather to be ramificationsof the intestinal tube, than proper vessels, for nodistinct circulation can be traced in them: an organization ofthis kind has already been noticed in the TseniseJ*It was, till very lately, the prevailing opinion among naturaliststhat all true insects are nourished by imbibition,and that there exists in their system no real vascular circulationof juices. In all the animals belonging to this class,and in every stage of their development, there is found atubular organ, called the dorsal vessel, extending the wholelength of the back, and nearly of uniform diameter, exceptwhere it tapers at the two ends. It contains a fluid, whichappears to be undulated backwards and forwards, by meansof contractions and dilatations, occurring in succession indifferent parts of the tube; and it is also connected withtransverse ligaments bands, apparently containing muscularfibres, capable, by their action, of producing, or, at least,of influencing these pulsatory movements. An enlarged representationof the dorsal vessel of the Melolontha vulgaris,or common cockchaffer, isolated from its attachments, isgiven in Fig. 333, showing the series of dilatations (v, v, v)which it usually presents in its course; and in Fig. 334, thesame vessel is exhibited in connexion with the ligamentsPage 64, in this volume, Fig. 247. The family o^ Planarise present exceptionsto this general rule: for many species possess a system of circulatingvessels. See Duges, Annales des Sciences Naturelles; xv, 161.THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.and muscular apparatus which surrounds it, seen from thelower side. In the last of these figures, A is the taperingprolongation of the tube, proceeding towards the head of theinsect; v, one of the dilated portions, or ventricles, as theyhave been called, of the dorsal part of the tube; f, one of thesmall tendinous folds, to which the ligaments bands areattached; and l is one of these bands, having a triangular,or, if considered as continuous with that on the other side ofthe vessel, a rhomboidal shape, and attached at r, to the superiorsegments of the abdomen. At i is seen a layer of thesame fibres, which are partly ligamentous and partly muscular,passing underneath the dorsal vessel, and forming, inconjunction with the layer that passes above it, a sheath,which embraces and fixes that vessel in its place: these inferiorlayers have been removed from the other parts of thevessel, to allow the upper layers to be seen, as is the case atCIRCULATION IN INSECTS. 173I Fig. 335 gives a side view of the anterior extremity ofthe same vessel, showing the curve (a) which it describesas it bends downwards in its course towards the head.The function performed by the dorsal vessel, which,judging from the universal presence of this organ in insects,must be one of great importance in their economy, was longa profound mystery. Its analogy in structure and positionto the dorsal vessels of the Arachnida and the Annelida,where it evidently communicates with channels of circulation,and exhibits movements of pulsation resembling thoseof insects', was a strong argument in favour of the opinionthat it is the prime mover of a similar kind of circulation;but then, again, this hypothesis appeared to be overturnedby the fact that no vessels of any kind could be seen extendingfrom it in any direction; nor could any channels for thetransmission of a circulating fluid be detected in any part ofthe body. Those organs, which, in animals apparently ofan inferior rank, are most vascular, such as the stomach, theintestinal tube, the eye, and other apparatus of the senses,seemed to be constructed, and to be nourished, by means totallydifferent from those adopted in the former animals.Although extremely minute ramifications of air tubes areevery where visible in the interior of insects, yet, neitherCuvier, nor any other anatomist, could succeed, by the closestscrutiny, in detecting the least trace of blood vessels; andthe presumption, therefore, was, that none existed.But it still remained a question, if the dorsal vessel benot subservient to circulation, what is its real function?Marcel des Serres, who bestowed great pains in investigatingthis subject, came to the conclusion that its use is tosecrete the fatty weather, which is generally found in greatabundance in the abdominal cavity, and which is accumulatedparticularly around the dorsal vessel.* A more attentiveexamination of the structure of the vessel itselfbrought to light a valvular apparatus, of which the only con-seehis various papers in the Memoires da Museum desist. Nat.; torn.iv. and v.f174 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.derivable purpose is that of determining the motion of thecontained fluid in one constant course; a purpose necessarilyincompatible with its supposed alternate undulation in'op-polite directions, from one end of the tube to the other.These valves are exhibited in Fig. 336, in a still more magnifiedview of a longitudinal section of the dorsal vessel,showing the semicircular folds (s, s) of its inner membrane,which perform the function of valves by closing the passageagainst any retrograde motion of the fluid. This discoveryof valves in the dorsal vessel, again made the balance of probabilityincline towards the opinion that it is the agent ofsome kind of circulation.All doubt as to the reality of a circulation in insects isnow dispelled by the brilliant discoveries of Professor Cams,who, in the year 1824, first observed this phenomenonin the larva of the Agrion puella. In the transparent partsof this insect, as well as of many others, numerous streamsof fluid, rendered manifest by the motions of the globulesthey contain, are seen meandering in the spaces which intervenebetween the layers of the integument, but withoutappearing to be confined within any regular vessels. Thestreams on the sides of the body all pass in a direction backwardsfrom the head, till they reach the neighbourhood ofthe posterior end of the dorsal vessel, towards which theyall converge; they are then seen to enter that vessel, and tobe propelled by its pulsations towards its anterior extremity,where they again issue from it, and are subsequently dividedinto the scattered streams, which descend along thesides of the body, and which, after having thus completedtheir circuit, return into the pulsating dorsal vessel.This mixed kind of circulation, partly diffused and partlyvascular, is beautifully seen in the larva of the Ephemeraniarginata,^ where, besides the main current, which, afterThis insect is figured and described in Dr. Goring and Mr. Pritchard** Microscopic Illustrations," and its circulation is very fully detailed, and illustratedby an engraving on a large scale, by Mr. Bowerbank, in the EntomologicalMagazine, i. 239; plate ii.CIRCULATION IN INSECTS.being discharged from the anterior extremity jos the dorsalvessel, descends in a wide spreading stream on each sideand beneath that vessel, another portion of the blood is conveyedby two lateral trunks, which pass down each side ofthe body, in a serpentine course, and convey it into thelower extremity of the dorsal vessel, with which they arecontinuous. These are decidedly vessels, and not portionsof the great abdominal cavity, for their boundaries areclearly definer*; yet they allow the blood contained in themto escape into that cavity, and mix with the portion previouslydiffused. All these wandering streams sooner or laterfind their way into the dorsal vessel, being absorbed by itat various points of its course, where its membranous coatis reflected inwards to form the valves. In the legs, thetail, and the antennae, the circulation is carried on by meansof vessels, which are continuous with the lateral vessels ofthe body, branching off from them in the form of loops, ascendingon one side, and then turning back to form the descendingvessel, so that the currents in each eve in contrarydirections. Fig. 337 represents the appearance ofthese parallel vessels in one of the antennae of the Seinhlisviridis, magnified thirty times its natural size. The whole176 THE VITAL PtTNCTIONS.system of circulating vessels in that insect, of which the formeris only a detached part, is shown in Fig. 338, wherethe course of the blood is indicated by arrows; a, representingthe currents in the antennae; w, those in the rudimentalwings; and t, those in the tail; in all which partsthe vessels form loops, derived from the main vessels of thetrunk. In some larvae the vascular loops, conveying thesecollateral streams, pass only for a certain distance into thelegs; sometimes, indeed, they proceed no farther than thehaunches. The currents of blood in these vessels have notauniform velocity, being accelerated by the impulsionsthey receive from the contractions of the dorsal vessel,which appears to be the prime agent in their motion.As the insect advances to maturity, and passes throughits metamorphoses, considerable changes are observed totake place in the organization of the circulating system, andin the energy of the function it performs. The vessels inthe extreme parts, as in the tail, are gradually obliterated,and the citation in them, of course, ceases, the blood appearingto retire into the more internal parts. In the wings,on the other hand, where the development proceeds rapidly,the circulation becomes more active; and even after theyhave attained their full size, and are yet in a soft state, themotion of the blood in the centre of all the nervures is distinctlyvisible:* but afterwards, as the wings become dry,it ceases there also, and is then confined to the vessels of thetrunk. In proportion as the insect approaches to the completionof its development, these latter vessels also, one afterthe other, shrink and disappear, till, at length, nothing whichhad once appertained to this system remains visible, exceptthe dorsal vessel. But, as we observe this vessel still continuingits pulsatory movements, we may fairly infer thatthey are designed to maintain some degree of obscure andimperfect circulation of the nutrient juices, through vessels,• These currents in the wing of the Semble Ulineata have been describedand delineated by Cams, in the Acta Acad, Cases. Leo. Carol. Nat. Cur. vol.XV. part ii. p. 9.CIRCULATION IN INSECTS.which may, in their contracted state, corresponding to thediminished demands of the system, have generally escapeddetection. In confirmation of these views, it may be stated,that several observers have, at length, succeeded in tracingminute branches, proceeding in different directions, from thedorsal vessel, and distributed to various organs. The divisionof the anterior part of the dorsal vessel into descendingbranches was noticed by Compared. Duges has observeda similar division of this vessel in the corselet of several speciesof Phalense, and farther ramifications in that of theGryllus Ihieola: and Audouin has traced them in many ofthe Hymenoptera.*• Annales des Sciences Naturelles, xv. 308,The fig-ures which follow (from 339 to 345) are representations, of the naturalsize, of the dorsal vessel of the Sphinx ligustrif or Privet Hawk-moth,which has been dissected in its three different stages, with great care, .Newport, from whose drawings these figures have been engraved, andto whom I am indebted also for the description which followethtoi-sal vessel of this insect is an elongated and gradually tapering vestEZ^X^^fl'^n^^.TXsel extending from the hinder part of the abdomen, along the back, towardsthe head? and furnished with valves, which correspond very nearly in theirsituation to the incisions of the body. During the changes of the insectfrom the larva to the imago state, it undergoes a slight modification of form.In every state it may be distinguished into two portions, a dorsal and an cor-vol.II. 23178 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.The discovery of the circulation in insects, and of its varyingenergy at different periods of growth, has elucidatedmany obscure points in the physiology of this importanttal. The dorsal portion, which is the 04ie in which a pulsation is chiefly ob-suitable,is furnished with distinct valves, is attached along the dorsal part ofthe body by lateral muscles, and has vessels which enter it laterally, pouringinto it the circulating fluid, which is returning from the sides and inferiorportions of the body. In the caterpillar, this portion of the dorsal vessel extendsfrom the twelfth to the anterior part of the fifth segment. It is furnishedwith eight double valves, which are formed, as Mr. Bowerbank hascorrectly described them in the Ephemera marginal — namely, the uppervalve " by a reflecting inwards and upwards of the inner coat, or coats of theartery," (by which he means the dorsal vessel) " and the under one by a contractionor projection of the like parts of a portion of the artery beneath, soas to come within the grasp of the lower part of the valve above it," Thewhole vessel is made up of three coats, the two innermost of which, thelining, or serous, and the muscular, or principal portion of the vessel, constitutethe reflected portions, or valves; while the third, or outermost coat,which is exceedingly thin and delicate, is continued over the vessel nearly inastraight line, and does not appear at all to follow the reflexion of the othertwo. In the caterpillar, this portion of the vessel has eight pairs of smallsuspensory muscles, seen along the upper side of Fig. 339, which arise fromthe middle of the upper surface of each valve, and are continued back to beattached over the middle of the next valve: they seem to have considerableinfluence over the contractions of the valves. The Aortal, or anterior portionof the vessel, extends from the hinder part of the fourth segment to itstermination and division into vessels, to be distributed to the head, which divisiontakes place after it has passed the oesophagus, and at a point immediatelybeneath the supra-ossophageal ganglion, or brain of the insect. Thisportion of the vessel is much narrower than the dorsal, has no distinctvalves or muscles; nor do any vessels enter it laterally; but it is very delicateand transparent, and gradually diminishes in size from its commencement toits anterior termination. Its course, in the caterpillar, is immediately beneaththe integument, along the fourth and third segments, till it arrives at thehinder parts of the second segment; when it gradually descends upOn theoesophagus, and, immediately behind the cerebral ganglion, gives off a pairof exceedingly minute vessels. It then passes beneath the ganglion, and, inthe front part of the head, is divided into several branches, as noticed by Mr.Newport in the anatomical description he has given of the nerves of this speciesof Sphinx: (Phil. Trans. 1832, p. 385.) These branches are best observedin the chrysalis (Fig. 339:) in all the stages they maybe divided intothree sets; the first is given off* immediately after the vessel has passed beneaththe ganglion; and consists of two lateral trunks, the united capacity ofCIRCULATION IN INSECTS. 179class. It explains why insects, after they have attained theirimago state, and the circulation is nearly obliterated, nolonger increase in size, and require but little nourishmentfor the maintenance of life. This, however, is a state notcalculated for so long a duration as that in which the developmentis advancing; and, accordingly, the period duringwhich the insect remains in the imago condition is generallyshort, compared to that of the larva, where a large supply ofnutriment, and a rapid circulation of the fluids, concur inmaintaining the vital functions in full activity. Thus, theEphemera, which lives for two or three years in the larvastate, generally perishes in the course of a few hours afterit has acquired wings, and reached its perfect state of maturity.•which is equal to about one-third of that of the aorta; they descend, one oneach side of the mouth, and are each divided into three branches. The secondset consists of two pairs of branches, one going apparently to the tongue,the other to the antennae. The third set is formed by two branches, whichpass upwards, and are the continuations of the aorta; they divide into branches,and are lost in the integuments, and structure-es of the anterior part of thehead.The pulsatory action of the dorsal vessel is continued along its whole course,and seems to terminate at the division of the vessel into branches. During themetamorphoses of the insect, this vessel becomes considerably shortened, butis stronger and more consolidated in its structure. Its course is likewise altered;from having, in the caterpillar, (Fig. 339,) passed along, nearly in astraight line, it begins in the chrysalis, (Fig. 340,) to descend in the fifthsegment, and to pass under what is to become the division between the thoraxand abdomen in the perfect insect. It then ascends in the fourth segment,and descends again in the second, so that when the insect has attainedits perfect form, (Fig. 341,) its course is very tortuous. The vessels whichenter it are situated in the abdomen, and pass in laterally among the muscles,chiefly at the anterior part of each segment or valve. Fig. 342 is a superior,or dorsal view of the same vessel, in the perfect state of the insect, whichshows, still more distinctly, the vessels entering it laterally, intermixed withthe lateral muscles. Fig. 343 is a magnified lateral view of the anterior extremityof the dorsal vessel, corresponding to Fig. 341; and Fig. 344, a similarlymagnified view of the same portion of the vessel seen from above, correspondingto Fig. 342. Fig. 345 shows the mode in which the valves areconned by a duplicate of the inner membrane in the perfect insect.180 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.In proportion as the changes of form which the insect undergoesare less considerable, the evidences of a circulationbecome more distinct. Such is the case in many of the ApterousInsects, composing the family of Myriapoda: in thescolopendra corsicans, (Linn,) for instance, Duges observedthe dorsal vessel dividing into three large branches.Most of the tribes belonging to the class of Arachnidahave, likewise, a dorsal vessel, very analogous in its structureand situation to that of insects; and, as none of themundergo any metamorphosis, their vascular system admitsof being considerably developed, and becomes a permanentpart of the organization. Fig. 346 shows the dorsal vesselof the J3ranea domestica, or house spider,with some of the arterial trunksarising^from it, lying embedded in a thickmass of substance, having a similar oilycharacter to that which is contained, inlargequantities, in the principal cavitiesof insects. It is, in general, difficult toobtain a view of the circulation in theliving spider, on account of the thick coveringof hair which is spread over thebody and the limbs; but if a species, which has no hair, beselected for examination, we car see very distinctly, throughthe microscope, the motion of the blood in the vessels, bymeans of the globules it contains, both in the legs and inother parts, where it presents , appearances very similar tothose already described in the limbs of the larva? of insects.A complete vascular circulation is established in all theanimals which compose the class of Annelida; the vesselsbeing continuous throughout, and having sufficient power topropel the blood through the whole of its circuit. Great varietyexists in the arrangement and distribution of thesevessels, depending on the form of the animal, the complicationof its functions, and the extent of its powers. Thefirst rudiment of a distinct system of circulating vessels, independentof the ramified tubes proceeding from the intes-CIRCULATION IN THE Angelina. 181final canal, occurs in the Planarias, which are a tribe of flatvermiform animals, in many respects allied to the moredeveloped Entozoa, and appearing placed as an intermediate346* link between them and the Annelida. Inmany species such as the Planaria nigrofusca, and tremeilaris, smiler,) Duges observedtwo longitudinal trunks (Fig. 346*)running along the sides of the under surface ofthe animal, and joining together, both at theirfore and hind extremities, so as to form acontinuous channel of an oval forms A greatnumber of smaller vessels branch off fromthese main trunks in every direction, andramify extensively often uniting with thosefrom the opposite side, and establishingthe freest communications between them.In the Annelida which have a more lengthened and cylindricform, the principal vessels have a longitudinal course,but are differently disposed in different species. There is,in all, a vascular trunk, extending along a middle line, thewhole length of the back, and especially designated as thedorsal vessel: in general, there is also a corresponding trunk,occupying the middle line of the lower, or abdominal sideof the body, and termed the abdominal vessel. This lattervessel is sometimes double; one being superficial, and anotherlying deeper; the principal nervous cord, and chain ofganglia being situated between them. Frequently, thereare found, in addition to these, vessels which run along thesides of the body, and are therefore called the lateral vessels.In every case there are, as we have seen in the Plana-ria,numerous branches, and collateral communications betweenthe lateral, the abdominal, and dorsal vessels; moreespecially at the two extremities of the body, where the greatmass of blood, which has been flowing in one direction inone set of vessels, is transferred into others, which convey■j- De Blainville has described a structure similar to thus in a Planaria fromBrazil. Diet, des Sc. Nat. t. xli. 216.182 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.it in the contrary direction, and complete the circuit of itscourse. The ramifications and lateral connexions of theminuter branches are often so numerous as to compose avascular net-work, covering a considerable extent of surface.This general description of the circulatory system is applicableto the tribes of Annelida possessing the simplest structure,such as the Nais, the Nereis, and the Leech; generawhich include a great variety of species of different shapesand sizes.Although the vessels themselves may be plainly discerned,it is not so easy to determine the real course which the bloodtakes while circulating within them; and we accordinglyfind very great discordance in the reports of different physiologistson this subject. De Blainville asserts that in allthe Annelida, the blood in the dorsal vessel is carried backwards,that is, from the head to the tail; a motion, which, ofCourse, implies its return in the contrary direction, either inthe lateral or the abdominal vessels. In the Nais, the Nereis,and the Leech, these last vessels are two in number, situatedat the sides of the abdominal surface of the body. Carusadds his testimony in favour of this mode of considering thecirculation in the Annelida. On the other hand, Six, Bonnet,Sir Everard Home, and Duges, describe the course ofthe blood as quite the opposite of this, and maintain that itmoves backwards, or towards the tail, in the abdominal vessels;and forwards, or towards the head, in the dorsal vessel.Morren, who is the latest authority on this subject, giveshis testimony in favour of the latter view of the subject, asfar as relates to the dorsal vessel of the Erpobdella vulgaris*an animal allied to the Leech, and already noticed inthe account of the mechanical functions of this tribe :t but heconsiders the abdominal vessel as performing also the samefunction of carrying the blood forwards towards the head,and the two lateral vessels as conveying it backwards, thuscompleting the circuit. This is illustrated by the diagramHirudo vulgaris. (Linn.) Nephews vulgaris. (Savlgny.)f Vol. i. p. 195, where a delineation of this animal was given, Fig. 130.CIRCULATION IN THE Angelina.(Fig. 347;) where A is the anterior, and p the posterior extremityof the animal, the dorsal vessel occupying the middlestraight line between the two lateral vessels, and the directionof the stream in each being indicated by the adjacentarrows. The blood in the abdominal vessel following thesame course as that in the dorsal vessel, the same diagramrepresents also these vessels seen from below. Fig. 348 isan inferior view of the Erpobdella, showing the numerousramifications of the abdominal vessel; the lesser branchesencircling the nervous ganglia, and accompanying the principalnervous filaments which proceed from them: while thelateral vessels are seen pursuing a slightly serpentinecourse.*The tribe of Lumbrici, which includes the earth-worm,♦ Duges represents the blood of this animal as moving in different directionsin the right and in the left lateral vessels; generally backwards in theformer, and forwards in the latter: at the same time that it moves backwardsin the dorsal, and forwards in the abdominal vessel. In the communicatingbranches which pass transversely from one lateral vessel to the other, theblood flows from left to right in those situated in the anterior half of thebody, and from right to left in those of the posterior half: so that the planein which its circuit is performed is horizontal, instead of vertical. It is curiousto find an example of a similar transverse circulation, in the vegetablekingdom; this has recently been observed by Mr. Solly and Mr. Valley, in asprout of the Chara vulgaris, near the end of which the enclosed fluid revolvescontinually on its own axis, instead of following the ordinary courseof ascent and descent along the sides of the cylindric cavity.— See Trans, ofthe Society of Arts, xlix. 180.184 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.is distinguished from the angelica already noticed, by beingmore highly organized, and possessing a more extensive circulation,and a more complicated apparatus for the performanceof this function. The greater extent of vascular ramificationsappears to require increased powers for carryingthe blood through the numerous and intricate passages it hasto traverse; and these are obtained by means of muscularreceptacles, capable, by their successive contraction, of addingto the impulsive force with which the blood is driveninto the trunks that distribute it so extensively. These muscularappendages are globular or oval dilatations of some ofthe large vascular trunks, which bend round the sides of theanterior part of the body, and establish a free communicationbetween the dorsal and the abdominal vessels. They aredescribed by Duges as consisting, in the Lumbricus gigs,of seven vessels on each side, forming a series of roundeddilatations, about twelve in number, resembling a string ofbeads.*In the Lumbricus terrestris, or common earth-worm,there are only five pairs of these vessels; they have been describedand figured by Sir E. Home if but the most full andaccurate account of their structure has been given by Mor-ren,in his splendid work on the anatomy of that animalsFig. 349, which is reduced from his plates, represents theseThey are termed by Duges, Vaisseaux moniliformeSf ou dorso-dbdomi-maux. — Annales des Sciences Naturelles, xv. 299.f Philos. Transact, for 1817, p. 3 : and PI. iii. Tig-. 4.% «« De Lumbrici terrestris Historia naturalis, necnon Anaemia Tractatus."Qto. Bruxelles, 1829.CIRCULATION IN THE CRUSTACEA. 185singular appendages to the vascular system of the earthworm,separated from their attachments, and viewed in connexiononly with the dorsal and abdominal trunks in whichthey terminate. The abdominal vessel, (a, a,) on arrivingnear the oesophagus, is dilated, at the point b, into a globularbulb (c,) which is followed, at equal intervals, by fourothers (c, c.) From each of these bulbs, or ventricles, asthey are termed by Morren, a vessel (d) is sent off at rightangles, on each side; this vessel also enlarges into severalnearly globular dilatations (e,) followed by a still larger, andmore elongated oval receptacle (f,) which completes the semicircularsweep taken by the vessel in bending round thesides of the body, in order to join the dorsal vessel (g, g,) inwhich all the other four communicating vessels, presentingsimilar dilatations, terminate. Sir E. Home is of opinionthat these dilated portions of the vessel are useful as reservoirsof blood, for supplying it in greater quantity to theneighbouring organs, as occasion may require: but Morrenascribes to them the more important oiSice of accelerating,by their muscular action, the current of circulating blood.If the latter of these views be correct, which the strong pulsations,constantly visible in these bulbs, render extremelyprobable, this structure would offer the first rudiments ofthe organ which, in all the superior classes of animals, performsso important an office in the circulation of the blood,namely, the heart: and this name, indeed, is given by Cuvier,Morren, and others, to these dilated portions of thevascular systems of the higher orders of Annelida.*Here, also, the statements of different anatomists are atvariance, with regard to the direction taken by the bloodwhile circulating in the vessels: Home and Duges representit as proceeding forwards in the dorsal, and backwards inthe abdominal vessels; a course which implies its descent• It is remarkable that the blood in most of the Amelia has a brightscarlet colour, and resembles, in this respect, the blood of vertebrated animals.Vol. n. 24#.1S6 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.along the lateral communicating vessels just described; whileDe Blainville and Morren ascribe to it a course precisely thereverse. Amidst these conflicting testimonies, it is extremelydifficult to determine on which side the truth lies; and asuspicion will naturally arise, that the course of the blood inthe vessels may not be at all times uniform, but may be liableto partial oscillations, or be even completely reversed, bythe operation of particular disturbing causes.The larger Crustacea possess a circulatory apparatus stillmore extensive and complete, accompanied by a correspondingincrease in the energy of the vital functions. As wefollow this system in the more highly organized tribes ofthis class, we find the powers of the dorsal vessel becomingmore and more concentrated in its anterior extremity; till,in the Decapoda, a family which comprehends the Lobsterand the Crab, we find this part dilated into an oval or globularorgan, with very muscular coats, capable of vigorouscontractions, propelling its contents with considerable forceinto the vessels, and therefore clearly entitled to the appellationof heart. The distinction between arteries and veins,which can scarcely be made with any precision in the systemsof the inferior tribes, is here perfectly determined bythe existence of this central organ of propulsion: for the vesselsinto which the blood is sent by its contractions, andwhich, ramifying extensively, distribute it to distant parts,are indisputably arteries; and, conversely, the vessels whichcollect the blood from all these parts, and bring it back tothe heart, are as decidedly veins. The heart of the lobsteris situated immediately under the carapace, or shell of thedorsal region of the thorax, directly over the stomach; itspulsations are very distinct, and are performed with greatregularity.The importance of the heart, as the prime agent in thecirculation, increases as we advance to the higher classes ofanimals, whose more active and energetic functions requirea continual and rapid renewal of nutrient fluid, and rendernecessary the introduction of farther refinements into itsCIRCULATION IN THE VERTEBRATA.structure. The supply of blood to the heart, being in a constantstream, produces a gradual dilatation of the cavity whichreceives it; and the muscular fibres of that cavity are not excitedto contraction, until they are stretched to a certainpoint. But in order effectually to drive the blood into everypart of the arterial system, where it has great resistancesto overcome, a considerable impulsive force is required, implyinga sudden as well as powerful muscular action. Thisobject is attained, in all vertebrated animals, by providing asecond muscular cavity, termed a ventricle, into which thefirst cavity, or auricle, throws the blood it has received fromthe veins, with a sudden impulse; and thus the ventricle, beingrapidly distended, is excited to a much more quick andforcible contraction than the auricle, and propels the bloodit contains into the artery, with an impetus incomparablygreater than could have resulted from the action of the auriclealone. Fig. 350 represents the heart with its two cavities;d being the auricle, and e the ventricle; together withthe main trunks of the veins (c, c,) which convey the bloodinto the auricle; and those of the arteries (a,) which receiveit from the ventricle for distribution over the whole^system.The force of contraction in the principal cavity of theheart being thus increased, it becomes necessary to provide188 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.additional security against the retrograde motion of its fluidcontents. Valves are accordingly interposed between theauricle and ventricle; and great refinement of mechanism isdisplayed in their construction. Fig. 351 represents theirappearance (at v) when the cavities, both of the auricle (d,)and the ventricle (e) are laid open: c, c, as before, being theupper and lower venae cause, and a, the main trunk of theaorta. These valves are composed of two loose membranes,the fixed edges of which are attached circularly to the apertureof communication between the cavities, and their looseedges project into the ventricle; so that they perform theoffice of flood-gates, allowing a free passage to the bloodwhen it is impelled into the ventricle, and being pushed backthe moment the ventricle contracts; in which latter case theyconcur in accurately closing the aperture, and preventing thereturn of a single drop into the auricle. These valves beingattached to a wide circular aperture, it is necessary that theyshould be restrained from inverting themselves into theauricle, at each contraction of the ventricle. For this purposethere are provided slender ligaments (which are seenin Fig. 351,) fixed by one end to the edge of the valve, andby the other to some part of the inner surface of the ventricle,so that the valve is always kept within the cavity of thelatter. In the auricle, the same purpose is answered by theoblique direction in which the veins enter it.CIRCULATION IN THE Vertebrata.The arteries themselves?, especially the main trunk of theaorta, as it issues from the heart, are muscular, and whensuddenly distended, contract upon their contents. It wasnecessary, therefore, to provide means for preventing anyreflux of blood into the ventricle during their contraction;and for this purpose a set of valves {v, Fig. 351,) is placedat the beginning of these tubes where they arise from theventricle. These valves consist usually of three membranes,which have the form of a crescent, and are capable of closingthe passage so accurately, that not a drop of blood can passbetween them.*In order to convey a more clear idea of the course of theblood in the circulatory system,I have drawn the diagram,Fig. 352, exhibiting the generalarrangement of its componentparts. The main arterialtrunk, or Aorta (a,) while proceedingin its course, gives offnumerous branches, (b,) whichdivide and subdivide, till theramifications (p) arrive at anextreme degree of minuteness;and they are finally distributedto every organ, and to the remotestextremities of the body.They frequently, during their course, communicate withone another, or anastomose, as it is termed, by collateralbranches, so as to provide against interruptions to the circulation,which might arise from accidental obstructions in anyparticular branches of this extended system of canals. Theminutest vessels (p,) which, in incalculable numbers, pervade• In the artery of the shark, and other cartilaginous fishes, where the actionof the vessel is very powerful, these valves are much more numerous,and arranged in rows, occupying several parts of the artery. Additionalvalves are also met with in other fishes at the branching of large arteries.190 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.every part of the frame, are named, from their being finerthan hairs, capillary vessels.After the blood, thus transmitted to the different parts ofthe body by the arteries, has supplied them with the nourishmentthey require, it is conveyed back to the heart by theveins, which, commencing from the extreme ramificationsof the arteries, bend back again in a course directed towardsthe heart. The smaller branches join in succession to formlarger and larger trunks, till they are at length all unitedinto one or two main pipes, called the Sense caves, (c,) whichpour their accumulated torrent of blood into the general reservoir,the heart; entering first into the auricle (d,) andthence being carried forward into the ventricle (e,) whichagain propels it through the Aorta, The veins are largerand more numerous than the arteries, and may be comparedto rivers, which, collecting all the water that is not imbibedby the soil, and recovering it into its general receptacle,the ocean, perform an analogous office in the economy of theearth.The communications of the capillary arteries with theveins are beautifully seen, under the microscope, in the transparentmembranes of frogs or fishes. The splendid spectacle,thus brought within the cognizance of our senses, of unceasingactivity in the minutest filaments of the animal frame, andof the rapid transit of streams of fluid, bearing along withthem minute particles, which appear to be pressing forwards,like the passengers in the streets of a crowded city, throughmultitudes of narrow and winding passages, can never fail,when first beheld, to fill the mind with astonishment;* a feelingwhich must be exalted to the highest admiration, on reflectingthat what we there behold is at all times going onLeeuwenhoek, speaking of the delight he experienced on viewing thecirculation of the blood in tadpoles, uses the following expressions: " Thispleasure has oftentimes been so recreating to me, that I do not believe thatall the pleasure of fountains, or water-works, either natural or made by art,could have pleased my sight so well, as the view of these creatures has givenme"— Phil. Trans, xxii. 453.RESPIRATORY Circulation.within us, during the whole period of our lives, in every,even the minutest, portion of our frame. How inadequate,then, must be any ideas we are capable of forming of the incalculablenumber of movements and of actions, which areconducted in the living system; and how infinite must betheprescience and the wisdom, by which these multifariousand complicated operations were so deeply planned, and soharmoniously adjusted!§ 3. Respiratory Circulation.The object of the circulation is not merely to distributethe blood through the general system of the body; it has,also, another and a very important office to perform. Theblood undergoes, in the course of its circulation, considerablechanges, both in its colour and its chemical composition.The healthy blood transmitted by the arteries is of a brightscarlet hue; that brought back by the veins is of a dark purple,from its containing an excess of carbon, and is consequentlyunfit to be again circulated. Whenever, from somederangement in the functions, this dark blood finds its wayinto the arteries, it acts as a poisonon every organ which it reaches, andwould soon, if it continued to circulate,destroy life. Hence, it is necessarythat the blood which returnsby the veins should undergo purification,by exposure either to the airitself, or to a fluid containing air, forthe purpose of restoring and preservingits salutary qualities. Theheart and vascular system have,therefore, the additional task assignedthem of conveying the vitiatedvenous blood to certain organs,where it may have access to the air, and receive its192 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.vivifying influence; and to this office a distinct set of arteriesand veins is appropriated, constituting a distinct circulation.This I have endeavoured to illustrate by the diagram,Fig. 353, where d represents the auricle, and e theventricle of the heart; and a and c, the main arterial andVenous trunks; and where the two circulations are, for thesake of distinctness, supposed to be separated from one another,so that the two systems of vessels may occupy differentparts of the diagram. The vessels which pervade thebody generally (b,) and are subservient to nutrition, belongto what is termed the greater , or systemic circulation: thosewhich circulate the blood through the respiratory organs,(r,) for the purpose of aeration, compose the system of thelesser, or respiratory circulation.Few subjects in Physiology present a field of greater interestthan the comparison of the modes in which these twogreat functions are, in all the various classes of animals, exactlyadjusted to each other. So intimately are the organsof circulation related to those which distribute the blood tothe respiratory organs, that we never can form a clear ideaof the first, without a close reference to the last of these systems.While describing the several plans of circulationpresented to us by the different classes, I shall be obliged toassume both the necessity of the function of respiration, andof a provision of certain organs for the reception of air, eitherin its gaseous forms or as it is contained in the water,where the blood may be subjected to its action. It is necessary,also, to state that the organs for receiving atmosphericair, in its gaseous state, are either hangs, or pulmonarycavities, while those which are constructed for aquatic respirationare termed gills, or branching; the arteries and theveins which carry on this respiratory circulation, beingtermed pulmonary, or branchial, according as they relateto the one or the other description of respiratory organs.In many animals it is only a part of the circulating bloodwhich undergoes aeration ; the pulmonary or branchial arteriesand veins being merely branches of the general systemRESPIRATORY CIRCULATION.of blood vessels: so that in this case, which is that representedin the preceding figure (353,) the lesser circulation isincluded as a part of the general circulation. But in all thehigher classes the whole of the blood is, in some part of itscircuit, subjected to the influence of the air; the pulmonary,being then distinct from the systemic circulation. In the Annelida,for instance, the venae cavae, which bring back theblood from the system, unite to form one or more vessels,which then assume the function of arteries, subdividing andramifying upon the branchial organs; after this the blood isagain collected by the branchial veins, which unite into onetrunk to form the arteries of the systemic circulation.Most insects, especially when arrived at the advanced stagesof their development, have too imperfect a circulation to effectthe thorough aeration of the blood: and indeed a greaterpart of that fluid is not contained within the vascular system,but permeates the cavities and cellular texture of thebody. It will be seen, when I come to treat of respiration,that the same object is accomplished by means totally independentof the circulatory apparatus; namely, by a systemof air-tubes, distributed over every part of the body. Butan apparatus of this kind is not required in those Arachnida,where the circulation is vigorous, and continues duringthe whole of life: here, then, we again meet with a pulmonaryas well as a systemic circulation, in conjunction withinternal cavities for the reception of air.In the Crustacea the circulation is conducted on the samegeneral plan as in the Annelida; the blood from every partof the body being collected by the Venae Cavae, which areexceedingly capacious, andextend, on each side, alongthe lower surface of the abdomen.They send outbranches, which distributethe blood to the gills; butthese branches, at their origin,suddenly dilate, so as toVol. II.194 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.form large receptacles, which are called sinuses, where theblood is allowed to accumulate, and where, by the muscularityof the expanded coats of the vessels, it receives an additionalforce of propulsion. From the branchiae the blood is returnedby another set of veins to the elongated heart formerlydescribed, and propelled by that organ into the systemicarteries. Fig. 354 shows the relative situation ofthese vessels, when isolated and viewed from behind inthe Maja squinado. c, c, are the venae cavae; e, e, the venoussinuses above-mentioned; f, f, are the branchial arteries;G, the gills, or branchiae; and i, i, the branchialveins terminating in the heart l.*In the Mollusca, the heart acquires greater size, comparedwith the other organs, and exerts a proportionally greaterinfluence as the prime mover in the circulation. In the developmentof its structure, in the different orders of this class,a beautiful gradation may be perceived: the Branchiopodahaving two hearts, one placed upon each of the two lateraltrunks of the branchial veins; the Gasteropoda having asingle heart, furnished with an auricle; and the Jicephalabeing provided with a heart, which has a single ventricle,but two auricles, corresponding to the two trunks of thebranchial veinsThe most remarkable variety of structure is that exhibitedby the Cephalopoda. We have already seen, in the Crustacea,dilatations of the sense cause, at the origin of the branchialarteries: but in the Nautilus the dilatations of the branchialveins are of such a size, as to be almost entitled to theappellation of auricles. The Sepia, in whose highly organizedsystem there is required great additional power to propelthe blood with sufficient force through the gills, is providedwith a large and complicated branchial apparatus; and• A minute account of the organs of circulation in the Crustacea is givenby Audouin and Milne Edwards, in the Annales des Sciences Naturelle,xi. 283 and 352, from which work the above figure is taken.f A great number of bivalve Mollusca exhibit the singular peculiarity ofthe lower portion of the intestinal tube traversing through the cavity of theheart.RESPIRATORY CIRCULATION IN FISHES. 195the requisite power is supplied by two additional hearts,situated on the venae cause, of which they appear as if theywere dilatations, immediately before the branchial arteriesare sent off.* They are shown at e, e, Fig. 355, which representsthis part of the vascular system of the Loligo, detachedfrom the surrounding parts; the course of this bloodbeing indicated by arrows, c is one of the three trunksconstituting the venae cavae, proceeding from above, dividinginto two branches as it descends, and terminating, conjointlywith the two venous trunks (d,) which are coming from below,into the lateral or branchial hearts (e, e,) already mentioned.Thence the blood is conveyed by the branchialarteries, (f, f,) on each side, to the .gills (g,) and returned,by the branchial veins (i,) to the large central, or systemicheart (l,) which again distributes it, by means of the systemicarteries, to every part of the body. The cuttle-fishtribe is the only one thus furnished with three distincthearts for carrying on a 'double circulation: none of thesehearts are furnished with auricles.The remarkable distribution of the muscular powerswhich give an impulse to the circulating fluids, met with in• These veins are surrounded by a great number of blind pouches, whichhave the appearance of a fringe; the use of this singular structure is unknown.THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.the Sepia, constitutes a step in the transition from Molluscato Fishes. In this latter class of animals, the two lateralhearts have united into a single central heart, while theaortic heart has entirely disappeared; and thus the positionof the heart with respect to the two circulations is just thereverse of that which it has in the invertebrated classes.The plan in Fishes is shown in thediagram, Fig. 356, where the centralorgans are seen to consist offour cavities, c, d, e, f, openingsuccessively the one into the other.The heart belongs exclusively tothe gills; and there proceeds fromit, not the aorta, but the trunk ofthose branchial arteries (f,) whichconvey the whole of the blood tothe respiratory organs (g, h.) Thisblood, after being there aerated, iscollected by the branchial veins(i,) which unite into a single trunk(a,) passing down the back, and performing, without anyintermediate heart, the office of an aorta; that is, it dividesinto innumerable branches, and distributes the blood toevery part of the system.* The blood is then reconveyedto the heart by the ordinary veins, which form a large venacava (c.) This vein is generally considerably dilated atits termination, or just before it opens into the auricle, constitutingwhat has been termed a venous sinus (s.) This,then, is followed by the auricle (d) and the ventricle (e;)but, besides these cavities, there is also a fourth (f,) formedby a dilatation of the beginning of the branchial artery, andtermed the bulbus arteriosus contributing, doubtless, toThe caudal branch of the aorta is protected by the roots of the inferiorspinous processes, joining to form arches through which it passes; and frequentlythe artery is contained in a bony channel, formed by the bodies ofthe vertebrae, which effectually secures it from all external pressure. In thesturgeon even the abdominal aorta is thus protected, being entirely concealedwithin this bony canal.RESPIRATORY CIRCULATION IN REPTILES.augment the impetus with which the blood is sent into thebranchial arteries.The circulation in Reptiles is not double, like that offishes; for only a part of the blood is brought under the influenceof the air in the pulmonary organs. All the animalsbelonging to this class are cold-blooded, sluggish, and inert;they subsist upon a scanty allowance of food, and are astonishinglytenacious of life. The simplest form in which wemeet with this'mode of circulation is in the Batrachia; it isshown in the diagram, Fig. 357. The heart of the Frog,for example, may be considered as consisting of a singleventricle (e,) and a single auricle (d.*)From the former there proceeds onegreat arterial trunk, which is properlythe aorta. This aorta soon dividesinto two trunks, which, after sendingbranches to the head and neck, benddownwards (as it is seen at o, p,) andunite to form a single trunk (a,) whichis the descending aorta. From thisvessel proceed all the arteries whichare distributed to the trunk and to thelimbs, and which are represented assituated at b: these arterial ramificationsare continued into the great venoustrunks, which, as usual, constitute the venae cavae (c,)and terminate in the auricle (d.)From each of the trunks which arise from the primarydivision of the aorta, there proceed the small arteries (p,)which are distributed to the lungs (h,) and convey to thoseorgans a part only of the mass of circulating blood. To• Dr. Davy has observed that although the auricle appears single, whenviewed externally, its cavity is in reality divided into two compartmentsby a transparent membranous partition in which some muscular fibres areapparent: these communicate with the cavity of the ventricle by a commonopening provided with three semilunar valves. Edin. Phil. Journal; xix.161.198 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.these pulmonary arteries there correspond a set of veins,uniting in the trunks (i,) which bring back the aerated bloodto the auricle of the heart (d,) where it is mixed with theblood which has returned by the venae cavae (c,) from thegeneral circulation. Thus the blood is only partially aerated,in consequence of the lesser circulation being here only abranch of the greater.Nothing is more curious or beautiful than the mode inwhich, during the transformations of this animal, Natureconducts the gradual transition of the branchial circulationof the tadpole, into the pulmonary circulation of the frog.In the former, the respiratory organs are constructed on themodel of those of fishes, and respiration is performed in thesame manner as in that class of animals: the heart is consequentlyessentially branchial, sending the whole of its bloodto the gills, the veins returning from which (describing thecourse marked by the dotted lines m, n, in the diagram,)unite, as in fishes, to form the descending aorta. As thelungs developed, small arterial branches, arising from the aorta,are distributed to those organs, and in proportion as thesearteries enlarge, the branchial arteries diminish; until, ontheir becoming entirely obliterated, the course of the bloodis wholly diverted from them, and flows through the enlargedlateral trunks (o, p,) of which the junction constitutesthe descending aorta. This latter vessel now receives thewhole of its blood directly from the heart; which, from beingoriginally a branchial, has become a systemic heart.The heart of the Chelonian reptiles, such as the ordinaryspecies of Tortoises and Turtles, has two distinct auricles;the one, receiving the blood from the pulmonary veins; theother, from those of the body generally; so that the mixtureof aerated and vitiated blood takes place, not in the auricle,but in the ventricle itself. When all the cavities are distendedwith blood, the two auricles being nearly of the samesize as the ventricle, the whole has the appearance of a unionof three hearts. The circulatory system of the Ophidia isconstructed on a plan very similar to that of the Chelonia.Warm-BLOODED CIRCULATION.In the Saurian reptiles, the structure becomes again morecomplicated. In the Chameleon each auricle of the hearthas a large venous sinus, appearing like two supplementaryauricles.* The heart of the Crocodile has not only two auricles,but its ventricle is divided by two partitions, intothree chambers: each of the partitions is perforated to allowof a free communication between the chambers; and the passagesare so adjusted as to determine the current of aeratedblood, returning from the lungs, into those arteries, moreespecially, which supply the head and the muscles of thelimbs; while the vitiated blood is made again to circulatethrough the arteries of the visceraIt is in warm-blooded animals that the two offices of thecirculation are most efficiently performed; for the whole ofthe blood passes, alternately, through the greater and thelesser circulations, and a complete apparatus is provided foreach. There are, in fact, two hearts, the one on the left sideimpelling the blood through the greater or systemic circulation;the other, on the right side, appropriated to the lesser,or pulmonary circulation. The annexed diagram, (Fig. 359,)illustrates the plan of the circulationin warm-blooded animals.From the left ventricle(l) the blood is propelledinto the aorta (a,) to be diffusedthrough the arteries ofthe system (b) to every part,and penetrating into all thecapillary vessels; thence it isreturned by the veins, throughthe venae cavae (c,) to the rightauricle (d,) which delivers itinto the right ventricle (e.)This right ventricle impelsthe blood, thus received, through the pulmonary arteries• Houston; Trans. Roy. Irish Acad. xv. 189.t It would appear, from this arrangement of the vessels, that the brain, ort^00 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.(f,) into the lungs (at h,) where it is aerated, and whence itis reconveyed by the pulmonary veins (i,) into the left auricle(k,) which immediately pours it into the left ventricle(l,) the point from whence we had set out.Both the right and the left heart have their respective auriclesand ventricles; but they are all united in one envelope,so as to compose, in appearance, but a single organ:* still,however, the right and left cavities are kept perfectly distinctfrom one another, and are separated by thick partitions,allowing of no direct transmission of fluid from the one sideto the other. These two hearts may, therefore, be comparedto two sets of chambers under the same roof, having,each, their respective entrances and exits, with a party-wallof separation between them. This junction of the two heartscentral organ of the nervous system, requires, more than any other part, asupply of oxyg-enated blood for the due performance of its functions. Timecurious provision which is made for sending this partial supply of blood, of aparticular quality, in the larger kinds of reptiles, such as the Crocodile hasbeen pointed out by many anatomists; but has been lately investigated moreparticularly by M. Martin St. Ange. (See the Report of G. St. Hilaire, RevueMedical, for April, 1833.) It is found that in these animals, as well as inthe Chelonia, a partial respiratory system is provided for by the admission,through two canals opening externally, of aerated water into the cavity of theabdomen, where it may act upon the blood which is circulating in the vessels.Traces of canals, of this description, are also met with in some of the higherclasses of vertebrated animals, as, for instance, among the Mammalia, in theMonotremata and the Marsupialia.A remarkable exception to thisgeneral law of consolidation occurs^^^ >^aiB%iP'"'JIL i- ^ - ^" ^^^ heart of the Bugong, representedin Fig. 360, in which it maybeseen that the two ventricles, e andL, are almost entirely detached fromeach other. In this figure, which istaken from the Philosophical Transactionsfor 1820, 1) is the systemicauricle, e the right or pulmonaryventricle, f the pulmonary artery, kthe left or pulmonary auricle, t theleft or systemic ventricle, and a theaorta.DISTRIBUTION OF BLOOD VESSELS. 201is conducive to their mutual strength: for the fibres of eachintermix and even co-operate in their actions, and both circulationsare carried on at the same time; that is, both ventriclescontract or close at the same instant; and the sameapplies to the auricles. The blood which has just returnedfrom the body, and that from the lungs, the former by thevenae cavae, the latter by the pulmonary veins, fill their respectiveauricles at the same instant; and both auricles, contractingat theme moment, discharge their contents simultaneouslyinto their respective ventricles. In the likemanner, at the moment when the left ventricle is propellingits aerated blood into the aorta, for the purposes of generalnutrition, the right ventricle is likewise driving the vitiatedblood into the pulmonary artery, in order that it may be purifiedby the influence of the air. Thus, the same bloodwhich, during the interval of one pulsation, was circulatingthrough the lungs, is, in the next, circulating through thebody; and thus do the contractions of the veins, auricles,ventricles, and arteries, all concur in the same general end,and establish the most beautiful and perfect harmony of action.*§ 4. Distribution of Blood VesselsIn the distribution of the arteries in the animal system,we meet with numberless proofs of wise and provident arrangementThe great trunks of both arteries and veins,which carry on the circulation in the limbs, are conductedalways on the interior sides, and along the interior anglesof the joints, and generally seek the protection of the Evidence is afforded of the human conformation being expressly adaptedto the erect position of the body by the position of the heart, as comparedwith quadrupeds; for, in the latter, the heart is placed directly in the middleof the chest, with the point towards the abdomen, and not occupying anyportion of the diaphragm; but, in man, the heart lies obliquely on the diaphragm,with the apex turned towards the left side.Vol. II. 26202 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.cent bones. Grooves are formed in many of the bones,where arteries are lodged, with the evident intention of affordingthem a more secure passage. Thus, the principalarteries which supply the muscles of the chest, proceedalong the lower edges of the ribs, in deep furrows formedfor their protection. Arteries are often still more effectuallyguarded against injury or obstruction by passing throughcomplete tubes of solid bone. An instance occurs in the arteriessupplying the teeth, which pass along a channel in thelower jaw, excavated through the whole length of the bone.The aorta in fishes, after having supplied arteries to the visceraof the abdomen, is continued to the tail, and passesthrough a channel, formed by bony processes from the vertebrae;and the same kind of protection is afforded to thecorresponding artery in the Cetacea. In the fore leg of theLion, which is employed in actions of prodigious strength,the artery, without some especial provision, would havebeen in danger of being compressed by the violent contractionsof the muscles: in order, therefore, to guard againstthis inconvenience, it is made to pass through a perforationin the bone itself, where it is completely secure from pressure.*The energy of every function is regulated in a great measureby the quantity of blood which the organs exercisingthat function receive. The muscles employed in the mostvigorous actions are always found to receive the largestshare of blood. It is commonly observed that the rightfore leg of quadrupeds, as well as the right arm in man, isstronger than the left. Much of this superior strength is,no doubt, the result of education; the right arm being habituallymore used than the left. But still the different modein which the arteries are distributed to the two arms constitutesa natural source of inequality. The artery supplyingthe right arm with blood is the first which arises from the111 like manner the coffin bone of the Horse is perforated for the safeconveyance of the arteries going to the foot.DISTRIBUTION OF BLOOD VESSELS. 203aorta, and it proceeds in a more direct course from the heartthan the artery of the left arm, which has its origin in commonwith the artery of that side of the head. Hence it hasbeen inferred that the right arm is originally better suppliedwith nourishment than the left. It may be alleged, in confirmationof this view, that in birds, where any inequalityin the actions of the two wings would have disturbed theregularity of flight, the aorta, when it has arrived at thecentre of the chest, divides with perfect equality into twobranches, so that both wings receive precisely the samequantity of blood; and the muscles, being thus equally nourished,preserve that equality of strength, which their functionrigidly demands.When a large quantity of blood is wanted in any particularorgan, and yet the force with which it would arrive, ifsent immediately by large arteries, might injure the textureof that organ, contrivances are adopted for diminishing itsimpetus, either by making the arteries pursue very windingand circuitous paths, or by subdividing them, before theyreach their destination, into a great number of smaller arteries.The delicate texture of the brain, for instance, wouldbe greatly injured by the blood being impelled with anyconsiderable force against the sides of the vessels which aredistributed to it; and yet a very large supply of blood is requiredby that organ for the due performance of its functions.Accordingly we find that all the arteries which gotothe brain are very tortuous in their course; every flexuretending considerably to diminish the force of the current ofblood.In animals that graze, and keep their heads for a longtimein a dependent position, the danger from an excessiveimpetus in the blood flowing towards the head is muchgreater than in other animals; and we find that an extraordinaryprovision is made to obviate this danger. The arterieswhich supply the brain, on their entrance into the basisof the skull, suddenly divide into a great number of minutebranches, forming a complicated net-work of vessels, an THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.rangement which, on the well known principles of hydraulics,must greatly check the velocity of the blood conductedthrough them. That such is the real purpose of this structureis evident from the branches afterwards uniting intolarger trunks when they have entered the brain, through thesubstance of which they are then distributed exactly as inother animals, where no such previous subdivision takesplace.In the Bradypus tridactylus, or great American Sloth,an animal remarkable for the slowness of its movements, aplan somewhat analogous to the former is adopted in thestructure of the arteries of the limbs. These arteries, attheir entrance into both the upper and lower extremities,suddenly divide into a great number of cylindric vessels ofequal size, communicating in various places by collateralbranches. These curiously subdivided arteries are exclusivelydistributed to the muscles of the limbs; for all theother arteries of the body branch off in the usual manner.This structure, which was discovered by Sir A. Carlisle,* isnot confined to the Sloth, but is met with in other animals,as the Lemur tardigradus, and the Lemur loris, which resemblethe sloth in the extreme sluggishness of their movements.It is extremely probable, therefore, that this peculiarityin the muscular power results from, or is at least insome way connected with this remarkable structure in thearteries. In the Lion, and some other beasts of prey, a similarconstruction is adopted in the arteries of the head, probablywith a view to confer a power of more permanentcontraction in the muscles of the jaws for holding a stronganimal, such as a buffalo, and carrying it to a distance.That we may form an adequate conception of the immensepower of the ventricle, or prime mover in the circulationof the blood, we have but to reflect on the numerousobstacles impeding its passage through the arterial system.There is, first, the natural elasticity of the coats of the arsPhil. Trans, for 1800, p. 98, and for 1804, p. 17.FORCE OP THE HEART. 205series, which must be overcome before any blood can enterthem. Secondly, the arteries are, in most places, so connectedwith many heavy parts of the body, that their dilatationcannot be effected without, at the same time, communicatingmotion to them. Thus, when we sit cross-legged,the pulsation of the artery in the ham, which is pressed uponthe knee of the other leg, is sufficiently 'strong to raise thewhole leg and foot at each beat of the pulse. If we considerthe great weight of the leg, and reflect upon the lengthof the lever by which that weight acts, we shall be convincedof the prodigious force which is actually exerted by the currentof blood in the artery in thus raising the whole limb.Thirdly, the winding course, which the blood is forced totake, in following all the oblique and serpentine flexures ofthe arteries, must greatly impede its motion. But notwithstandingthese numerous and powerful impediments, theforce of the heart is so great, that, in defiance of all obstaclesor causes of retardation, it drives the blood with immensevelocity into the aorta. The ventricle of the human heartdoes not contain more than an ounce of blood, and it contractsat least seventy times in a minute; so that above threehundred pounds of blood are passing through this organduring every hour that we live. *' Consider," says Paley,what an affair this is when we come to very large animals.The aorta of a whale is larger in the bore than the main pipeof the water works at London Bridge; and the water roaringin its passage through that pipe is inferior in impetus and velocityto the blood gushing through the whale's heart. Ananatomist who understood the structure of the heart, mightsay before hand that it would play; but he would expect,from the complexity of its mechanism, and the delicacy ofmany of its parts, that it should always be liable to derangement,or that it would soon work itself out. Yet shall thiswonderful machine go on night and day, for eighty yearstogether, at the rate of a hundred thousand strokes everytwenty-four hours, having at every stroke a great resistanceto overcome, and shall continue this action for this length206 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.of time, without disorder and without weariness. To thosewho venture their lives in a ship, it has often been said thatthere is only a plank between them and destruction; but inthe body, and especially in the arterial system, there is inmany parts only a membrane, a skin, a thread." Yet howwell has every part been guarded from injury: how providentiallyhave accidents been anticipated: how skilfully hasdanger been averted!The impulse which the heart, by its powerful contraction,gives to the blood, is nearly expended by the time it hasreached the veins: nature has accordingly furnished themwith numerous valves, all opening, of course, in a directiontowards the heart; so that as long as the blood proceeds inits natural course, it meets with no impediment; while a3g^ retrograde motion is effectually prevented.Hence external pressure, occasionally appliedto the veins, assists in promoting theflow of blood towards the heart; and hencethe effects of exercise in accelerating the circulation.Valves are more especially providedin the veins which pass over the musclesof the extremities, or which run immediatelybeneath the skin; while they are notfound in the more internal veins belonging tothe viscera, which are less exposed to unequalpressure. These valves are delineated in Fig. 365,which represents the interior of one of the larger veins.The situation and structure of the valves belonging tothe hydraulic apparatus of the circulation furnish as unequivocalproofs of design as any that can be adduced. Itwas the observation of these valves that first suggested tothe mind of Harvey the train of reflections which led himto the discovery of the real course of the blood in the veins,the arteries and the heart. This great discovery was oneof the earliest fruits of the active and rational spirit of inquiry,which, at the era of Bacon's Writings, was beginningto awaken the human mind from its long night of slumber,VALVES OP THE VEINS. 207and to dissipate the darkness which had, for so many ages,overshadowed the regions of philosophy and science. Wecannot but feel a pride, as Englishmen, in the recollection,that a discovery of such vast importance as that of the circulationof the blood, which has led to all the modern improvementsin the medical art, was made by our own countryman,whose name will for ever live in the annals of ourrace as one of its most distinguished benefactors. The consideration,also that it had its source in the study of comparativeanatomy and physiology, affords us a convincingproof of the great advantage that may result from the cultivationof those sciences; to which Nature, indeed, seems,in this instance, expressly to have invited us, by displayingto our view, in the organs of the circulation, an endless diversityof combinations, as if she had purposely designed toelucidate their relations wish the vital powers, and to assistour investigations of the laws of organized beings.< 208 )CHAPTER XLRespiration.§ 1. Respiration in General.The acticti of atmospheric air is equally necessary forthe maintenance of animal, as of vegetable life; and as theascending sap of the one cannot be perfected unless exposedto the chemical agency of air in the leaves, in like mannerthe blood of animals requires the perpetual renovation ofits vital properties by the purifying influence of respiration.The great importance of this function is evinced by the constantprovision which has been made by Nature, in everyclass of animals, for bringing each portion of their nutritivejuices, in its turn, into contact with air. Even the circulationof these juices is an object of inferior importance, comparedwith their aeration; for we find that insects, whichhave but an imperfect and partial circulation of their blood,still require the free introduction of air into every part oftheir system. The necessity for air is more urgent thanthe demand for food; many animals being capable of subsistingfor a considerable time without nourishment, but allspeedily perishing when deprived of air. The influence ofthis element is requisite as well for the production and development,as for the continuance of organized beings in aliving state. No vegetable seed will germinate, nor willany egg, even of the smallest insect, give birth to a larva,if kept in a perfect vacuum. Experiments on this subjecthave been varied and multiplied without end by Spallanza-ni, who found that insects under an air pump, confined inrarefied air, in general lived for shorter periods in propos209tion to the degree to which the exhaustion of air had beencarried. Those species of infusoria, which are most tenaciousof life, lived in very rarefied air for above a month:others perished in fourteen, eleven, or eight days; and somein two days only. In this imperfect vacuum, they wereseen still to continue their accustomed evolutions, wheelingin circles, darting to the surface, or diving to the bottom ofthe fluid, and producing vortices by the rapid vibration oftheir cilia, to catch the floating particles which serve as theirfood: in course of time, however, they invariably gave indicationsof uneasiness; their movements became languid, ageneral relaxation ensued, and they at length expired. Butwhen the vacuum was rendered perfect, none of the infusionsof animal or vegetable substances, which, under ordinarycircumstances, soon swarm with millions of these microscopicbeing sever exhibited a single animalcule; althoughthese soon made their appearance in great numbers, if thesmallest quantity of air was admitted into the receiver.Animals which inhabit the waters, and remain constantlyunder its surface, such as fishes, and the greater number ofmollusca, are necessarily precluded from receiving the directaction of atmospheric air in its gaseous state. But asall water exposed to the air soon absorbs it in large quantities,it becomes the medium by which that agent is appliedto the respiratory organs of aquatic animals; and the oxygenit contains may thus act upon the blood with considerableeffect; though not, perhaps, to the same extent as whendirectly applied in a gaseous state. The air which is presentin water is, accordingly, as necessary to these animalsas the air of the atmosphere is to those which live on land:hence, in our inquiries into the respiration of aquatic animals,it will be sufficient to trace the means by which thesurrounding water is allowed to have access to the organsappropriated to this function; and in speaking of the actionof the water upon them, it will always be understood thatI refer to the action of the atmospheric air which that watercontains.Vol. II. 27210 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.Respiration, in its different modes, may be distinguished,according to the nature of the medium which is breathed,into aquatic or atmospheric; and in the former case, it iseither cutaneous, or branchial according as the respiratoryorgans *are external or internal. Atmospheric respiration,again, is either tracheal, or pulmonary, according as theair is received by a system of air tubes, or tracheae, or intopulmonary cavities, or lungs.§ 2. %8.quatic Respiration,Zoophytes appear in general to be unprovided with anydistinct channels for conveying aerated vater into the interiorof the bodies, so that it may act in succession on the nutritivejuices, and after performing this office, may be expelled,and exchanged for a fresh supply. It has accordinglybeen conjectured, on the presumption that this functionis equally necessary to them as it is to all other animals, thatthe vivifying influence of the surrounding element is exertedthrough the medium of the surface of the body. Thus,it is veiy possible that in Polypi, while the interior surfaceof the sac digests the food, its external surface may performthe office of respiration : and no other mode of accomplishingthis function has been distinctly traced in the Jlcalepha, Medusae,indeed, appear to have a farther object than mere progressionin the alternate expansions and contractions of thefloating edges of their hemispherical bodies; for these movementsare performed with great regularity under all circumstancesof rest or motion; and they continue even when theanimal is taken out of the water and laid on the ground, aslong as it retains its vitality. The specific name of the Medusapulmo^ (the Pulmone Marino of the Italians,) is derivedfrom the supposed resemblance of these movements to thoseof the lungs of breathing animals. The large cavities adjacentto the stomach, and which have been already pointedout in Fig. 249 and 252,t have been conjectured to be resSee the delineation of this animal in Fig. 135> vol. i. p. 198.f Pages 67 and 68 of this volume.AQUATIC RESPIRATION. 211oratory organs, chiefly, I believe, because they are notknown to serve any other purpose.The Entozoa, in like manner, present no appearance ofinternal respiratory organs; so that they probably receivethe influence of oxygen only through the medium of thejuices of the animals on which they subsist. Planariae,which have a more independent existence, though endowedwith a system of circulating vessels, have no internal respiratoryorgans; and whatever respiration they perform must bewholly cutaneous. Such is also the condition of several ofthe simpler kinds of Annelida; but in those which are morehighly organized, an apparatus is provided for respiration,which is wholly external to the body, and appears as an appendageto it, consisting generally of tufts of projectingfibres, branching like a plume of feathers, and floating in thesurrounding fluid. The Lumhricus marinus, or lob-worm,*for example, has two rows of branchial organs of this description,one on each side of the body; each row being composedof from fourteen to sixteen tufts. In the more stationaryAnnelida, which inhabit calcareous tubes, as theSerpxda and the Teredo these arborescent tufts are protectedby a sheath which envelops their roots; and they are placedon the head, as being the only part which comes in contactwith the water.Most of the smaller Crustacea have branchiae in the formof feathery tufts, attached to the paddles near the tail, andkept in incessant vibratory motion, which gives an appearanceof great liveliness to the animal, and is more especiallystriking in the microscopic species. The variety of shapeswhich these organs assume in different tribes is too great toallow of any specific description of them in this place: butamidst these varieties, it is sufficiently apparent that theirconstruction has been, in all cases, designed to obtain a considerableextent of surface over which the minute subdivideArenicola pis cato nim (Lam.) See a delineation of this marine worm inFig. 135, vol. i. p. 198.2tl2 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.sons of the blood vessels might be spread, in order to exposethem fully to the action of aerated water.The Mollusca, also, present great diversity in the forms oftheir respiratory organs, although they are all, with but fewexceptions, adapted to aquatic respiration. In many of thetribes which have no shell, as the Thetis the Doris, and theTritons, there are arborescent gills projecting from differentparts of the body, and floating in the water. In the Leas,or barnacle, a curious family, constituting a connecting linkbetween molluscocis and articulated animals, there organsare attached to the bases of the cirrhi^ or jointed tentacula,which are kept in constant notion, in order to obtain thefull action of the water on the blood vessels they contain.We are next to consider the extensive series of aquaticanimals in which respiration is carried on by organs situatedin the interior of the body. The first example of internalaquatic respiration occurs in the Holothuria, where there isan organ composed of ramified tubes, situated in a cavitycommunicating with the intestine, and having an externalopening for the admission of the aerated water, which isbrought to act on a vascular net-work, containing the nutritivejuices of the animal, and apparently performing a partialcirculation of those juices. A still more complicatedsystem of respiratory channels occurs, both in the Echinusand Asterias, where they open by separate, but very minuteorifices, distinct from the larger apertures through which thefeet protrude; and the water admitted through these tubes isallowed to permeate the general cavity of the body, and isthus brought into contact with all the organs.The animals composing the family of Ascidix have a largerespiratory cavity, receiving the water from without, andhaving its sides lined with a membrane, which is thrown intoa great number of folds; thus considerably extending thesurface on which the water is designed to act. The entranceinto the oesophagus, or true mouth, is situated at the bottomof this cavity; that is, at the part most remote from the externalorifice; so that all the food has to pass through theAQUATIC RESPIRATION. 213respiratory cavity, before it can be swallowed, and receivedinto the stomach.In seven-al of the Anndida^ also, we find internal organsof respiration. The Lumbricus terrestrial, or commonearth-worm, has a single row of apertures, about 120 in number,placed along the back, and opening between the segmentsof the body: they each lead into a respiratory vesicle,situated between the integument and the intestine.* TheLeech has sixteen minute orifices of this kind on each sideof the body, opening internally into the same number of ovalcells, which are respiratory cavities; the water passing bothin and out by the same orificesThe *aphrodite aculeata has thirty-two orifices on eachside, placed in rows, opening into one large respiratory sac,which is situated immediately under the muscles of the back,but separated by a membrane from the abdominal cavity.Projecting into this sac, are seen several membranous vesicles,fifteen in number on each side, which have no externalopening, but which receive, on the inner part, the ends ofcertain tubes, or caeca, sent ofi* from the intestinal canal; sothat the nutriment is aerated almost as soon as it is preparedby the digestive organsIn all the higher classes of aquatic animals, where the circulationis carried on by means of a muscular heart, andwhere the whole of the blood is subjected, during its circuit,to the action of the aerated water, the immediate organs ofrespiration consist of long, narrow filaments, in the form ofa fringe, and the blood vessels belonging to the respiratorysystem are extensively distributed over the whole surface ofA minute description of these organs is given by Morren, in pages 53and 148 of his work, already quoted.f The blood, after being aerated in these cells, is conveyed into the largelateral vessels, by means of canals, which pass transversely, forming loops, situatedbetween the caeca of the stomach. These loops are studded with animmense number of small rounded bodies of a glandular appearance, resemblingthose which convey the venae cavae of the cephalopoda.t Home, Philos. Trans, for 1815, p. 259, '214 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.these filaments. Organs of this description are denominatedBranchiae, or Gills; and the arteries which bring the bloodto them are called the branchial arteries; the veins, whichconvey it back, being, of course, the branchial veins.The larger Crustacea have their branchiae situated on theunder side of the body, not only in order to obtain protectionfrom the carapace, which is folded over them, but alsofor the sake of being attached to the haunches of the feet-jaws,and thoracic feet, and thus participating in the movementsof those organs. They may be seen in the Lobster,or in the Crab, by raising the lower edge of the carapace.The form of each branchial lamina is shown at G, in Fig.354:* they consist of assemblages of many thousands of minutefilaments, proceeding from their respective stems, likethe fibres of a feather; and each group having a triangular,or a pyramidal figure. The number of these pyramidal bodiesvaries in the different genera; thus, the Lobster hastwenty-two, disposed in rows on each side of the body;, butinthe Crab, there are only seven on each side. To theseorgans are attached short and flat paddles, which are movedby appropriate muscles, and are kept in incessant motion,producing strong currents of water, evidently for the purposeof obtaining the full action of the element on every portionof the surface of the branchiae.In the greater number of Mollusca, these important organs,although external sith respect to the viscera, are withinthe shell, and are generally situated near its outer margin.They are composed of parallel filaments, arranged like theteeth of a fine comb; and an opening exists in the mouth foradmitting the water which is to act upon theist In the♦ Page 193, of this volume.f These filaments appear, in many instances, to have the power of producing"currents of water in their vicinity by the action of minute cilia, similarto those belonging to the tentacula of many polypi, where the same phenomenonis observable. Thus, if one of the branchial filaments of the freshwatermuscle be cut across, the detached portion will be seen to advance inthe fluid by a spontaneous motion, like the tentaculum of a polype, underAQUATIC RESPIRATION. 215Gasteropoda, or inhabitants pf univalve shells, this openingis usually wide. In the •^cephala, or bivalve mollusca, thegills are spread out, in the form of laminae, round the marginof the shell, as is exemplified in the oyster, where it iscommonly known by the name of beard. The aerated wateris admitted through* a fissure in the mouth, and when ithas performed its office in respiration, is usually expelled bya separate opening. The part of the mouth through whichthe water is admitted to the branchiae is sometimes prolonged,forming a tube, open at the extremity, and at all times allowingfree ingress and egress to the water, even when theanimal has withdrawn its body wholly within its shell.Sometimes one, and sometimes two tubes of this kind aremet with; and they are often protected by a tubular portionof shell, as is seen in the Murex, Buccinum, and Strombus;in other instances, the situation of the tube is only markedby a deep notch in the edge of the shell. In those molluscawhich burrow in the sand, this tube can be extended to aconsiderable length, so as to reach the water, which is alternatelysucked in and ejected by the muscular action of themouth. In those Acephala which are unprovided with anytube of this kind, the mechanism of respiration consistssimply in the opening and shutting of the shell. By watchingthem attentively, we may perceive that the surroundingwater is moved in an eddy by these actions, and that thecurrent is kept up without interruption. All the Sepia havetheir gills enclosed in two lateral cavities, which communicatewith a funnel-shaped opening in the middle of the neck,alternately receiving and expelling the water by the muscularaction of its sides. The forms assumed by the respiratoryorgans in this class are almost infinitely diversified,while the general design of their arrangement is still thesame.As we rise in the scale of animals, the respiratory func-the same circumstances. Similar currents of water, according to the recentobservations of Mi*. Lister, and apparently determined by the same mechanismof vibratory cilia, take place in the branchial sac of Ascidiae.THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.tion assumes a higher importance. In fishes the gills formlarge organs, and the continuance of their action is more essentialto life than it appears to be in any of the inferiorclasses: they are situated, as is well known, on each side ofthe throat in the immediate vicinity of the heart. Theirusual form is shown at g g, Fig. 3£^ where they are representedon one side only, but in their relative situations withrespect to the auricle (d,) and ventricle (e,) of the heart; thebulbus arteriosus (b,) and the branchial artery (f.) Theyhave the same fringed structure as in the mollusca, the fibresbeing set close to each other, like the barbs of a feather, orthe teeth of a fine comb, and being attached on each side ofthe throat, in double rows, to the convex margins of fourcartilaginous or osseous arches, which are themselves connectedwith the jaws by the bone called the os hordes. Themode of their articulation is such as to allow each arch tohave a small motion forwards, by which they are separatedfrom one another; and by moving backwards they are againbrought together, or collapsed. Each filament contains aslender plate of cartilage, giving it mechanical support, andenabling it to preserve its shape while moved by the streamsof water which are perpetually rushing past. When theirRESPIRATION IN Wishes. 217surfaces are still more minutely examined, they are found tobe covered with innumerable minute processes, crowded togetherlike the pile of velvet; and on these are distributedmyriads of blood vessels, spread like a delicate net-work,over every part of the surface. The whole extent of thissurface exposed to the action of the aerated water, by thesethickly set filaments, must be exceedingly great.*A large flap termed the Operculum extends over thewhole organ, defending it from injury, and leaving below awide fissure for the escape of the water, which has performedits office in respiration. For this purpose the wateris taken in by the mouth, and forced by the muscles of thethroat through the apertures which lead to the branchial cavities:in this action the branchial arteries are brought forwardsand separated to a certain distance from each other;and the rush of water through them unfolds and separateseach of the thousand minute filaments of the branchiae, sothat they all receive the full action of that fluid as it passesby them. Such appears to be the principal mechanical objectof the act of respiration in this class of animals; and itis an object that requires the co-operation of a liquid suchas water, capable of acting by its impulsive momentum inexpanding every part of the apparatus on which the bloodvessels are distributed. When a fish is taken out of the water,this effect can no longer be produced; in vain the animalreiterates its utmost efforts to raise the branchiae, andrelieve the sense of suffocation it experiences in consequenceof the general collapse of the filaments of those organs, whichadhere together in a mass, and can no longer receive the vivifyinginfluence of oxygen. t Death is, in like manner, theconsequence of a ligature passed round the fish, and preventingthe expansion of the branchial and the motion of theopercula,• Dr. Monroe computed that in the skate, the surface of the gills is, at theleast, equal to the whole surface of the human body'.f It has been generally stated by physiologists, even of the highest authority,such as Cuvier, that the principal reason why fishes cannot maintainVol. II. 28218 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.In all osseous fishes the opening under the operculum forthe exit of the respired water, is a simple fissure; but inmostof the cartilaginous tribes, there is no operculum, andthe water escapes through a series of apertures in the side ofthe throat. Sharks have five oblong orifices of this description,as may be seen in Fig. 367.*As the Lamprey employs its mouth more constantly thanother fish in laying hold of its prey, and adhering to otherbodies, the organs of respiration are so constructed as to beindependent of the mouth in receiving the water. Thereare seven external openings on each side (Fig. 368,) leadinginto the same number of separate oval pouches, situatedhorizontally, and the inner membrane of which has the samestructure as gills: these pouches are seen on a larger scalethan in the preceding figure, in Fig. 369. There is also anequal number of 'internal openings, seen in the lower partof this last figure, leading into a tube, the lower end of whichis closed and the upper terminates by a fringed edge in theoesophagus. The water which is received by the seven lateralopenings, enters at one side, and after it has acted uponthe gills, passes round the projecting membranes. Thegreater part makes its exit by the same orifices; but a portionescapes into the middle tube, and thence passes, eitherinto the other cavities, or into the Oesophaguslife, when surrounded by air instead of water, is that the branchiae becomedry, and lose the power of acting when thus deprived of their natural moisture:for it might otherwise naturally be expected that the oxyg-en of atmosphericair would exert a more powerful action on the blood which circulatesin the franchise, than that of merely aerated water. The rectification of thiserror is due to Florins, who pointed out the true cause of suffocation, statedin the text, in a Memoir entitled " Experiences sur le Mechanism de la Respirationdes Poissons." — Annales des Sciences Naturelles, xx. 5.• They are also visible in Fig. 293, (page 122,) which is that of the/S'j'Ma-lusprisUs, a species belonging to this tribe.■j- It was commonly supposed that the respired water is ejected throughthe nostril; but this is certainly a mistake, for the nostril has no communicationthrough the mouth, as was pointed out by Sir E. Home. Phil. Trans.for 1815, p. 259. These organs have also been described by Bloch andPartner.RESPIRATION IN FISHES. 219In the Myxine, which feeds upon the internal parts of itsprey, and buries its head and part of its body in the flesh,the openings of the respiratory organs are removed sufficientlyfar from the head to admit of respiration going onwhile the animal is so employed; and there are only twoexternal openings, and six lateral pouches on each side, withtubes similar to those in the lamprey.The Perca sanders (Daldorff,*) which is a fish inhabitingthe seas of India, has a very remarkable structure adaptingit to the maintenance of respiration, and consequently to thesupport of life for a considerable time when out of the water:and hence it is said occasionally to travel on land to somedistance from the coast The pharyngeal bones of this fishhave a foliated and cellular structure, which gives them acapacity for retaining a sufficient quantity of water, notonly to keep the gills moist, but also to enable them to performtheir proper office; while not a particle of water is sufferedto escape from them, by the opercula being accuratelyclosed.The same faculty, resulting from a similar structure, ispossessed by the Ophicephalus, which is also met with inthe lakes and rivers of India and China. Eels are enabledto carry on respiration when out of water, for a certain period,in consequence of the narrowness of the aperture forthe exit of the water from the branchial cavity, which enablesit to be closed, and the water to be retained in thatcavity 4I have already stated that, in all aquatic animals, the waterwhich is breathed is merely the vehicle by which the air itcontains is brought into contact with the organs of respiration.This air is constantly vitiated by the respiration of theseanimals, and requires to be renewed by the absorption of aArdhias testudinus.(J^\oc\\:) Jnabs (CuffThis peculiar faculty has been ah-lady alluded to in volume i. p. SOI.+ Dr. Hancock states that the Bores contains, (Silurus cristatus, Linn.) orHassan, in veiy dry seasons, is sometimes seen, in great numbers, making longmarches over land, in search of water. Edin. Phil. Journal, xx. 396.220 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.fresh portion, which can only take place when the waterfreely communicates with the atmosphere: and if this renewalbe by any means prevented, the water is no longercapable of sustaining life. Fishes are killed in a very fewhours, if confined in a limited portion of water, which has noaccess to fresh air. When many fishes are enclosed in anarrow vessel, they all struggle for the uppermost place,(where the atmospheric air is first absorbed,) like the unfortunatemen imprisoned in the black-hole at Calcutta. Whena small fish pond is frozen over, the fishes soon perish, unlessholes be broken in the ice, in order to admit air: theymay be seen flocking towards these holes, in order to receivethe benefit of the fresh air as it is absorbed by thewater; and so great is their eagerness on these occasions,that they often allow themselves to be caught by the hand.Water from which all air has been extracted, either by theair-pump, or by boiling, is to fishes what a vacuum is to abreathing terrestrial animal. Humboldt and Provencalmade a series of experiments on the quantities of air whichfinishes require for their respiration. They found that river-watergenerally contains about one 36th of its bulk of air,of which quantity one-third consists of oxygen, being aboutone per cent., of the whole volume. A tench is able tobreathe when the quantity of oxygen is reduced to thecouth part of the bulk of the water, but soon becomes exceedinglyfeeble by the privation of this necessary element.The fact, however, shows the admirable perfection of the organsof this fish, which can extract so minute a quantity ofair from water to which that air adheres with great tenacity.*• The swimming bladder of fishes is regarded by many of the Germannaturalists as having some relations with the respiratory function, and as beingthe rudiment of the pulmonary cavity of land animals; the passage ofcommunication with the oesophagus being conceived to represent the trachea.The air contained in the swimming bladder of fishes has been examinedby many chemists, but although it is generally found to be a mixture ofoxygen and nitrogen, the proportion in which these gases exist is observedto vary considerably. Riot concluded from his experiments, that in the air-atmosphericRESPIRATION. 221§ 3. atmospheric Respiration.The next series of structures which are to come underour review, comprehends all those adapted to the respirationof atmospheric air in its gaseous form; and their physiologyis no less diversified than that of the organs by which wateris respired.Air may be respired by tracheae, or by pulmonary cavities;the first mode is exemplified in insects; the second isthat adopted in the larger terrestrial animals.The greater part of the blood of insects being diffused bytransudation through every internal organ of their bodies,and a small portion only being enclosed in vessels, and circulatingin them, the salutary influence of the air could nothave been generally extended to that fluid by any of the ordinarymodes of respiration, where the function is carried onin an organ of limited extent. As the blood could not bebrought to the air, it became necessary, therefore, that theair should be brought to the blood. For this purpose, therehas been provided, in all insects, a system of continuous andramified vessels, called traces, distributing air to everypart of the body. The external orifices, from which theseair tubes commence, are called spiracles, or stigmata, andbladder of fishes inhabiting" the greatest depths of the ocean, the quantity ofoxygen is greater, while in those of fishes which come often to the surface,the nitrogen is more abundant; and De la Roche came to the same conclusionfrom his researches on the fishes of the Mediterranean. From the experimentsof Humboldt and Provencal, on the other hand, we may conclude, that thequality of the air contained in the air-bladder is but remotely connected withrespiration. (Memoires de la Societe d'Arcueil, ii. 359.)According to Hermann, the Comitis, or Loche, occasionally swallows air,which is decomposed in the alimentary canal, and effects a change in theblood vessels, with which it is brought into contact, exactly similar to thatwhich occurs in ordinary respiration. It is also believed that in all fishes apartial aeration of the blood is the reside of a similar action, taking place at thesurface of the body inter the scales of the integuments. Cuvier, sur lesPoissons, I. 383.222 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.are usually situated in rows on each side of the body, as .isshown in Fig. 370, which represents the lower abdominalsurface of the Dytiscus marginal. They are seen verydistinctly in the caterpillar, which has generally ten on eachside, corresponding to the number of abdominal segments.In many insects we find them guarded by bristles, or tuftsof hair, and sometimes by valves, placed at the orifice, toprevent the entrance of extraneous bodies. The spiraclesare opened and closed by muscles provided for that purpose.Fig. 371 is a magnified view of spiracles of this description,from the Ceramhyx heros. (Fab.) They are the beginningsof short tubes, which open into large trunks, (as shownin Fig. 372,) extending longitudinally on each side, andsending ofi" radiating branches from the parts which are oppositeto the spiracles; and these branches are farther subdivided,in the same manner as the arteries of the larger animals,so that their minute ramifications pervade every organin the body. This ramified distribution has frequently occasionedtheir being mistaken for blood vessels. In thewings of insects, the nervures, which have the appearanceof veins, are only large air-tubes. Jurine asserts that it isby forcing air into these tubes that the insect is enabled suddenlyto expand the wings iu preparing them for flight,RESPIRATION IN INSECTS. 223giving them, by this means, greater buoyancy, as well astension.The tracheae are kept continually pervious by a curiousmechanism: they are formed of three coats, the external andinternal of which are membranous; but the middle coat isconstructed of an elastic thread coiled into a helix, or cylindricalspiral, (as seen in Fig. 372;) and the elasticity of thisthread keeps the tube constantly in a state of expansion, andtherefore full of air. When examined under water, the tracheaehave a shining silvery appearance, from the air theycontain. This structure has a remarkable analogy with thatof the air vessels of plants, which also bear the name of tracheae;and in both similar variations are observed in the contextureof the elastic membrane by which they are keptpervious.*The tracheae, in many parts of their course, present remarkabledilatations, which apparently serve as reservoirsof air: they are very conspicuous in the Dytiscus Tnargina-lis, which resides principally in water; but they also existin many insects, as the Melolontha and the Ceramhyx,which live wholly in the air.t Those of the Scotia horton(Fab.) are delineated in Fig. 373, considerably magnified.If an insect be immersed in water, air will be seen escapingin minute bubbles at each spiracle; and in proportionas the water enters into the tubes, the sensibility is destroyed.If all the spiracles be closed by oil, or any otherunctuous substance, the insect immediately dies of suffocation;but if some of them be left open, respiration is keptup to a considerable extent, from the numerous communicationswhich exist among the air vessels. Insects soon• According to the observation of Dr. Kidd these vessels are often annularin insects, as is also the case with those of plants. He considers the longitudinaltrachea as connecting channels, by which the insect is enabled todirect the air to particular parts for occasional purposes. Phil. Trans, for1825, p. 234.• \ Leon Dufour, Annales des Sciences Naturelle viii. 26.224 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.perish when placed in the receiver of an air-pump, and theair exhausted; but they are generally more tenacious of lifeunder these circumstances than the larger animals, and often,after being apparently dead, revive on the readmission ofair.Aquatic insects have tracheae, like those living in air, andare frequently provided with tubes, which are of sufficientlength to reach the surface of the water, where they absorbair for respiration. In a few tribes a complicated mode ofrespiration is practised; aerated water is taken into the body,and introduce into cavities, when the air is extracted fromit, and transmitted by the ordinary tracheae to the differentparts of the system.*Such, then, is the extensive apparatus for aeration in animals,which have either no circulation of their nutritiousjuices, or a very imperfect one; but no sooner do we arriveat the examination of animals possessing an enlarged systemof blood vessels, than we find nature abandoning thesystem of tracheae, and employing more simple means ofeffecting the aeration of the blood. Advantage is taken ofthe facility afforded by the blood vessels of transmitting theblood to particular organs, where it may conveniently receivethe influence of the air. Thus, Scorpions are provided,on each side of the thorax, with four pulmonary cavities,seen at l, on the left side of Fig. 374, into each of whichair is admitted by a separate external opening, a, b, is thedorsal vessel, which is connected with the pulmonary cavitiesby means of two sets of muscles, the one set (m, m) beinglonger than the other (m, m, m.) The branchial arteries(v) are seen ramifying over the inner surface of the• Mr. Dutrochet conceives that the principle on which this operation isconducted is the same with that by which gases are reciprocally transmittedthrough moistened membranes; as in the experiments of Humboldt and Gayliussac, who, on enclosing mixtures of oxygen, nitrogen, and carbonic acidgases, in any proportion, in a membranous bladder, which was then immersedin aerated water, found that there is a reciprocal transit of the gases juntil at length pure atmospheric air Remains in the cavity of the bladder.RESPIRATION IN INSECTS.pulmonary cavities (r) on the right side, whence the bloodis conveyed by a corresponding set of branchial veins tothe dorsal vessel: and other vessels, which are ordinaryveins, are seen at o, proceeding from the abdominal cavityto join the dorsal vessel. The membrane which lines thepulmonary cavities is curiously plaited, presenting the appearanceof the teeth of a comb, and partaking of the structureof gills; and on this account these organs are termedby Latreille pneumo-franchise. Organs of a similar descriptionexist in Spiders, some species having eight, othersfour, and some only two: but there is one entire order ofArachnida which respire by means of trachea, and in thesethe' circulation is as imperfect as it is in insects.It may here be remarked that an essential difference existsin the structure of the respiratory organs, according tothe nature of the medium which is to act upon them: for inVol. II. 29226 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.aquatic respiration the air contained in water is made toact on the blood circulating in vessels which ramify on theexternal surface of the filaments of the gills; while in atmosphericrespiration the air in its gaseous state is alwaysreceived into cavities, on the internal surface of which theblood vessels, intended to receive its influence, are distributed.It is not difficult to assign the final cause of thischange of plan; for in each case the structure is accommodatedto the mechanical properties of the medium respired.A liquid, being inelastic and ponderous, is adapted, by itsmomentum alone, to separate and surround the loose floatingfilaments composing the branchiae; but a light gaseousfluid, like air, is, on the contrary, better fitted to expand dilatablecavities into which it may be introduced.Occasionally, however, it is found that organs constructedlike branchiae, and usually performing aquatic respiration,can be adapted to respire air. This is the case with somespecies of Crustacea, of the order Decapoda, such as theCrab, which, by means of a peculiar apparatus, discoveredby Audouin, and Milne Edwards, retain a quantity of waterin the branchial cavity so as to enable them to live a verylong time out of the water. It is only in their mature stateof development, however, that they are qualified for thisamphibious existence, for at an early period of growth theycan live only in water.There is an entire order of Gasteropodous Mollusca whichbreathe atmospheric air by means of pulmonary cavities.This is the case with the Limaxx, or slug, and also with theHelix, or snail, the Testaceous, the Clausilia, and manyothers, which, though partial to moist situations, are, fromthe conformation of their respiratory organs, essentiallyland animals. The air is received by a round aperture nearthe head, guarded by a sphincter muscle, which is seen todilate or contract as occasion may require, but which issometimes completely concealed from view by the mouthfolding over it. The cavity, to which this opening leads,is lined by a membrane delicately folded, and overspreadRESPIRATION BY LUNGS. 227with a beautiful net-work of pulmonary vessels. Othermollusca of the same order, which are more aquatic in theirhabits, have yet a similar structure, and are obliged at intervalsto come to the surface of the water in order to breatheatmospheric air:^ this is the case with the Onchidium, thePlanorbis, the Lymnaea, &c.The structure of the pulmonary organs becomes graduallymore refined and complicated as we ascend to the higherclasses of animals. In all vertebrated terrestrial animalsthey are called lungs, and consist of an assemblage of vesicles,into which the air is admitted by a tube, called thetrachea, or wind-pipe, extending downwards from the backof the mouth, parallel to the oesophagus. Great care is takento guard the beginning of this passage from the intrusion ofany solid or liquid that may be swallowed. A cartilaginousvalve, termed the epiglottis, is generally provided for thispurpose, which is made to descend by the action of the samemuscles that perform deglutition, and which then closes accuratelythe entrance into the air-lube. It is an exceedinglybeautiful contrivance, both as to the simplicity of the mechanism,and the accuracy with which it accomplishes thepurpose of its formation. At the upper part of the chestthe trachea divides into two branches, called the bronchia,passing to the lungs on either side. Both the wind-pipeand the bronchia are prevented from closing by the interpositionof a series of firm cartilaginous ringlets, interposedbetween their inner and outer coats, and placed at small andequal distances from one another. The natural elasticity ofthese ringlets tends to keep the sides of the tube stretched,and causes it to remain open: it is a structure very analogousto that of the trachea of insects, or of the vessels of thesame name in plants.The lungs of Reptiles consist of large sacs, into the cavityof which the bronchia, proceeding from the bifurcation ofthe trachea, open at once, and without farther subdivision.Cells are formed within the sides of this great cavity, byfine membranous partitions, as thin and delicate as soap228 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.bubbles. The lungs of serpents have scarcely any of thesepartitions, but consist of one simple pulmonary sac, situatedon the right side, having the slender elongated form of allthe other viscera, and extending nearly the whole length ofthe body. The lung on the left side is in general scarcelydiscernible, being very imperfectly developed. In the chameleonthe lungs have numerous processes which projectfrom them like caeca. In the Sauria, the lungs are moreconfined to the thoracic region, and are more completelycellular.The mechanism, by which, in these animals, the air isforced into the lungs, is exceedingly peculiar, and was foralong time a subject of controversy. If we take a frog asan example, and watch its respiration, we cannot readilydiscover that it breathes at all, for it never opens its mouthto receive air, and there is no motion of the sides to indicatethat it respires; and yet, on any sudden alarm, we seetheanimal blowing itself up, as if by some internal power,though its mouth all the while continues to be closed. Wemay perceive, however, that its throat is in frequent motion,as if the frog were economizing its mouthful of air,and transferring it backwards and forwards between itsmouth and lungs; but if we direct our attention to the nostrils,we may observe in them a twirling motion, at eachmovement of the jaws; for it is, in fact, through the nostrilsthat the frog receives all the air which it breathes. Thejaws are never opened but for eating, and the sides of themouth form a sort of bellows, of which the nostrils are theinlets; and by their alternate contraction and relaxation theair is swallowed, and forced into the trachea, so as to inflatethe lungs. If the mouth of a frog be forcibly kept open, itcan no longer breathe, because it is deprived of the powerof swallowing the air required for that function; and if itsnostrils be closed, it is, in like manner, suffocated. Therespiration of most of the Reptile tribes is performed in asimilar manner; and they may be said rather to swallow theair they breathe, than to draw it in by any expansive actionRESPIRATION IN REPTILES. 229of the parts which surround the cavity of lungs; for eventhe ribs of serpents contribute but little, by their motion,to this effect, being chiefly useful as organs of progressivemotion. * 'The Chelonia have lungs of great extent, passing backwardsunder the carapace, and reaching to the posteriorpart of the abdomen. Turtles, which are aquatic, derivegreat advantages from this structure, which enables themto give buoyancy to their body, (encumbered as it is with aheavy shell,) by introducing into it a large volume of air; sothat the lungs, in fact, serve the purposes of a large swimmingbladder. That this use was contemplated in theirstructure is evident from the volume of air received intothe lungs, being much greater than is required for the solepurpose of respiration. The section of the lungs of the turtle(Fig. 375,) shows their interior structure, composed oflarge cells, into which the trachea (t) opens.Few subjects in animal physiology are more deservingthe attention of those whose object is to trace the operationsof nature in the progressive development of the organs, thanthe changes which occur in the evolution of the tadpole fromthe time it leaves the egg till it has attained the form of the230 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.perfect frog. We have already had occasion to notice severalof these transformations in the organs of the mechanicalfunctions, and also in those of digestion and circulation: butthe most remarkable of all are the changes occurring in therespiratory apparatus, corresponding with the opposite natureof the elements which the same animal is destined toinhabit in the different stages of its existence. No less thanthree sets of organs are provided for respiration; the twofirst being branchiae, adapted to the fish-like condition of thetadpole, and the last being pulmonary cavities, for receivingair, to be employed when the animal exchanges its aquaticfor its terrestrial life. It is exceedingly interesting to observethat this animal at first breathes by gills, which projectin an arborescent form from the sides of the, neck, andfloat in the water; but that these structures are merely temporary,being provided only to meet the immediate exigencyof the occasion, and being raised at a period when noneof the internal organs are as yet perfected. As soon as anotherset of gills, situated internally, can be constructed, andare ready to admit the circulating blood, the external gillsare superseded in their office; they now shrivel, and are removed,and the tadpole performs its respiration by means ofbranchiae, formed on the model of those of fishes, and actingby a similar mechanism. By the time that the system hasundergone the changes necessary for its conversion into thefrog, a new apparatus has become evolved for the respirationof air. These are the lungs, which gradually cominginto play, direct the current of blood from the branchiae, andtake upon themselves the whole of the office of respiration.The branchiae, in their turn, become useless, are soon obliterated,and leave no other trace of their former existencethan the original division of the arterial trunks, which hadsupplied them with blood directly from the heart, but which,now uniting in the back, form the descending aorta.*There is a small family called the Perennial-branchia, besSee Fig, 357, p. 197.RESPIRATION IN REPTILES. 231longing to this class, which, instead of undergoing all thechanges I have been describing, present, during their wholelives, a great similitude to the first stage of the tadpole.This is the case with the Jlxolotl, the Proteus sanguinis,the Siren lacerta, and the Menohranchus lateralis whichpermanently retain their external gills, while at the sametime they possess imperfectly developed lungs. It wouldtherefore seem as if, in these animals, the^progress of developmenthad been arrested at an early stage, so that theiradult state corresponds to the larva condition of the frog.*In all warm-blooded animals respiration becomes a functionof much greater importance, the continuance of lifebeing essentially dependent on its vigorous and unceasingexercise. The whole class of Mammalia have lungs of anexceedingly developed structure, composed of an immensenumber of minute cells, crowded together as closely as possible,and presenting a vast extent of internal surface. Thethorax, or cavity in which the lungs, together with the heartand its great blood vessels, are enclosed, has somewhat theshape of a cone; and its sides are defended from compressionby the arches of the ribs, which extend from the spineto the sternum, or breast-bone, and produce mechanical supporton the same principle that a cask is strengthened bybeing girt with hoops, which, though composed of comparativelyweak materials, are yet capable, from their circularshape, of presenting great resistance to any compressiveforce.While Nature has thus guarded the chest, with such peculiarsolicitude, against the efforts of any external force,tending to diminish its capacity, she has made ample provisionfor enlarging or contracting its diameter in the act ofGeoffroy St. Hilaire thinks there is ground for believing that Crocodilesand Turtles possess, in addition to the oi-diary pulmonary respiration, a partialaquatic abdominal respiration, effected by means of the two channels ofcommunication which have been found to east between the cavity of theabdomen and the external surface of the body: and also that some analogymay be traced between this aquatic respiration in reptiles, by these peritonealcanary and the supposed function of the swimming bladder of fishes, in subserviencyto a species of aerial reputation.232 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.respiration. First, at the lower part, or that which correspondsto the basis of the cone, the only side, indeed,which is not defended by bone, there is extended a thin expansion,partly muscular, and partly tendinous, forming acomplete partition, and closing the cavity of the chest on theside next to the abdomen. This muscle is called the Diaphragm:it is perforated, close to its origin from the spine,by four tubes, namely, the oesophagus, the aorta, the venacava, and the thoracic duct. Its surface is not flat, but convexabove, or towards the chest; and the direction of itsfibres is such, that, when they contract, they bring down themiddle part, which is tendinous, and render it more flat thanbefore, (the passage of the four tubes already mentioned, notinterfering with this action,) and thus, the cavity of the thoraxmay be considerably enlarged. It is obvious that if,upon the descent of the diaphragm, the lungs were to remainin their original situation, an empty space would beleft between them and the diaphragm. But no vacuum cantake place in the body; the air cells of the lungs must alwayscontain, even in their most compressed state, a certainquantity of air: and this air will tend, by its elasticity, to expandthe cells; the lungs will, consequently, be dilated, andwill continue to fill the chest; and the external air will rushin through the trachea in order to restore the equilibrium.This action is termed inspiration. The air is again thrownout when the diaphragm is relaxed, and pushed upwards, bythe action of the large muscles of the trunk; the elasticityof the sides of the chest, concurring also in the same effect;and thus expiration is accomplished.The muscles which move the ribs conspire also to producedilatations and contractions of the cavity of the chest. Eachrib is capable of a small degree of motion on that extremityby which it is attached to the spine; and this motion, assumingthe chest to be in the erect position, as in man, ischiefly upwards and downwards. But, since the inclinationof the ribs is such that their lower edges form acute angleswith the spine, they bend downwards as they proceed towardsthe breast; and the uppermost rib being a fixed point,RESPIRATION IN MAMMALIA.the action of the intercostal muscles, which produces an approximationof the ribs, tends to raise them, and to bringthem more at right angles with the spine; the sternum, also,to which the other extremities of the ribs are articulated, iselevated by this motion, and, consequently, removed to agreater distance from the spine; the general result of all theseactions being to increase the capacity of the chest.Thus, there are two ways in which the cavity of thethorax can be dilated; namely, by the action of the diaphragm,and by the action of the intercostal muscles. It isonly in peculiar exigencies that the whole power of this apparatusis called into action; for in ordinary respiration thediaphragm is the chief agent employed, and the principaleffect of the action of the intercostal muscles is simply to fixthe ribs, and thus give greater purchase to the diaphragm.The muses of the ribs are employed chiefly to give activeVol. IL 30234 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.assistance to the diaphragm, when, from any cause, a difficultyarises in dilating the chest.In Birds the mechanism of respiration proceeds upon adifferent plan, of which an idea may be derived from theview given of the lungs of the Ostrich, at l. l Fig. 377.The construction of the lungs of birds is such as not to admitof any change in their dimensions; for they are very compactin their texture, and are so closely braced to the ribs, and upperparts of the chest, by firm membranes, as to preclude allpossibility of motion. They in part, indeed, project behindthe intervals between the ribs, so that their whole mass isnot altogether contained within the thoracic cavity. Thereis no large muscular diaphragm by which any change in thecapacity of the chest could be effected, but merely a fewnarrow slips of muscles, arising from the inner sides of theribs, and inserted into the thin transparent membrane whichcovers the lower surface of the lungs. They have the effectof lessening the concavity of the lungs towards the abdomenat the time of inspiration, and thereby assist in dilatingthe air-cells.* The bronchia, or divisions of the trachea(t,) after opening, as usual, into the pulmonary air-cells, donot terminate there, but pass on to the surface of the lungs,where they open by numerous apertures. The air is admitted,through these apertures into several large air-cells.(c c c,) which occupy a considerable portion of the body,and which enclose most of the large viscera contained in theabdomen, such as the liver, the stomach, and the intestinesand there aj*e, besides, many lateral cells in immediate communicationwith the lungs, and extending all down the sidesof the body. Numerous air-cells also exist between themuscles, and underneath the skin; and the air penetrates eveninto the interior of the bones themselves, filling the spacesusually occupied by the marrow, and thus contributing masHunter in the Animal Economy, p. 78.■j- It was asserted by the Parisian Academicians, that the air got admissioninto the cavity of the pericardium, in which the heart is lodged. This errorwas first pointed out by Dr. Macartney, in Trees's Cyclops aecQa. — Art. BirdRESPIRATION IN BIRDS. 235eternally to the lightness of the fabric* All these cells arevery[large and numerous in birds which perform the highestand most rapid flight, such as the eagle. The bill of theToucan, which is of a cellular structure, and also the cellsbetween the plates of the skull in the Oi^/,are,in like manner,filled with air, derived from the lungs: the barrels ofthe large quills of the tails and wings are also supplied withair from the same source.In birds, then, the air is not merely received into thelungs, but actually passes through them, being drawn forwardsby the muscles of the ribs when they elevate thechest, and produce an expansion of the subjacent air-cells.The chest is depressed, for the purpose of expiration, byanother set of muscles, and the air driven back: this air,consequently, passes a second time through the lungs, andacts twice on the blood which circulates in those organs.It is evident that if the lungs of birds had been constructedon the plan of those of quadrupeds, they must have beentwice as large to obtain the same amount of aeration in theblood; and consequently must have been twice as heavy,which would have been a serious inconvenience in an animalformed for flying The diffusion of so large a quantityof air throughout the body of animals of this class presentsan analogy with a similar purpose apparent in the conformationof insects, where the same object is effected by meansof tracheae. |:• In birds, not formed for extensive flight, as the gallinaceous tribes, thehumerus is the only bone into which air is introduced. — Hunter on theAnimal Economy, p. 81.f I must mention, however, that the correctness of this view of the subjectis contested by Dr. Macai'tney, who thinks it probable that the air, onits return from the large air-cells, passes directly by the large air-holes intothe bronchia, and is not brought a second time into contact with the blood.\ The peculiarities of structure in the respiratory system of birds haveprobably a relation to the capability we see them possess, of bearing withimpunity, very quick and violent changes of atmospheric pressure. Thus,the Condor of the Andes is often seen to descend rapidly from a height ofabove 20,000 feet, to the edge of the sea, where the air is more than twice236 THE VITAL FUNCTIONSThus, has the mechanism of respiration been varied inthe different classes of animals, and adapted to the particularelement, and mode of life designed for each. Combinedwith the peculiar mode of circulation, it affords a tolerably-accuratecriterion of the energy of the vital powers. Inbirds, the muscular activity is raised to the highest degree,in consequence of the double effect of the air upon the wholecirculating blood in the pulmonary organs. The Mammaliarank next below birds, in the scale of vital energy; butthey still possess a double circulation, and breathe atmosphericair. The torpid and cold-blooded reptiles are separatedfrom mammalia by a very wide interval, because, althoughthey respire air, that air only influences a part ofthe blood; the pulmonary, being only a branch of the generalcirculation. In fishes, again, we have a similar result,because, although the whole blood is brought by a doublecirculation to the respiratory organs, yet it is acted upononly by that portion of air which is contained in the waterrespired, and which is less powerful in its action than thesame element in its gaseous state. We may, in like manner,continue to trace the connexion between the extent ofthese functions and the degrees of vital energy throughoutthe successive classes of invertebrate animals. The vigourand activity of the functions of insects, in particular, havean evident relation to the effective manner in which thecomplete aeration of the blood is secured by the extensivedistribution of tracheae through every part of their system.§ 4. Chemical Changes effected by Respiration.We have next to direct our attention to the chemical officeswhich respiration performs in the animal economy. Itthe density of that which the bird had been breathing. We are, as yet, unableto trace the connexion which probably exists between the structure ofthe lungs, and this extraordinary power of accommodation to such greatand sudden variations of atmospheric pressure.CHEMICAL JJPPECTS OP RESPIRATION. 237is only of late years that we may be said to have obtainedany accurate knowledge as to the real nature of this importantfunction; and there is perhaps no branch of physiologywhich exhibits in its history a more humiliating picture ofthe wide sea of error in which the human intellect is proneto lose itself, when the path of philosophical induction isabandoned, than the multitude of wild and visionary hypotheses,devoid of all solid foundation, and perplexed by themost inconsistent reasonings, which formerly prevailed withregard to the objects and the processes of respiration. Togive an account, or even a brief enumeration of these theories,now sufficiently exploded, would be incompatible withthe purpose to which I must confine myself in this treatise.*I shall content myself, therefore, with a concise statementof such of the leading facts relating to this function, as havenow by the labours of modern physiologists, been satisfactorilyestablished, and which serve to elucidate the beneficentintentions of nature in the economy of the animal system.Atmospheric air acts without difficulty upon the bloodwhile it is circulating through the vessels which are ramifiedover the membranes lining the air cells of the lungs;for neither these membranes, nor the thin coats of the vesselsthemselves, present any obstacle to the transmission ofchemical elements from the one to the other. The bloodbeing a highly compound fluid, it is exceedingly difficult toobtain an accurate analysis of it, and still more to ascertainwith precision the different modifications which occur in itschemical condition at different times: on this account, it isscarcely possible to determine, by direct observation, whatare the exact chemical changes, which that fluid undergoes• For an account of the history of the various chemical theories whichhave prevailed on this interesting department of Physiology, I must refer tothe "Essay on Respiration," by Dr. Stock, and also to the "ElementarySystem of Physiology," by the same author, which latter work comprisesthe most comprehensive and accurate compendium of the science which hasyet appeared.238 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.during its passage through the lungs; and we have only collateralevidence to guide us in the inquiry.*The most obvious effect resulting from the action of theair is a change of colour from the dark purple hue, whichthe blood has when it is brought to the lungs, to the brightvermilion colour, which it is found to assume in those organs,and which accompanies its restoration to the qualitiesof arterial blood. In what the chemical difference betweenthese two states consists may, in some measure, be collectedfrom the changes which the air itself, by producing them,has experienced.The air of the atmosphere, which is taken into the lungs,is known to consist of about twenty per cent, of oxygen gas,seventy-nine of nitrogen gas, and one of carbonic acid gas.When it has acted upon the blood, and is returned from thelungs, it is found that a certain proportion of oxygen, whichit had contained, has disappeared, and that the place of thisoxygen is almost wholly supplied by an addition of carbonicacid gas, together with a quantity of watery vapour. It appearsalso probable that a small portion of the nitrogen gasis consumed during respiration.For our knowledge of the fact of the disappearance of oxygenwe are indebted to the labours of Dr. Priestley. It had,indeed, been long before suspected by Mayovv, that someportion of the air inspired is absorbed by the blood; but themerit of the discovery that it is the oxygenous part of theair which is thus consumed is unquestionably due to Dr.Some experiments very recently made by Messrs. Macaire and Marcet,on the ultimate analysis of arterial and venous blood, taken from a rabbit,and dried, have shown that the former contains a larger proportion of oxygenthan the latter; and that the latter contains a larger proportion of carbonthan the former: the proportions of nitrogen and hydrogen being the samein both. The following are the exact numbers expressive of these proportions:Carbon. Oxygen. Nitrogen. Hydrogen.Arterial blood 50.2 . . . 26.3 . . . 16.3 . 6.6Venous blood 55.7 . . . 21.7 . . . 16.2 . 6.4Memoires de la Society de Physique et desist, Nature de Geneva. T. v.p. 400.CHEMICAL EFFECTS OF RESPIRATION. 239Priestley. The exact quantity of oxygen, which is lost innatural respiration, varies in different animals, and even indifferentconditions of the same animal. Birds, for instance,consume larger quantities of oxygen by their respiration;and hence require, for the maintenance of life, apurer air than other vertebrated animals. Vauquelin, however,found that many species of insects and worms possessthe power of abstracting oxygen from the atmospherein a much greater degree than the larger animals. Evensome of the terrestrial mollusca, such as snails, are capableof living for a long time in the vitiated air in whicha bird had perished. Some insects, which conceal themselvesin holes, or burrow under ground, have been knownto deprive the air of every appreciable portion of its oxygen.It is observed by Spallanzani, that those animals, whosemodes of life oblige them to remain for a great length oftime in these confined situations, possess this power in agreater degree than others, which enjoy more liberty ofmoving in the open air: so admirably have the faculties ofanimals been, in every instance, accommodated to their respectivewants.Since carbonic acid consists of oxygen and carbon, it isevident that the portion of that gas which is exhaled fromthe lungs is the result of the combination of either the whole,or a part, of the oxygen gas, which has disappeared duringthe act of respiration, with the carbon contained in the darkvenous blood, which is brought to the lungs. The bloodhaving thus parted with its superabundant carbon, whichescapes in the form of carbonic acid gas, regains its naturalvermilion colour, and is now qualified to be again transmittedto the different parts of the body for their nourishmentand growth. As the blood contains a greater proportion ofcarbon than the animal solids and fluids which are formedfrom it, this superabundant carbon gradually accumulates inproportion as its other principles, (namely, oxygen, hydrogen,and nitrogen) are abstracted from it by the processes ofsecretion and nutrition. By the time it has returned to the240 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.heart, therefore, it is loaded with carbon, a principle, which,when in excess, becomes noxious, and requires to be removedfrom the blood, by combining it with a fresh quantityof oxygen obtained from the atmosphere. It is not yetsatisfactorily determined whether the whole of the oxygen,which disappears during respiration, is employed in the formationof carbonic acid gas: it appears, probable, however,from the concurring testimony of many experimentalists,that a small quantity is permanently absorbed by the blood,and enters into it as one of its constituents.A similar question arises with respect to nitrogen, ofwhich, as I have already mentioned, it is probable that asmall quantity disappears from the air when it is respired;although the accounts of experimentalists are not uniform onthis point. The absorption of nitrogen during respirationwas one of the results which Dr. Priestley had deduced fromhis experiments: and this fact, though often doubted, appears,on the whole, to be tolerably well ascertained by theinquiries of Davy, Pfaff, and Henderson. With regard tothe respiration of cold-blooded animals, it has been satisfactorilyestablished by the researches of Spallanzani, and moreespecially by those of Humboldt and Provencal, on fishes,that nitrogen is actually absorbed. A confirmation of thisresult has recently been obtained by Messrs. Macaire andMarcet, who have found that the blood contains a largerproportion of nitrogen than the chyle, from which it isformed. We can discover no other source from which chylecould acquire this additional quantity of nitrogen, during itsconversion into blood, than the air of the atmosphere, towhich it is exposed in its passage through the pulmonaryvessels.*According to these views of the chemical objects of respiration,the process itself is analogous to those artificialoperations which effect the combustion of charcoal. Thefood supplies the fuel, which is prepared for use by the disSee the note at page 238.CHEMICAL EFFECTS OF RESPIRATION. 241festive organs, and conveyed by the pulmonary arteries tothe place where it is to undergo combustion: the diaphragmis the bellows, which feeds the. furnace with air; and the tracheais the chimney, through which the carbonic acid, whichis the product of the combustion, escapes.It becomes an interesting problem to determine whetherthis analogy may not be farther extended; and whether thecombustion of carbon, which takes place in respiration, benot the exclusive source of the increased temperature, whichall animals, but more especially those designated as war m-blooded usually maintain above the surrounding medium.The uniform and exact relation which may be observed totake place between the temperature of animals and the energyof the respiratory function, or, rather, the amount of thechemical changes induced by that function, affords verystrong evidence in favour of this hypothesis. The coincidence,indeed, is so strong, that, notwithstanding the objectionsthat have been raised against the theory founded uponthis hypothesis, from some apparent anomalies which occasionallypresent themselves, we must, I think, admit that itaffords the best explanation of the phenomena of any theoryyet proposed, and that, therefore, it is probably the true one.The maintenance of a very elevated temperature appearsto require the concurrence of two conditions; namely, first,that the whole of the blood should be subjected to the influenceof the air, and, secondly, that the air should be presentedto it in a gaseous state. These, then, are the circumstanceswhich establish the great distinction between warmand cold-blooded animals; a distinction which at once stampsthe character of their whole constitution. It is the conditionof a high temperature in the blood which raises the quadrupedand the bird to a rank, in the scale of vitality, so farabove that of the reptile: it is this which places an insuperableboundary between mammalia and fishes. However thewarm-blooded Cetacea, who spend their lives in the ocean,may be found to approximate in their outward form, and intheir external instruments of motion, to the other inhabitantsVol II. 31242 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.of the deep, they are still, from the conformation of theirrespiratory organs, dependent on another element. If a seal,a porpoise, or a dolphin were confined, but for a short time,under the surface of the water, it would perish with thesame certainty as any other of the mammalia, placed in thesame situation. We observe them continually rising to thesurface in order to breathe, under every circumstance of privationor of danger; and however eagerly they may pursuetheir prey, however closely they may be pressed by theirenemies, a more urgent want compels them, from time totime, to respire air at the surface of the sea. Were it notfor this imperious necessity, the Whale, whose enormousbulk is united with corresponding strength and swiftness,would live in undisturbed possession of the widely extendeddomains of the ocean, might view, without dismay, wholefleets sent out against him, and might defy all the efforts thatman could practise for his capture or destruction. But theconstitution of his blood, obliging him to breathe at the surfaceof the water, brings him within the reach of the fatalharpoon. In vain, on feeling himself wounded, does heplunge for refuge into the recesses of the deep; the same necessityrecurs, and compelling him again to present himselfto his foes, exposes him to their renewed attacks, till he fallsin the unequal struggle. His colossal form and giganticstrength are of little avail against the power of man, feeblethough that power may seem, when physically considered,but which derives resistless might from its association withan immeasurably superior intellect.243 )CHAPTER NilSECRETION.The capability of effecting certain chemical changes in thecrude materials introduced into the body, is one of thepowers which more especially characterize life; but althoughthis power is exercised both by vegetable and by animal organizations,we perceive a marked difference in the resultsof its operation in these two orders of beings. The food ofplants consists, for the most part, of the simpler combinationsof elementary bodies, which are elaborated in cellularor vascular textures, and converted into various products.The oak, for example, forms, by the powers of vegetation,out of these elements, not only the green pulpymatter of its leaves, and the light tissue of its pith, but alsothe densest of its woody fibres. It is from similar materials,again, that the olive prepares its oil, and the cocoa-nut itsmilk; and the very same elements in different states of combination,compose, in other instances, at one time the luscioussugar of the cane, at another the narcotic juice of the poppy,or the acrid principle of the euphorbia: and the same plantwhich furnishes in one part the bland farina of the potato,will produce in another the poisonous extract of the nightshade.Yet all these, and thousands of other vegetable products,differing widely in their sensible qualities, agree verynearly in their ultimate chemical analysis, and owe their peculiarproperties chiefly to the order in which their elementsare arranged; an order dependent on the processes to whichthey have been subjected in the system of each particularvegetable.244 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS,In the animal kingdom we observe these processes multipliedto a still greater extent; and the resulting substancesare even farther removed from the original condition of unorganizedmatter. In the first place, the food of animals,instead of being simple, like that of plants, has always undergoneprevious preparation; for it has either constituteda portion of some other organized being, or it has been aproduct of organization; in each case, therefore, partakingof the complexity of composition which characterizes organizedbodies. Still, whatever may be its qualities whenreceived into the stomach, it is soon converted by the powersof digestion into a milky, or transparent fluid, havingnearly the same uniform properties. We have seen thatthere is scarcely any animal or vegetable substance, howeverdense its texture, or virulent its qualities, but is capableof affording nourishment to various species of animals.Let us take as an example the elytra of cantharides, whichare such active stimulants when applied in powder to theskin in the ordinary mode of blistering; we find that, notwithstandingtheir highly acrid qualities, they constitutethe natural food of several species of insects, which devourthem with great avidity; and yet the fluids of these insects,though derived from this pungent food, are perfectly bland,and devoid of all acrimony. Cantharides are also, accordingto Pallas, the favourite food of the hedge-hog; althoughto other mammalia they are highly poisonous. It has alsobeen found that even those animal secretions, (such as thevenom of the rattle-snake,) which, when infused, even inthe minutest quantity, into a wound, prove instantly fatal,may be taken into the stomach without producing any deleteriouseffects. These, and a multitude of other well-knownfacts, fully prove how completely substances receivedas aliment may be modified, and their propertieschanged, or even reversed, by the powers of animal digestion.No less remarkable are the transmutations, which theblood itself, the result of these previous processes, is subse-SECRETION. 245quietly made to undergo in the course of circulation, andwhen subjected to the action of the nutrient vessels and secretingorgans; being ultimately converted into the varioustextures and substances which compose all the parts of theframe. All the modifications of cellular substance, in itsvarious states of condensation; the membranes, the ligaments,the cartilages, the bones, the marrow; the muscles,with their tendons; the lubricating fluid of the joints; themedullary pulp, of the brain; the transparent jelly of theeye; in a word, all the diversified textures of the variousorgans, which are calculated for such different offices, arederived from the same nutrient fluid, and may be consideredas being merely modified arrangements of the same ultimatechemical elements.In what, then, we naturally ask, consists this subtle chemistryof life, by which nature effects these multifariouschanges; and in what secret recesses of the living frame hasshe constructed the refined laboratory in which she operatesher marvellous transformations, far surpassing even thosewhich the most visionary alchemist of former times hadever dreamed of achieving? Questions like these can onlybe fairly met by the confession of profound ignorance; for,although the subject of secretion has long excited the mostardent curiosity of physiologists, and has been prosecutedwith extraordinary zeal and perseverance, scarcely any positiveinformation has resulted from their labours, and thereal nature of the process remains involved nearly in thesame degree of obscurity as at first.* It was natural to It is not yet precisely determined to what extent the organs of secretionare immediately instrumental in producing the substance which is secreted;and it has been even suggested that possibly their office is confined to themere separation, or filtration from the blood, of certain animal products,which are always spontaneously forming in that fluid in the course of itscirculation. This hypothesis, in which the glands, and other secreting apparatusare regarded as only very fine strainer, is supported by a few facts,which seem to indicate the presence of these products in the blood, independentlyof the secreting processes by which they are usually supposed tobe formed; but the evidence is as yet too scanty and equivocal to warrantthe deduction of any general theory on the subject.246 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.pet that in this inquiry material assistance would be derivedfrom an accurate anatomical examination of the organsby which the more remarkable secretions are formed;yet, notwithstanding the most minute and careful scrutinyof these organs, our knowledge of the mode in which theyare instrumental in effecting the operations which are thereconducted, has not in reality advanced a single step. Toadd to our perplexity, we often see, on the one hand, parts,to all appearance very differently organized, giving rise tosecretions of a similar nature; and, on the other hand, substancesof very different properties produced by organs,which, even in their minutest details, appear to be identicalin their structure. Secretions are often found to be pouredout from smooth and membranous surfaces, such as thosewhich line the cavities of the abdomen, the chest, and thehead, and which are also reflected inwards, so as to investthe organs therein contained, as the heart, the lungs, thestomach, the intestines, the liver, and the brain.* In otherinstances, the secreting membrane is thickly set with minuteprocesses, like the pile of velvet: these processes arecalled villi, and their more obvious use, as far as we canperceive, is to increase the surface from which the secretionis prepared. At other times we see an opposite kind ofstructure employed; the secreting surface being the internallining of sacs or cells, either opening at once into somelarger cavity, or prolonged into a tube, or duct, for convey-sometimesthe secreting organ appears to be entirely composed of amass of vessels covered with a smooth membrane; in other cases, it appearsto contain some additional material, or parenchyma as it is termed. Vertebratedanimals present us with numerous instances of glandular organs employedfor special purposes of secretion: thus, in the eyes of fishes there existsa large vascular mass, which has been called the choroid glands andwhich is supposed to be placed there for the purpose of replenishing someof the humours of the eye, in proportion as they are wasted. Within theair-bladder of several species of fishes there is found a vascular organ, apparentlyserving to secrete the air with which the bladder is filled; numerousducts, filled with air, having been observed proceeding from the organ, andopening on the inner surface of the air-bladder.SECRETION. 247ing the secreted fluid to a more distant point. These cells,or follicles, as they are termed, are generally employed forthe mucous secretions, and are often scattered throughoutthe surfaces of membranes:* at other times the secretingcavities are collected in great numbers into groups; andthey then frequently consist of a series of lengthened tubes,like caeca, examples of which we have already seen in thehepatic and salivary glands of insects.A secretory organ, in its simplest form, consists of short,narrow and undivided tubes; we next find tubes which areelongated, tortuous or convoluted, occasionally presenting dilatedportions, or even having altogether the appearance of acollection of pouches, or sacs; while, in other cases, they arebranched, and extend into minute ramifications. Sometimesthey are detached, or isolated ; at other times they are collectedinto tufts, or variously grouped into masses, where still the separatetubes admit of being unravelled. The secreting filamentsof insects float in the general cavity, containing themass of nutrient fluid, and thence imbibe the materials theyrequire for the performance of their functions. It is onlywhen they receive a firm investment of cellular membrane,forming what is termed di capsule, and assuming the appearanceof a compact body, that they properly constitute agland; and this form of a secreting organ is met with onlyamong the higher animalsGreat variety is observable both in the form and structureof different glands, and in the mode in which theirblood vessels are distributed. In animals which are furnishedwith an extensive circulation, the vessels supplyingthe glands with blood are distributed in various modes; andit is evident that each plan has been designedly selectedwith reference to the nature of the particular secretion taSee p. 135 of this volume; and in particular Fig. 305. Sebaceous folliclesare also noticed in Vol. i. p. 91.f Dr. Kidd, however, describes bodies apparently of a glandular character,disposed in rows on the inner surface of the intestinal canal of the Gry^lotalpa, or mole-cricket. Phil. Than. for 1825, p. 227.248 THE VITAL rUNCTIONS.be performed, although we are here unable to follow theconnexion between the means and the end. In some glands,for example, the minute arteries, on their arrival at the organ,suddenly divide into a great number of smaller branches,like the fibres of a camel-hair pencil: this is called thepencilled structure. Sometimes the minute branches, insteadof proceeding parallel to each other after their division,separate like rays from a centre, presenting a stellated,or star-like arrangement. In the greater number ofinstances, the smaller arteries take a tortuous course, andare sometimes coiled into spirals, but generally the convolutionsare too intricate to admit of being unravelled. It isonly by the aid of the microscope that these minute anddelicate structures can be rendered visible; but the fallacy,to which all observations requiring the application of highmagnifying powers are liable, is a serious obstacle to the advancementof our knowledge in this department of physiology.Almost the only result, therefore, which can becollected from these laborious researches in microscopic anatomy,is that nature has employed a great diversity of meansfor the accomplishment of secretion; but we still remain inignorance as to the kind of adaptation, which must assuredlyexist, of each structure to its respective object, and as to thenice adjustment of chemical affinities which has been providedin order to accomplish the intended effects.* Electiveonly Instance in which we can perceive a correspondence betweenthe chemical properties of the secretion, and the kind of blood from whichit is prepared, is in the liver, which, unlike all the other islands, has venous,instead of arterial blood, sent to it for that purpose. The veins, which returnthe blood that has circulated through the stomach, and other abdominalviscera, are collected into a large trunk, called the vena portae, which entersthe liver, and is there again subdivided and ramified, as if it were an artery:its minuter branches here unite with those of the hepatic artery, and ramifythrough the minute lobules which compose the substance of the liver. Afterthe bile is secreted, and carried off by hepatic ducts, the remaining blood isconducted, by means of minute hepatic veins, which occupy the centres ofeach lobule, into larger and larger trunks, till they all unite in the vena cava,going directly to the heart. (See Pierian's Paper on the Anatomy and Physiologyof the Liver, Phil. Trans, for 1833, p. 711.) A similar system of ve-SECRETION. 249trinity is, no doubt, an important agent in all these processes,but in the absence of all certain knowledge as to the modein which it is excited and brought into play in the livingbody, the chasm can for the present be supplied only byremote conjecture.The process which constitutes the ultimate stage of nutrition,or the actual incorporation of the new material withthe solid substance of the body, of which it is to form a partisinvolved in equal obscurity with that of secretion.nous ramifications, though on a much smaller scale, has been discovered byJacobson, in the kidneys of most fishes and reptiles, and even in some birds.Vol. II. 32250 )CHAPTER XiiABSORPTION.Absorption is another function, related to nutrition,which deserves special notice. The principal object of thisfunction is the removal of such materials as have been alreadydeposited, and have become either useless or injurious,and their conveyance into the general mass of circulatingfluids; purposes which are accomplished by a peculiar set ofvessels, called the Lymphatics, These vessels contain afluid, which, being transparent and colourless like water, hasbeen denominated the lymph. The lymphatics are perfectlysimilar in their structure, and probably, also, in their modeof action, to the lacteals, which absorb the chyle from theintestinal cavity: they are found in all the classes of vertebratedanimals, and pervade extensively every part of thebody. Exceedingly minute at their origin, they unite togetheras they proceed, forming larger and larger trunks,generally following the course of the veins, till they finallydischarge their contents either into the thoracic duct, or intosome of the large veins in the vicinity of theheart. Throughout their whole course, theyare, like the lacteals, provided with numerousvalves, which, when the vessel is distendedwith lymph, give it a resemblance to a stringof beads. Fig. 37S.* In the lower animals, itappears that the veins are occasionally endowedwith a power of absorption, similar to that possessedIn warm-blooded animals, the lymphatics are made to traverse, in somepart of their course, certain bodies of a compact structure, resembling g-lands,and termed, accordingly, the lymphatic glands. One of these is representedABSORPTION. 251by the lymphatics. None ©f the invertebrata, indeed, possesslymphatics, and absorption must consequently be performedby the veins, when these latter vessels exist. Theaddition of the system of lymphatic vessels, as auxiliaries tothe veins, may therefore be regarded as a refinement in organization,peculiar to the higher classes of animals.*Professor Muller, of Bonn, has lately discovered that thefrog, and several other amphibious animals, are providedwith large receptacles for the lymph, situated immediatelyunder the skin, and exhibiting distinct and regular pulsations,like the heart. The use of these lymphatic hearts,as they may be called, is evidently to propel the lymph inits proper course along the lymphatic vessels. In the frogfour of these organs have been found; the two posteriorhearts being situated behind the joint of the hip, and thetwo anterior ones on each side of the transverse process ofthe third vertebra, and under the posterior extremity of thescapula. The pulsations of these lymphatic hearts do notcorrespond with those of the sanguineous heart; nor do thoseof the right and left sides take place at the same times, butthey often alternate in an irregular manner. ProfessorMuller has discovered similar organs in the toad, the salamander,and the green lizard, and thinks it probable thatthey exist in all the amphibiain Fig. 378. They correspond in structure, and probably also in their functions,to the mesenteric glands, through which, in the mammalia, the lactealspass, before reaching the thoracic duct. It is chiefly in the mammalia, indeed,that these glands are met with; for they are rare among birds, and stillmore so among fishes and reptiles.• Johann, who has made extensive researches on the absorbent vesselsthroughout all the classes of vertebrated animals, has found that they terminateextensively in the veins. See his work, entitled " Anatomise uber die Verbindung der Saugadem mit den Venn."t Phil. Trans, for 1833, p. 89.252 )CHAPTER XIV.NERVOUS POWER.The organs which are appropriated to the performanceof the various functions conducive to nutrition, are generallydesignated the vital organs, in order to distinguish themfrom those which are subservient to sensation, voluntarymotion, and the other functions of animal life. The slightestreflection on the variety and complication of actionscomprised under the former class of functions in the higheranimals, will convince us that they must be the result ofthe combined operation of several different agents; but theprincipal source of mechanical force required by the vitalorgans, is still, as in all other cases, the muscular power.The coats of the stomach and of the intestinal tube containa large proportion of muscular fibres, the contractions ofwhich effect the intermixture and propulsion of the contentsof these cavities, in the manner best calculated to favourthe chemical operations to which they are to be subjected,and to extract from them all the nourishment theymay contain. In like manner, all the tubular vessels, whichtransmit fluids, are endowed with muscular powers adaptedto the performance of that office. The heart is a strong hollowmuscle, with power adequate to propel the blood, withimmense force, through the arterial and venous systems.The blood vessels, also, especially the minute, or capillaryarteries, besides being elastic, are likewise endowed withmuscular power, which contributes its share in forwardingthe motion of the blood, and completing its circulation.The quantity of blood circulating in each part, the velocityof its motion, and the heat which it evolves, are regulatedNERVOUS POWER. 353in a great measure by the particular mode of action of theblood vessels of that part. The quantity, and sometimeseven the quality of the secretions, are dependent, in likemanner, on the conditions of the circulation; and the actionof the ducts, which convey the secreted fluids to their respectivedestinations, is also resolvable into the effects of amuscular power.'The immediate cause which, in these organs, excites themuscular fibre tf> contraction, may frequently be traced tothe forcible stretching of its parts. This is the case in allhollow and tubular muscles, such as the stomach, the heart,and the blood vessels, when they are mechanically distended,beyond a certain degree, by the presence of contained fluids,or other substances. At other times, the chemical qualityof their contents appears to be the immediate stimulus incitingthem to contraction. But numerous instances occur,in the higher orders of animals, in which these causes aloneare inadequate to explain the phenomena of the vital functions.No mechanical hypothesis will suffice to account forthe infinite diversity in the modes of action of the organswhich perform these functions, or afford any clew to themeans by which they are made to co-operate, with suchnicety of adjustment, in the production of the ultimate effect.Still less will any theory, comprising only the agencyof the muscular power, and the ordinary chemical affinities,enable us to explain how an irritating cause, applied at onepart, shall produce its visible effects on a distant organ; orinwhat way remote and apparently unconnected parts shall,as if by an invisible sympathy, be brought, at the same moment,to act in concert, in the production of a common effect.Yet such co-operation must, in innumerable cases, beabsolutely indispensable to the perfect accomplishment ofthe vital functions of animals.Nature has not neglected objects so important to the successof her measures, but has provided, for the accomplishmentof these purposes, a controlling faculty, residing in thenervous system, and denominated the nervous power. THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.pediments have shown that the due performance of the vitalfunctions of digestion, of circulation, and of secretion, requiresthe presence of an agency, derived from differentparts of the train and spinal marrow, and regulating the orderand combinations of the actions of the organs which areto perform those functions. The same influence, for example,which increases the power of secretion in any particulargland, is found to increase, at the same time, the actionof those blood vessels which supply that gland with the materialsfor secretion; and conversely, the increased action ofthe blood vessels is accompanied by an increased activityof the secreting organ. Experience also shows that whenthe influence of the brain and spinal marrow is intercepted,although the afilux of blood may, for a time, continue, yetthe secretion ceases, and all the functions dependent uponsecretion, such as digestion, cease likewise. Thus, the nervouspower combines together different operations, adjuststheir respective degrees, and regulates their succession, so asto ensure that perfect harmony which is essential to the attainmentof the objects of the vital functions; and thus, notonly the muscular power which resides in the vital organs,but also the organic affinities which produce secretion, andall those unknown causes which effect the nutrition, development,and growth of each part, are placed under the controlof the nervous power.*Although we arc entirely ignorant of the nature of thenervous power, we know that, when employed in the vitalfunctions, it acts through the medium of a particular set offibres, which form part of the nervous system, and are classed,therefore, among the nerves. The principal filaments of thisclass of nerves compose what is called the sympatheticnerve, from its being regarded as the medium of extensive♦ As the functions of plants are sufficiently simple to admit of being conductedwithout the aid of muscular power, still less do they require the assistanceof the nervous energy: both of which properties are the peculiar attributesof animal vitality. We accordingly find no traces either of nervousor of muscular fibres in any of the vegetable structures.NERVOUS POWER.sympathies among the organs; but the whole assemblage ofthese nerves is more commonly known by the name of theganglionic system, from the circumstance of their beingconnected with small masses of nervous substance, termedganglia, which are placed in different parts of their course.Fig. 379, represents a ganglion (g,) through which thenerve (n,) consisting at its origin of a number of separatefilaments (f,) is seen to pass, before it subdivides intobranches (b.) The numerous communications and interchangesof filaments, which subsequently take place at variousparts, forming what is called 2i plexus, are shown in Fig.3S0: where four trunks (t, t,) divide into branches, whichare again separated, and variously reunited in their course,like a ravelled skein of thread, before they proceed to theirrespective destinations.The ganglia are connected by nervous filaments withevery part of the brain and spinal marrow, the great centralorgans of the nervous system; and they also send out innumerablebranches, to be distributed all over the body. Allthe parts receiving blood vessels, and more especially theorgans of digestion, are abundantly supplied with ganglionicnerves; so that, by their intervention, all these parts haveextensive connexions with the brain and spinal marrow, andalso with one another. The ganglia are more particularlythe points of union between nervous fibres coming from256 THE VITAL FUNCTIONS.many different parts: they may be considered, therefore, asperforming, with regard to the vital functions, an office analogousto that which the brain and spinal marrow performwith regard to the other nerves, or as being secondary centresof nervous power. Thus, there are two important objectsfor which the nerves belonging to the ganglionic systemhave been provided; first, to serve as the channelsthrough which the affections of one organ might be enabledto influence a distant organ; and secondly, to be the mediumthrough which the powers of several parts might be combinedand concentrated for effecting particular purposes, co-operation. Hence it is by means of the ganglionicnerves that all the organs and all the functions arerendered efficient in the production of a common object, andare brought into one comprehensive and harmonious systemof operation.The nervous power, the effects of which we are here considering,should be carefully distinguished from that powerwhich is an attribute of another portion of the nervous system,and which, being connected with sensation, volition,and other intellectual operations, has been denominated sensorialpower, '^ The functions of digestion, circulation, absorption,secretion, and all those included under the class ofnutrient or vital functions, are carried on in secret, are notnecessarily, or even usually attended with sensation, andare wholly removed from the control of volition. Naturehas not permitted processes, which are so important to thepreservation of life, to be in any way interfered with by thewill of the animal. We know that in ourselves they go onas well during sleep as when we are awake, and whetherour attention be directed to them or not; and though occasionallyinfluenced by strong emotions, and other affectionsof mind, they are in general quite independent of every intellectualprocess. In the natural and healthy condition of♦ This distinction has been most clearly pointed out, and illustrated by Dr.A. P. W. Philip. Sec his « Experimental Inquiry into the Laws of the VitalFunctions."NERVOUS POWER. 257the system all its internal operations proceed quietly, steadily,and constantly, whether the mind be absorbed in thoughtor wholly vacant. The kind of existence resulting fromthese functions alone, and to which our attention has hithertobeen confined, must be regarded as the result of merevegetative, rather than of animal life. It is time that weturn our views to the higher objects, and more curious fieldof inquiry, belonging to the latter.Vol. II. 33258 )PART III.THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.CHAPTER I.SENSATION.The system of mechanical and chemical functions whichwe have been occupied in reviewing, has been establishedonly as a foundation for the endowment of those higher facultieswhich constitute the great objects of animal existence.It is in the study of these final purposes that thescheme of nature, in the formation of the animal world,opens and displays itself in all its grandeur. The whole ofthe phenomena we have hitherto considered concur in oneessential object, the maintenance of a simply vital existence.Endowed with these properties alone, the organized systemwould possess all that is absolutely necessary for the continuanceand support of mere vegetative life. The machineryprovided for this purpose is perfect and complete in allits parts. To raise it to this perfection, not only has theDivine Architect employed all the properties and powers ofmatter, which science has yet revealed to man, but has alsobrought into play the higher and more mysterious energies ofnature, and has made them to concur in the great work thatwas to be performed. On the organized fabric there has beenconferred a vital force; with the powers of mechanism havebeen conjoined those of chemistry j and to these have beenSENSATION. 259superadded the still more subtle and potent agencies of caloricand of electricity: every resource has been employed,every refinement studied, every combination exhausted thatcould ensure the stability, and' prolong the duration of thesystem, amidst the multifarious causes which continuallymenace it vt^ith destruction. It has been supplied with amplemeans of repairing the accidents to which it is ordinarilyexposed; it has been protected from the injurious influenceof the surrounding elements, and fitted to resist for a lengthenedperiod the inroads of disease, and the progress ofdecay.But can this, which is mere physical existence, be the soleend of life? Is there no farther purpose to be answered bystructures so exquisitely contrived, and so bountifully providedwith the means of maintaining an active existence, thanthe mere accumulation and cohesion of inert materials, differingfrom the stones of the earth only in the more artificialarrangement of their particles, and the more variedconfiguration of their texture? Is the growth of an animalto be ranked in the same class of phenomena as the concretionof a pebble, or the crystallization of a salt? Must we notever associate the power of feeling with the idea of animallife? Can we divest ourselves of the persuasioruthat themovements of animals directed like our own, to obviousends, proceed from voluntary acts, and imply the operationof an intellect, not wholly dissimilar in its spiritual essencefrom our own? In vain may Descartes and his followerslabour to sustain their paradox, that brutes are onlyautomata, — mere pieces of artificial mechanism, insensibleeither to pleasure or to pain, and incapable of internal affections,analogous to those of which we are conscious in ourselves.Their sophistry will avail but little against the plaindictates of the understanding. To those who refuse to admitthat enjoyment, which implies the powers of sensation, andof voluntary motion, is the great end of animal existence, theobject of its creation must for ever remain a dark and impenetrablemystery; by such minds must all farther inquiry260 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.into final causes be at once abandoned as utterly vain andhopeless. But it surely requires no laboured refutation tooverturn a system that violates every analogy by which ourreasonings on these subjects must necessarily be guided; andno artificial logic or scholastic syllogisms will long prevailover the natural sentiment, which must ever guide our conduct,that animals possess powers of feeling, and of spontaneousaction, and faculties appertaining to those of intellect.The functions of sensation, perception, and voluntary motionrequire the presence of an animal substance, which wefind to be organized in a peculiar manner, and endowed withvery remarkable properties. It is called the medullary substance;and it composes the greater part of the texture ofthe brain, spinal marrow, and nerves; organs, of which theassemblage is known by the general name of the nervoussystem. Certain affections of particular portions of this medullarysubstance, generally occupying some central situation,are, in a way that is totally inexplicable, connected withaffections of the sentient and intelligent principle; a principlewhich we cannot any otherwise conceive than as beingdistinct from matter; although we know that it is capableof being affected by matter operating through the mediumof this nervous substance, and that it is capable ofreacting upon matter through the same medium. Of thetruth of these propositions there exist abundant proofs;but as the evidence which establishes them will more convenientlycome under our notice at a subsequent period ofour inquiry, I shall postpone their consideration; and proceedingupon the assumption that this connexion exists, shallnext inquire into the nature of the intervening steps in theprocess, of which sensation and perception are the results.Designating, then, by the name of brain this primary andessential organ of sensation, or the organ whose physical affectionsare immediately attended by that change in thepercipient being which we term sensation; let us first inquirewhat scheme has been devised for enabling the brainto receive impressions from such external objects, as it isNERVOUS SYSTEM. 261intended that this sentient being shall be capable of perceiving.As these objects can, in the first instance, makeimpressions only on the organs situated at the surface of thebody, it is evidently necessary that some medium of communicationshould be provided between the external organand the brain. Such a medium is found in the nerves, whichare white cords, consisting of bundles of threads or filamentsof medullary matter, enveloped in sheaths of membrane,and extending continuously from the external organto the brain, where they all terminate. It is also indispensablyrequisite that these notices of the presence of objectsshould be transmitted instantly to the brain; for the slightestdelay would be attended with serious evil, and might evenlead to fatal consequences. The nervous power, of which,in our review of the vital functions, we noticed some of theoperations, is the agent employed by nature for this importantoffice of a rapid communication of impressions. The velocitywith which the nerves subservient to sensation transmitthe impressions they receive at one extremity, alongtheir whole course, to their termination in the brain, exceedsall measurement, and can be compared only to that of electricitypassing along a conducting wire.It is evident, therefore, that the brain requires to be furnishedwith a great number of these nerves, which performthe office of conductors of the subtle influence in question;and that these nerves must extend from all those parts of thebody which are to be rendered sensible, and must unite attheir other extremities in that central organ. It is of especialimportance that the surface of the body, in particular,should communicate all the impressions received from thecontact of external bodies, and that these impressions shouldproduce the most distinct perceptions of touch. Hence, wefind that the skin, and all those parts of it more particularlyintended to be the organs of a delicate touch, are most abundantlysupplied with nerves; each nerve, however, communicatinga sensation distinguishable from that of every other,so as to enable the mind to discriminate between them, and262 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.refer them to their respective origins in different parts of thesurface. It is also expedient that the internal organs of thebody should have sonne sensibility; but it is better that thisshould be very limited in degree, since the occasions are fewin which its exercise would be useful, and many in which itwould be positively injurious: hence, the nerves of sensationare distributed in less abundance to these organs.It is not sufficient that the nerves of touch should communicatethe perceptions of the simple pressure or resistanceof the bodies in contact with the skin: they should also furnishindications of other qualities in those bodies, of whichit is important that the mind be apprized; such, for example,as warmth, or coldness. Whether these different kinds ofimpressions are all conveyed by the same nervous fibres, itis difficult, and, perhaps, impossible to determine.When these nerves are acted upon in a way which threatensto be injurious to the part impressed, or to the systemat large, it is also their province to give warning of the impendingevil, and to rouse the animal to such exertions asmay avert it; and this is effected by the sensation of pain,which the nerves are commissioned to excite on all these occasions.They act the part of sentinels, placed at the outposts,to give signals of alarm on the approach of danger.Sensibility to pain must then enter as a necessary constituentamong the animal functions; for, had this propertybeen omitted, the animal system would have been but ofshort duration, exposed, as it must necessarily be, to perpetualcasualties of every kind. Lest any imputation shouldbe attempted to be thrown on the benevolent intentions ofthe great Author and Designer of this beautiful and wondrousfabric, so expressly formed for varied and prolonged enjoyment,it should always be borne in mind that the occasionalsuffering, to which an animal is subjected from this law ofits organization, is far more than counterbalanced by theconsequences arising from the capacities for pleasure, withwhich it has been beneficently ordained that the healthy exerciseof the functions shall be accompanied. EnjoymentNERVOUS SYSTEM. 263appears universally to be the main end, the rule, the ordinaryand natural condition: while pain is but the casualty,the exception, the necessary remedy, which is ever tendingto a remoter good, in subordination to a higher law of creation.*It is a wise and bountiful provision of nature that each ofthe internal parts of the body has been endowed with a particularsensibility to those impressions which, in the ordinarycourse, have a tendency to injure its structure; while ithas, at the same time, been rendered nearly, if not completely,insensible to those which are not injurious, or to whichit is not likely to be exposed. Tendons and ligaments, forexample, are insensible to many causes of mechanical irritation,such as cutting, pricking, and even burning: but themoment they are violently stretched, that being the mode inwhich they are most liable to be injured, they instantly communicatea feeling of acute pain. The bones, in like manner,scarcely ever communicate pain in the healthy state,except from the application of a mechanical force whichtends to fracture them.The system of nerves, comprising those which are designedto convey the impressions of touch, is universallypresent in all classes of animals; and among the lowest orders,they appear to constitute the sole medium of communicationwith the external world. As we rise in the scaleof animals, we find the faculties of perception extending toa wider range, and many qualities, depending on the chemicalaction of bodies, are rendered sensible, more especiallythose which belong to the substances employed as food.Hence arises the sense of taste, which may be regarded as anew and more refined species of touch. This difference inthe nature of the impressions to be conveyed, renders it necessarythat the structure of the nerves, or, at least, of thoseparts of the nerves which are to receive the impression,should be modified and adapted to this particular mode ofaction.As the sphere of perception is enlarged, it is made to264 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.comprehend, not merely those objects which are actually incontact with the body, but also those which are at a distance,and of the existence and properties of which it is highly importantthat the animal, of whose sensitive faculties we areexamining the successive endowment, should be apprized.It is more especially necessary that he should acquire anaccurate knowledge of the distances, situations and motionsof surrounding objects. Nature has accordingly providedsuitable organizations for vision, for hearing, and for theperception of odours; all of which senses establish extensiverelations between him and the external world, and give himthe command of various objects which are necessary to supplyhis wants, or procure him gratification; and which alsoapprize him of danger while it is yet remote, and may beavoided. Endowed with the power of combining all theseperceptions, he commences his career of sensitive and intellectualexistence; and though he soon learns that he is dependentfor most of his sensations on the changes whichtake place in the external world, he is also conscious of aninternal power, which gives him some kind of control overmany of those changes, and that he moves his limbs by hisown voluntary act; movements which originally, and ofthemselves, appear, in most animals, to be productive ofgreat enjoyment.To a person unused to reflection, the phenomena of sensationand perception may appear to require no elaborateinvestigation. That he may behold external objects, nothingmore seems necessary than directing his eyes towards them.He feels as if the sight of those objects were a necessaryconsequence of the motion of his eye-balls, and he dreamsnot that there can be any thing marvellous in the functionof the eye, or that any other organ is concerned in this simpleact of vision. If he wishes to ascertain the solidity ofan object within his reach, he knows that he has but tostretch forth his hand, and to feel in what degree it resiststhe pressure he gives to it. No exertion even of this kindis required for hearing the voices of his companions, or be-sensation.265ing apprized, by the increasing loudness of the sound offalling waters, as he advances in a particular direction, thathe is coming nearer and nearer to the cataract Yet howmuch is really implied in all these apparently simple phenomena!Science has taught us that these perceptions ofexternal objects, far from being direct or intuitive, are onlythe final results of a long series of operations, produced byagents of a most subtle nature, which act by curious andcomplicated laws, upon a refined organization, disposed inparticular situations in our bodies, and adjusted with admirableart to receive their impressions, to modify and combinethem in a certain order, and to convey them in regularsuccession, and without confusion, to the immediate seat ofsensation.Yet this process, complicated as it may appear, constitutesbut the first stage of the entire function of perception: forere the mind can arrive at a distinct knowledge of the presenceand peculiar qualities of the external object whichgives rise to the sensation, a long series of mental changesmust intervene, and many intellectual operations must beperformed. All these take place in such rapid succession,that even when we include the movement of the limb, whichis consequent upon the perception, and which we naturallyconsider as part of the same continuous action, the wholeappears to occupy but a single instant. Upon a careful analysisof the phenomena, however, as I shall afterwards attemptto show, we find that no less than twelve distinguishablekinds of changes, or rather processes, some of whichimply many changes, must always intervene, in regularsuccession, between the action of the external object on theorgan of sense, and the voluntary movement of the limbwhich it excites.The external agents, which are capable of affecting thediflferent parts' of the nervous system, so as to produce sensation,are of different kinds, and are governed by laws peculiarto themselves. The structure of the organs must,accordingly, be adapted, in each particular case, to receiveVol. II. 34266 THE SENSORIAL Functions.the impressions made by these agents, and must be modifiedin exact conformity with the physical laws they obey.Thus, the structure of that portion of the nervous systemwhich receives visual impressions, and which is termed the •retina must be adapted to the action of light; and the eye,through which the rays are made to pass before reachingthe retina, must be constructed with strict reference to thelaws of optics. The ear must, in like manner, be formedto receive delicate impressions from those vibrations of theair which occasion sound. The extremities of the nerves,in these and other organs of the senses, are spread out intoa delicate expansion of surface, having a softer and moreuniform texture than the rest of the nerve, whereby theyacquire a susceptibility of being affected by their own appropriateagents, and by no other. The function of eachnerve of sense is determinate, and can be executed by naother part of the nervous system. These functions are notinterchangeable, as is the case with many others in the animalsystem. No nerve, but the optic nerve, and no partof that nerve, except the retina, is capable, however impressed,of giving rise to the sensation of light: no part ofthe nervous system, but the auditory nerve, can convey thatof sound; and so of the rest. The credulity of the publichas sometimes been imposed upon by persons who pretendedto see by means of their fingers: thus, at Liverpool, thecelebrated Miss Savoy contrived for a long time to persuadea great number of persons that she really possessedthis miraculous power. Equally unworthy of credit are altthe stories of persons, under the influence of animal magnetism,hearing sounds addressed to the pit of the stomach,,and reading the pages of a book applied to the skin overthat organ.In almost every case the impression made upon the sentientextremity of the nerve which is appropriated to sensation,is not the direct effect of the external body, but resultsfrom the agency of some intervening medium. Thereis always a portion of the organ of sense interposed betweenSENSATION. 267the object and the nerve on which the impression is to bemade. The object is never allowed to come into direct contactwith the nerves; not even in the case of touch, wherethe organ is defended by the cuticle, through which the impressionis made, and by which that impression is modifiedso as to produce the proper effect on the subjacent nerves.This observation applies with equal force to the organs oftaste and of smell, the nerves of which are not only sheathedwith cuticle, but defended from too violent an action by asecretion expressly for that purpose. In the senses of hearingand of vision, the changes which take place in the organsinterposed between the external impressions and the nerves,are still more remarkable and important, and will be respectivelythe subjects of separate inquiries. The objects ofthese senses, as well as those of smell, being situated at a distance,produce their first impressions by the aid of some mediumexterior to our bodies, through which their influenceextends: thus, the air is the usual medium through whichboth light and sound are conveyed to our organs. Hence,in order to understand the whole series of phenomena belongingto sensation, regard must be had to the physicallaws which regulate the transmission of these agents. Wearenow to consider these intermediate processes in the caseof each of the senses.268CHAPTER II.TOUCH.I HAVE already had occasion to point out the stricture ofthe integuments, considered in their mechanical office ofprotecting the general frame of the body;* but we are notto view them in their relation to the sense of touch, of whichthey are the immediate organ. It will be recollected thatthe corium forms the principal portion of the skin; that thecuticle composes the outermost layer; and that between thesethere occurs a thin layer of a substance, termed theresa mucous.The corium is constructed of an intertexture ofdense and tough fibres, through which a multitude of bloodvessels and nerves are interspersed; but its external surfaceis more vascular than any other part, exhibiting a fineand delicate net-work of vessels, and it is this portion ofthe skin, termed by anatomists the vascular plexus, whichis the most acutely sensible in every point: hence we mayinfer that it contains the terminations of all the nervous filamentsdistributed to this organ, and which are here found todivide to an extreme degree of minuteness.When examined with the microscope, this external surfacepresents a great number of minute projecting filaments.Malpighi first discovered this structure in the foot of a pig;and gave these prominences the name of papillae. It is probablethat each of these papillae contains a separate branchof the nerves of touch, the ultimate ramifications of whichare spread over the surface: so that we may consider thesepapillae, of which the assemblage has been termed the corpuspapillae, as the principal and immediate organ of• Vol. I. p, 90,TOUCH. 269touch. This structure is particularly conspicuous on thoseparts of the skin which are more especially appropriated tothis sense, such as the tips of the fingers, the tongue, andthe lips: in other parts of the surface, which are endowedwith less sensibility, the papillae are scarcely visible, evenwith the aid of the microscope.The surface of the corium is exquisitely sensible to all irritations,whether proceeding from the contact of foreignbodies, or from the impression of atmospheric air. This extremesensibility of the corium would be a source of constanttorment, were it not defended by the cuticle, whichis unprovided with either blood vessels or nerves, and is,therefore, wholly insensible. For the same reason, also, itis little liable to change, and is thus, in both respects, admirablycalculated to afford protection to the finely organizedcorium.Although the cuticle exhibits no traces of vascularity, itis by no means to be regarded as a dead or inorganic substance,like the shells of the mollusca. That it is still partof the living system is proved by the changes it frequentlyundergoes, both in the natural and the diseased conditions ofthe body. It is perpetually, though slowly, undergoing decayand renovation; its external surface drying off in minutescales, and in some animals peeling off in large portions.When any part of the human skin is scraped with aknife, a gray dust is detached from it, which is found to consistof minute scales.By repeated friction, or pressure of any part of the skin,the cuticle soon acquires an increase of thickness and ofhardness; this is observable in the soles of the feet, andpalms of the hands, and in the fingers of those who makemuch use of them in laborious work. But this greater thicknessin the parts designed by nature to suffer considerablepressure, is not entirely the effect of education; for the cuticle,which exists before birth, is found even then to be muchthicker on the soles of the feet, and palms of the hands, thanon other parts. This example of provident care in originTHE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.nelly adjusting the structures of parts to the circumstancesin which they are to be placed at an after period, would ofitself, were it a solitary instance, be well fitted to call forthour admiration. But the proofs of design in the adaptationof organs to their respective purposes multiply upon us insuch profusion, as we study in detail each department of theanimal economy, that we are apt to overlook individual instances,unless they are particularly brought before our notice.How often have we witnessed and profited by therapid renewal of the cuticle, when by any accident it hasbeen destroyed, without adverting to the nature of the processwhich it implies; or reflected that the vessels of theskin must, on all these occasions, supply the materials, outof which the new cuticle is to be formed, must effect theircombination in the requisite proportions, and must depositethem in the precise situations in which they are wanted!Different animals present remarkable differences in thethickness and texture of the cuticle, according to the elementthey are destined to inhabit, and the situations in whichthey are most frequently placed. Provision is in manycases made for preserving the cuticle from the injury itwould receive from the long continued action of the air orwater; for it is apt to become rigid; and to peel off, from exposureto a very dry atmosphere; and the constant action ofwater, on the contrary, renders it too soft and spongy. Inorder to guard against both these effects, the skin has beenfurnished, in various parts of its surface, with a secretingapparatus, which pours out unctuous or mucilaginous fluids:the oily secretions being more particularly employed as adefence against the action of the air, and the mucilaginousfluids as a protection against that of water.The conditions on which the perfection of the sense oftouch depends are, first, an abundant provision of soft papillaesupplied with numerous nerves; secondly, a certaindegree of fineness in the cuticle; thirdly, a soft cushion ofcellular substance beneath the skin; fourthly, a hard resistingbasis, such as that which is provided in the nails of theTOUCH. 271human fingers; and lastly, it is requisite that the organ beso constructed as to be capable of being readily applied, inavariety of directions, to the unequal surfaces of bodies; forthe closer the contact, the more accurate will be the perceptionsconveyed. In forming an estimate of the degree ofperfection in which this sense is exercised in any particularanimal, we must, accordingly, take into account the mobility,the capability of flexion, and the figure of the parts employedas organs of touch.As touch is the most important of all the senses, inasmuchas it is the foundation of all our knowledge of the materialworld, so its relative degrees of perfection establish markeddifferences in the intellectual sagacity of the several tribes,and have a considerable influence on the assignment of theirproper station in the scale of animals.Although the power of receiving obscure impressions.from the contact of external bodies, and of perceiving variationsof temperature, is probably possessed by all animals,a small number only are provided with organs specially appropriatedfor conveying the more delicate sensations oftouch. The greater part of the surface of the body in thetestaceous Mollusca is protected by a hard and insensiblecovering of shell. The integuments of Insects, especiallythose of the Coleoptera, are in general too rigid to receive-anyfine impressions from the bodies which may come incontact with them; and the same observation applies, witheven greater force, to the Crustacea. The scales of Fishes,and of Reptiles, the solid increments of the Chelonia, theplumage of Birds, the dense coating of the Armadillo, thethick hides of the Rhinoceros, and other Pachydermata, areevidently incompatible with any delicacy of touch. Thisnicer faculty of discrimination can be enjoyed only by animalshaving a soft and flexible integument, such as all thenaked Zoophytes, Worms, and Mollusca, among the lowerorders, and Serpents, among the higher. The flexibility ofthe body or limbs is another condition which is extremelynecessary towards procuring extensive and correct notionsTHE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.of the relative positions of external objects. It is essentialtherefore that those instruments which are more particularly-intendedas organs of touch, should possess this property.It will not be necessary to enter into a minute descriptionof these organs, because they have, for the most part, beenalready noticed as instruments of prehension; for the senseof touch is in general exercised more particularly by thesame parts which perform this latter function. Thus thetentacula of the various tribes of Polypi, of Actiniae, and ofAnnelida, are organs both of prehension and of touch. Thetubular feet of the Asterias and Echinus are, in like manner,subservient both to the sense of touch, and to the facultyof progressive motion. The feet of Insects and ofCrustacea are well calculated, indeed, by their jointed structure,for being applied to the surfaces, and to different sidesof bodies; but they are scarcely ever employed in this capacity;being superseded by the palpi, which are situated nearthe mouth. When insects are walking, the palpi are incessantlyapplied to the surface on which they advance, as ifthese organs were especially employed to feel their way.There can be little doubt, however, that, in most insects.TOUCH. 273the principal organs of touch are the Antennae, also denominated,from their supposed office, ihQ feelers.*Some idea of the great variety in the forms of the antennaeof insects may be obtained from the specimens delineatedin Fig. 381, which shows a few of the most remarkableThe universality of these organs among every species ofthis extensive class of animals, their great flexibility, arisingfrom their jointed structures their incessant motion whenthe insect is walking, and their constant employment in examiningthe surfaces of all the bodies with which they comein contact, sufficiently point them out as instruments of avery delicate sense of touch. Organs of this kind were particularlynecessary to insects, since the horny nature of the• The German name for their fuhlhomer, or the feeling horns, is foundedon the same notion.•f In this figure, A represents the form of antennae, technically denominatedAntenna capituli uncinato, as exemplified in the Pausua.B . is the A . piloso-verticillata, as in the Psydioda oceUaris.C . . A . biclavata, {Claviger longicornis.)D . . A . triangularis, {Lophosia.)E . . A . cravat, (Matris.)F . . A . capt lamellae, {Mehlontha mas.)G . . A . capt fissile, (Jphodius fossor.)H . . A . uniforms, {Zygsma.)I . . A . capital, (Aesculapius.)K. . A . furcata, (Nea.)L. . A . bipectinata, bombyx.)M . . A . irregulars, {Agaon paradoxes.)N . . A . cordage, {Diaperis boleti.)O . . A . bipectinata, (Cienophora.)P . . A . panama, (Nea cinerea.)Q . . A . uniforms, (Truxalis.)R . . A . setacea, (Ceramhyx.)i The number of segments into which these organs are divided is oftenvery great. In the GryUotalpa, or mole cricket, it amounts to above 100.(Kidd, Phil. Trans, for 1825, p. 211.) This insect has, besides the antennaeon the head, two posterior or caudal antennae, which are not jointed, exceptingat their very commencement. These are extremely sensible, and serve,probably, to give the animal notice of the approach of any annoyance frombehind, lb. p. 216.Vol. II. 35274 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.integuments of the greater number, precludes them from impartingany accurate perceptions of touch.It has been conjectured that the antennae of insects are theorgans of other senses besides that of touch. If an insect bedeprived of its antennae, it either remains motionless, or if itattempt to walk or fly, appears bewildered, and moves withoutany apparent object. Huber found that bees are enabled,by feeling with their antennas, to execute their variousworks in the interior of the hive, where, of course, they canhave no assistance from light. They employ these organsperpetually while building the combs, pouring honey intothe magazines, ascertaining the presence of the queen, andfeeding and tending the larvae. The same naturalist observes,also, that it is principally by means of the antennaethat these social insects communicate to one another theirimpressions and their wants.The different modes in which ants, when they happen tomeet during their excursions, mutually touch one anotherwith their antennae, appears to constitute a kind of naturallanguage understood by the whole tribe. This contact ofthe antennae evidently admits of a great variety of modifications,and seems capable of supplying all the kinds of informationwhich these insects have occasion to impart Itwould seem impossible, indeed, for all the individuals composingthese extensive societies to co-operate effectually inthe execution of many works, calculated for the general benefitof the community, unless some such means of communicationexisted. There is no evidence that sound is themedium of this intercourse; for none, audible to us at least,was ever known to be emitted by these insects. Their modeof conversing together appears to be simply by touching oneanother in different ways with the antennae. Ruler's observationson this subject are exceedingly curious.* He remarksthat the signal denoting the apprehension of danger,is made by the ant striking its head against the corselet of• See his " Recherches sur les mcEursdes fourmis indigenes'*TOUCH. 275every ant which it chances to meet Each ant, on receivingthis intimation, .immediately sets about repeating the samesignal to the next ant which comes in its way; and the alarmis thus disseminated with astonishing rapidity throughout thewhole society. Sentinels are at all times stationed on theoutside of the nests, for the purpose of apprizing the inhabitantsof any danger that may be at hand. On the attackof an enemy, these guardians quickly enter into the nest,and spread the-intelligence on every side: the whole swarmis soon in motion, and while the greater number of ants rushforwards with desperate fury to repel the attack, others whoare intrusted with the office of guarding the eggs and thelarvae, hasten to remove their charge to places of greater security.When the queen bee is forcibly taken away from the hive,the bees which are near her at the time do not soon appearsensible of her absence, and the labours of the hive are carriedon as usual. It is seldom before the lapse of an hour,that the working-bees begin to manifest any symptoms ofuneasiness: they are then observed to quit the larvae whichthey had been feeding, and to run about in great agitation,to and fro, near the cell which the queen had occupied beforeher abduction. They then move over a wider circle,and on meeting with such of their companions as are notaware of the disaster, communicate the intelligence by crossingtheir antennae, and striking lightly with them. Thebees which receive the news become, in their turn, agitated,and conveying this feeling wherever they go, the alarm issoon participated by all the inhabitants of the hive. Allrush forwards with tumultuous precipitation, eagerly seekingtheir lost queen; but after continuing the search for somehours, and finding it to be fruitless, they appear resigned totheir misfortune; the noisy hubbub subsides, and the beesquietly resume their labours.A bee, deprived of its antennae, immediately becomes dulland listless: it desists from its usual labours, remains at thebottom of the hive, seems attracted only by the light, and276 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.takes the first opportunity of quitting the hive, never moreto return. A queen bee, thus mutilated; ran about, withoutapparent object, as if in a state of delirium, and was incapableof directing her trunk with precision to the food whichwas offered to her. Latreille relates that, having deprivedsome labouring ants of their antennae, he replaced them nearthe nest; but they wandered in all directions, as if bewildered,and unconscious of what they were doing. Some oftheir companions were seen to notice their distress; and, approachingthem with apparent compassion, applied theirtongues to the wounds of the sufferers, and anointed themwith their saliva. This trait of sensibility was repeatedlywitnessed by Latreille, while watching their movementswith a magnifying glass.The Arachnida, from the mobility of their limbs, and thethinness of their cutaneous investment, have a very delicatesense of touch. Among the Mollusca, it is only the higherorders of Cephalopoda that enjoy this sense in any considerabledegree, and they are enabled to exercise it bymeans of their long and flexible tentacula. Many bivalvemollusca have, indeed, a set of tentacula placed near themouth, but they are short, and of little power. It is probablethat the foot may also be employed by these animalsas an organ of touch.Fishes are, in general, very ill-constructed for the exerciseof this sense; and their fins are used for no other purposesthan those of progressive motion. That part of thesurface which possesses the most acute feeling is the underside,where the integuments are the thinnest. The chiefseat of the sense of touch, however, is the lip, or end of thesnout, which is largely supplied with nerves; and perhapsthe cirrhi, or little vermiform processes called barbels, whichin some species are appended to the mouth, may be subservientto this sense.* These processes in the Silurus glansare moved by particular muscles.These kind of tentacula are remarkable for their length and mobility inthe Hopkins piscaiorius, or Angler; and it is said that they are employed byTOUCH. 277Serpents, from the great flexibility of their spine, are capableof grasping and twining round objects of almost anyshape, and of taking, as it were, their exact measure. Thisconformation must be exceedingly favourable to the acquisitionof correct perceptions of touch. As it is these perceptions,which, as we shall afterwards find, lay the foundationof the most perfect acquaintance with the tangible propertiesof surrounding bodies, we may presume that thispower contributes much to the sagacity possessed by theseanimals. It has been said of Serpents, that their whole bodyis a hand, conferring some of the advantages of that instrument.Bellman has shown that the slender bifurcatedtongue of these animals is used for the purposes of touch.*In those species of Lizards which are enabled by thestructure of their feet to clasp the branches of trees, as theGecko and the Chameleon, and whose tails also are prehensile,we must, for the same reason, presume that the senseof touch exists in a more considerable degree than in othersaurian reptiles, which do not possess this advantage Thetoes of Birds are also well calculated to perform the office oforgans of touch, from the number of their articulations andtheir divergent position, and from the papillae with whichtheir skin abounds, accompanied as they are with a largesupply of nerves. Those birds, which, like the Parrot, employthe feet as organs of prehension, probably enjoy agreater development of this sense. The skin which coversthe bills of aquatic birds is supplied by very large nerves,and consequently possesses great sensibility. This structureenables them to find their food, which is concealed inthe mud, by the exercise of the sense of touch residing inthat organ. A similar structure, probably serving a similarpurpose, is found in the Ornithorhyncus.Among Mammalia, we find the seat of this sense frequentlytransferred to the lips, and extremity of the nostrils, andthe fish, while lurking in ambush, as a decoy to other fishes, which they enticeby their resemblance to worms.Quoted by Blumenbach.278 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.many have the nose prolonged and flexible, apparently withthis view. This is the case with the Shrew and the Mole,which are burrowing animals, and still more remarkablywith the Pachydermata, where this greater sensibility of theparts about the face seems to have been bestowed as somecompensation for the general obtuseness of feeling resultingfrom the thickness of the hide which covers the rest of thebody. Thus, the Rhinoceros has a soft, hook-shaped extensionof the upper lip, which is always kept moist, in orderto preserve its sensibility as an organ of touch. The Hoghas the end of the nose also constructed for feeling; thoughit is not so well calculated for distinguishing the form of objects,as where the organ is prolonged in the form of a snout,which it is in the Tapir, and in a still higher degree in theadmirably constructed proboscis of the Elephant, which, asan organ, both of prehension and of touch, forms the nearestapproach to the perfect structure of the human hand.The Lion, Tiger, Cat, and other animals of the genus felix,have whiskers, endowed at their roots with a particularsensibility, from being largely supplied with nerves. Thesame is the case with the whiskers of the Seal.The prehensile tails of the American monkeys are doubtlessfitted to convey accurate perceptions of touch, as wellas the feet and hands: as may be inferred from the great sizeof the nervous papillae, and the thinness of the cuticle ofthose parts.The sense of touch attains its greatest degree of excellencein the human hand, in which it is associated with the mostperfect of all instruments of prehension. But as the structureand functions of this organ are the exclusive subjects ofanother of these treatises, I shall refrain from any fartherremarks respecting them.879 )CHAPTER III.TASTE.The senses of taste and smell are intended ta convey impressionsresulting from the chemical qualities of bodies, theone in the fluid, the other in the gaseous state.* There isa considerable analogy between the sensations derived fromthese two senses. The organ of taste is the surface of thetongue, the skin of which is furnished with a large proportionof blood vessels and nerves. The vascular plexus immediatelycovering the corium is here very visible, and formsa distinct layer, through which a great number of papillaepass, and project from the surface, covered with a thin cuticle,like the pile of velvet In the fore part of the humantongue these papillae are visible even to the naked eye, andespecially in certain morbid conditions of the organs Theyare of different kinds; but it is only those which are of a conicalshape that are the seat of taste. If these papillae betouched with a fluid, which has a strong taste, such as vinegar,applied by means of a camel-hair pencil, they will beseen to become elongated by the action of the stimulus, aneffect which probably always accompanies the perception oftaste.• Bellini contended that the different flavors of saline bodies were owingto the peculiar figures of their crystalline particles. It is strange that Dumasshould have thought it worth while seriously to combat this extravagant hypothesis,by a laboured refutation.•{• This is particularly the case in scarlatina, in the early stage of which diseasethey are elongated, and become of a bright red colour, from their minuteblood vessels being distended with blood. As the fever subsides, thepoints of the papist collapse, and acquire a brown hue, giving rise to theappearance known by the name of the strawberry tongue.280 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.The primary use of this sense, the organ of which isplaced at the entrance of the alimentary canal, is evidentlyto guide animals in the choice of their food, and to warnthem of the introduction of a noxious substance into the stomach.With respect to the human species, this use has been,in the present state of society, superseded by many acquiredtastes, which have supplanted those originally given to usby nature: but in the inferior animals it still retains its primitiveoffice, and is a sense of great importance to the safetyand welfare of the individual, from its operation being coincidentwith those of natural instincts. If, as it is said theseinstincts are still met with among men in a savage state, theyare soon weakened or effaced by civilization.The tongue, in all the inferior classes of vertebrated animals,namely. Fishes, Reptiles, and Birds, is scarcely everconstructed with a view to the reception of delicate impressionsof taste; being generally covered wither thick, and oftenhorny cuticle; and being, besides, scarcely ever employedin mastication. This is the case, also, with a large proportionof quadrupeds, which swallow their food entire, andwhich cannot, therefore, be supposed to have the sense oftaste much developed.Insects which are provided with a tongue or a proboscismay be conceived to exercise the sense of taste by means ofthese organs. But many insects possess, besides these, apair of short feelers, placed behind the true antennae; and ithas been observed that, while the insect is taking food, theseorgans resin incessant motion, and are continually employedin touching and examining the food, before it is introducedinto the mouth: hence, some entomologists have concludedthat they are organs of taste. But it must be obvious thatin this, as in every other instance in which our researchesextend to beings of such minute dimensions, and which occupya station, in the order of sensitive existence, so remotefrom ourselves, we are wandering into regions where theonly light that is afforded us must be borrowed from vagueand fanciful analogies, or created by the force of a vivid anddeceptive imagination.281 )CHAPTER IV.SMELL,Animal life being equally dependent upon the salubriousqualities of the air respired, as of the food received, a sensehas been provided for discriminating the nature of the former,as well as of the latter. As the organs of taste areplaced at the entrance of the alimentary canal, so those ofsmell usually occupy the beginning of the passages for respiration,where a distinct nerve, named the olfactory, appropriatedto this office, is distributed.The sense of smell is generally of greater importance tothe lower animals than that of taste; and the sphere of itsperceptions is in them vastly more extended than in man.The agents, which give rise to the sensations of smell, arecertain effluvia, or particles of extreme tenuity, which aredisseminated very quickly through a great extent of atmosphericair. It is exceedingly difficult to conceive how matterso extremely rare and subtle as that which composesthese odorous effluvia can retain the power of producing anysensible impression on the animal organs: for its tenuity isso extraordinary as to exceed all human comprehension.The most copious exhalations from a variety of odoriferoussubstances, such as musk, valerian, or asafoetida, will becontinually emanating for years, without any perceptibleloss of weight in the body which supplies them. It is wellknown that if a small quantity of musk be enclosed for a.few hours in a gold box, and then taken out, and the boxcleaned as carefully as possible with soap and water, thatbox will retain the odour of musk for many years; and yetVol. II. 36282 , THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.the nicest balance will not show the smallest increase of itsweight from this impregnation. No facts in natural philosophyafford more striking illustrations of the astonishing,and indeed inconceivable divisibility of matter, than thoserelating to odorous effluvia.It would appear that most animal and vegetable bodies arecontinually emitting these subtle effluvia, of which our ownorgans are not sufficiently delicate to apprize us, unlesswhen they are much concentrated, but which are readilyperceived and distinguished by the lower animals; as maybeinferred from their actions. A dog is known to followits master by the scent alone, through the avenues and turningsof a crowded city, accurately distinguishing his trackamidst thousands of others.The utility of the sense of smell is not confined to that ofbeing a check upon the respiration of noxious gases; for itis also a powerful auxiliary to the sense of taste, which, ofitself, and without the aid of smell, would be very vague inits indications and limited in its range. What may havebeen its extent and delicacy in man, while he existed in asavage state, we have scarcely any means of determining;but in the present artificial condition of the race, resultingfrom civilization and the habitual cultivation of other sourcesof knowledge, there is less necessity for attending to its perceptions,and our sensibility to odours may perhaps have diminishedin the same proportion. It is asserted both byStammering and Blumenbach that the organ of smell issmaller in Europeans, and other civilized races of mankind,than in those nations of Africa or America, which are butlittle removed from a savage state: it is certainly much lessdeveloped in man than in most quadrupeds. To the carnivoroustribes, especially, it is highly useful in enabling themto discover their natural food at great distances.The cavity of the nostrils, in all terrestrial vertebratedanimals is divided into two by a vertical partition; and thewhole of its internal surface is lined by a soft membrane.SMELL.called the Schneiderian membrane,* which is constantly-keptmoist, is supplied with numerous blood vessels, andupon which are spread the ultimate ramifications of the olfactorynerves. The relative magnitude of these nerves ismuch greater in carnivorous quadrupeds than in those whichsubsist on vegetable food. In quadrupeds as well as in man,these nerves are not collected into a single trunk in theircourse towards the brain, but compose a great number of filaments,which pass separately through minute perforationsin a plate of bone, (called the ethmoid bone) before they enterinto the cavity of the skull, and join that part of the cerebralsubstance with which they are ultimately connected.The surface of the membrane which receives the impressionsfrom odorous effluvia, is considerably increased by-severalthin plates of bone, which project into the cavity ofthe nostrils, and are called the turbinated bones. These aredelineated at t, t, in Fig. 3S2, as they appear in a verticaland longitudinal section of the cavity of the human nostril,where they are seen covered by the Schneiderian memeIt has been so named in honour of Schneider, the first anatomist whogave an accurate description of this membrane.THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.brave.* A transverse and vertical section of these parts isgiven in Fig, 3S3.t The turbinated bones are curiously-folded,and often convoluted in a spiral form, with the evidentdesign of obtaining as great an extent of surface as possiblewithin the confined space of the nasal cavity. This turbinated,or spiral shape, chiefly characterizes these bonesamong herbivorous quadrupeds: in the horse, for example,the turbinated bones are of a large diameter, and extend thewhole length of the prolonged nostrils. Their structure isexceedingly intricate; for while they retain, externally, thegeneral shape of an oblong spiral shell, they are pierced onall their internal sides with numerous perforations, throughThis fig-ure shows the branches of the olfactory nerve (o,) passing-throughthe thin cribriform plate of the ethmoid bone, and distributed overthat membrane. Several of the cells, which open into the cavity, are alsoseen; such as the large sphenoidal sinus (s,) the frontal sinus (f,) and one ofthe ethmoidal cells (c.) n, is the nasal bone; p, the palate; and e, themouth of the Eustachian tube, which leads to the ear.■j- In this figure, s, is the septum, or partition of the nostrils, on each sideof which are seen the sections of the turbinated bones projecting into thecavity; the ethmoid cells (c,) situated between the orbits (o;) and the Antrummaxilkre (a,) which is another large cavity communicating with thenostrils.SMELL.which the membrane, together with the fine branches of thenerves, passes freely from one side to the other. The cavitiesresulting from the convolutions are intersected by un-perforatedpartitions of extraordinary tenuity, serving bothto support the arches of bone, and to furnish a still greatersurface for the extension of the olfactory membrane. Inthe Sheep, the Goat, and the Deer, the structure is very similarto that just described; but the convolutions are double,with an intermediate partition, so as to resemble in its transversesection the capital of an Ionic column.* They areshown at (t) in the transverse section of the nostrils of asheep in Fig. 3S4.In carnivorous quadrupeds the structure of these bones isstill more intricate, and is calculated to afford a far more extensivesurface for the distribution of the olfactory nerve.In the Seal this conformation is most fully developed, andthe bony plates are here not turbinated, but ramified, asIn a species of Antelope described by Mr. Hodgson, cavities exist, situatedimmediately behind the ordinary nostrils, and communicating" withthem. The accessory nostrils are conjectured to be useful to this exceedinglyfleet animal by facilitating its breathing, while it is exerting its utmostspeed; for the expansion of the nostrils opens also these posterior cavities,the sides of which, being elastic, remain dilated. Journal of the Asiatic Society,Feb. 1832, p. 59.286 . THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.shown at t in Fig. 385. Eight or more principal branchesarise from the main trunk; and each of these is afterwardsdivided and subdivided to an extreme degree of minuteness,so as to form, in all, many hundred plates. The olfactorymembrane, with all its nerves, is closely applied to everyplate in this vast assemblage, as well as to the main trunk,and to the internal surface of the surrounding cavity: so thatits extent cannot be less than 120 square inches in each nostril.An organ of such exquisite sensibility requires an extraordinaryprovision for securing it against injury, by thepower of voluntarily excluding noxious vapours; and naturehas supplied a mechanism for this express purpose, enablingthe animal to close, at pleasure, the orifice of the nostril.The hog, which, in its natural state, subsists wholly on vegetablefood, resembles herbivorous tribes in the externalform and relative magnitude of the turbinated bones; butthey are more simple in their structure, being formed of single,and slightly convoluted plates, without partitions or perforations.In this respect, they approach to the humanstructure, which is even less complicated, and indicates agreater affinity with vegetable than with animal feeders.Man, indeed, distinguishes more accurately vegetable odoursthan those proceeding from animal substances; while thereverse is observed with regard to quadrupeds whose habitsare decidedly carnivorous. A dog, for instance, is regardlessof the odour of a rose or violet; and, probably, as hederives from them no pleasure, is unable to discriminate theone from the other. Predacious animals, as Sir B. Haywoodobserves, require both larger olfactory nerves, and a moreextensive surface for their distribution, than the vegetableeaters. The food of the latter is generally near at hand;and as they have occasion only to select the wholesome fromthe noxious plants, their olfactory organs are constructed forthe purpose of arresting the effluvia of odorous substancesimmediately as they arise. The former are often under thenecessity of discovering the lurking places of their prey ata considerable distance, and are, therefore, more sensible toSMELL. 287the weak impressions of particles widely diffused throughthe surrounding; medium, or slightly adhering to those bodies,with which the object of their pursuit may have comeinto contact.The olfactory bones of birds are constructed very muchon the model of the spiral bones of herbivorous quadrupeds,and vary but little in the different species. Fig. 386 exhibitstheir appearance in the Turkey: but the size of the olfactorynerves of birds of prey greatly exceeds that of thesame nerves in granivorous birds. In the latter, indeed,they are exceedingly small; and as the natural food of thattribe has but little odour, we find that they are easily deceivedby any thing which bears a resemblance to it. SirBusick Harwood relates that some poultry, which wereusually fed with a mixture of barley meal and water, werefound to have swallowed, by mistake, nearly the whole contentsof a pot of white paint. Two of the fowls died, andtwo others became paralytic. The crops of the latter wereopened, and considerably more than a pound of the poisonouscomposition taken from each; and the crops, either naturally,or from the sedative effects of the paint, appearedto have so little sensibility that, after the wounds weresewed up, both the fowls eventually recovered.The olfactory nerves are conspicuous in the Duck, bothfrom their size and mode of distribution. They are seen288 THE SENSORIAL Function.in Fig. 387, passing out through the orbit of the eye (o) intwo large branches, an upper one (u,) and a lower one (l,)the ramifications of which are spread over the mandibles,both within and without. For the protection of the highly-sensibleextremity of the beak against the injurious impressionsof hard bodies, a horny process (p,) similar, both informand office, to the human nail, is attached to it, and itsedges guarded by a narrow border of the same horny material;these receive a first, and fainter impression, and admonishthe animal of approaching danger; if none occur, thematter is then submitted to the immediate scrutiny of thenerves themselves, and is swallowed or rejected accordingto their indication.*It has been generally asserted that Vultures, and otherbirds of prey, are gifted with a highly acute sense of smell;and that they can discover by means of it the carcass of adead animal at great distances: but it appears to be now sufficientlyestablished by the observations and experiments ofMr. Audubon, that these birds in reality possess the senseof smell in a degree very inferior to carnivorous quadrupeds;and that so far from guiding them to their prey froma distance, it affords them no indication of its presence, evenwhen close at hand. The following experiments a'j^pear tobe perfectly conclusive on this subject. Having procuredthe skin of a deer, Mr. Audubon stuffed it full of hay; andafter the whole had become perfectly dry and hard, heplaced it in the middle of an open field, laying it down onSuch is the account given by Sir Busick Harwood, in his " System ofComparative Anatomy and Physiology," p. 26.SMELL. 289its back, in the attitude of a dead animal. In the course ofa few minutes afterwards, he observed a vulture flying towardsit, and alighting near it. Quite unsuspicious of thedeception, the bird immediately proceeded to attack it, asusual, in the most vulnerable points. Failing in his object,he next, with much exertion, tore open the seams of theskin, where it had been stitched together, and appearedearnestly intent on getting at the flesh, which he expectedto find within, Tnd of the absence of which, not one of hissenses was able to inform him. Finding that his efforts,which were long reiterated, led to no other result than thepulling out large quantities of hay, he at length, thoughwith evident reluctance, gave up the attempt, and tookflight in pursuit of other game to which he was led by thesight alone, and which he was not long in discovering andsecuring.Another experiment, the converse of the first, was nexttried. A large dead hog was concealed in a narrow andwinding ravine, about twenty feet deeper than the surfaceof the earth around it, and filled with briers and high cane.This was done in the month of July, in a tropical climate,where putrefaction takes place with great rapidity. Yet,although many vultures were seen, from time to time, sailingin all directions over the spot where the putrid carcasswas lying, covered only with twigs of cane, none ever discoveredit; but in the mean while, several dogs had foundtheir way to it, and had devoured large quantities of theflesh. In another set of experiments, it was found that youngvultures, enclosed in a cage, never exhibited any tokens oftheir perceiving food, when it could not be seen by them,however near to them it was brought.*It has been doubted whether fishes, and other aquatic animals,possess the sense of smell; in some of the whale tribe,♦ Edinburgh New Journal of Science, ii. 172. The accuracy of these results,which had been contested by Mr. Watertown, is fully established by therecent observations and experiments of M. Coachman, which are detailed inLondon's Magazine of Nat. Hist vii. 167.Vol. II. 37290 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.indeed, neither the organ of smell nor the olfactory nervesare found.* Some physiologists have gone the length of denyingthe capability of water to serve as the vehicle of odorouseffluvia. But as water is known to contain a largequantity of air, which acts upon the organs of respiration, itis easy to conceive that it may also convey to the nostrilsthe peculiar agents which are calculated to excite perceptionsof smell. Fishes are, in fact, observed to be attracted fromgreat distances by the effluvia of substances thrown into thewater; and they are well known to have a strong predilectionfor all highly odoriferous substances. Baits used byanglers are rendered more attractive by being impregnatedwith volatile oils, or other substances having a powerfulscent, such as asafoetida, camphor, and musk. Mr. T. Bellhas discovered in the Crocodile and Alligator, a gland, whichsecretes an unctuous matter, of a strong, musky odour, situatedbeneath the lower jaw, on each side. The externalorifice of this gland is a small slit, a little within the loweredge of the jaw; and the sac, or cavity containing the odoriferoussubstance, is surrounded by two delicate bands ofmuscular fibres, apparently provided for the purpose of firstbringing the gland into a proper position, and then, by compressingit, discharging its contents. Mr. Bell conceivesthat the use of this secretion is to act as a bait for attractingfish towards the sides of the mouth, where they can be readilyseized in the mode usual to the alligator, which is thatof snapping sideways at the objects he aims at devouring.The organs of smell in Fishes are situated in cavities,placed one on each side, in front of the head: they are merelyblind sacs, having no communication with the mouth orthroat, and, indeed, no other outlet but the external openings,which are generally two to each sac. The principalentrance is furnished with a valve, formed by a moveablemembrane, appearing like a partition dividing each nostril• Home Lectures on Comparative Anatomy, i. 17.t Phil, Trans, for 1827, p. 132.SMELL.into two cavities, and serving the purpose of preventing theintroduction of any foreign body. The organ itself is situatedbehind this valve, and consists either of a membrane,curiously plaited into numerous semicircular folds, or oftufted or arborescent filaments. Fig. 388 shows this cavity(s,) with its plaited membrane in the Perch : and Fig. 389, inthe Skate; the laminae in the former being radiated, and inthe latter, foliated, or parallel to each other. On the surfaceof these organs, whatever be their shape, the olfactorynerves (n,) arising from the anterior lobes (o) of the brain,are distributed; and the great size of these nerves wouldlead us to infer considerable acuteness in the sense whichthey supply. When the fish is swimming, their situation infront of the snout exposes them to the forcible impulse ofthe water which strikes against them. According to GeoffreySt Hilaire, the water enters the cavity by the upperorifice, and escapes by the lower. Scarpa alleges that fishesexercise this sense by compressing the water against themembrane. On the other hand, it is contended by Demerit,that the perceptions communicated by this organ, being theresult of the action of a liquid instead of a gas, should beclassed under the head of taste rather than of smell. Thisseems, however, to be a mere verbal criticism, in makingwhich it appears to have been forgotten that the impressionsof odorous effluvia, even in animals breathing atmosphericair, always act upon the nerve through the intermediate ofthe fluid which lubricates the membrane of the nostril.That the nasal cavities of fishes are rudimental forms of292 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.those of the mammalia, although they do not, as in the latterclass, open into the the respiratory organs, is shown by thecurious transformation of the one into the other during thedevelopment of the tadpole, both of the frog and of the salamander.During the first periods of their existence, theseanimals are perfectly aquatic, breathing water by means ofgills, and having all their organs formed on the model of thefish. Their nasal cavities are not employed for respirationat this early period, nor even for some time after they havebegun to take in air, which they do by the mouth, swallowingit in small portions at a time, and afterwards throwingit out in bubbles by the same channel. But when they quitthe water, and become land animals with pulmonary respiration,the nostrils are the channels through which the airis received and expelled ; and it is here also that the sense ofsmell continues to be exercised.We know very little respecting the seat of the sense ofsmell in any of the invertebrated animals, though it is veryevident that insects, in particular, enjoy this faculty in avery high degree. Analogy would suggest the spiracles asthe most probable seat of this sense, being the entrances tothe respiratory passages. This office has, however, been assignedby many to the antennae; while other entomologistshave supposed that the palpi are the real organs of smell.*Experiments on this subject are attended with great difficulty,and their results must generally be vague and inconclusive.Those which Mr. P. Huber made on bees, seem,however, to establish, with tolerable certainty, that the spiraclesare insensible to strong odours, such as that of oil ofturpentine, which is exceedingly offensive to all insects. Itwas only when a fine camel-hair pencil containing this pungentfluid was presented near the cavity of the mouth, abovethe inspection of the proboscis, that any visible effect was producedupon the insect, which then gave decisive indicationsOn the subject of this sense in insects, See Kirby and Spence's Introductionto Entomology, vol. iv. p. 249.SMELL. 293of Strong aversion. Mr. Kirby has discovered in the anteriorpart of the nose of the Necrophorus vespillo, or buryingbeetle, which is an insect remarkable for the acutenessof its smell, a pair of circular pulpy cushions, coveredwith a membrane, beautifully marked with fine transversefurrows. These he considers as the organs of smell; and hehas found similar structures in several other insects.*No distinct organs of smell have been discovered in anyof the Mollusca; but as there is evidence that some of theanimals belonging to that class possess this sense, it hasbeen conjectured that it resides either in the whole mucoussurface of the mantle, or in the respiratory organs. observed, long ago, that snails are evidently affectedby odours; and cuttle-fish are said to show a decidedaversion to strongly scented plants*'Kirby and Spence's Introduction to Entomology, vol. il. 481; and iv.254.294 )CHAPTER V.HEARING.§ 1. Jicoustic Principles,The knowledge acquired by animals of the presence andmovements of distant objects is derived almost wholly fromthe senses of hearing and of sight; and the apparatus, necessaryfor the exercise of these senses, being more elaborateand refined than any of the organs we have yet examined,exhibit still more irrefragable evidence of those profounddesigns, and that infinite intelligence, which haveguided the construction of every part of the animal frame.Sound results from certain tremulous or vibratory motionsof the particles of an elastic medium, such as air or water,excited by any sudden impulse or concussion given to thoseparticles by the movements of the sounding body. Thesesonorous vibrations are transmitted with great velocitythrough these fluids, till they strike upon the external ear;and, then, after being concentrated in the internal passagesof the organ, they are made to act on the filaments of a particularnerve called the acoustic, or auditory nerve, ofwhich the structure is adapted to receive these peculiar impressions,and to communicate them to the brain, wherethey produce changes, which are immediately followed bythe sensation of sound. Sound cannot traverse a void space,as light does; but always requires a ponderable material vehiclefor its transmission; and, accordingly, a bell suspendedin the vacuum of an air-pump, gives, when struck, no audit295able sound, although its parts are visibly thrown into theusual vibratory motions. In proportion as air is admittedinto the receiver, the sound becomes more and more distinct;and if, on the other hand, the air be condensed, thesound is louder than when the bell is surrounded by air ofthe ordinary density.*The impulses given by the sounding body to the contiguousparticles of the elastic medium, are propagated in everydirection, from particle to particle, each, in its turn, strikingagainst the next, and communicating to it the whole of its ownmotion, which is destroyed by the reaction of the particleagainst which it strikes. Hence, after moving a certain definitedistance, a distance, indeed, which is incalculably small,each particle returns back to its former situation, and is againready to receive a second impulse. Each particle, beingelastic within a certain ranges suffers a momentary compression,and immediately afterwards resumes its formershape: the next particle is, in the mean time, impelled, andundergoes the same succession of changes; and so on,throughout the whole series of particles. Thus, the sonorousundulations have an analogy with waves, which spreadin circles on the surface of water, around any body, which,by its motion, ruiBes that surface; only that, instead ofmerely extending in a horizontal plane, as waves do, the sonorousundulations spread out in all directions, forming, notcircles in one plane, but spherical shells; and, whatever betheintensity of the sounds, the velocity with which the undulationsadvance is uniform, as long as they continue in amedium of uniform density. This velocity in air, is, on anaverage, about 1100 feet in a second, or twelve and a half♦ These facts were first ascertained by Dr. Hauksbee. See PhilosophicalTransactions for 1705, vol. xxiv., p. 1902, 1904.f The particles of water are as elastic, within a limited distance, as thoseof the most solid body, although, in consequence of their imperfect cohesion,or, rather, their perfect mobility in all directions, this property cannotbe so easily recognised in masses of fluids, as it can in solids.296 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.miles in a minute: it is greater in dense, and smaller in rarefiedair; being, in the same medium, exactly proportioned tothe elasticity of that medium.Water is the medium of sound to aquatic animals, as theair is to terrestrial animals. Sounds are, indeed, conveyedmore quickly, and to greater distances, in water than in air,on account of the greater elasticity of the constituent particlesof water, within the minute distance required for theiraction in propagating sound. Stones, struck together underwater,are heard at great distances by a person whose headis under water. Franklin found, by experiment, that sound,after travelling above a mile through water, loses but littleof its intensity. According to Chladni, the velocity ofsound in water is about 4900 feet in a second, or betweenfour and five times as great as it is in air.Solid bodies, especially such as are hard and elastic, andof uniform substance, are also excellent conductors of sound.Of this we may easily convince ourselves by applying theear to the end of a log of wood, or a long iron rod, in whichsituation we shall hear very distinctly the smallest scratchmade with a pin at the other end; a sound, which, had itpassed through the air only, would not have been heard atall. In like manner, a poker suspended by two strings, theends of which are applied to the two ears, communicates tothe organ, when struck, vibrations which would never havebeen heard under ordinary circumstances. It is said thatthe hunters in North America, when desirous of hearing thesounds of distant footsteps, which would be quite inaudiblein any other way, apply their ears close to the earth, andthen readily distinguish them. Ice is known to conveysounds, even better than water: for if cannon be fired froma distant fort, where a frozen river intervenes, each flash oflight is followed by two distinct reports, the first being conversedby the ice, and the second by the air. In like manner,if the upper part of the wall of a high building be struckwith a hammer, a person standing close to it on the ground,HEARING. 297will hear two sounds after each blow, the first descendingthrough the wall, and the second through the air.As sounds are weakened by diffusion over a larger sphereof particles, so they are capable of having their intensity increasedby concentration into a smaller space; an effectwhich may be produced by their being reflected from thesolid walls of cavities, shaped so as to bring the undulationsto unite into a focus; it is on this principle that the ear-trumpet,for assisting persons dull of hearing, is constructed:and the same effect sometimes takes place in echoes,which occasionally reflect a sound of greater loudness thanthe original sound which was directed towards them.If the impulses given to the nerves of the ear be repeatedat equal intervals of time, provided these intervals be verysmall, the impressions become so blended together as not tobe distinguishable from one another, and the sensation of auniform continued sound, or musical note, is excited in themind. If the intervals between the vibrations be long, thenote is grave; if short, that is, if the number of vibrationsin a given time be great, the note is, in the same proportion,acute. The former is called a liv, the latter a high note:designations which in all probability were originally derivedfrom the visible motions of the throat of a person who issinging these different notes; for, independently of this circumstance,the terms of high and low are quite arbitrary;and it is well known that they were applied by the ancientsin a sense exactly the reverse of that in which we now usethem.The different degrees of tension given to the cord or wireof a stringed musical instrument, as well as its differentlengths, determine the frequency of its vibrations; a greatertension, or a shorter length, rendering them more frequent,and consequently producing a higher note; and on the contrary,the note is rendered more grave by either lesseningthe tension, or lengthening the cord or wire. In a windinstrument, the tone depends altogether upon the length ofthe tube producing the sound.Vol. II. 3S298 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.There are, therefore, two qualities in sound recognisableby the ear, namely, loudness, or intensity, and quality, ortone; the former depending on the force of the vibrations;the latter, on their frequency. These acoustic principlesare to be borne in mind in studying the comparative physiologyof hearing; and since the functions of the different partsof the organ of this sense are, as yet, but imperfectly understood,I shall, in treating of this subject, deviate from theplan I have hitherto followed, and premise an account of thestructure of the ear in its most perfectly developed state,which it appears to be in Man§ 2. Physiology of Hearing in Man.That part of the organ of hearing, which, above all othersis essential to the performance of this function, is the acousticnerve, of which the fibres are expanded, and spread overthe surface of a fine membrane, placed in a situation adaptedto receive the full impression of the sonorous undulations,which are conveyed to them. This membrane, then, withits nervous filaments, may be regarded as the immediate organof the sense; all the other parts being merely accessoryapparatus, designed to collect and to condense the vibrationsof the surrounding medium, and to direct their concentratedaction on the auditory membrane.I have endeavoured, in Fig. 390, to exhibit, in one view,the principal parts of this complicated organ, as they existin man, in their relative situations, and of their natural size:thereby affording a scale by which the real dimensions ofthose portions, which I shall afterwards have occasion toexplain by magnified representations, may be properly^p-recited.*The Concha, or external ear (c,) is formed of an elasticplate of cartilage, covered by integument, and presenting vainthis and all the following figures, the parts of the right ear are shown,and similar parts are always indicated by the same letters.HEARING. 299pious elevations and depressions, which form a series of paraboliccurves, apparently foi the purpose of collecting thesonorous undulations of the air, and of directing them intoa funnel-shaped canal (m,) termed the meatus auditors,which leads to the internal ear. This canal is composedpartly of cartilage, and partly of bone; and the integumentlining it is furnished with numerous small glands, whichsupply a thick oily fluid, of an acrid quality, apparently designedto prevent the intrusion of insects: the passage is alsoguarded by hairs, which appear intended for a similar purpose.The meatus is closed at the bottom by a membrane (d,)which is stretched across it like the skin of a drum, and hasbeen termed, from this resemblance, the membrane of thetympanum or the ear-drum.* It performs, indeed, an officecorresponding to its name; for the sonorous undulationsof the air, which have been collected, and directed inwardsby the grooves of the concha, strike upon the ear-drum, andthrow it into a similar state of vibration. The ear-drum isThe inner surface of the ear-drum is shown in this figure, the cavity ofthe tympanum, which is behind it, being bud open.800 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.composed of an external membrane, derived from the cuticlewhich lines the meatus; an internal layer, which is continuouswith that of the cavity beyond it; and a middlelayer, which consists of radiating muscular fibres, proceedingfrom the circumference towards the centre, where theyare inserted into the extremity of a minute bony process(h,) presently to be described.* This muscular structureappears designed to vary the degree of tension in the ear-drum,and thus adapt the rate of its vibrations to those communicatedto it by the air. There is, also, a slender muscle,situated internally, which, by acting on this delicate processof bone, as on a lever, puts the whole membrane on thestretch, and enables its radiating fibres to effect the niceradjustments required for tuning, as it may be called, thispart of the organ. tImmediately behind the membrane of the ear-drum, thereis a hollow space (t,) called the cavity of the tympanumof an irregular shape, scooped out of the most solid part ofthe temporal bone, which is here of great density and hardness.This cavity is always filled with air; but it wouldobviously defeat the purpose of the organ if the air wereconfined in this space; because unless it were allowed occasionallyto expand or contract, it could not long remain inequilibrium with the pressure exerted by the atmosphere onthe external surface of the ear-drum; a pressure which, as iswell known, is subject to great variations, indicated by therise and fall of the barometer. These variations would exposethe membrane of the ear-drum to great inequalities ofpressure at its outer and inner surfaces, and endanger itsbeing forced, according to the state of the weather, eitheroutwards or inwards, which would completely interfere withthe delicacy of its vibrations. Nature has guarded againstIn many quadrupeds their insertion into this process is at some distancefrom the centre of the membrane. These muscular fibres are delineated inFig. 45, vol. i. p. 105.\ Home, Lectures, &c., iii. 268.HEARING.these evils by establishing a passage of communication betweenthe tympanum and the external air, by means of atube (e,) termed the Eustachian tube, which begins by asmall orifice from the inner side of the cavity of the tympanum,and opens by a wide mouth at the back of the This tube performs the same office in the ear, as thehole which it is found necessary to make in the side of adrum, for the purpose of opening a communication withthe external air; a communication which is as necessary forthe functions of the ear, as it is for the proper sounding ofthe drum. We find accordingly that a degree of deafness isinduced whenever the Eustachian tube is obstructed, whichmay happen either from the swelling of the membranelining it, during a cold, or from the accumulation of secretionin the passage. It is also occasionally useful as a channelthrough which sounds may gain admittance to the internalear; and it is perhaps for this reason that we instinctivelyopen the mouth when we are intent on hearing a veryfaint or distant sound.On the side of the cavity of the tympanum, which is oppositeto the opening of the Eustachian tube, is situated thebeginning of another passage, leading into numerous cells,contained in the mastoid process of the temporal bone, andtherefore termed the mastoid cells: these cells are likewisefilled with air. The innermost side of the same cavity, thatis, the side opposite to the ear-drum, and which is shown in^^^ 2. ^♦ This opening is seen at e, in Fig. 316, p. §63? representing a vertical andlongitudinal section of the rierht nostril*" ^longitudinal302 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.Fig. 391, is occupied by a rounded eminence (p,) of a triangularshape, termed the promontory; on each side ofwhich there is an opening in the bone, closed, however, bythe membrane lining the whole internal surface of the cavity.The opening (o,) which is situated at the upper edgeof the promontory, is called the fenestra ovalis, or ovalwindow; and that near the under edge (r,) is the fenestrarotunda, or round window.Connected with the membrane of the ear-drum, at oneend, and with the fenestra ovalis at the other, there extendsa chain of very "minute moveable bones, seen at (b,) in Fig.390; but more distinctly in Fig. 392, which is drawn on asomewhat larger scale, and in which as before (d) is theear-drum; (p) the promontory, (o,) the fenestra ovalis; and(r) the fenestra rotunda. These bones, which may be calledthe tympanic ossicula, are four in number, and are represented,enlarged to twice the natural size, in Fig. 393. Thenames they have received are more descriptive of theirshape than of their office. The first is the malleus, or hammer(m;) and its long handle (h) is affixed to the centre ofthe ear-drum: the second is the incus, or anvil (i;) thethird, which is the smallest in the body, being about thesize of a millet seed, is the orbicular bone (o;)* and thelast is the stapes, or stirrup (s,) the base of which is appliedto the membrane of the fenestra ovalis. These bones areregularly articulated together, with all the ordinary apparatusof joints, and are moved by small muscles providedfor that purpose. Their office is apparently to transmit thevibrations of the ear-drum to the membrane of the fenestraovalis, and probably, at the same time, to increase theirforce.The more internal parts of the ear compose what is ,and other anatomists, consider this as not being a separatebone, but only a process of the mcjt^a view of the subject which is supportedby the observations ojf Mr Shrapnel, detailed in the Medical Gazette,xii., 172.HEARING.signaled, from the intricacy of its winding passages, the labyrinth.It is seen at (s v k) inFig. 390, in connexion with thetympanum; but in Fig. 394, it isrepresented, on a very large scale,detached from every other part,and separated from the solid bonein which it lies embedded. Itconsists of a middle portion,termed the vestibule (v,) fromwhich, on its upper and posteriorside, proceed the three tubes (x,Y, z,) called, from their shape, thesemicircular canals; while to the lower anterior side of thevestibule there is attached a spiral canal, resembling in appearancethe shell of a snail, and on that account denominatedthe Cochlea (k.) All these bony cavities are linedwith a very delicate membrane, or periosteum, and are filledwith a transparent watery, or thin gelatinous fluid, which istermed by Breschet, ih^ peri lymph *Within the cavity of the osseous labyrinth, now described,are contained membranes having nearly the shape ofthe vestibule and semicircular canals, but not extending intothe cochlea. These membranes, which compose what hasbeen termed, for the sake of distinction, the membranouslabyrinth, form one continuous, but closed sac, containing afluids perfectly similar in appearance to the perilymph,which surrounds it on the outer side, and intervenes betweenit and the sides of the osseous labyrinth, preventingany contact with those sides. In Fig. 395, which is on astill larger scale than the preceding figure, the osseous labyrinthis laid open, so as to show the parts it encloses, and• Annales des Sciences Naturelles, xxix. 97. It has ako been called theAqua labyrinth and the fluid of Cotunnius, from the name of the Anatomistwho first distinctly described it.■}- De Blainville has termed this fluid " la vitriol fugitive," from its supposedanalogy with the vitreous humour of the eye.THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.more especially the membranous labyrinth, floating in theperi lymph (p.) The form of this latter part is still moredistinctly seen, in Fig. 396, where it is represented in a positionexactly corresponding to the former figure, but whollydetached from the bony labyrinth, and connected onlywith the nervous filaments which are proceeding to be distributedto its different parts.A simple inspection of these figures, in both of which thecorresponding parts are marked by the same letters, willshow at once the form and the connexions of the three semicircularcanals, (x, y, z,) each of which present, at their originfrom the vestibule, a considerable dilatation, termed anampulla (a, a, a,) while, at their other extremities, wherethey terminate in the vestibule, there is no enlargement oftheir diameter: and it will also be seen that two of these canals(x and y) unite into one before their termination. TheHEARING, 305same description applies in all respects both to the osseousand to the membranous canals contained within them; thespace (p) which intervenes between the two, being filled withthe peri lymph. But the form of the membranous vestibuledemands more particular notice, as it is not so exact an imitationof that of the osseous cavity; being composed of twodistinct sacs, opening into each other: one of these (u) istermed the utricle;^ and the other (s,) the sacculus. Eachsac contains in its interior a small mass of white calcareousmatter, (o, o,) resembling powdered chalk, which seems to besuspended in the fluid contained in the sacs by the intermediateof a number of nervous filaments proceeding from theacoustic nerves (g and n,) as seen in Fig. 396. From theuniversal presence of these cretaceous substances in the labyrinthof all the mammalia, and from their much greatersize and hardness in aquatic animals, there can be littledoubt that they perform some office of great importance inthe physiology of hearing.! Their size and appearance inthe Dog is shown in Fig. 397: and in the Hare, in Fig. 398.The Cochlea, again, is an exceedingly curious structure,being formed of the spiral convolutions of a double tube, orrather of one tube, separated into two compartments by apartition (l,) called the lamina spiralis, which extends itswhole length, except at the very apex of the cone, where itsuddenly terminates in a curved point, or hook (h,) leavingan aperture by which the two portions of the tube communicatetogether. In Fig. 395, a bristle (b, b) is passed throughthis aperture. The central pillar, round which these tubestake two and a half circular turns, is termed the modiolus.Its apex is seen at (m.) One of these passages is distinguishedby the name of the vestibular tubes in consequence• Scarpa and Weber term it tl»e sinus or alveus utriculosus; it is called by-othersthe sacculus vestibuli. Breschet gives it the name of le sinus median.See the Memoir already quoted, p. 98.f These cretaceous bodies are termed by Breschet polities, and otoconieSyaccording as they are of a hard or soft consistence. Ibid. p. 99.\ Scala vestibuli.Vol. II. 39306 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.of its arising from the cavity of the vestibule; and the otherby that of the tympanic tube,* because it begins from theinner side of the membrane which closes the fenestra rotunda,and forms the only separation between the interior ofthat tube, and the cavity of the tympanum. The trunk ofthe auditory nerve occupies a hollow space immediately behindthe ventricle, and its branches pass through minuteholes in the bony plate which forms the wall of that cavity,being finally expanded on the different parts of the membranouslabyrinthsGreat uncertainty prevails with regard to the real functionsperformed by the several parts of this very complexapparatus. It is most probable, however, that the sonorousvibrations of the air which reach the external ear, are directeddown the meatus, and striking against the ear-drumwhich closes the passage, throw that membrane into vibrationsof the same frequency; to which the action of its muscles,which appear intended to regulate its tension, may alsocontribute. The vibrations of the ear-drum, no doubt, excitecorresponding motions in the air contained in the cavityof the tympanum; which, again, communicates them to themembrane of the fenestra rotunda; while, on the other hand,the membrane closing the fenestra ovalis, receives similarimpressions from the stapes, conveyed through the chain oftympanic ossicula, which appear to serve as solid conductorsof the same vibrations. Thus, the peri lymph, or fluid containedin the labyrinth, is affected by each external sound,both through the medium of the air in the tympanum, andby means of the ossicula: the undulations thus excited pro-scalatympani.f In Fig. 396, the anterior trunk of the auditory nerve is seen (at g) distributingbranches to the ampuUx (a> a,) the utricle (u,) and the calcareousbody it contains; while the posterior trunk (n) divides into a branch, whichsupplies the sacculus (s) and its calcareous body (o) and a second branch(k) which is distributed over the cochlea, (d) is the nerve called the portiadura which merely accompanies the auditory nerve, but has no relationto the sense of hearing. In Fig. 390, the auditory nerve (n) is seen enteringat the back of the vestibule.HEARING. 307truce impressions on the extremities of the nervous filaments,which are spread over the membranous labyrinth; and theseimpressions being conveyed to the brain, are immediatelyfollowed by the sensation of sound.With regard to the purposes which are answered by thewinding passages of the semicircular canals, and cochlea,hardly any plausible conjecture has been offered; yet nodoubt can be entertained that the uses of all these parts areof considerable importance, both as to delicacy and correctnessof hearing. There is an obvious correspondence betweenthe positions of the three semicircular canals, (two ofwhich are vertical, and one horizontal, and of which theplanes are reciprocally perpendicular to one another,) and thethree dimensions by which the geometrical relations of spaceare estimated; and it might hence be conjectured that the objectof this arrangement is to allow of the transmission of vibrationsof every kind, in whatever direction they may arrive.It is not an improbable supposition that the returninto the vestibule, of undulations which have passed throughthese canals, has the effect of at once putting a stop to allfarther motion of the fluid, and preventing the continuanceof the impression which has been already made on thenerves. The same use may be assigned to the double spiralconvolutions of the tubes of the cochlea: for the undulationsof the fluid in the tympanic tube, received from the membraneof the fenestra rotunda, will meet those proceedingalong the vestibular tube, derived from the membrane of thefenestra ovalis, and like two opposing waves, will tend todestroy one another. Thus each external sound will producebut a single momentary impression; the prolongationof the undulations of the fluid of the labyrinth being preventedby their mutual collision and neutralization.*The preliminary steps in the process above described are not absolutely-essentialto hearing', for many instances have occurred in which the power ofhearing has been perfectly retained after the membrane of the ear-drum, andalso the ossicula had been destroyed by disease. A small aperture in themembrane does not interfere with its power of vibration; but if the whole308 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.§ 3. Comparative Physiology of Hearing.The structure of the organs of hearing in the lower animalspresents a regular gradation from the simple vestibule,with its membranous sac, supplied with nervous filaments,which may be regarded as the only essential part of this organ,through the successive additions of semicircular canals,fenestra ovalis, tympanic cavity, ossicula, ear-drum, meatusauditors, cochlea, and concha, till we arrive at the combinationof all these parts in the higher orders of the Mammalia.The simpler forms are generally met with in aquaticanimals, probably because the sonorous undulations ofwater are communicated more readily, and with greaterforce, than those of air, and require no accessory apparatusfor their concentration. The lobster, for instance, has a vestibularcavity (seen at v, in Fig. 399,) containing a membranoussac, with a striated groove (g,)* and receiving the filamentsof the auditory nerve. This vestibule is protectedby the shell on all sides, except at one part, where it isclosed only by a membrane (e,) which may therefore beconsidered as corresponding to the fenestra ovalis. Theouter side of this membrane in the Jistacus Jluviatilis, orcray-fish, is seen at f in Fig. 401 ; while Fig. 402, shows anear-drum be destroyed, and the ossicula lost, an almost total deafness generallyensues. After a time, however, the hearing may be in a great measurerecovered, with an undiminished power of distinguishing musical tones. Seetwo papers by Sir Ashley Cooper, in the Phil. Trans, for 1800, p. 151; andfor 1801, p. 437.This groove is represented magnified in Fig. 400.HEARING. 309interior view of the same membrane (p,) with the vestibule(v) laid open, and the auditory nerve (n) passing throughthe shell to be distributed on the sacculus.It appears froid a variety of observations that Insects, bothin their larva and their perfect state, possess the faculty ofhearing; but no certain knowledge has been obtained of theparts which exercise this sense. The prevailing opinionamong entomologists is that it resides in some part of theantennae; organs, which are supposed to have a peculiar sensibilityto aerial undulations. This hypothesis is foundedprincipally on the analogy of the Crustacea, whose antennaecontain the vestibular cavity already described; but on theother hand it is opposed by the fact that Spiders, which hearvery acutely, have no antennae; and it is also reported thatinsects, when deprived of their antennae, still retain thepower of hearing.*None of the Mollusca appear to possess, even in the smallestdegree, the sense of hearing, if we except the highly organizedCephalopoda; for in them we find, at the lower partof the cartilaginous ring, which has been supposed to exhibitthe first rudiment of a cranium, a tubercle, containing inits interior two membranous vesicles, contiguous to eachother, and surrounded by a fluid. They evidently correspondto the vestibular sacs, and contain each a small calcareousbody, suspended from the vesicles by slender nervousfilaments, like the clapper of a bell, and probably performingan office analogous to that instrument; for, being throwninto a tremulous motion by every undulation of the surroundingfluid, they will strike against the membrane, andcommunicate similar and still stronger impulses to thenerves by which they are suspended, thus increasing theimpression made on those nerves. The mechanical effect ofan apparatus of this kind is shown by the simple experiment,• Camparetti has described structures in a gveai numbei;^ of insects, whichhe imagined were organs of hearing; but his observations have not been confirmedby subsequent inquirers, and their accuracy is therefore doubtful.See De Blainville "De Organisation des Animaux," i. 565.%,310 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.mentioned by Camper, of enclosing a marble in a bladderfull of water, and held in the hand; when the slightest shakingof the bladder will be found instantly to communicate motionto the marble, the reaction of which on the bladder givesan unexpected concussion to the hand.The ear of Fishes contains, in addition to the vestibule,the three semicircular canals, which are, in general, greatlydeveloped.* An enlarged view of the membranous labyrinthof the Lophius piscatorius is given in Fig. 403, showingthe form and complication of its parts,'which are representedof twice the natural size, x, y, z, are the semicircularcanals, with their respective ampullae (a, a, a.) m is theSinus median, or principal vestibular sac, with its anteriorexpansion, termed the Utricle (u.) The Sacculus (s)has, in like manner, a posterior appendage (c) termed theCysticule. The hard calcareous bodies (o, o, o) are threein number; and the branches of nerves (i, i, i) by whichthey are suspended in the fluid contained in the membranes,are seen passing into them; while the ampullae are suppliedby other branches (n, n, n.) In all the osseous fishes, thelabyrinth is not enclosed in the bones of the cranium, butprojects into its cavity; but in the larger cartilaginous fishes,♦ In the lamprey, these canals exist only in a rudimental state, appearingas folds of the membrane of the vestibule; and there are also no cretaceousbosses in the vestibular sac.HEARING. 311as the ray and shark tribes, it is surrounded by solid bone,and is not visible within the cranium. In these latter fishes,we first meet with a rudiment of the meatus, in a passageextending from the inner side of the vestibule, to the upperand back part of the skull, where it is closed by a membrane,which is covered by the skin.Aquatic reptiles have ears constructed nearly on the sameplan as those of fishes: thus, the Triton or Newt has a vestibulecontaining only one cretaceous body, and three semicircularcanals, unprotected by any surrounding bone. Inthe Frog, however, we first perceive the addition of a distinctcavity, closed by a membrane, which is on a levelwith the integuments, on each side of the head. From thiscavity, which corresponds to that of the tympanum, thereproceeds an Eustachian tube; and within it, extending fromthe external membrane, which must here be regarded as anear-drum, to the membrane of the vestibule, or fenestraovalis, is found a bone, shaped like a trumpet, and termedthe Columella. This bone is seen at c in Fig. 404, attached404 Oby its base (b) to the fenestra ovalis of the vestibule (v,)which contains the cretaceous body (o.) There is also asmall bone (i) attached in front to the columella. In theChelonia, the structure of the ear is essentially the same asin the Frog, but the tympanum and columella are of greaterlength. In the saurian reptiles the cavity of the tympanumis still more capacious, and the ear-drum very distinctlymarked, and these animals possess great delicacy of hearing.The labyrinth of the Crocodile is enclosed in bone, and containsthree calcareous bodies: it presents also an appendage312 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.which has been regarded as the earliest rudiment of a cochlea;and there are two folds of the skin, resembling eye-lids,at the external orifice of the organ, which appear like thefirst step towards the development of an external ear.The structure of the ear in the Crocodile is but an approximationto that which we find prevailing in Birds,where the organ is of large size compared with that of thehead. The rudimental cochlea, as seen at k in Fig. 405,which represents these organs in the Turkey, is of largesize, and slightly curved. In the cavity of the tympanum(t) is seen the columella, which extends to the fenestraovalis; and beyond it, the semicircular canals (s,) the bonycells (b) which communicate with the tympanum, the osquadratus (q,) the zygomatic process (z,) and the lowerjaw (j.) The ear-drum is now no longer met with at thesurface, but lies concealed at the bottom of a short meatus,the orifice of which is surrounded with feathers arranged soas to serve as a kind of imperfect concha, or external ear.In Owls these feathers are a prominent and characteristicfeature; and in these birds there is, besides, a membranousflap, acting as a valve to guard the passage.The chief peculiarity observable in the internal ears ofMammalia is the great development of the cochlea, thetubes of which are convoluted, turning in a spiral, and assumingthe figure of a turbinated shell. From an extensivecomparison of the relative size of the cochlea in differenttribes of quadrupeds, it has been inferred that it bears a tolerablyconstant proportion to the degree of acuteness ofhearing, and that, consequently, it contributes essentially tothe perfection of that faculty: bats, for instance, which areknown to possess exquisite delicacy of hearing, have a cochleaof extraordinary size, compared with the other parts ofthe ear. The tympanic ossicula are completely developedonly in the Mammalia.* It is also in this class alone that• These tympanic ossicula are regarded by Geoffroy St. Hilaire as correspondingto the opercular bones of fishes, where, according to his theory,they have attained the highest degree of development.HEARING. 313we meet with a concha, or external ear, distinctly marked;and the utility of this part, in catching and collecting thesonorous undulations of the air, may be inferred from thecircumstance, that a large and very moveable concha is generallyattended with great acuteness of hearing. This ismore particularly the case with feeble and timid quadruped,as the hare and rabbit, which are ever on the watch to catchthe most distant sounds of danger, and whose ears are turnedbackwards, or. in the direction of their pursuers; while, onthe contrary, the ears of predaceous animals are directedforwards, that is, towards the objects of their pursuit. Thisdifference in direction is not confined to the external ear,but is observable also in the bony passage leading to thetympanum.The Cetacea, being strictly inhabitants of the water, haveno external ear; and the passage leading to the tympanum isa narrow and winding tube, formed of cartilage instead ofbone, and having a very small external aperture. In theDolphin tribe the orifice will barely admit the entrance ofa pin; it is also exceedingly small in the Dugong; theseStructures being evidently intended for preventing the entranceof any quantity of water.* It is apparently with thesame design that in the Seal the passage makes a circularturn; and that, in the Ornithorhyncus paradoxes, it windsround the temporal bone, and has its external orifice at agreat distance from the vestibule. The internal parts of theorgan of hearing in the Whale, and other cetacea, are enclosedin a bone of extraordinary hardness, which, insteadof forming a continuous portion of the skull, is connected toitonly by ligaments, and suspended in a kind of osseous cavity,formed by the adjacent bones. The cochlea is less developedthan in quadrupeds, for it only takes one turn anda half, instead of two and a half. The existence of the sesIt is probable that in these animals the principal channel by whichsounds reach the internal organ is the Eustachian tube.Vol. II. 40314 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.circular canals in the cetacea was denied by Camper; butthey have since been discovered by Cuvier.Several quadrupeds which resin the habit of burrowing,or of diving, as the Sorexx bodies, or water-shrew, are furnishedwith a valve, composed of a double membrane, capableof accurately closing the external opening of the meatus,and protecting it from the introduction of water, earth, orother extraneous bodies.* In like manner the external earof the Hippopotamus, which feeds at the bottom of rivers,is guarded by an apparatus which has the effect of a valve.We find, indeed, the same provident care displayed inthis as in every other department of the animal economy:every part, however minute, of the organ of this importantsense, being expressly adapted, in every species, to the particularcircumstances of their situation, and to that degree ofacuteness of perception, which is best suited to their respectivewants and powers of gratification.!• Geoffroy St. Hilaire; Memoires du Museum, i. 305.I The Comparative Physiology of Voice, a function of which the object,in animals as well as in man, is to produce sounds, addressed to the ears andexpressive of their ideas, feelings, desires and passions, forms a natural sequelto that of Hearing; but Sir Charles Bell having announced his intentionof introducing it in his Treatise on the Hand, I have abstained from enteringinto this extensive subject.315 )CHAPTER VLVISION,§ 1. Object of the Sense of Vision.To those who study nature with a view to the discoveryof final causes, no subject can be more interesting or instructivethan the physiology of Vision, the most refined andmost admirable of all our senses. However well we maybeacquainted with the construction of any particular part ofthe animal frame, it is evident that we can never form acorrect estimate of the excellence of its mechanism, unlesswe have also a knowledge of the purposes to be answered byit, and of the means by which those purposes can be accomplished.Innumerable are the works of creation, the art andcontrivance of which we are incompetent to understand,because we perceive only the ultimate effects, and remain ignorantof the operations by which those effects are produced.In attempting to investigate these obscure functions of theanimal or vegetable economy, we might fancy ourselves engagedin the perusal of a volume, written in some unknownlanguage, where we have penetrated the meaning of a fewwords and sentences, sufficient to show us that the whole ispregnant with the deepest thought, and conveys a tale of surpassinginterest and wonder, but where we are left to gatherthe sense of connecting passages by the guidance of remoteanalogies or vague conjecture. Wherever we fortunatelysucceed in deciphering any continued portion of the discourse,we find it characterized by a perfection of style, andgrandeur of conception, which at once reveal a master's hand,316 THE SENSORIAL PtTNCTIONS.and which kindle in us the most ardent desire of supplyingthe wide chasms perpetually intervening in the mysteriousand inspiring narrative. But in the subject which now claimsour attention we have been permitted to trace, for a considerableextent, the continuity of the design, and the lengthenedseries of means employed for carrying that design intoexecution; and the view which is thus unfolded of the magnificentscheme of creation is calculated to give us the mostsublime ideas of the wisdom, the power, and the benevolenceOF God.On none of the works of the Creator, which we are permittedto behold, have the characters of intention been moredeeply and legibly engraved than in the organ of vision, wherethe relation of every part to the effect intended to be producedis too evident to be mistaken, and the mode in which theyoperate is at once placed within the range of our comprehension.Of all the animal structures, this is, perhaps, the onewhich most admits of being brought into close comparisonwith the works of human art; for the eye is, in truth, a refinedoptical instrument, the perfection of which can never befully appreciated until we have instituted such a comparison;and the most profound scientific investigations of the anatomyand physiology of the eye concur in showing that thewhole of its structure is most accurately and skilfully adaptedto the physical laws of light, and that all its parts arefinished with that mathematical exactness which the precisionof the effect requires, and which no human effort canever hope to approach, — far less to attain.To the prosecution of this inquiry we are farther invited bythe consciousness of the incalculable advantages we derivefrom the sense of sight, the choicest and most enchanting ofour corporeal endowments. The value of this sense must,indeed, appear inestimable, when we consider of how largea portion of our sensitive and intellectual existence it is theintermediate source. Not only has it given us extensivecommand over the objects which surround us, and enabledus to traverse and explore the most distant regions of theVisions. 317globe, but it has introduced us to the knowledge of the bodieswhich compose the solar system, and of the countlesshosts of stars which are scattered through the firmament,thus expanding our views to the remotest confines of creation.As the perceptions supplied by this sense are at oncethe quickest, the most extensive, and the most varied, sothey become the fittest vehicles for the introduction of otherideas. Visual impressions are those which in infancy, furnishthe principal means of developing the powers of the understanding:it is to this class of perceptions that the philosopherresorts for the most apt and perspicuous illustrations ofhis reasonings; and it is also from the same inexhaustiblefountain that the poet draws his most pleasing and graceful,as well as his sublimest imagery.The sense of Vision is intended to convey to its possessora knowledge of the presence, situation, and colour ofexternal and distant objects, by means of the light whichthose objects are continually sending ofi*, either spontaneously,or by reflection from other bodies. It would appearthat there is only one part of the nervous system so peculiarlyorganized as to be capable of being affected by luminousrays, and conveying to the mind the sensation of light,and this part is the Retina, so namtfd from the thin anddelicate membranous net-work, on which the pulpy extremitiesof the optic nerves, establishing an immediate communicationbetween that part and the brain, are expanded.If the eye were so constructed as to allow the rays oflight, which reach it from surrounding objects, simply toimpinge on the retina as they are received, the only perceptionwhich they could excite in the mind, would be ageneral sensation of light, proportionate to the total quantitywhich is sent to the organ from the whole of the oppositehemisphere. This, however, does not properly constituteVision; for in order that the presence of a particular objectin its real direction and position with respect to us, may berecognised, it is necessary that the light, which comes fromit, and that light alone, produce its impression exclusively318 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.on some particular part of the retina; it being evident thatif the light, coming from any other object, were allowed toact, together with the former, on the same part, the two actionswould interfere with one another, and only a confusedimpression would result. The objects in a room, for example,are all throwing light on a sheet of paper laid on thefloor; but this light, being spread equally over every part ofthe surface of the paper, furnishes no means of distinguishingthe sources from which each portion of the light hasproceeded; or, in other words, of recognising the respectivefigures, situations, and colours of the objects themselves.We shall now proceed to consider the modifications to beintroduced into the structure of the organ, in order to attainthese objects.§ 2. Modes of accomplishing the Objects of Vision.Let us suppose that it were proposed to us, as a problem,to invent an apparatus, by which, availing ourselves of theknown properties of light, we might procure the concentrationof all the rays, proceeding from the respective pointsof the object to be viewed, on separate points of the retina,and obtain likewise the exclusion of all other rays; and alsoto contrive that the points of the retina, so illuminated, shallhave the same relative situations among one another, whichthe corresponding points of the surrounding objects have innature. In other words, let us suppose ourselves called uponto devise a method of forming on the retina a faithful delineation,in miniature, of the external scene.As it is a fundamental law in optics that the rays of light,while they are transmitted through the same medium, proceedin straight lines, the simplest mode of accomplishingthe proposed end would be to admit into the eye, and conveyto each particular point of the retina, only a single rayproceeding directly from that part of the object which. is tobe depicted on it, and to exclude all other rays. For car-vision.319rylng this design into effect we have the choice of two methods,both of which we find resorted to by nature underdifferent circumstances.The first method consists in providing for each of thesesingle rays a separate tube, with darkened sides, allowingthe ray which traverses it, and no other, to fall on its respectivepoint of the retina, which is to be applied at theopposite end of the tube. The most^onvenient form to begiven to the surface of the retina, which is to be spread outto receive the rays from all these tubes,appears to be that of a convex hemisphere;and the most eligible distributionof the tubes is the placing them so as toconstitute diverging radii, perpendicular,in every part, to the surface of the retina.This arrangement will be understood byreference to Fig. 406, which representsa section of the whole organ: (t, t,) beingthe tubes disposed in radii every whereperpendicular to the convex hemisphericalsurface of the retina (r.) Thus will an image be formed,composed of the direct rays from each respective point ofthe objects, to which the tubes are directed; and these pointsof the image will have, among themselves, the same relativesituation as the external objects, from which they originallyproceeded, and which they will accordingly faithfullyrepresent.The second method, which is nearly the inverse of thefirst, consists in admitting the rays through a small apertureinto a cavity, on the opposite and internal side of which theretina is expanded, forming a concave, instead of a convexhemispherical surface. The mode in which this arrangementis calculated to answer the intended purpose will beeasily understood by conceiving a chamber (as representedin Fig. 407,) into which no light is allowed to enter, exceptwhat is admitted through a small hole in a shutter, so as tofall on the opposite side of the room. It is evident thatTHE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.each ray will, in that case, illuminate a different part of thewall, and that the whole external scene will be there faithfullyrepresented; for the several illuminated points, whichconstitute these images, preserve among themselves thesame relative situation which the objects they represent doin nature, although with reference to the actual objects theyhave an inverted position. This inversion of the image is anecessary consequence of the crossing of all the rays at thesame point; namely, the small aperture in the shutter,through which they are admitted.40;^1 -j1 ^1m1 -w1 ^1 1:>k iOne inconvenience attending the limiting of the illuminationof each point of the wall to that of a single ray, in themode last pointed out, is that the image produced must necessarilybe very faint. If, with a view of remedying thisdefect, the aperture were enlarged, the image would, indeed,become brighter, but would at the same time be renderedmore indistinct, from the intermixture and mutual interferenceof adjacent rays; for all the lines would be spread out,the outlines shaded off, and the whole picture confused.The only mode by which distinctness of image can be obtainedwith increased illumination, is to collect into onepoint a great number of rays proceeding from the correspondingpoint of the object to be represented. Such a collectionof rays proceeding from any point, is termed, in thelanguage of optics, a pencil of rays; and the point intoVISION. . 321which they are collected is called 2i focus. For the purposeof cementing a pencil of rays into a focus, it is evident thatall of the m, except the one which proceeds in a straight linefrom the object to that focus, must be deflected, or bent fromtheir rectilineal course. This effect may be produced byrefraction, which takes place according to another opticallaw; a law of which the following is the exposition.It is only when the medium which the rays are traversingis of uniform density that their course is constantly rectilineal.If the density change, or if the ra's pass obliquelyfrom one medium into another of a different density, theyare refracted; each ray being deflected towards a line situatedin the medium of greatest density, and drawn from thepoint where the ray meets the new medium, perpendicularto the refracting surface. Thus, the ray, r. Fig. 408, strikingobliquely on the surface of a denser medium, at the points,instead of pursuing its original course along the line so, is refracted, or turned in the direction s t, which is a linesituated between s o, and s p; this latter line being drawnperpendicularly to the surface of the medium, at the point s,and within that medium. When the ray arrives at t, andmeets the posterior surface of the dense medium, passingthence into one that is less dense, it is again refracted accordingto the same law; that is, it inclines towards the perpendicularline T I, drawn from t, within the denser medium,and describes the new course t u instead of t v. Theamount of the deflection corresponds to the degree of ob-vol.II. 41322 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.equity of the ray to the surface which refracts it; and ismathematically expressed, by the law that the sines of thetwo angles formed with the perpendicular by the incidentand the refracted rays retain, amidst all the variations ofthose angles, the same constant proportion to one another.We may hence derive a simple rule for placing the plane ofthe refracting surface so as to produce the particular refractionwe wish to obtain. When a ray is to be deflected fromits original course to a particular side, we have only to turnthe surface of the medium in such a manner as that the perpendicularline to that surface, contained within the densermedium, shall lie still farther on the same side. Thus, inFig. 408, if we wish to turn the ray r s, from s o to s t, wemust place the dense medium so that the perpendicular s p,which is within it, shall be still farther from s o, than s t is;that is, shall lie on the other side of s t. The same rule appliesto the contrary refraction of the ray s t from t v to tu, when it passes out of a dense, into a rare medium; for theperpendicular t i must still be placed on the same side ofT V as T u is situated.Let us now apply these principles to the case before us;that is, to the determination of the form to be given to adense medium, in order to collect a pencil of rays, proceedingfrom a distant object, accurately to a focus. We shallsuppose the object in question to be very remote, so thatthe rays composing the pencil may be considered as beingparallel to each other; for at great distances their actual de-vision.323nation from strict parallelism is wholly insensible; and let a,B, c, D, E, (Fig. 409,) represent these rays. There mustevidently be one of these rays (c,) and only one, which bycontinuing its rectilineal course, would arrive at the point(r) intended to be the focus of the rays. This ray, then,may be suffered to pass on, without being subjected to anyrefraction; the surface of the medium should, therefore, bepresented to the ray (at i) perpendicularly to its course, sothat it may pass through at right angles to that surface.Those rays (b and d) which are situated very near to thisdirect or central raj (c,) will require but a small degree ofrefraction in order to reach the focus (r:) this small refractionwill be effected by a slight degree of obliquity in themedium at the points (h and k) where those rays meet it.In proportion as the rays (such as those at a and e) are moredistant from the central ray, a greater amount of refraction,and consequently a greater obliquity of the surfaces (gand l) will be required, in order to bring them to the samefocus.The convergence of these rays, after they have passedthis first surface, may be farther increased by interposingnew surfaces of other media at the proper angles. If thenew medium be still denser than the last, the inclination ofits surface must be similar to that already described; if rarer,they must be in an opposite direction. This last case is illustratedin the figure, where m, n, o, p, q, represent the inclinationsof the surfaces of a rarer medium, calculated toincrease the convergence of the rays, that is to bring themto a nearer focus (r.) The result of the continued changeof direction in the refracting surface, is a regular curvilinealsurface, which, in the present case, approaches very nearlyto that of a sphere. Hence by giving these refractive mediaspherical surfaces, we adapt them, with tolerable exactness,to produce the convergence of parallel rays to a focus,and by making the denser medium convex on both sides(as shown in Fig. 410,) both surfaces will conspire in producingthe desired effects. Such an instrument is termedTHE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.a double convex lens; and it has the property of collectinginto a focus rays proceeding from distant points.*Having obtained this instrument, we may now ventureto enlarge the aperture through which the light was admittedinto our dark chamber, and lit into the aperture a doubleconvex lens. We have thus constructed the well knownoptical instrument called the Camera Obscura, in whichthe images of external objects are formed upon a white surfaceof paper, or a semi-transparent plate of glass; and theseimages must evidently be in an inverted position with respectto the actual objects which they represent.Such is precisely the construction of the eye, which is, to• The refraction by spherical surfaces does not, strictly speaking", unite apencil of parallel or divergent rays into a mathematical point, or focus; forin reality the rays which are near the central line are made to converge to apoint a little more distant than that to which the remoter rays converge: aueffect which I have endeavoured to illustrate by the diagram Fig. 41 Ij whereinorder to render it obvious to the eye, the disparity is much exaggerated.But, on ordinary occasions, where great nicety is not required, this differencein the degree of convergence between the cent-al rays and those neapthe circumference of the lens, giving rise to what is termed the Narrationof Sphericity, is too small to attract notice.VISION.all intents, a camera obscura: for in both these instruments,the objects, the principles of construction, and the mode ofoperation are exactly the same; and the only difference is,that the former is an infinitely more perfect instrument thanthe latter can ever be rendered by the utmost efforts of humanart.with a view of simplifying the subject, I have assumed, in the accountgiven in the text, that the rays which arrive at the eye are parallel, which iamathematical stricWtss they never are. The focus of the rays refracted bya convex lens is more remote in proportion as the rays are more divergent,or, in other words, proceed from nearer objects. This is illustrated by Figures412, 413, and 414^ to which I shall again have occasion, to refer in thesequel.§ 3. structure of the Eye,One of the many points of superiority which the eye possessesover the ordinary camera obscura is derived from itsspherical shape, adapting the retina to receive every portionof the images produced by refraction, which are themselvescurved: whereas, had they been received on a plane surface,as they usually are in the camera obscura, a considerableportion of the image would have been indistinct. This sphericalform is preserved by means of the firm membraneswhich protect the eye, and which are termed its Coats; andthe transparent media which they enclose, and which effect-theSENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.the convergence of the rays, are termed the Humours ofthe Eye. There are in this organ three principal coats, andthree humours, composing altogether what is called theGlobe of the Eye. Fig. 415, which gives an enlarged viewof a horizontal section of the right eye, exhibits distinctlyall these parts.The outermost coat (s,) which is termed the Sclerotica, isexceedingly firm and dense, and gives to the globe of theeye the mechanical support it requires for the performanceof its delicate functions. It is perforated behind by the opticnerve (o,) which passes onwards to be expanded into theretina (r.) The sclerotica does not extend farther than aboutfour-fifths of the globe of the eye; its place in front beingsupplied by a transparent convex membrane (c,) called theCornea, which is more prominent than the rest of the eyeball.A line passing through the centre of the cornea andthe centre of the globe of the eye, is called the axis of theeye. The Sclerotica is lined internally by the Choroid coatVISION. 327^x,) which is chiefly made up of a tissue of blood vessels,for supplying nourishment to the eye. It has on its innersurface a layer of a dark coloured viscid secretion, knownby the name of the Pigments nigrum, or black pigment.Its use is to absorb all the light which may happen to be irregularlyscattered through the eye, in consequence of reflectionfrom different quarters; and it serves, therefore, thesame purpose as the black paint with which the inside ofoptical instruments, such as telescopes, microscopes, and cameraeobscure, is darkened. Within the pigments nigrum,and almost in immediate contact with it,* the Retina (r) isexpanded, forming an exceedingly thin and delicate layer ofnervous matter, supported by a fine membrane.More than three-fourths of the globe of the eye are filledwith the vitreous humour (v,) which has the appearance ofa pellucid and elastic jelly, contained in an exceedingly delicatetexture of cellular substance. The Crystalline humour,(lj) which has the shape of a double convex lens, isformed of a denser material than any of the other humours,and occupies the fore part of the globe of the eye, immediatelyin front of the vitreous humour, which is there hollowedto receive it The space which intervenes betweenthe lens and the cornea is filled with a watery secretion (a,)called the Aqueous humour This space is divided into ananterior and a posterior chamber by a flat circular partition(i,) termed the Iris.The iris has a central perforation (p,) called the Pupil,an't it is fixed to the edge of the choroid coat, by a whiteelastic ring (q,) called the Ciliary Ligament. The posteriorsurface of the iris is called the Uvea, and is lined witha dark brown pigment. The structure of the iris is verypeculiar, being composed of two layers of contractile fibresthe one, forming concentric circles; the other, disposed likeradii between the outer and inner margin.! When the• Between the pigments and the retina there is found a veiy fine mtm-i)rane, discovered by Dr. Jacobson: it use has not been ascertained,t See Fig, 47, vol, i. p. 105.Sis THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.former act, the pupil is contracted; when the latter act, thebreadth of the iris is diminished, and the pupil is, of course,dilated. By varying the size of the pupil the quantity oflight admitted into the interior of the eye is regulated, andaccommodated to the sensibility of the retina. When theintensity of the light would be injurious to that highly delicateorgan, the pupil is instantly contracted, so as to excludethe greater portion; and, on the contrary, when the light istoo feeble, it is dilated, in order to admit as large a quantityas possible. The iris also serves to intercept such rays aswould have fallen on parts of the crystalline lens less fittedto produce their regular refraction, the object of which willbe better understood when we have examined the functionsof this latter part. But, before engaging in this inquiry, itwill be proper to complete this sketch of the Anatomy ofthe Eye by describing the principal parts of the apparatusbelonging to that organ, which are exterior to the eye-ball,and may be considered as its appendages.The purposes answered by the parts exterior to the eyeballare chiefly those of motion, of lubrication, and of protection.As it is the central part of the retina which is endowedwith the greatest share of sensibility, it is necessary that theimages of the objects to be viewed should be made to fallon this part; and, consequently, that the eye should be capableof having its axis instantly directed to those objects,wherever they may be situated. Hence, muscles are providedwithin the orbits, for effecting the motions of the eyeball.A view of these muscles, with their attachments tothe ball of the eye, but separated from the other parts, isgiven in Fig. 416. Four of theseproceed in a straight course fromthe bottom of the orbit, arisingfrom the margin of the aperturethrough which the optic nervepasses, and being inserted by abroad tendinous expansion into theVISION. 329fore part of the sclerotic coat. Three of these are markedA, B, and c, in the figure: and the edge of the fourth is seenbehind and above b. These straight muscles, as they arecalled, surround the optic nerve and the eye-ball, formingfour longitudinal bands; one (a) being situated above for thepurpose of turning the eye upwards; a second (c,) situatedbelow, for turning it downwards; and the two others, oneither side, for performing its lateral motions to the right orleft The cavity of the orbits being considerably larger thanthe eye-ball, the intervening space, especially at the backpart, is filled up by fat, which serves as a soft cushion forits protection, and for enabling it to roll freely in all directions.Besides these straight muscles, there are also two others(s and i) termed the oblique muscles, which give the eyeballa certain degree of rotation on its axis. When these actin conjunction, they draw the eye forwards, and serve as antagoniststo the combined power of the straight muscles.The upper oblique muscle (s) is remarkable for the artificialmanner in which its tendon passes through a cartilaginouspulley (p) in the margin of the orbit, and then turns backagain to be inserted into the eye-ball, so that the effect producedby the action of the muscle is a motion in a directionexactly the reverse of that in which its fibres contract Thismechanism, simple as it is, affords one of the most palpableinstances that can be adduced of express contrivance; for inno other situation could the muscle have been so convenientlylodged as within the eye-ball; and in no other waycould its tendon have been made to pull in a direction contraryto that of the muscle, than by the interposition of apulley, turning the tendon completely round.The fore-part of the globe of the eye, which is of a whitecolour, is connected with the surrounding integuments by amembrane, termed the Conjunctiva* This membrane, on• An abundant supply of nerves has been bestowed on this membrane forthe purpose of conferring upon it that exquisite degree of sensibility whichVol. II. 42330 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.arriving at the base of the eye-lids, is folded forwards so asto line their inner surfaces, and to be continuous with theskin which covers their outer sides. The surfaces of theconjunctiva and of the cornea are kept constantly moist bythe tears, which are as constantly secreted by the Lacrymalglands. Each gland, (as shown at l, Fig. 417,) is situatedabove the eye, in a hollow of the orbit, and the ducts(d) proceeding from it open upon the inner side of the uppereye-lid (e.) This fluid, the uses of which are obviouslyto wash away dust, or other irritating substances which mayhappen to get introduced, is distributed over the outer surfaceof the eye by means of the eye-lids. Each lid is supportedby an elastic plate of cartilage, shaped like a crescent,and covered by integuments. An orbicular muscle,the fibres of which run in a circular direction, immediatelyunderneath the skin, all round the eye,* is provided forclosing them. The upper eye-lid is raised by a separatemuscle, contained within the orbit, immediately above thewas necessary to give immediate warning" of the slightest danger to so importantan organ as the eye from the intrusion of foreign bodies. That thisis the intention is apparent from the fact that the internal parts of the eyepossess but little sensibility compared with the external surface.• See Fig. 46, vol. i. p. 105,VISION. 331nipper straight muscle of the eye-ball. The eye-lashes arecurved in opposite directions, so as not to interfere witheach other when the eye-lids are closed. Their utility inguarding the eye against the entrance of various substances,such as hairs, dust, or perspiration, and also in shading theeye from too strong impressions of light, is sufficiently apparent.The eye-lids, in closing, meet first at the outercorner of the eye; and their junction proceeds along theline of their edges, towards the inner angles, till the contactis complete: by this means the tears are carried onwards inthat direction and accumulated at the inner corner of theeye, an effect which is promoted by the bevelling of themargins of the eye-lids, which, when they meet, form achannel for the fluid to pass in that manner. When theyarrive at the inner corner of the eye, the tears are conveyedaway by two slender ducts, the orifices of which, calledthe puncta lacrymal (p, p,) are seen at the inner cornerof each eye-lid, and are separated by a round projectingbody (c,) connected with a fold of the conjunctiva, andtermed the lacrymal caruncle. The two ducts soon uniteto form one passage, which opens into a sac (s,) situated atthe upper part of the sides of the nose, and terminating below(at n) in the cavity of the nostrils, into which the tearsare ultimately conducted. When the secretion of the tearsis too abundant to be carried off by this channel, they overflowupon the cheeks; but when the quantity is not excessive,the tendency to flow over the eye-lid is checked by anoily secretion proceeding from a row of minute glands, situatedat the edge of the eye-lids, and termed the Meibo-Tyrian glands.The eye-brows are a farther protection to the eyes, thedirection of the hairs being such as to turn away from themany drops of rain or of perspiration which may chance tofall from above.Excepting in front, where the eyes are covered and protectedby the eye-lids, these important organs are on all332 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.sides effectually guarded from injury by being contained inahollow bony socket, termed the orbit, and composed ofseven portions of bone. These seven elements may be recognisedin the skulls of all the mammalia, and perhaps alsoin those of all other vertebrated animals, affording a remarkableillustration of the unity of the plans of nature in theconstruction of the animal fabric.§ 4. Physiology of perfect Vision.The rays of light, proceeding from a distant object, strikeupon the convex surface of the cornea, which being of greaterdensity than the air, refracts them, and makes them convergetowards a distant focus. This effect, however, is inpart counteracted on their emergence from the concave posteriorsurface of the cornea, when the rays enter into theaqueous humour. On the whole, however, they are refracted,and made to converge to a degree equal to that whichthey would have undergone if they had at once impingedagainst the convex surface of the aqueous humour, supposingthe cornea not to have been interposed.A considerable portion of the light which has thus enteredthe aqueous humour is arrested in its course by the iris;so that it is only those rays which are admitted through thepupil that are subservient to vision. These next arrive atthe crystalline lens, where they undergo two refractions,the one at the anterior, the other at the posterior surface ofthat body. Both these surfaces being convex outwardly,and the lens being a denser substance than either the aqueousor the vitreous humours, the effect of both these refractionsis to increase the convergence of the rays, and to bringthem to unite in a focus on the retina at the bottom of theeye. The most considerable of these refractions is the first;because the difference of density between the air and thecornea, or rather the aqueous humour, is greater than thatof any of the humours of the eye compared with one another.VISION. 333The accurate convergence of all the rays of light, whichenter through the pupil, to their respective foci on the retina,is necessary for the perfection of the images there formed;but, for the complete attainment of this end, various nice adjustmentsare still requisite.In the first place, the Merraiion of Sphericity ,* whichis a consequence of the geometrical law of refraction, introducesa degree of confusion in the image; which is scarcelyperceptible, indeed, on a small scale, but which becomessensible in instruments of much power; being one of thegreatest difficulties which the optician has to overcome inthe construction of the telescope and the microscope. Nature,in framing the human eye, has solved this difficulty bythe simplest, yet most effectual means, and in a manner quiteinimitable by human art. She has, in the first place, givento the surfaces of the crystalline lens, instead of the sphericalform, curvatures more or less hyperbolical or elliptical;and has, in the next place, constructed the lens of an infinitenumber of concentric layers, which increase in their density,as they succeed one another from the surface to the centre.The refracting power, being proportional to thedensity, is thus greatest at the centre, and diminishes as werecede from that centre. This admirable adjustment exactlycorrects the deficiency of refraction, which always takesplace in the central portions of a lens composed of a materialof uniform density, as compared with the refraction ofthe parts more remote from the centre.!The second adjustment for perfect vision has reference tothe variations in the distance of the focus which take placeaccording as the rays arrive at the eye from objects at differentdistances, and which may be called the Narrations of• See Fig. 411, and the note referring' to it, p. 324.I Sir David Brewster has ascertained that the variations of density producingthe doubly refracting structure, in the crystalline lens of fishes, arerelated, not to the centre of the lens, but to the diameter which forms theaxis of vision: an arrangement peculiarly adapted for correcting the sphericalaberrations. Philos. Trans, for 1816, p. 317.334 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.Parallax. When the distance of the object is very great,the rays proceeding from each point arrive at the eye withso little divergence, that each pencil may be considered ascomposed of rays which are parallel to each other; the actualdeviation from parallelism being quite insensible. Butif the same object be brought nearer to the eye, the divergenceof the rays becomes more perceptible; and the effectof the same degree of refraction is to collect them into afocus more remote than before.* For every distance of theobject there is a corresponding focal distance; and when theeye is in a state adapted for distinct vision at one distance,it will have confused images of objects at another distance;because the exact foci of the rays will be situated either beforeor behind the retina. It is evident that if the retina benot placed exactly at the point where the focus is situated, itwill either intercept the pencil of rays before they are unitedinto a point, or receive them after they have crossed oneanother in passing through the focus: in either of whichcases, each pencil will throw upon the retina a small circleof light, brighter at the middle and fainter at the edges,which will mix itself with the adjacent pencils, and createconfusion in the image.It is found, however, that the eye has a power of accommodatingitself to the distinct vision of objects at a great varietyof distances, according as the attention of the mind is directedto the particular object to be viewed. The mode inwhich this change in the state of the eye is effected has beenthe subject of much controversy. The increase of the refractingpower of the eye necessary to adapt it to the visionof near objects is evidently the result of a muscular effort,of which we are distinctly conscious when we accurately attendto the accompanying sensations. The researches of• This is illustrated by Fig. 412, 413, and 414; the first of which showsthe rapid convergence of rays proceeding from a very distant object, andwhich may be considered as parallel. The second shows that divergent raysunite at a more distant focus; and the third, that the focus is more distant thegreater the divergence.VISION. 335Dr. Young have rendered it probable that some change takesplace in the figure of the lens, whereby its convexity, andperhaps, also, its distance from the retina, are increased. Hehas shown, by a very decisive experiment, that any changewhich may take place in the convexity of the cornea hasbut little share in the production of the effect; for the eyeretains its power of adaptation when immersed in water, inwhich the form of the cornea can in no respect influence therefraction.But the rays of light are of different kinds; some excitingthe sensation of red, others of yellow, and others again ofblue; and these different species of light are refracted, undersimilar circumstances, in different degrees. Hence, themore refrangible rays, namely, the violet and the blue, arebrought to a nearer focus, than those which are less refractive,which are the orange and the red rays: and this wantof coincidence in the points of convergence of these differentrays, (all of which enter into the composition of white light,)necessarily impairs the distinctness of all the images producedby refraction, shading off their outlines with variouscolours, even when the object itself is colourless. This defect,which is incident to the power of a simple lens, andwhich is termed the Chromatic Narration, is remediedalmost perfectly in the eye, by the nice adjustment of thepowers of the different refracting media, which the rays oflight have to traverse before they arrive at the retina, producingwhat is called an achromatic combination;* and it isfound that the eye, though not an absolutely achromatic instrument,as was asserted by Euler is yet sufficiently sofor all the ordinary practical purposes of life.The object, then, of the whole apparatus appended to theoptic nerve, is to form inverted images of external objectson the retina, which, as we have seen, is the expanded ex-forthe exposition of the principles on which these achromatic combinationsof lenses correct this source of aberration, I must refer to workswhich treat professedly on Optics,f For the rectification of this error^we are indebted to Dr. Young.336 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.trinity of that nerve. That this effect is actually produced,may be easily shown by direct observation; for if the scleroticand choroid coats be carefully dissected off from theposterior part of the eye of an ox, or any other large quadruped,leaving only the retina, and the eye so prepared beplaced in a hole in a window-shutter, in a darkened room,with the cornea on the outside, all the illuminated objectsof the external scene will be beautifully depicted, in an invertedposition, on the retina.Few spectacles are more calculated to raise our admirationthan this delicate picture, which nature has, with suchexquisite art, and with the finest touches of her pencil,spread over the smooth canvass of this subtle nerve; a picture,which, though scarcely occupying a space of half aninch in diameter, contains the delineation of a boundlessscene of earth and sky, full of all kinds of objects, some atrest, and others in motion, yet all accurately represented asto their forms, colours and positions, and followed in alltheir changes, without the least interference, irregularity,or confusion. Every one of those countless and stupendousorbs of fire, whose light, after traversing immeasurable regionsof space, at length reaches our eye, is collected on itsnarrow curtain into a luminous focus of inconceivable minuteness;and yet this almost infinitesimal point shall besufficient to convey to the mind, through the medium of theoptic nerve and brain, a knowledge of the existence and positionof the far distant luminary, from which that light hasemanated. How infinitely surpassing all the limits of ourconception must be the intelligence, and the power of thatBeing, who planned and executed an instrument comprising,within such limited dimensions, such vast powers as theeye, of which the perceptions comprehend alike the nearestand most distant objects, and take cognizance at once of themost minute portions of matter, and of bodies of the largestmagnitude !VISION. 337§ 5. Comparative Physiology of Vision,In the formation of every part of the animal machinerywe may generally discern the predominance of the law ofgradation; but this law is more especially observed in thoseorgans which exhibit, in their most perfect state, the greatestcomplication and refinement of structure: for on followingall their varieties in the ascending series, we always findthem advancing by slow gradations of improvement, beforethey attain their highest degree of excellence. Thus, theorgan of vision presents, amidst an infinite variety of constructions,successive degrees of refinement, accompanied bycorresponding extensions of power. So gradual is the progressof this development, that it is not easy to determinethe point where the faculty of vision, properly so called, beginsto be exercised, or where the first rudiment of its organbegins to appear.Indications of a certain degree of sensibility to light areafforded by many of the lower tribes of Zoophytes, while novisible organ appropriated to receive its impressions can betraced. This is the case with many microscopic animalcules;and still more remarkably with the Hydra, and the ^dctinia,which show by their movements that they feel the influenceof this agent; for, when confined in a vessel, they alwaysplace themselves, by preference, on the side wherethere is the strongest light.* The Cerebellum cynomo-rum, on the other hand, seeks the darkest places, and contractsitself the moment it is exposed to lightest In a perfectlycalm sea, the Medusa which are rising towards thesurface, are seen to change their course, and to descend again,as soon as they reach those parts of the water which receivethe full influence of the sun's rays, and before any part ofSuch is the uniform report of Trembleyy, Baker, Bonnet, Goeze, Ha-now,RcEsel, and Schaeffer.f Rappi Nov. Act. Acad. Nat Cur. of Bonn, xiv. 645.Vol. II. 43338 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.their bodies has come into contact with the atmosphere.*But, in all these instances a doubt may arise whether theobserved actions be not prompted by the mere sensation ofwarmth excited by calorific rays which accompany those oflight; in which case they would be evidence only of theoperation of a finer kind of touch.The first unequivocal appearance of visual organs is metwith in the class of Annelida; although the researches ofEhrenberg would induce us to believe that they may betraced among animals yet lower in the scale; for he has noticedthem in several of the more highly organized Infusoria,belonging to the order Rotifera, and particularly inthe Hydatina senta, where he has found the small blackpoints observable in other species, united into a singlespot of larger size. Nitsch, also, states that the Cercariaviridis, possesses three organs of this kind. Planarisepresent two or three spots, which have been regardedas visual organs; and these have been found by Baer tobe composed, in the Planaria torva, of clusters of blackgrains, situated underneath the white or transparent integumentsThe eyes of the Nais proboscis are composed, accordingto Gruithuisen, simply of a small mass of black pigment,attached to the extremity of the optic nerve ;t and organsapparently similar to these are met with in many ofthe inferior tribes of Annelida. In all these cases it isa matter of considerable doubt whether the visual organsare constructed with any other intention than merely to conveygeneral sensations of light, without exciting distinct perceptionsof the objects themselves from which the light proceeds;this latter purpose requiring, as we have seen, a specialoptical apparatus of some degree of complexity. An approachto the formation of a crystalline lens takes place inthe genus Eunice of Cuvier, {Lycoris, Sav,) which, from theGrant; Edin. Journal of Science: No. 20.f Nov. Act. Acad. Nat. Cur. of Bonn, xiii. 712. See also the Memoir ofDuges, entitled "Recherches surl'Organisation elles McEursdes Planches,"in the Annales des Sc. Nat. xv. 148.\ Nov. Act. Acad. Nat. Cur. of Bonn, xi. 242.VISION. 339account given by Professor Muller,* has four eyes, situated onthe hinder part of the head, and covered with the epidermis,but containing in their interior a spherule, composed of anopaque white substance, surrounded by a black pigment, andpenetrated by an optic nerve, which is continued to the brain.On the other hand. Professor Weber found in the HirudoTnedicinalis, or common leech, no less than ten minute eyes,arranged in a semicircle, in front of the head, and projectinga little from the surface of the integument: they presentexternally a convex, and perfectly transparent cornea; whileinternally, they are prolonged into cylindrical tubes, containinga black pigment;! structures, apparently subservientto a species of vision of a higher order than that which consistsin the simple recognition of the presence of lightNo organs having the most distant relation to the sense ofvision, have ever been observed in any of the Acephalous,or bivalve Mollusca; but various species of Gasteropoda haveorgans which appear to exercise this sense, situated sometimesat the base, sometimes at the middle, and frequently at the extremityof the tentacula. Of the latter we have examples inthe common slug and snail, where these tentacula, or horns,are four in number, and are capable of being protruded andagain retracted, by folding inwards like the finger of a glove,at the pleasure of the animal. According to Muller the eyeof the Helix portia, represented at e, (Fig. 418;) is situateda little to one side of the rounded extremity, or papilla(p,) of the tentaculum, and is attached to an oval bulb of a• Annales des Sciences Naturelles, xxii. 23.f Meckel, Archie. fur Anatomic und Physiologic; 1824, p. 301.^ Annales des Sciences Naturelles; xxii. 12.340 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.black colour. It receives only a slender branch fo) from alarge nerve (n n) which is distributed to the papilla of thetentaculum, and appears to be appropriated exclusively tothe sense of touch. The bulb, with the eye attached to it,is represented, in this figure, as half retracted within the tubularsheath of the tentaculum (s s;) but it can exercise itsproper function only when fully exposed, by the completeunfolding and protrusion of the tentaculum. This eye contains,within its choroid coat, a semi-fluid and perfectlytransparent substance, filling the whole of the globe; andMuller also discovered at the anterior part, another transparentbody, having the shape of a lens.* A structure verysimilar to this was found to exist in the eye of the Murextritons, with the addition of a distinct iris, perforated so asto form a pupil; a part which had also been observed, togetherwith a crystalline lens of very large size, in the Foecymbium, by De Blainville.t Thus, the visual organsof these Gasteropoda appear to possess every requisite for distinctvision, properly so called. Experiments are said tohave been recently mad both by Leuchs, and by Steifen-sands in which a snail was repeatedly observed to avoid asmall object presented near the tentaculum; thus affordingevidence of its possessing this sense.The accurate investigation of the anatomy of the eyes ofinsects presents considerable difficulty, both from the minutenessof their parts and from the complication of theirstructure; so that notwithstanding the light which has recentlybeen thrown on this interesting subject by the patientand laborious researches of entomologists, great obscuritystill prevails with regard to the mode in which these diisMuller thus confirms the accuracy of Swammerdam's account of theanatomy of the eye of the snail, which had been contested by Sir E. Home(Phil. Trans. 1824, p. 4) and other writers.principes d' Anatomic Compared, i. 445.\ Quoted by Muller; ibid. p. 16. These results also corroborate the testimonyof Swimmer-dam, who states that he had obtained proofs that the snailcould see by means of these organs.VISION. 341native beings exercise the sense of vision. Four descriptionsof visual organs are met with in the class of ArticulatedAnimals; the first are the simple eyes, or stemmata,as they are termed, which appear as lucid spots, resemblingthose we have noticed in the higher orders of Annelida; thesecond, are the conglomerate eyes, which consist of clustersor aggregations of simple eyes; the third, are the compoundeyes, which are formed of a vast assemblage of smalltubes, each having its respective apparatus of humours, andof retina, and terminating externally in a separate cornea,slightly elevated above the general surface of the organ: thefourth kind of eyes, which have not yet been distinguishedby any particular appellation, are constituted by a numberof separate lenses, and subjacent retinae, but the whole coveredby a single cornea common to them all.Few insects are wholly destitute of visual organs, eitherin their larva or perfect states.* The larvae of those insectswhich undergo a complete metamorphosis have only stemmata;but those which are subjected only to a partial changeof form, as the Orthoptera, the Hemiptera, and the aquaticNeuroptera, have compound as well as simple eyes. Perfectinsects, with the few exceptions above noticed, have alwayscompound eyes, generally two in number, placed on thesides of the head: and they are often accompanied by stemmatasituated between, or behind them, on the upper part ofthe head. These stemmata, when met with, are generallythree in number, and are either placed in a row, or form atriangle. Their structure has been minutely examined byProfessor Muller, who found them to contain a hard andspherical crystalline lens, a vitreous humour, and a choroidcoat, with its accompanying black pigment; the whole beingcovered externally by a convex cornea. The stemmata of• This is the case, however, with the genus Ciaviger, among the ColeopteraBraula (Nitzch) among Litera, and also some of the species of Fupipara,NycteribiOi and Mehphagusy which are all parasitic insects: there are also fivespecies of ants, whose neuters have no eyes. (Muller, Annales des Sc. Nat.anrii. 366.)342 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.a caterpillar, which has eight of these eyes, are shown in Fig.419, connected together by a circular choroid membrane(x x) common to the whole: together with the separatebranches (o o) of the optic nerve (n) belonging to each.All the Arachnida possess eyes of this latter description;and from their greater size afford facilities for dissection,which are not met with among proper insects. Their numberin Spiders is generally eight, and they are disposed withgreat symmetry on the upper side of the head. Fig. 420represents, on a magnified scale, one of the large stemmata,on the head of the Scorpio tunensis, dissected so as to displayits internal parts; in which are seen the cornea (c,) derivedfrom an extension of the integument (i;) the densespherical crystalline lens (l;) the choroid coat with its pigment(x,*) forming a wide opening, or pupil; the vitreous humour(v,) covered behind the retina (r,) which is closely appliedto it; and the optic nerve (o,) with which the retina iscontinuous.Examples of the conglomerate eye occur in the Myriapo-da: in the Scolopendra, for instance, they consist of abouttwenty contiguous circular pellucid lenses, arranged in fivelines, with one larger eye behind the rest, which Kirby comparesto a sentinel, or scout, placed at some little distancefrom the main body. In the Julius terrestris, or commonMillepede, these eyes, amounting to 28, form a triangle, be-marcelde Serres states, that some of the stemmata of the insects whichhe examined contain a thin choroid, having a sUveiy lustre, as if intended asareflector of the light which falls on it.VISION. 343ing disposed in seven rows, the number in each regularlydiminishing from the base to the apex; an arrangementwhich is shown in Fig. 421.*The compound eyes of insects are formed of a vast numberof separate cylinders or elongated cones closely packedtogether on the surface of a central bulb, which may be consideredas a part of the optic nerve; while their united basesor outer extremities constitute the surface of a hemisphericalconvexity, which often occupies a considerable space oneach side of the head. The usual shape of each of thesebases is that of a hexagon, a form which admits of their uniformarrangement with the greatest economy of space, likethe cells of a honey-comb; and the hexagonal divisions ofthe surface are very plainly discernible on viewing the surfaceof these eyes with a microscope, especially as there isa thin layer of black pigment intervening between each, likemortar between the layers of brick. The appearance theypresent in the Melolontha, when highly magnified, is shownin Fig. 422. J The internal structure of these eyes will bebest understood from the section of that of the Lihellulavulgate, or gray Dragon-fly, shown in Fig. 424, aided bythe highly magnified views of smaller portions given in thesucceeding figures, in all of which the same letters of referenceare used to indicate the same objects The wholeouter layer (c c) of the compound eye may be considered• Kirby and Spence's Introduction, &c., iii. 494.■j- The number of these cones or cylinders which compose the entire organdiffers much in different species. In the ant, there are only 50; in a Scar'bseus, 3 180 5 in the Bombyx rrwri, 6236; in the house-fly (Musca domestica,)8000; in the Mehlontha vulgaris 8820; in the Phalaena cossus, 11,300; in theLibeller, 12,544; in the Papilio, 17,325; and in the Mordella, 25,088.+ In the Phaknae, and other tribes, they are arranged in squares (as shownin Fig. 423,) instead of hexagons, and frequently much less regularly; a»must necessarily happen, in many parts, from the curvature of the sphericalsurface.^ These figures, as well as the account of the anatomy of the eye of theLibellula, are taken from the memoir of Duges, in the Annates des SciencesNaturelles, xx. 341.THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.as corresponding to the cornea: each separate division ofwhich has been termed a Cornice, being composed of ahorny and perfectly transparent material. Each corneille(c) has the form of a truncated pyramid, the length ofwhich (l) is between two and three times the diameterof the base (b.) The outer surface (b) is very convex;but the internal, or truncated end (d) is concave; andthe concavity of the latter being smaller than the convexityof the former, its optical effect is that of a meniscus,or concavo-convex lens, with power of converging toa distant focus the rays of light which traverse it. Withinthese corneules there is extended a layer of an opaquevision. 345black pigment (x,) probably connected with a choroidcoat, which, from the delicacy of its texture, has hithertoescaped observation. There exists opposite to the centre,or axis of each corneule, a circular perforation (p,) whichperforms the functions of a pupil.* Duges states, indeed,that he has witnessed in this part movements of contractionand dilatation, like those of the iris in vertebratedanimals. He has likewise found that there is a small space(a) intervening between the extremity of each corneule andthe iris, and filled with an aqueous humour. The compartmentsformed by the substance of the choroid (x) are continuedinwards towards the centre of the general hemisphere,the cylindrical spaces which they enclose being occupiedeach by a transparent cylinder (v,) consisting of an outermembrane, filled with a viscid substance analogous to the vitreoushumour. Their general form and situation, as they lieembedded in the pigment, may be seen from the magnifiedsections; each cylinder commencing by a rounded convexbase, immediately behind its respective pupil, and slightlytapering to its extremities, where it is met by a filament(n) of the optic nerve; and all these filaments, after passingfor a certain distance through a thick mass of pigment, areunited to the large central nervous bulb (g, Fig. 427,) whichis termed the optic ganglionThis pupillary aperture was discovered by Muller, and had eluded allthe efforts of former observers to detect it; and it was accordingly the prevailingnotion that the black pigment lined the whole surface of the cornea,and interposed an insuperable barrier to the passage of light beyond thecornea. It was evidently impossible, while such an opinion was entertained,that any intelligible theory of vision, with eyes so constructed, could beformed.t Numberless modifications of the forms of each of these constituent partsoccur in different species of insects. Very frequently the vitreous humour(v,) instead of forming an elongated cylinder, has the shape of a short cone,terminating in a fine point, as shown in Fig. 426. Straus Durckheim appearsto have mistaken this part for an enlarged termination of the opticnerve, believing it to be opaque, and to form a retina applied to the back ofthe corneule, which latter part he considered as properly the crystalline lens.In his elaboi-ate work on the anatomy of the Melolontha, he describes theVol. II. 44346 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.It thus appears that each of the constituent eyes, whichcompose this vast aggregate, consists of a simple tube, furnishedwith all the elements requisite for distinct vision,and capable of receiving impressions from objects situatedin the direction of the axis of the tube. The rays traversingadjacent corneules are prevented from mixing themselveswith those which are proper to each tube by the interpositionof the black pigment, which completely surroundsthe transparent cylinders, and intercepts all lateral or scatteredlight. Thus has nature supplied the want of mobilityin the eyes of insects, by the vast multiplication of theirnumber, and by providing, as it were, a separate eye foreach separate point which was to be viewed; and thus hasshe realized the hypothetical arrangement, which suggesteditself in the outset of our inquiries, while examining all thepossible modes of effecting this object.This mode of vision is probably assisted by the convergingpowers of each corneule, although in parts which aire so minuteit is hardly possible to form an accurate estimate ofthese powers by direct experiment In corroboration of thisview I am fortunately enabled to cite a valuable observationof the late Dr. Wollaston, relative to the eye of the JistacusJluviatilis, or cray-fish, where the length of each componenttube is short, compared with that of the Libellula. Onmeasuring accurately the focal distance of one of the .Dr. Wollaston ascertained that it corresponds withfilaments (f) of the optic nerve, in their progress inwards, as passing througha second membrane (k, Fig. 428,) which he denominates the common choroidand afterwards uniting to form an expanded layer, or more general retina(r,) whence proceed a small number of short but thick nervous columns(k,) still converging towards the large central ganglion (g,) in whichthey terminate. The use he ascribes to this second choroid is to interceptthe light, which, in so diminutive an organ, might otherwise penetrate tothe general retina and produce confusion, or injurious irritation. The colourof the pigment is not always black, but often has a bluish tint: in thecommon fly, it is of a bright scarlet hue, resembling blood. In nocturnalinsects the transverse layer of pigment between the corneule and the vitreousbumoui' is absent.VISION. 347great exactness to the length of the tube attached to it; sothat an image of an external object is formed precisely atthe point where the retina is placed to receive it*Little is known of the respective functions of these twokinds of eyes, the simple and the compound, both of whichare generally possessed by the higher orders of winged insects.From the circumstance that the compound eyes arenot developed before the insect acquires the power of flight,it has been inferred that they are more particularly adaptedto the vision oi" distant objects; but it must be confessed thatthe experiments made on this subject have not, hitherto, ledto any conclusive results. Duges found, in his trials, thatafter the stemmata had been covered, vision remained apparentlyas perfect as before, while, on the other hand, wheninsects were deprived of the use of the compound eyes, andsaw only with the stemm.ata, they seemed to be capable ofdistinguishing nothing but the mere presence or absence oflight. Others have reported, that if the stemmata be coveredwith an opaque varnish, the insect loses the power ofguiding its flight, and strikes against walls or other obstacles:whereas, if the compound eyes be covered while thestemmata remain free, the insect generally flies away, risingperpendicularly in the air, and continuing its vertical ascentas long as it can be followed by the observer. If all theeyes of an insect be covered, it will seldom make any attemptwhatsoever to fly.The eyes of insects, whether simple or compound, areimmoveable fixed in their situations; but the compound eyesof the higher orders of the class of Crustacea, are placed atthe ends of moveable pedicles, so as to admit of being turnedat pleasure towards the objects to be viewed This, how-thisinteresting fact was communicated to me by Captain Eater, who,together with Mr. Children, assisted Dr. Wollaston in this examination.f Latreille describes a species of Crab, found on the shores of the Mediterranean,having its eyes supported on a long jointed tube, consisting oftwo articulations, which enables the animal to move them in various directions,like the arms of a telegraph.348 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.ever, is not the case with the Entomostraca, comprisingthe various species of Monoculi, in which the two eyes arebrought so close to one another, as apparently to constitutea single organ, corresponding in its structure to the fourthclass of eyes already enumerated; that is, the separate lensesit contains have a general envelope of a transparent membrane,or cornea. Muscles are provided for moving theeye in its socket; so that we have here indications of anapproach to the structure of the eye which prevails in thehigher classes of animals. There is, however, a still nearerapproximation to the latter in the eye of the Cephalopoda;for Sepia differ from all the tribes belonging to the inferiororders of mollusca in having large and efficient eyes, containinga hemispherical vitreous humour, placed immediatelybefore a concave retina, and receiving in front a largeand highly convex crystalline lens, which is soft at its exterior,but rapidly increases in density, and contains a nucleusof great hardness: there is also a pigments nigrum, and adistinct iris, with a kidney-shaped pupil. This eye is remarkablefor the total absence of a cornea; the integumentsof the head being continued over the iris, and reflected overthe edges of the pupil, giving a covering to the external surfaceof the lens: there is, of course, no chamber for containingan aqueous humour. The globe of the eye is nearlyspherical, but the sclerotica is double, leaving, at the posteriorpart, between its two portions, a considerable space, occupiedby the large ganglion of the optic nerve, with its numerousfilaments, which are embedded in a soft glandularsubstance.*The eyes of Fishes differ from those of sepia principallyin the addition of a distinct cornea, exterior to the lens andiris, but having only a slight degree of convexity. This,indeed, is the case with all aquatic animals; for, since thedifference of density between the cornea and the externalmedium is but small, the refractive power of any cornea,• See Cuvier, sur les MolUisques; Memoir sur le Poulpe, p. 37. In theAdopts there are folds of the skin, which appear to be rudiments of eye-liarVISION. 349however convex, would be inconsiderable; and the chiefagent for performing the requisite refraction of the rays isthe crystalline lens. We, accordingly, in general, find thecornea nearly flat, and the globe of the eye approaching inshape to a hemisphere; while the lens itself is nearly spherical,and of great density. The circumstances are shownin the section of the eye of the Perch, Fig. 430.* Theflatness of the cornea leaves scarcely any space for aqueoushumour, and but little for the motions of the iris.The surface of the eye in fishes, being continually washedby the* water in which it is immersed, requires no provision43Q of a secreted fluid for that purpose; andthere are consequently neither lacrymalapparatus, nor proper eye-lids; the integumentssupplying only a thin transparentmembrane, which passes over and protectsthe cornea, serving the office of a conjunctiva.The eye retains its form by the support it receivesfrom the sclerotic coat, which is of extraordinary thicknessand density. In the Shark and the Skate the eye is supportedfrom the bottom of the orbit, by a cartilaginous pedicle,which enables it to turn as on a pivot, or lever.Sir David Brewster has recently made an interesting analysisof the structure of the crystalline lens of the Cod, towhich he was led by noticing some remarkable optical appearancespresented by thin layers of this substance whentransmitting polarized light. He found that the hard centralportion is composed of a succession of concentric, andperfectly transparent, spheroidal laminae, the surfaces ofwhich, though apparently smooth, have the same kind ofiridescence as mother-of-pearl, and arising from the samecause; namely, the occurrence of regularly arranged lines,• In this figure, as in the others, c is the cornea; l, the lens; v, the vitreoushumour; n, the retina; o, the optic nerve; and s, the sclerotica. There isalso found in the eyes of most fishes an organ, lodged in the space k, termedthe Choroid gland, which envelops the optic nerve, is shaped like a horseshoe,is of a deep red colour, and highly vascular; its use is quite unknown.THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.or striae,* These lines, which mark the edges of the separatefibres, composing each lamina, converge like meridiansfrom the equator to the two poles of the spheroid, as isshown in Fig. 431. The fibres themselves are not cylindrical,but flat; and they taper at each end as they approachthe points of convergence. The breadth of the fibres in themost external layer, at the equator, is about the 5,500th partof an inch. The observation of another optical phenomenon,of a still more delicate kind, led Sir David Brewster to thefarther discovery of the curious mode in which, (as is representedin Fig. 432,) the fibres are locked together attheir edges by a series of teeth, resembling those of rack-work.He found the number of teeth in each fibre to be12,500; and, as the whole lens contains about 5,000,000fibres, the total number of these minute teeth amounts to62,500,000,000.1Some fishes, which frequent the depths of the ocean, beingfound at between three and four hundred fathoms belowthe surface, to which it is impossible that any sensible quantityof the light of day can penetrate, have, like nocturnalquadrupeds, very large eyes.J In a few species, which♦ See vol. i. p. 169. »"f As far as his observations have extended, this denticulated structure existsin the lenses of all kinds of fishes, and likewise in those of birds. He hasalso met with it in two species of Lizards and in the Ornithorhyncus; buthe has not been able to find it in any of the Mammalia, not even in the .(Phil. Trans, for 1833, p. 323.)^ See " Observations sur les Poissons recueillis dans un Voyage aux liesBleared et Pythiuses. Pah* M. Delai'oche."VISION. 351dwell in the muddy banks of rivers, as the Cecilia, andMursena caeca, or blind eel, the eyes are quite rudimental,and often nearly imperceptible; and in the Gastrobranchus,De Blainville states that it is impossible, even by the mostcareful dissection, to discover the least trace of eyes.Reptiles, being destined to reside in air as well as in water,have eyes accommodated to these variable circumstances.By the protrusion of the cornea, and the addition of an aqueoushumour, they approach nearer to the spherical form thanthe eyes of fishes: and the lens has a smaller refractive power,because the principal refraction is now performed bythe cornea and aqueous humour. Rudiments of eye-lidsare met with in the Salamander, but they are not of sufficientextent to cover the whole surface of the eyes. In someserpents, the integuments pass over the globe of the eye,forming a transparent conjunctiva, or external cornea, behindwhich the eye-ball has free motion. This membraneis shed, along with the cuticle, every time that the serpentis mounting; and at these epochs, while the cornea is preparingto detach itself, air insinuates itself underneath theexternal membrane and renders it opaque: so that until thisoperation is completed and an entire separation effected, theserpent is rendered blind. Serpents have no proper eyelids;but the cornea is covered by a transparent integument,which does not adhere to it* Lizards have usually a singleperforated eye-lid, which, when closed by its orbicularmuscle, exhibits merely a horizontal slit. There is also asmall internal fold, forming the rudiment of a third eye-lid.The Chameleon has remarkably projecting eyes, to whichthe light is admitted through a very minute perforation inIt was the general opinion, until very lately, that serpents are unprovidedwith any lacrymal apparatus; but a small lacrymal passage has beenrecently discovered by Coquet, leading from the space in the inner comerof the eye, between the transparent integument and the cornea. This lacrymalcanal opens into the nasal cavity in venomous snakes, and into themouth in those that are not venomous.352 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.the skin constituting the outer eye-lid. This animal hasthe power of turning each eye, independently of the other,in a great variety of directions.The eyes of Tortoises exhibit an approach to those ofbirds: they are furnished with large lacrymal glands, andwith a very moveable membrana nicias or third oye-lid.Birds present a still farther development of all theseparts: their eyes are of great size compared with the head,as may be seen from the large portion of the skull which isoccupied on each side by the orbits. The chief peculiaritiesof the internal structure of these organs are apparentlydesigned to accommodate them to vision through a veryrare medium, and to procure their ready adjustment to objectssituated at very different distances. The form of theeye appears calculated to serve both these purposes; for thegreat prominence of its anterior portion, which has oftenthe shape of a short cone, or cylinder, prefixed to the frontof a hemispherical globe, and which is terminated by a veryconvex cornea, affords space for a larger quantity of aqueoushumour, and also for the removal of the lens to a greaterdistance from the retina, whereby the vision of near objectsis facilitated, while at the same time the refracting powersare susceptible of great variation.For the purpose of preserving the hemispherical form ofthe sclerotica, this membrane in birds is strengthened by acircle of bony plates, which occupy the fore-part, and arelodged between the two layers of which it consists. Theseplates vary in number from fifteen to twenty, and they lieclose together, their edges successively overlapping eachother. There is manifest design in this arrangement: for itis clear that a ring formed of a number of separate plates isbetter fitted to resist fracture than an entire bony circle ofthe same thickness.There is a dark-coloured membrane, called the Marcussituated in the vitreous humour, the use of which isunknown, though it appears to be of some importance, as itVISION.is found in almost every bird having extensive powers ofvision.* The comparative anatomy of the eye offers, indeed,a great number of special structures of which we donot understand the design, and which I have therefore purposelyomitted to notice, as being foreign to the object ofthis treatise.In most birds the membrana nictitans, or third eye-lid,is of considerable size, and consists of a semi-transparent foldof the conjunctiva, lying, when not used, in the inner cornerof the eye, with its loose edge nearly vertical: it is representedat N, Fig. 434, covering half the surface of theeye: its motion, like that of a curtain, is horizontal, and iseffected by two muscles: the first of which, seen at q, inFig. 435, is called from its shape the quadratus, and arisesfrom the upper and back part of the sclerotica: its fibres descendingin a parallel course towards the optic nerve, wherethey terminate, by a semicircular edge, in a tubular tendon.This tendon has no particular attachment, but is employedfor the purpose of serving as a loop for the passage of thelong tendon of the second muscle (p,) which is called thepyramidalis, and which arises from the lower and back partof the sclerotica. Its tendon (t,) after passing through the• It is shown at m, Fig. 433, which is a magnified section of the eye of aGoose, c is the cornea; i, the iris; p, the ciliary processes, s, the scleroticcoat, and o, the optic nerve.Vol. II. 45354 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.channel above described, which has the effect of a pulley, isconducted through a circular sheath, furnished by the scleroticato the under part of the eye, and is inserted into thelower portion of the loose edge of the nictitating membrane.By the united action of these two muscles, the former ofwhich serves merely to guide the tendon of the latter, andincrease the velocity of its action, the membrane is rapidlydrawn over the front of the globe. Its return to its formerposition is effected simply by its own elasticity, which issufficient to bring it back to the inner corner of the eye.If the membrane itself had been furnished with muscularfibres for effecting this motion, they would have interferedwith its use by obstructing the transmission of light.The eyes of quadrupeds agree in their general structurewith those of man. In almost all the inferior tribes they areplaced laterally in the head, each having independent fields ofvision, and the two together commanding an extensive portionof the whole sphere. This is the case very generallyamong fishes, reptiles, and birds. Some exceptions, indeed,occur in particular tribes of the first of these classes, as inthe Uranoscopus, where the eyes are directed immediatelyupwards; in the Ray and the Callionymus, where their directionis oblique; and in the Pleuronectes, where there isa remarkable want of symmetry between the right and leftsides of the body, and where both eyes, as well as the mouth,are apparently situated on one side. Among birds, it is onlyin the tribe of Owls, which are nocturnal and predacious,that we find both eyes placed in front of the head. In thelower quadrupeds, the eyes are situated laterally, so thatthe optic axes form a very obtuse angle with each other.As we ascend towards the quadrant we find this angle becomingsmaller, till at length the approximation of the fieldsof view of the two eyes is such as to admit of their beingboth directed to the same object at the same time. In thehuman species the axes of the two orbits approach nearer toparallelism than in any of the other mammalia; and the fieldsof vision of both eyes coincide nearly in their whole extent.VISION. "^ 355This is probably a circumstance of considerable importancewith regard to our acquisition of correct perceptions by thissense.In the magnitude of the organ compared with that of thebody, we may occasionally observe some relation to the characterof the animal and the nature of its pursuits. Herbivorousanimals, and especially those whose bulk is great, asthe Elephant, the Rhinoceros ya^ndi the Hippopotamus, havecomparatively small eyes; for that of the elephant does notexceed two inches in diameter. The eye of the Whale isnot much more than the sooth part of the length of the body.When the natural food of an animal is stationary and requiresno effort of pursuit, the eye is generally small, andthe sight less keen; while in the purely carnivorous tribes,which are actively engaged in the chase of living prey, theorgan of vision is large and occupies a considerable portionof the head; the orbit is much developed, and encroaches onthe bones of the face; while, at the same time, the bony partitionseparating at the globe of the eye from the temporalmuscle is supplied by ligament alone: so that when thatmuscle is in strong action, the eye is pressed outwards,giving to the expression of the countenance a peculiar ferocity.While nature has thus bestowed great acuteness of sighton pursuing animals, she has, on the other hand, been no lesscareful to arm those which are the objects of pursuit, withpowers of vision, enabling them to perceive their enemiesfrom afar, and avoid the impending danger. Thus, largeeyes are bestowed on the Rodentia and the Ruminant.Those tribes which pursue their prey by night, or in thedusk of the evening, as for example the Lemur and the Cat,are furnished with large eyes. Bats, however, form an exceptionto this rule, their eyes being comparatively small;but a compensation has been afforded them in the superioracuteness of their other senses. In many quadrupeds a portionof the choroid coat is highly glistening, and reflects a356 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.great quantity of coloured light: the object of this structure,which is termed the Tapetum, is not very apparent.Among the lesser quadrupeds which burrow in the ground,we find many whose eyes are extremely minute, so muchso, indeed, as to be scarcely serviceable as visual organs.The eye of the Sorexx, or shrew mouse, is very small, andsurrounded by thick hair, which completely obstructs vision,and requires to be removed by the action of the subcutaneousmuscles, in order to enable the animal to derive anyadvantage from its eyes. These organs in the Mole are stillmore remarkably deficient in their development, not beinglarger than the head of a pin, and consequently not easilydiscovered.* It is therefore probable that this animal trustschiefly to its sense of hearing, which is remarkably acute,for intimations of the approach of danger, especially as, inits subterranean retreats, the vibrations of the solid earth arereadily transmitted to its ears. The Mus fi/phlus, or blindrat of Linnaeus; (the Zemni of Pallas,) which is an inhabitantof the western parts of Asia, cannot be supposed to possesseven the small degree of vision of the mole: for no externalorgan of this sense has been detected in any part of that animal.The whole side of the head is covered with a continuousintegument of uniform thickness, and equally overspreadwith a thick velvety hair. It is only after removingthe skin that a black spot is discovered on each side, of exceedinglysmall size, and apparently the mere imperfect rudimentof an eye, and totally incapable of exercising any ofthe functions of vision.Those mammalia, whose habits are aquatic, having the eyefrequently immersed in a dense medium, require a specialprovision for accommodating the refractive power of thatorgan to this variation of circumstances. Accordingly, it isfound that in the Seal, and other amphibious tribes, theMagendie asserts that the mole has no optic nerve; but G. St. Hilaireand Cams recognise the existence of a very slender nervous filament, arisingfrom the brain, and distributed to the eye of that animal.VISION. 357structure of the eye approaches to that of fishes, the lens beingdenser and more convex than usual, the cornea thin andyielding, and both the anterior and posterior segments ofthe sclerotic thick and firm; but the middle circle is verythin and flexible, admitting of the ready separation or approximatingof the other portions, so as to elongate or contractthe axis of the eye; just as a telescope can be drawnout or shortened, in order to adapt it to the distance of theobject to be viewed. The whole eye-ball is surrounded bystrong muscles which are capable of effecting these requisitechanges of distance between the cornea and the retina. TheDolphin, which lives more constantly in the water, has aneye still more nearly approaching in its structure to that offishes; the crystalline lens being nearly spherical, and theglobe of the eye furnished with strong and numerous muscles.In birds which frequently plunge their heads underwaterthe crystalline lens is more convex than in othertribes; and the same is true, also, of aquatic reptiles.358 )CHAPTER VII.PERCEPTION.The object of nature in establishing the organizations wehave been reviewing is to produce certain modified impressionson the extremities of particular nervous filaments providedto receive them; but these impressions constitute onlythe commencement of the series of corporeal changes whichterminate in sensation; for they have to be conveyed alongthe course of the nerves to the brain, or central organ of thenervous system,* where, again, some physical change musttake place, before the resulting affection of the mind can beproduced. The particular part of the brain, where this lastphysical change, immediately preceding the mental change,takes place, is termed the Sensorium., Abundant proofsexist that all the physical changes here referred to really occur,and, also, that they occur in this order of succession:for they are invariably found to be dependent on the healthystate, not only of the nerve, but, also, of the brain; thus, thedestruction, or even compression of the nerve, in any partof its course between the external organ and the sensorium,totally prevents sensation; and the like result ensues fromeven the slightest pressure made on the sensorium itself.Although the corporeal or physical change taking place inthe sensorium, and the mental affection we term sensation,are linked together by some inscrutable bond of connexion,It is usual to designate the end of the nerve which is next to the sensorium,as the origin of that nerve; whereas, it should more properly be regardedas its termination; for the series of changes which end in sensationcommence at the organ of sense, and are thence propagated along the nerveto the sensorium.PERCEPTION. 359they are, in their nature, as perfectly distinct as the subjectsin which they occur; that is, as mind is distinct from matter;and they cannot, therefore, be conceived by us ashaving the slightest resemblance the one to the other. Yetsensations invariably suggest to the mind ideas, not only ofthe existence of an external agent as producing them, butalso of various qualities and attributes belonging to theseagents; and the belief, or rather the irresistible conviction,thus forced upon us, of the reality of these external agents,which we conceive as constituting the material world, istermed Perception.Various questions here present themselves concerning theorigin, the formation, and the laws of our perceptions. Thisvast field of curious but difficult inquiry, situated on theconfines of the two great departments of human knowledge,(of which the one relates to the phenomena of matter, andthe other to those of mind,) requires for its successful cultivationthe combined efforts of the physiologist and the metaphysician.For although our sensations are purely mentalaffections, yet inasmuch as they are immediately dependenton physical causes, they are regulated by the physicallaws of the living frame; whereas the perceptions derivedfrom these sensations, being the results of intellectual processes,are amenable rather to the laws which regulate mentalthan physical phenomena. It is certain, from innumerablefacts, that in the present state of our existence, theoperations of the mind are conducted by the instrumentalityof our bodily organs; and that unless the brain be in ahealthy condition, these operations become disordered, oraltogether cease. As the eye and the ear are the instrumentsby which we see and hear, so the brain is the material instrumentby which we retrace and combine ideas, and bywhich we remember, we reason, we invent. Sudden pressureon this organ, as in a stroke of apoplexy, puts a totalstop to all these operations of the mind. If the pressure beof a nature to admit of remedy, and has not injured the textureof the brain, recovery may take place; and immediately360 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.on the return of consciousness, the person awakes as from adream, having no sense of the time which has elapsed sincethe moment of the attack. All causes which disturb thehealthy condition of the brain, such as alcohol, opium, andother narcotic drugs, or which disorder more especially thecirculation in that organ, such as those inducing fever, orinflammation, produce corresponding derangements of theintellectual powers; modifying the laws of the association ofideas, introducing confusion in the perceptions, irregularityin the trains of thought, and incapacity of reasoning, andleading to the infinitely diversified forms of mental hallucination,delirium, or insanity. Even the strongest minds aresubject to vicissitudes arising from slighter causes, whichaffect the general tone of the nervous system. Vain, indeed,was the boast of the ancient Stoics that the humanmind is independent of the body, and impenetrable to externalinfluences. No mortal man, whatever may be the vigourof his intellect, or the energy of his application, canwithstand the influence of impressions on his externalsenses; for, if sufficiently reiterated or intense, they will alwayshave power, if not to engross his whole attention, atleast to interrupt the current of his thoughts, and direct theminto other channels. Nor is it necessary for producing thiseffect that cannon should thunder in his ears; the mere rattlingof a window, or the creaking of a hinge will often besufficient to disturb his philosophical meditations, and disseverthe whole chain of his ideas. " Marvel not," says Pascal," that this profound statesman is just now incapable ofreasoning justly; for behold, a fly is buzzing round his head.If you wish to restore to him the power of correct thinking,and of distinguishing truth from falsehood, you must firstchase away the insect, holding in thraldom that exalted reason,and that gigantic intellect, which govern empires anddecide the destinies of mankind."Although we must necessarily infer, from the evidencefurnished by experience, that some physical changes in thebrain accompany the mental processes of thought, we are inPERCEPTION. 361utter ignorance of the nature of those actions; and all ourknowledge on this subject is limited to the changes whichwe are conscious are going on in the mind. It is to thesemental changes, therefore, that our attention is now to bedirected.In experiencing mere sensations, whatever be their assemblageor order of succession, the mind is wholly passive:on the other hand, the mind is active on all occasions whenwe combine into one idea sensations of different kinds, (suchas those which are derived from each separate sense,) whenwe compare sensations or ideas with one another, when weanalyze a compound idea, and unite its elements in an orderor mode of combination different from that in which theywere originally presented. Many of these active operationsof mind are implied in the process of perception; for althoughit might be supposed that the diversity in the natureof our sensations would sufficiently indicate to us a correspondingvariety in the qualities of the material agents,which produce their impressions on our senses, yet thesevery qualities, nay, even the existence of the objects themselves,are merely inferences deduced by our reasoningpowers, and not the immediate effects of those impressionson the mind. We talk, for instance, of seeing a distantbody; yet the immediate object of our perception can onlybe the light, which has produced that particular impressionon our retina; whence we infer, by a mental process, theexistence, the position, and the magnitude of that body.When we hear a distant sound, the immediate object of ourperception is neither the sounding body whence it emanates,nor the successive undulations of the medium conveying theeffect to our ear; but it is the peculiar impression made bythe vibrating particles of the fluid, which are in direct contactwith the auditory nerve. It is not difficult to provethat the objects of perception are mere creations of the mind,suggested, probably instinctively, by the accompanying sensations,but having no real resemblance or correspondenceeither with the impressions themselves, or with the agenciesVol. II. 46362 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.which produce them; for many are the instances in whichour actual perceptions are widely different from the truth,and have no external prototype in nature. In the absenceof light, any mechanical pressure, suddenly applied to theeye, excites, by its effect on the retina, the sensation of vividlight. That this sensation is present in the mind we arecertain, because we are conscious of its existence: here therecan be no fallacy. But the perception of light, as a causeof this sensation, being inseparably associated with such sensation,and wholly dependent on it, and corresponding in allrespects, both as to its duration and intensity, with the samecircumstances in the sensation, we cannot avoid having theperception as well as the sensation of light: yet it is certainthat no light has acted. The error, then, attaches tothe perception; and its source is to be traced to the mentalprocess by which perception is derived from sensation.Many other examples might be given of fallacious perceptions,arising from impressions made in an unusual manneron the nerves of the senses. One of the most remarkableis the appearance of a flash of light from the transmissionof the galvanic influence through the facial nerves. Ifa piece of silver, or of gold, be passed as high as possiblebetween the upper lip and the gums, while at the same timea plate of zinc is laid on the tongue, or applied to the insideof the cheeks; and if a communication be then made betweenthe two metals, either by bringing them into directcontact, or by means of a wire touching both of them at thesame time, a flash of light is seen by the person who is thesubject of the experiment. This appearance is the effect ofan impression made either on the retina, or on the opticnerve, and is analogous to that occasioned by a mechanicalimpulse, such as a blow directed to the same part of the nervoussystem, both being phenomena totally independent ofthe presence of light. A similar fallacy occurs in the perceptionof taste, which arises in the well known experimentof placing a piece of zinc and another of silver, the one onthe upper and the other on the under surface of the tongue,PERCEPTION. 363and making them communicate, when a pungent and disagreeablemetallic taste is instantly perceived: this happensbecause the nerves of the tongue, being acted upon by thegalvanism thus excited, communicate the same sensation asthat which would be occasioned by the actual application ofsapid bodies to that organ. Thus, it appears that causeswhich are very different in their nature, may, by acting onthe same nerves, produce the very same sensation; and itfollows, therefore, that our sensations cannot be dependedupon as being always exactly correspondent with the qualitiesof the external agent which excites them.Evidence to the same effect may also be gathered fromthe consideration of the narrowness of those limits withinwhich all our senses are restricted. It requires a certain intensityin the agent, whether it be light, or sound, or chemicalsubstances applied to the senses of smell or taste, inorder to produce the very lowest degree of sensation. Onthe other hand, when their intensity exceeds a certain limit,the nature of the sensation changes, and becomes one ofpain. Of the sensations commonly referred to the sense oftouch, there are many which convey no perception of thecause producing them. Thus, a slighter impression thanthat which gives the feeling of resistance produces the sensationof itching, which is totally different in its kind. Thesensation of cold is equally positive with that of warmth,and differs from it, not in degree merely, but in species; althoughwe know that it is only in its degree that the externalcause of each of these sensations differs.The only distinct notions we are capable of forming respectingMatter, are that it consists of certain powers ofattraction and repulsion, occupying certain portions of space,and capable of moving in space; and that its parts therebyassume different relative positions or configurations. But ofmind, our knowledge is more extensive and more precise,because we are conscious of its existence, and of many 6fits operations, which are comprised in the general termthought. To assert that thought can be a property of mat364 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.ter, is to extend the meaning of the term matter to that withwhich we cannot perceive it has any relation. All that weknow of matter has regard to space: nothing that we knowof the properties and affections of mind has any relationwhatsoever to space.A similar incongruity is contained in the proposition thatthought is 2i function of the brain. It is not the brain whichthinks, any more than it is the eye which sees, though eachof these material organs is necessary for the production ofthese respective effects. That which sees and which thinksis exclusively the mind; although it is b)'' the instrumentalityof its bodily organs that these changes take place. Attentionto this fundamental distinction, which, although obviouswhen explicitly pointed out, is often lost sight of inordinary discourse, will furnish a key to the solution ofmany questions relating to perception, which have beenconsidered as difficult and embarrassing.The sensations derived from the different senses have noresemblance to one another, and have, indeed, no propertyin common, except that they are felt by the same percipientbeing. A colour has no sort of resemblance to a sound; norhave either of these any similarity to an odour, or a taste,or to the sensations of heat, or cold. But the mind, whichreceives these incongruous elements, has the power ofgiving them, as it were, cohesion, of comparing them withone another, of uniting them into combinations, and of formingthem into ideas of external objects. All that naturepresents is an infinite number of particles, scattered in differentparts of space; but out of these the mind forms individualgroups, to which she gives a unity of her own creation.All our notions of material bodies involve that of space;and we derive this fundamental idea from the peculiar sensationswhich attend the actions of our voluntary muscles.These actions first give us the idea of our own bodies, of itsvarious parts, and of their figure and movements; and nextteach us the position, distances, magnitudes, and figures ofPERCEPTION. 365adjacent objects. Combined with these ideas are the moreimmediate perceptions of touch, arising from contact withthe skin, and especially with the fingers. All these perceptions,variously modified, make us acquainted with thosemechanical properties of bodies, which have been regardedby many as primary or essential qualities. The perceptionsderived from the other senses can only add to the formerthe ideas of partial, or secondary qualities, such as temperature,the jiecaliar actions which produce taste and smell, thesounds conveyed from certain bodies, and, lastly, their visibleappearances.The picture formed on the retina by the refracting powerof the humours of the eye, is the source of all the perceptionswhich belong to the sense of vision: but the visible appearanceswhich these pictures immediately suggest, when takenby themselves, could have given us no notion of the situation,distances, or magnitudes of the objects they represent;and it is altogether from the experience acquired by the exerciseof other senses that we learn the relation which theseappearances have with those objects. In process of time theformer become the signs and symbols of the latter; while abstractedly,and without such reference, they have no meaning.The knowledge of these relations is acquired by a processexactly analogous to that by which we learn a new language.On hearing a certain sound in constant conjunction with acertain idea, the two become inseparably associated togetherin our minds; so that on hearing the name, the correspondingidea immediately presents itself. In like manner, thevisible appearance of an object is the sign, which instantlyimpresses us with ideas of the presence, distance, situation,form, and dimensions of the body, that gave rise to it. Thisassociation is, in man at least, not original, but acquired. Theobjects of sight and touch, as Bishop Berkeley has justly observed,constitute two worlds, which although they have avery important correspondence and connexion, yet bear nosort of resemblance to one another. The tangible world hasthree dimensions, namely, length, breadth, and thickness; the366 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.visible world only two, namely, length and breadth. Theobjects of sight constitute a kind of language, which Natureaddresses to our eyes, and by which she conveys informationmost important to our welfare. As, in any language,the words or sounds bear no resemblance to the thingsthey denote, so in this particular language the visible objectsbear no sort of resemblance to the tangible objects theyrepresent.The theory of Berkeley received complete confirmation bythe circumstances attending the well known case, describedby Cheselden, of a boy, who, from being blind from birth,suddenly acquired, at the age of twelve, the power of seeing,by the removal of a cataract. He at first imagined thatall the objects he saw touched his eyes, as what he felt didhis skin; and he was unable either to estimate distancesby the sight alone, or even to distinguish one object fromanother, until he had compared the visual with what has beencalled the tactual impression.This theory also affords a satisfactory solution of a questionwhich has frequently been supposed to involve considerabledifficulty; namely, how it happens that we see objectsin their true situation, when their images on the retina,by which we see them, are inverted. To expect that theimpression from an inverted image on the retina should producethe perception of a similar position in the object viewed,is to commit the error of mistaking these images for the realobjects of perception, whereas they are only the means whichsuggest the true perceptions. It is not the eye which sees;it is the mind. The analogy which the optical part of theeye bears to a camera obscura has perhaps contributed to thefallacy in question; for, in using that instrument, we reallycontemplate the image which is received on the paper, and reflectedfrom it to our eyes. But in our own vision nothingof this kind takes place. Far from there being any contemplationby the mind of the image on the retina, we are utterlyunconscious that such an image exists, and still lesscan we be sensible of the position of the image with respectVISUAL PERCEPTIONS. 367to the object. All that we can distinguish as to the localityof the visual appearance which an object produces, is tl^atthis appearance occupies a certain place in the field of vision; and we are taught, by the experience of our other senses,that this is a sign of the existence of the external object in aparticular direction with reference to our own body. It is notuntil long after this association has been established, that welearn, by deduction from scientific principles, that the part ofthe retina, on which the impression causing this appearanceis made, is on the side opposite to that of the object itself; andalso that the image of a straight object is curved as well asinverted. But this subsequent information can never interferewith our habitual, and perhaps instinctive reference ofthe appearance resulting from an impression made uponthe upper part of the retina, to an object situated below us,and vice versa. Hence we at once refer impressions madeon any particular part of the retina to a cause proceedingfrom the opposite side. Thus, if we press the eye-ball withthe finger applied at the outer corner of the orbit, the luminousappearance excited by the pressure is immediately referredto the opposite or inner side of the eye.If we place a card perpendicularly between the two eyes,and close to the face, the card will appear double, because,although each surface is seen by the eye which is adjacentto it, in the direction in which it really is with regard tothat eye, yet, being out of the limits of distinct vision, it isreferred to a much greater distance than its real situation; andconsequently, the two sides of the object appear separatedby a wide interval, and as if they belonged to two differentobjects. Many other examples might be given of similarfallacies in our visual perceptions.All impressions made on the nerves of sensation have adefinite duration, and continue for a certain interval of timeafter the action of the external agent has ceased. The operationof this law is most conspicuous in those cases wherethe presence or absence of the agent can readily be determined.Thus, we retain the sensation of a sound for some368 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.time after, the vibrations of the external medium have ceased ;as is shown b)^ the sensation of a musical note being the resultof the regular succession of aerial undulations, when theimpression made by each continues during the whole intervalbetween two consecutive vibrations. The impulses oflight on the retina are unquestionably consecutive, like thoseof sound, but being repeated at still shorter intervals, giverise to a continuous impression. A familiar instance of thesame principle occurs in the appearance of an entire luminouscircle, from the rapid whirling round of a piece oflighted charcoal; for the part of the retina which receivesthe brilliant image of the burning charcoal, retains the impressionwith nearly the same intensity during the entirerevolution of the light, when the same impression is renewed.For the same reason a rocket, or a fiery meteor,shooting across the sky in the night, appears to leave behindit a long luminous train. The exact time, during whichthese impressions continue, after the exciting cause has beenwithdrawn, has been variously estimated by different experimentalists,and is very much influenced, indeed, by the intensityof the impression.*♦ Many Curious visual illusions may be traced to the operation of thisprinciple. One of the most remarkable is the curved appearance of thespokes of a carriage wheel rolling on the ground, when viewed through theintervals between vertical parallel bars, such as those of a palisade, or Venetianwindow-blind. On studying the circumstances of this phenomenon, Tfound that it was the necessary result of the traces left on the retina by theparts of each spoke which became in succession visible through the apertures,and assumed the curved appearances in question. A paper, in which I gavean account of the details of these observations, and of the theory by which Iexplained them, was presented to the Royal Society, and published in thePhilosophical Transactions, for 1825, p. 131. About three years ago, Mr.Faraday prosecuted the subject with the usual success' which attends all hisphilosophical researches, and devised a great number of interesting experimentson the appearances resulting from combinations of revolving wheels;the details of which are given in a paper contained in the first volume of theJournal of the Royal Institution of Great Britain, p. 205. This again directedmy attention to the subject, and led me to the invention of the instrumentwhich has since been introduced into notice under the name of the PhantasmPERCEPTIONS. 369When the impressions are very vivid, another phenomenonoften takes place; namely, their subsequent recurrence,after a certain interval, during which they are not felt, andquite independently of any renewed application of the causewhich had originally excited them. If, for example, welook steadfastly at the sun for a second or two, and then immediatelyclose our eyes, the image or spectrum of the sunremains for a long time present to the mind, as if its lightwere still acting on the retina. It then gradually fades anddisappears; but if we continue to keep the eyes shut, thesame impression will, after a certain time, recur, and againvanish; and this phenomenon will be repeated at intervals,the sensation becoming fainter at each renewal. It is probablethat these reappearances of the image, after the lightwhich produced the original impression has been withdrawn,are occasioned by spontaneous affections of the retina itself,which are conveyed to the sensorium. In other cases,where the impressions are less strong, the physical changesproducing these spectra are perhaps confined to the sensorium.These spectral appearances generally undergo variouschanges of colour, assuming first a yellow tint, passingthen to a green, and lastly becoming blue, before they finallydisappear.Another general law of sensation is, that all impressionsmade on the nerves of sense tend to exhaust their sensibility,so that the continued or renewed action of the same externalcause produces a Jess effect than at first: while, on theother hand, the absence or diminution of the usual excitementleads to a gradual increase of sensibility, so that thesubsequent application of an exciting cause produces morethan the usual effect. One of the most obvious exemplificationsof this law presents itself in the case of the sensationsof temperature. The very same body may appear warm toscope or Phenakisticope. I constructed several of these at that period,(in the spring of 1831 ) which I showed to many of my friends; but in consequenceof occupations and cares of a more serious kind, I did not publish anyaccount of this invention, which was last year reproduced on the continent.Vol. II. 47370 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.the touch at one time, and cold at another, (although its realtemperature has not varied,) according to the state of theorgan induced by previous impressions: and a very differentjudgment will be formed of its temperature, when felt byeach hand in succession, if the one has immediately beforebeen exposed to cold, while the other has retained its naturalwarmth. Similar phenomena may be observed withregard to all the other senses: thus, the flavour of odorous,as well as sapid bodies, depends much on the previous stateof the organ by which they are perceived; any strong impressionof taste made on the nerves of the tongue, renderingthem, for some time, nearly insensible to weaker tastes.Sounds, which make a powerful impression on the auditorynerves, will, in like manner, occasion temporary deafnesswith regard to faint sounds. The converse of this is observedwhen hearing has been suddenly restored in deafpersons, by the operation of perforating the ear-drum.* Thesensibility of the auditory nerves, which had not been accessibleto impressions of sound, is found to be increased toa morbid degree. This was remarkably exemplified in thecase of a gentleman, who, for several years, had been verydeaf, in consequence of the obliteration of the Eustachiantube, so that he could scarcely hear a person speaking in aloud voice close to his ear. As soon as the instrument whichhad made the perforation was withdrawn, the by-sandersbegan to address him in a very low tone of voice, and weresurprised at receiving no answer, and at his remaining immoveablein his chair, as if stunned by a violent blow. Atlength, he burst out into the exclamation, " For God's sake,gentlemen, refrain from crying out so terribly loud! you aregiving me excessive pain by speaking to me." The surgeonsupon this, retired across the room; unfortunately,however, the creaking of his boots caused the gentleman tostart up in an agony from his chair, at the same time applyinghis hand instinctively to cover his ear; but in doing this,See the note in p. 307 of this volume.f M. Manor, of Geneva, on whose authority I have given this account.VARIATIONS OF SENSIBILITY. 371the sound of his fingers coming in contact with his head wasSI fresh source of pain, producing an effect similar to that ofa pistol suddenly fired close to him. For a long time after,when spoken to, even in the lowest whisper, he complainedof the distressing loudness of the sounds; and it was severalweeks before this excessive sensibility of the auditory nerveswore off: by degrees, however, they accommodated themselvesto their proper function, and became adapted to theordinary impressions of sound. Some time afterwards, thisgentleman had a similar operation performed on the otherear, and with precisely the same results; the same degree ofexcessive sensibility to sounds was manifested on the restorationof hearing in this ear as had occurred in the first; andan equal time elapsed before it was brought into its naturalstate.The most striking illustrations of the extent of this laware furnished by the sense of vision. On entering a darkchamber, after having been for some time exposed to theglare of a bright sunshine, we feel as if we were blind; forthe retina, having been exhausted by the action of a stronglight, is insensible to the weaker impressions which it thenreceives. It might be supposed that the contraction of thepupil, which takes place on exposure to a strong light, and,of course, greatly reduces the quantity admitted to the retina,is a cause adequate to account for this phenomenon:but careful observation will show that the pupil very rapidlyenlarges to its full expansion when not acted upon bylight; while the insensibility of the retina continues for amuch longer time. It regains its usual sensibility, indeed,only by slow degrees. By remaining in the dark its sensibilityis still farther increased, and a faint light will exciteimpressions equal to those produced in the ordinary state ofthe eye by a much stronger light; and while it is in thisstate, the sudden exposure to the light of day produces adazzling and painful sensation.This law of vision was usefully applied by Sir WilliamHerschel in training his eye to the acquisition of extraordi-372 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.nary sensibility, for the purpose of observing very faint celestialobjects. It often happened to him, when, in a finewinter's night, and in the absence of the moon, he was occupiedduring four, five, or six hours in taking sweeps ofthe heavens with his telescope, that, by excluding from theeye the light of surrounding objects, by means of a blackhood, the sensibility of the retina was so much increased,that when a star of the third magnitude approached thefield of view, he found it necessary immediately to withdrawhis eye, in order to preserve its powers. He relatesthat on one occasion the appearance of Sirius announceditself in the field of the telescope like the dawn of the morning,increasing by degrees in brightness, till the star at lastpresented itself with all the splendour of the rising sun,obliging him quickly to retreat from the beautiful but overpoweringspectacle.The peculiar construction of the organ of vision allows ofour distinguishing the effects of impressions made on particularparts of the retina from those made on the rest, andfrom their general effect on the whole surface. These partialvariations of sensibility in the retina give rise to the phenomenaof ocular spectra, , as they are called, which wherefirst noticed by Buffon, and afterwards more fully investigatedby Dr. Robert Darwin. A white object on a darkground, after being viewed steadfastly till the eye has becomefatigued, produces, when the eye is immediately directedto another field of view, a spectrum of a darker colourthan the surrounding space, in consequence of the exhaustionof that portion of the retina on which its image hadbeen impressed. The converse takes place, when the eye,after having been steadfastly directed to a black object on alight ground, is transferred to another part of the same field;and in this case a bright spectrum of the object is seen.It is a still more curious fact that the sensibility of the retinato any particular kind of light, may, in like manner, beincreased or diminished, without any change taking place inits sensibility to other kinds of light. Hence the spectrumOCULAR SPECTRA. 373of a red object appears green; because the sensibility of thatportion of the retina, on which the red image has been impressed,is impaired with regard to the red rays, while theyellow and the blue rays still continue to produce their usualeffect; and these, by combining their influence, produce theimpression of green. For a similar reason, the spectrum ofa green object is red; the rays of that colour being thosewhich alone retain their power of fully impressing the retina,previously rendered less sensible to the yellow and theblue rays composing the green light it had received from theobject viewed.The judgments we form of the colours of bodies are influenced,in a considerable degree, by the vicinity of othercoloured objects, which modify the general sensibility of theretina. When a white or gray object of small dimensions,for instance, is viewed on a coloured ground, it generallyappears to assume a tint of the colour which is complementaryto that of the ground itself* It is the etiquette amongthe Chinese, in all their epistles of ceremony, to employpaper of a bright scarlet hue: and I am informed by SirGeorge Staunton, that for a long time after his arrival inChina, the characters written on this kind of paper appearedto him to be green; and that he was afterwards much surprisedat discovering that the ink employed was a pureblack, without any tinge of colour, and on closer examinationhe found that the marks were also black. The greenappearance of the letters, in this case, was an optical illusion,arising from the tendency of the retina, which hadbeen strongly impressed with red light, to receive impressionscorresponding to the complementary colour, which isgreen.A philosophical history of the illusions of the senses wouldafford ample evidence that limits have been intentionally assignedto our powers of perception; but the subject is muchAny two colours which, when combined together, produce white light,are said to be complementary to one another.374 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS,too extensive to be treated at length in the present work.*I must content myself with remarking, that these illusionsare the direct consequences of the very same laws, which,in ordinary circumstances, direct our judgment correctly,but are then acting under unusual or irregular combinationsof circumstances. These illusions may be arranged underthree classes, according as they are dependent on causes ofa physical, physiological, or mental kind.The first class includes those illusions in which an impressionis really made on the organ of sense by an externalcause, but in a way to which we have not been accustomed. Tothis class belong the acoustic deceptions arising from echoes,and from the art of ventriloquism; the deceptive appearancesof the mirage of the desert, the looming of the horizonat sea, the Fata Morgana of the coast of Calabria, the giganticspectre of the Brocken in the Harts, the suspendedimages of concave mirrors, the visions of the phantasmagoria,the symmetrical explications of objects in the field ofthe kaleidoscope, and a multitude of other results of thesimple combinations of the laws of optics.The second class comprehends those in which the causeof deception is more internal, and consists in the peculiarcondition of the nervous surface receiving the impressions.Ocular spectra of various kinds, impressions on the tongueand the eye from galvanism, and those which occasion singingin the ears, arising generally from an excited circulation,are among the many perceptions which rank under thishead.The third class of fallacies comprehends those which areessentially mental in their origin, and are the consequencesof errors in our reasoning powers. Some of these have alreadybeen pointed out with regard to the perceptions ofvision and of hearing, the formation of which is regulated• In the Justinian Lectures, which I was appointed to read to the RoyalCollege of Physicians, in May, 1832, 1 took occasion to enlarge on this subject.A summary of these lectures was given in the London Medical Gazette,vol. X. p. 273.ILLUSIONS OF THE SENSES. 375by the laws of the association of ideas. But even the senseof touch, which has been generally regarded as the least liableto fallacy, is not exempt from this source of error, as isproved by the well known experiment of feeling a singleball, of about the size of a pea, between two fingers whichare crossed; for there is then a distinct perception of thepresence of two balls instead of one.But limited as our senses are in their range of perception,and liable to occasional error, we cannot but perceive, that,both in ourselves, and also in every class of animals, theyhave been studiously adjusted, not only to the properties andthe constitution of the material world, but, also, to the respectivewants and necessities of each species, in the situationsand circumstances where it has been placed by the graciousand beneficent Author of its being.If the sensorial functions had been limited to mere sensationand perception, conjoined with the capacity of passiveenjoyment and of suffering, the purposes of animal existencewould have been but imperfectly accomplished; for, in orderthat the sentient being may secure the possession ofthose objects which are agreeable and salutary, and avoid orreject those which are painful or injurious, it is necessarythat he possess the power of spontaneous action. Hence,the faculty of Voluntary Motion is superadded to the othersensorial functions. The muscles which move the Kmbs,the trunk, the head, and organs of sense, — all those parts, inaword, which establish relations with the external world,are, through the intermediate of a separate set of nervousfilaments, totally distinct from those which are subservientto sensation,* made to communicate directly with the sensorium,and are thereby placed under the direct control andguidance of the will. The mental act of volition is doubtlessaccompanied by some corresponding physical change inthat part of the sensorium, whence the 7notor nerves, or• On this subject I most refer the reader to the researches of Sir CharlesBell, and Magendie, who have completely established the distinction betweenthese two classes of nerves.376 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.those distributed to the muscles of voluntary motion, arise.Here, then, we pass from mental phenomena to such as arepurely physical; and the impression, whatever may be itsnature, originating in the sensorium, is propagated along thecourse of the nerve to those muscles, whose contraction isrequired for the production of the intended action. Of thefunction of voluntary motion, as far as concerns the movingpowers and the mechanism of the instruments employed,* Ihave already treated at sufficient length in the first part ofthis work.Every excitement of the sensorial powers is, sooner orlater, followed by a proportional degree of exhaustion; andwhen this has reached a certain point, a suspension of theexercise of these faculties takes place, constituting the stateof sleep, during which, by the continued renovating actionof the vital functions, these powers are recruited, and renderedagain adequate to the purposes for which they werebestowed. In the ordinary state of sleep, however, the exhaustionof the sensorium is seldom so complete as to precludeits being excited by internal causes of irritation, whichwould be scarcely sensible during our waking hours: andhence arise dreams, which are trains of ideas, suggested byinternal irritations, and which the mind is bereft of thepower to control, in consequence of the absence of all imeA voluntary action, occurring as the immediate consequence of the applicationof an external ag-went to an organ of the senses, though apparentlya simple phenomenon, implies the occurrence of no less than twelve successiveprocesses, as may be seen by the following enumeration. First, thereis the modifying action of the organ of the sense, the refractions of the rays,for instance, in the case of the eye : secondly, the impression made on theextremity of the nerve: thirdly, the propagation of this impression along thenerve: fourthly, the impression or physical change in the sensorium. Nextfollow four kinds of mental processes, namely, sensation, perception, association,and volition. Then, again, there is another physical change takingplace in the sensorium, immediately consequent on the mental act of volition:this is followed by the propagation of the impression downwards alongthe motor nerve? then an impression is made on the muscle; and, lastly, weobtain the contraction of the muscle, which is the object of the whole seriesof operations.VOLUNTARY MOTION. 377pressions from the external senses.* In many animals, amuch more general suspension of the actions of life, extendingeven to the vital functions of respiration and circulation,takes place during the winter months, constituting what istermed Liberation.The only indications of dreaming given by the lower animals occur inthose possessed of the greatest intellectual powers, such as the Dogs amongquadrupeds, and the Parrot, among birds.Vol. II. 48378 )CHAPTER VIII.COMPARATIVE PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.§ 1. Nervous Systems of Vertebrates Animals.Our knowledge of the exact uses and functions of thevarious parts which compose the nervous system, and especiallyof its central masses, is unfortunately too scanty toenable us to discern the correspondence, which undoubtedlyexists, between the variations in tl4e functions and the diversitiesin the organization. The rapid review which Ipropose to take of the different plans, according to whichthe nervous system is constructed in the several classes ofanimals, will show that these central masses are multipliedand developed in proportion as the faculties of the animalembrace a wider range of objects, and are carried to higherdegrees of excellence.In none of the lowest tribes of Zoophytes, such as Sponges,Polypi, and Medusa, have any traces of organs, bearingthe least analogy to a nervous system, been discovered; noteven in the largest specimens of the last named tribe, someof which are nearly two feet in diameter. All these animalsgive but very obscure indications of sensibility; forthe contractions they exhibit, when stimulated, appear tobe rather the effect of a vital property of irritability thanthe result of any sensorial faculty. Analogy, however,would lead us to the belief that many of their actions arereally prompted by sensations and volitions, though in a degreevery inferior to those of animals higher in the scale ofbeing: but whatever may be their extent, it is probable thatthe sensorial operations in these animals take place without.-45,NERVOUS SYSTEM OP INVERTEBRATA. 379the intervention of any common sensorium, or centre of action.It is at the same time remarkable that their movementsare not effected by means of muscular fibres, as theyare in all other animals, the granular flesh, of which theirwhole body is composed, appearing to have a generally diffusedirritability, and perhaps also some degree of sensibility;so that each isolated granule may be supposed to beendowed with these combined properties, performing, independentlyof the other granules, the functions both of nerveand muscle. Such a mode of existence exhibits apparentlythe lowest and most rudimental condition of the animalfunctions. Yet the actions of the Hydra, of which I havegiven an account, are indicative of distinct volitions; as arealso, in a still more decided manner, those of the Infusoria.In the way in which the latter avoid obstacles while swimmingin the fluid, and turn aside when they encounter oneanother, and in the eagerness with which they pursue theirprey, we can hardly fail to recognise the evidence of voluntaryaction.To seek for an elucidation of these mysteries in the structureof animals whose minuteness precludes all accurate examination,would be a hopeless inquiry. Yet the indefatigableEhrenberg has recently discovered, in some of thelarger species of animalcules belonging to the order Roti-fera,an organization, which he believes to be a nervous system.He observed, in the Hydatina senta, a series of sixor seven gray bodies, enveloping the upper or dorsal partof the oesophagus, closely connected together, and perfectlydistinguishable, by their peculiar tint, from the viscera andthe surrounding parts. The uppermost of these bodies,which he considers as a ganglion, is much larger than theothers, and gives off slender nerves, which, by joininganother ganglion, situated under the integuments at theback of the neck, form a circle of nerves, analogous tothat which surrounds the oesophagus in the mollusca: fromthis circle two slender nervous filaments are sent off tothe head, and a larger branch to the abdominal surface of#380 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.the body. The discovery of a regular structure of muscularbands of fibres, in these animalcules, is a farther evidenceof the connexion which exists between nerves andmuscles.We again meet with traces of nervous filaments, accompaniedalso with muscular bands of fibres, in some of themore highly organized Entozoa. In the Discards, or longround worm, a slender and apparently single filament is seenpassing forwards, along the lower side of the abdomen, till itreaches the oesophagus, where it splits into two branches,one passing on each side of that tube, but without exhibitingany ganglionic enlargement. This may be consideredas the first step towards the particular form of the nervoussystem of the higher classes of articulated animals, wherethe principal nervous cord is obviously double throughoutits whole length, or, if partially united at different points, itis always readily divisible into two, by careful manipulation.In addition to this characteristic feature, these cordspresent, in their course, a series of enlargements, appearinglike knots; one pair of these generally corresponding to eachof the segments of the body, and sending off, as from a centre,branches in various directions. It is probable that theseknots, or ganglia, perform, in each segment of the worm, anoffice analogous to that of the brain and spinal marrow ofvertebrated animals, serving as centres of nervous, and perhaps,also, of sensorial powers. Many facts, indeed, tend toshow that each segment of the body of articulated animals,of an annular structure and cylindric form, such as the longworms and the myriapoda, has in many respects an independentsensitive existence, so that when the body is dividedinto two or more parts, each portion retains both thefaculty of sensation, and the power of voluntary motion. Asfar as we can judge, however, the only external sense whichis capable of being exercised by this simple form of nervoussystem, is that of touch; all the higher senses evidently requiringa much more developed and concentrated organizationof nervous ganglia.Nervous System OP Articulate. 381In this division of the animal kingdom, the primary nervouscords always pass along the middle of the lower surfaceof the body, this being the situation which, in the absenceof a vertebral bony column, affords them the best protection.They may be considered as analogous to the spinalmarrow, and as serving to unite the series of ganglia,through which they pass, into one connected system. Onarriving at the oesophagus, they form round it a circle, orcollar, studded with ganglia, of which the uppermost, or thatnearest the head, is generally of greater size than the rest,and is termed the (esophageal, cephalic, or cerebral ganglion,being usually regarded as analogous to the brain oflarger animals. Perhaps a more correct view of its functionswould be conveyed by calling it the principal brain,and considering the other ganglia as subordinate brains.This large ganglion, which supplies an abundance of nervousfilaments to every part of the head, seems to be thechief organ of the higher senses of vision, of bearing, oftaste, and of smell, and to be instrumental in combiningtheir impressions, so as to constitute an individual percipientanimal, endowed with those active powers which are suitedto its rank in the scale of being.Such is the general form of the nervous system in all theangelica: but in the higher orders of Articulate we findit exhibiting various degrees of concentration. The progressof this concentration is most distinctly traced in theCrustacea* One of the simplest forms of these organs occursin a little animal of this class, which is often found inimmense numbers, spread over tracts of sand on the seashore,and which is called the Talitrus locusts, or hopper, (Fig. 438.) The central partsof its nervous system are seen in Fig.439, which represents the abdominalside of this animal laid open, and magnifiedto twice the natural size. The two primary nervous.• See the account of the researches of Victor Audouin, and M Edwards,on this subject, given in the Ann. des Sc. Nat. xix. 181.THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS,cords, which run in a longitudinal direction, are here perfectlydistinct from one another, and even separated by asmall interval: they present a series of ganglia, which arenearly of equal size, and equidistant from one another, onepair corresponding to each segment of the body,* and unitedJoy transverse threads: and other filaments, diverging laterally,proceed from each ganglion. During the progress ofgrowth, the longitudinal cords approach somewhat nearer toeach other, but still remain perfectly distinct. The firstpair of ganglia, or the cephalic, have been considered, thoughimproperly, as the brain of the animal.The next step in the gradation occurs in the Fhyllosoma(Leach,) where the ganglia composing each pair in the abdomenand in the head, are united into single masses, whilethose in the thoracic region are still double. In the Cymo-thou, (Fab,) which belongs to the family of Priscus, thereis the appearance of a single chain of ganglia, those on theone side having coalesced with those on the other; each paircomposing a single ganglion, situated in the middle line;while the longitudinal cords which connect them still re-thesesegments are numbered in this and the following figure in theirproper order, beginning with that near the head, a is the external antenna;a, the internal antenna; and e, the eye.\NERVOUS SYSTEM OF CRUSTACEA.main double, as is shown in Fig. 440, which represents theinterior of this crustaceous animal, nearly of the natural size.But in the higher orders of Crustacea, as in the Lobsterthese longitudinal cords are themselves united in the abdominalregion, though still distinct in the thorax.In following the ascending series of crustaceous animals,we observe also an approximation of the remoter ganglia towardsthose near the centre of the body: this tendency alreadyshows itself in the shortening of the hinder part ofthe nervous system of the Cymothoa, as compared with theTalitrus; and the concentration proceeds farther in othertribes. In the Salmon, for example, most of the thoracicganglia, and in the Palinurus (Fab,) all of them, have coalescedinto one large oval mass, perforated in the middle,and occupying the centre of the thorax; and, lastly, inthe Maia squinadOy or Spider Crab (Fig. 441,*) this mass• In this figure are seen the great thoracic ganglion (b,) from which proceedthe superior thoracic nerves (t,) those to the fore feet (f,) to the hinder384 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.acquires still greater compactness, assumes a more globularform, and has no central perforation.These different forms of structure are also exemplified inthe progress of the development of the higher Crustacea:thus, in the Lobster, the early condition of the nervous systemis that of two separate parallel cords, each having a distinctchain of ganglia, as is the case in the Talitrus: then thecords are observed gradually to approximate, and the gangliaon each stifle to coalesce, as represented in the Cymo-thou: and at the period when the limbs begin to be developed,the thoracic ganglia approach one another, unite inclusters, and acquire a rapid enlargement, preparatory to thegrowth of the extremities from that division of the body,the abdominal ganglia remaining of the same size as before.The cephalic ganglion, which was originally double, andhas coalesced into one, is also greatly developed, in correspondencewith the growth of the organs of sense. The nextremarkable change is that taking place in the hinder portionsof the nervous cords, which are shortened, at the sametime that their ganglia are collected into larger masses, preparatoryto the growth of the tail and hinder feet; so thatthroughout the whole extent of the system the number ofganglia diminishes in the progress of development, whiletheir size is augmented.All Insects have the nervous system constructed on thesame general model as in the last mentioned classes; and itassumes, as in the Crustacea, various degrees of concentrationin the different stages of development. As an examplewe may take the nervous system of the Sphinx ligustri, ofwhich representations are given in the larva, pupa, and imam(f,) and the abdominal nervous rank (n;) the cephalic ganglion (c,)communicating by means of two nervous cords (o,) which surround theoesophagus and entrance into the stomach (s,) with the thoracic ganglion(b;) and sending off the optic nerve (e) to the eyes (e,) and the motornerves (m,) to the muscles of those organs; and also the nerves (a) to theinternal antennae, and the nerves (x) to the external antennae (a. )NERVOUS SYSTEM OF INSECTS. 385go states, wholly detached from the body, and of their naturalsize, in Figures 442, 443, and 444.*This system in the larva (Fig. 442) has the same simpleform as in the Annelida, or in the Talitrus, for it consists of♦ These figures were drawn by Mr. Newport, from original preparationsmade by himself. The same numbers in each refer to the same parts; sothat by comparing the figures with one another, a judgment may be formedof the changes of size and situation which occur in the progress of the principaltransformations of the insect. Numbers 1 to 11 indicate the series ofganglia which are situated along the under side of the body, and beneaththe alimentary canal. Of these the first five are the thoracic, and the lastsix the abdominal ganglia; while the cephalic, or cerebral ganglion (17) issituated above the oesophagus and dorsal vessel, and communicates by twonervous chords with the first of the series, or sub-oesophageal ganglion (1,)which is, in every stage of the insect, contained within the head, and distributesnerves to the parts about the mouth. The next ganglion (2) becomesobliterated at a late period of the change from the pupa to the imago state:the third (3) remains, but the two next (4, 5) coalesce to form, in the imago,the large thoracic ganglion; while the two which follow (6 and 7,) becomewholly obliterated before the insect attains the imago state, the interveningcords becoming shorter, and being, with the nerves they send out,carried forwards. The last four (8, 9, 10, 11) of the abdominal ganglia remain,with but little alteration, in all the stages of metamorphosis: in thelarva, they supply nerves to the false feet. The nerves (12, 13) which supplythe wings of the imago, are veiy small in the larva; and they arise bytwo roots, one derived from the cord, and one from the ganglion. Thenerves sent to the three pairs of anterior, or true legs, are marked 14, 15, 16.The nervous system of the larva is exhibited in Fig. 442, that of the pupain Fig. 443, and that of the imago in Fig. 444. It will be seen that in thepupa the abdominal ganglia are but little changed; but those situated moreforward (6, 7) are brought closer together by the shortening of the interveningcord, preparatory to their final obliteration in the imago; a changewhich those in front of them (4, 5) have already undergone. The progressivedevelopment of the optic (18) and antennal (19) nerves may alsobe traced. Mr. Newport has also traced a set of nerves (20) which arisefrom distinct roots, and which he found to be constantly distributed to theorgans of respiration.A detailed account of the anatomy of the nervous system of the Sphinxligusiriy and of the changes it undergoes up to a certain period, is given byMr. Newport in a paper in the Phil. Trans, for 1832, p. 383. He has sincecompleted the inquiry to the last transformation of this and other insects, andhas lately presented to the Royal Society an account of his researches.Vol. II. 49THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.a longitudinal series of ganglia, usually twelve or thirteen innumber, connected in their whole length by a double filament.By degrees the different parts of which it consistsapproach each other, the thoracic ganglia, in particular, coalescinginto larger masses, and becoming less numerous, somebeing apparently obliterated; the whole cord becomes in consequenceshorter, and the abdominal ganglia are carried forwards.The optic nerves are greatly enlarged during thelatter stages of transformation, and are often each of greatermagnitude than the brain itself. A set of nerves has alsobeen discovered, the course of which is peculiar, and appearsto correspond with the sympathetic or ganglionic system ofnerves in vertebrated animals, while another nerve resemblesin its mode of distribution, the pneumo-gastric nerve,or par vague. Very recently Mr. Newport has distinctlytraced a separate nervous tract, which he conceives givesNERVOUS SYSTEM OP INSECTS.origin to the motor nerves, while the subjacent column sendsout the nerves of sensation.In the next great division of the animal kingdom, whichincludes all molluscous animals, the nervous ganglia have acircular, instead of a longitudinal arrangement. The firstexample of this type occurs in the JisteriaSy where the nervoussystem (Fig. 445) is composed of small ganglia, equalin number to the rays of the animal, and disposed in a circleround the central aperture or mouth, but occupying situationsintermediate between each of the rays. A nerveis sent off from both sides of each ganglion, and passesalong the side of the rays, each ray receiving a pair ofthese nerves. In the Uolothuria there is a similar chainof ganglia, encircling the oesophagus; and the same modeof arrangement prevails in all the bivalve Mollusca,except that, besides the oesophageal ganglia, others are metwith in different parts of the body, distributing branches tothe viscera, and connected with one another and with theoesophageal ganglia, by filaments, so as to form with themone continuous nervous system. In the Gasteropoda, whichare furnished with a distinct head and organs of the higher388 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.senses, (such as the *^plysia, of which the nervous system isexhibited in Fig. 446,) there is generally a special cephalicganglion (c,) which may be supposed to serve the office ofbrain.* In others, again, as in the Patella (Fig. 447,) thecephalic ganglion is scarcely discernible, and its place is suppliedby two lateral ganglia (l, l;) and there is besides aa transverse ganglion (t,) below the oesophagus. The cephalicganglion, on the other hand, attains a considerablesize in the Cephalopoda (c. Fig. 448,) where it has extensiveconnexions with all the parts of the head: the optic ganglia(o, o,) in particular, are of very great size, each of them,singly, being larger than the brain itself§ 2. Nervous System of Vertebrated Animals,The characteristic type of the nervous system of vertebratedanimals is that of an elongated cylinder of nervousmatter, (m, z. Fig. 449,) extending down the back, andlodged in the canal formed by the grooves and arches of thevertebrae. It has received the name of spinal marrow, or,more properly, spinal cord: and, (as is seen in the transversesection. Fig. 450,) is composed of six parallel columns, twoposterior, two middle, and two anterior, closely joined together,but leaving frequently a central canal, which is filledwith fluid. On each side of the spinal cord, and betweenall the adjacent vertebrae, there proceed two sets of nervousfilaments, those which are continuous with the posterior columns(p,) being appropriated to the function of sensation;and those arising from the anterior columns (a,) being subThis figure also shows a ganglion (a,) which is placed higher, and communicatesby lateral filaments with the cephalic ganglion (c;) two lateralganglia (t, l,) of great size; and a large abdominal ganglion (g.)•)■ Some peculiarities in the structure of the cephalic ganglion of the Sepiahave been supposed to indicate an approach to the vertebrated structure; forthis ganglion, together with the labyrinth of the ear, is enclosed in a cartilaginousring, perforated at the centre to allow of the passage of the oesophagus,and imagined to be analogous to a cranium.NERVOUS System OP VERTEBRATA.servient to voluntary motion. The former, soon after theirexit from the spine, pass through a small ganglion (g,) andthen unite with the nerves from the anterior column, composing,by the intermixture of their fibres, a single nervous390 THE SENSORIAL. FUNCTIONS.trunk (n,) which is afterwards divided and subdivided inthe course of its farther distribution, both to the muscularand the sentient organs of the body. Each of these spinalnerves also sends branches to the ganglia of the sympatheticnerve, which, as was formerly described, passes down oneach side, parallel and near to the spine.Enlargements of the spinal marrow are observed in thoseparts, (w and l, Fig. 449,) which supply the nerves of theextremities, the increase of diameter being proportional tothe size of the limbs requiring these nerves. In Serpents,which are wholly destitute of limbs, the spinal marrow isnot enlarged in any part, but is a cylindrical column of uniformdiameter. In Fishes, these enlargements are in proportionto the relative size and muscularity of the lateral fins,and correspond to them in their situation. The Piper Gurnard( Trigla lyra,) which is a species of flying fish, havingvery large pectoral fins, that portion of the spinal marrowsupplying their muscles with nerves (as seen in the spacebetween m and s. Fig. 451,) has numerous enlargements,presenting a double row of tubercles. Fishes which possesselectrical organs have a considerable dilatation of the spinalmarrow, answering to the large nerves which are distributedto those organs. Birds which fly but imperfectly, as theGallinaceous tribe and the Scansores, have the posteriorenlargement much greater than the anterior; a disproportionwhich is particularly remarkable in the Ostrich. On thecontrary, the anterior enlargement is much more considerablethan the posterior in birds which have great power offlight. In the Dove, of which the brain and whole extent ofthe spinal marrow are shown in Fig. 449, the enlargements(w and l) corresponding to the wings and legs respectively,are nearly of equal size. In Quadrupeds, we likewise findthe relative size of these enlargements corresponding to thatof fore and hind extremities. When the latter are absent,as in the Cetacea, the posterior dilatation does not exist.The brain (b) may be regarded as an expansion of the anterioror upper end of the spinal marrow; and its magnitude,NERVOUS SYSTEM OF VERTEBRATA. 391as well as the relative size of its several parts, vary much inthe different classes and . families of vertebrated animals.This will appear from the inspection of the figures I havegiven of this organ in various species, selected as specimensfrom each class, viewed from above; and in all of which Ihave indicated corresponding parts by the same letters ofreference.The portion (m) of the brain, which appears as the immediatecontinuation of the spinal marrow (s,) is termed themedulla oblongata. The single tubercle (c,) arising fromthe expansion of the posterior columns of the spinal marrow,is termed the cerebellum, or little brain. Next followthe pair (t) which are termed the optic tubercles, or lobes*and appear to be productions from the middle columns ofthe spinal marrow. These are succeeded by another pair oftubercles (h,) which are called ih^ cerebral hemispheres, 2,n^the origin of which may be traced to the anterior columnsof the spinal marrow. There is also generally found, infront of the hemispheres, another pair of tubercles (o,) which,being connected with the nerves of smelling, have beencalled the olfactory lobes, or tubercles These are theprincipal parts of the cerebral mass to be here noticed, for Ipurposely omit the mention of the minuter divisions, which,though they have been objects of much attention to anatomists,unfortunately furnish no assistance in understandingthe physiology of this complicated and wonderful organ.On comparing the relative proportions of the brain andof the spinal marrow in the four classes of vertebrated animals,a progressive increase in the size of the former will beobserved as we ascend from Fishes to Reptiles, Birds, andMammalia. This increase in the magnitude of the brainarises chiefly from the enlargement of the cerebral hemispheres(h,) which, in the inferior orders of fishes, as in theIn the Mammalia, and in Man, they have been often designated by thevery inappropriate name of Corpora quadrigemina.\ Several cavities, termed Ventricles, are occasionally found in the interiorof the principal tubercles of the brain; but their use is unknown.393 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.Trigla lyra, or Piper Gurnard, (Fig. 451,) and in the Mu-ranaconger, or Conger Eel, (Fig. 452,) are scarcely discernible.They are very small in the Perca Jiuviatilis, orcommon Perch (Fig. 453;) but more developed in Reptiles,as in the Testudo midas, or Green Turtle, (Fig. 454,) and inthe Crocodile, (Fig. 455;) and still more so in Birds, as isseen in the brain of the Dove, (Fig. 449;) but, most of all,in the Mammalia, as is exemplified in the brain of the Lioriy(Fig. 456.) On the other hand, the optic tubercles (t) arelargest, compared with the rest of the brain, in Fishes; andtheir relative size diminishes as wee ascend to Mammalia:and the same observation applies also to the olfactorylobes, (o.)The relative positions of the parts of the brain are muchinfluenced by their proportional development. This will berendered manifest by the lateral views of the brains of thePerch, the Turtle, the Dove, and the Lion, presented inFigures 457, 458, 459, and 460, respectively, where thesame letters are employed to designate the same parts as inthe preceding figures. In Fishes, all the tubercles whichcompose this organ, are disposed nearly in a straight line,continuous with the spinal marrow, of which, as they scarcelyexceed it in diameter, they appear to be mere enlargements.As the skull expands more considerably than thebrain, this organ does not fill its cavity, but leaves a largespace filled with fluid. Some degree of shortening, however,may be perceived in the brain of the Perch (Fig. 457;)for the medulla oblongata (m) is doubled underneath the cerebellum(c,) pushing it upwards, and rendering it moreprominent than the other tubercles. This folding inwards,and shortening of the whole mass, proceeds to a greater extentas we trace the structure upwards, as may be seen in the brainof the Green Turtle (Fig. 458.) In that of Birds, of whichFig. 459 presents a vertical section, the optic tubercles havedescended from their former place, and assumed a lateral position,near the lower surface of the brain, lying on each sideof the medulla oblongata, at the part indicated by the letterNERVOUS SYSTEM OF VERTEBRATA. 393T. In the Mammalia, as the Lion (Fig. 460,) they arelodged quite in the interior of the organ, and concealed bythe expanded hemispheres (h;) their position only beingmarked by the same letter (t.) These changes are consequencesof the increasing development of the brain, comparedwith that of the cavity in which it is contained, requiringevery part to be more closely packed; thus, the layersof the hemispheres in Mammalia are obliged, from theirgreat extent, to be plaited and folded on one another, presentingat the surface curious windings, or convolutions, asthey are called (seen in Fig. 456,) which do not take placein the hemispheres of the inferior classes. The foldings ofthe substance of the cerebellum produce, likewise, even inbirds, transverse furrows on the surface; and from the interpositionof a substance of a gray colour between the laminaeof the white medullary matter, a section of the cerebellumpresents the curious appearance (seen in Fig. 459,)denominated, from its fancied resemblance to a tree, theJirbor Vitae.Thus far we have followed an obvious gradation in thedevelopment and concentration of the different parts of theVol. II. 50394 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.brain: but on arriving at Man the continuity of the series issuddenly disturbed by the great expansion of the hemispheres,(Fig. 461,) which, compared with those of quadrupeds,bear no sort of proportion to the rest of the nervoussystem. Both Aristotle and Pliny have asserted that theabsolute, as well as the comparative size of the human brainis greater than in any other known animal: exceptions, however,occur in the case of the Elephant, and also in that ofthe Whale, whose brains are certainly of greater absolutebulk than that of man. But all the large animals, withwhich we are familiarly acquainted, have brains considerablysmaller; as will readily appear from an examination oftheir skulls, which are narrow and compressed at the partoccupied by the brain; the greater part of the head beingtaken up by the development of the face and jaws. In Man,on the other hand, the bones of the skull rise perpendicularlyfrom the forehead, and are extended on each side, soas to form a capacious globular cavity for the reception anddefence of this most important organ. It is chiefly from theexpansion of the hemispheres, and the development of itsconvolutions, that the human brain derives this great augmentationof size.*• This will be apparent from the vertical section of the human brun, ;where, as before, s is the spinal marrow; m, the medulla oblongata; c,the cerebellum, with the arbor vitae the optic tubercles, or corpora ,dwindled to a very small size, compared with their bulk in fishes:p, the pineal gland, supposed by Des Cartes to be the seat of the soul; v,one of the lateral ventricles; a, the corpus callosum; and h, h, h, the hemispheres.Several expedients have been proposed for estimating the relative size ofthe brain in different tribes of animals, with a view of deducing conclusionsas to the constancy of the relation which is presumed to exist between itsgreater magnitude and the possession of higher intellectual faculties. Themost celebrated is that devised by Camper, and which he termed the facialangle, composed of two lines, one drawn in the direction of the basis of theskull, from the ear to the roots of the upper incisor teeth, and the other fromthe latter point, touching the most projecting part of the forehead. Camperconceived that the magnitude of this angle would coiTcctly indicate thesize of the bniin, as compared with the organs of the principal senses whichFUNCTIONS OP THE BRAIN. 395§ 3. Functions of the Brain.Physiologists have in all ages sought for an elucidationof the functions of the brain by the accurate examination ofits structure, which evidently consists of a congeries of medullaryfibres, arranged in the most intricate manner. Greatpains have been bestowed in unravelling the tissue of thesefibres, in the hope of discovering some clew to the perplexinglabyrinth of its organization: but nearly all that has beenlearned from the laborious inquiry, is that the fibres of thebrain are continuous with those which compose the columnsof the spinal marrow; that they pass in their course, throughmasses of nervous matter, which appear to be analogous toganglia; and that their remote extremities extend to the surfaceof the convolutions of the brain and cerebellum, whichare composed of a softer and more transparent gray matter,termed the cortical or cineritioiis substance of the brain.It is a remarkable fact, that in vertebrated animals all theorgans which are subservient to the sensorial functions aredouble, those on one side being exactly similar to those onthe other. We see this in the eyes, the ears, the limbs, andall the other instruments of voluntary motion; and in likemanner the parts of the nervous system which are connectedwith these functions are all double, and arranged symmetricallyon the two sides of the body. The same law ofsymmetry extends to the brain: every part of that organwhich is found on one side is repeated on the other; so that,strictly speaking, we have two brains, as well as two opticnerves and two eyes. But in order that the two sets offibres may co-operate, and constitute a single organ of sensation,corresponding with our consciousness of individuality,it was necessary that a free communication should becompose the face: but the fallacy of this criterion of animal sagacity has beenshown in a great many cases.396 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.established between the parts on both sides. For this purposethere is provided a set of medullary fibres, passing directlyacross from one side of the brain to the other; theseconstitute what are called the Commissures of the brain.*The question, however, still recurs: — What relation doesall this artificial intertexture and accumulation of fibres bearto the mental operations of which we are conscious, such asmemory, abstraction, judgment, imagination, volition? Arethere localities set apart for our different ideas in the storehouseof the cerebral hemispheres, and are they associatedby the material channels of communicating fibres? Are themental phenomena the effects, as was formerly supposed, ofa subtle fluid, or animal spirits, circulating with great velocityalong invisible canals in the nervous substance? orshall we, with Hartley, suppose them to be the results ofvibrations and vibratiimcles, agitating in succession thefiner threads of which this mystic web has been constructed?But a little reflection will suffice to convince us thatthese, and all other mechanical hypotheses, which the mostfanciful imagination can devise, make not the smallest approachto a solution of the difficulty; for they, in fact, donot touch the real subject to be explained, namely, how theaffections of a material substance can influence and be influencedby an immaterial agent. All that we have been ableto accomplish has been to trace the impressions from theorgan of sense along the communicating nerve to the sensorium:beyond this the clew is lost, and we can follow theprocess no farther.• The principal commissure of the human brain, called the corpus callosum,is seen at a, Fig. 461. Dr. Macartney, in a paper which he read at the latemeeting at Cambridge of the British Association for the Advancement ofScience, described the structure of the human brain, as discovered by his peculiarmode of dissection, to be much more complicated than is generallysupposed. He observed that its fibres are interlaced in the most intricatemanner, resembling the plexuses met with among the nerves, and establishingthe most extensive and general communications between every part ofthe cerebral mass.FUNCTIONS OP THE BRAIN. 397The exact locality of the sensorium has been eagerly-soughtfor by physiologists in every age. It would appear,from the results of the most recent inquiries, that it certainlydoes not extend to the whole mass of the brain, buthas its seat more especially in th lower part, or basis ofthat organ. It differs, however, in its locality, in differentclasses of animals. In man, and the mammalia which approachthe nearest to him in their structure, it occupiessome part of the region of the medulla oblongata, probablythe spot where most of the nerves of sense are observed toterminate. In the lower animals it is not confined to thisregion, but extends to the upper part of the spinal marrow.As we descend to the inferior orders of the animal kingdom,we find it more and more extensively diffused over the spinalmarrow; and in the Invertebrata the several ganglia appearto be endowed with this sensorial property: but, becomingless and less concentrated in single masses, the characterof individuality ceases to attach to the sensorial phenomena;until, in Zoophytes, we lose all traces of gangliaand of nervous filaments, and every part appears to possessan inherent power of exciting sensation, as well as performingmuscular contractions.Beyond this point we can derive no farther aid from Anatomy,since the intellectual operations of which we are consciousbear no conceivable analogy with any of the configurationsor actions of a material substance. Although thebrain is constructed with evident design, and composed of anumber of curiously wrought parts, we are utterly unable topenetrate the intention with which they are formed, or toperceive the slightest correspondence which their configurationcan have with the functions they respectively perform.The map of regions which modern Phrenologistshave traced on the surface of the head, and which they supposeto have a relation to different faculties and propensities,does not agree either with the natural divisions of the brainser with the metaphysical classification of mental phenomenaTHE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.na.* Experiments and pathological observations, however,seem to show that the hemispheres of the brain are the chiefinstruments by which the intellectual operations are carriedon; that the central parts, such as the optic lobes and themedulla oblongata, are those principally concerned in sensation;and that the cerebellum is the chief sensorial agentin voluntary motion.§ 4. Comparative Physiology of Perception,Of the perceptions of the lower animals, and of the lawswhich they obey, our knowledge must, of necessity, be extremelyimperfect, since it must be derived from a comparisonwith the results of our own sensitive powers, whichmay differ very essentially from those of the subjects of ourobservation. The same kind of organ which, in ourselves,conveys certain definite feelings, may, when modified inother animals, be the source of very different kinds of sensationsand perceptions, of which our minds have not thepower to form any adequate conception. Many of thequalities of surrounding bodies, which escape our more obtusesenses, may be distinctly perceived, in all their gradations,by particular tribes of animals, furnished with moredelicate organs. Many quadrupeds and birds possess powersof vision incomparably more extensive than our own; inacuteness of hearing, we are excelled by a great number ofanimals, and in delicacy of taste and smell, there are fewquadrupeds which do not far surpass us. The organ ofsmell, in particular, is often spread over a vast extent of surface,in a cavity occupying the greatest part of the head;so that the perceptions of this sense must be infinitely diversified.For a summary of the doctrines of Drs. Gall and Spurzhelm, I beg leaveto refer the reader to an account which I drew, up, many years ago, for theEncyclopaedia Britannica, and which composed the article "Cranioscopy"4n the last supplement to that work, edited by Mr. Napier.FUNCTIONS OF THE BRAIN. 399Bats have been supposed to possess a peculiar, or sixthsense, enabling them to perceive the situations of external objectswithout the aid either of vision or of touch. The principalfacts upon which this opinion has been founded werediscovered by Spallanzani, who observed that these animalswould fly about rapidly in the darkest chambers, althoughvarious obstacles were purposely placed in their way, withoutstriking against or even touching them. They continuedtheir flight with the same precision as before, threading theirway through the most intricate passages, when their eyeswere completely covered, or even destroyed. Mr. Jurine,who made many experiments on these animals, concludesthat neither the senses of touch, of hearing or of smell, werethe media through which bats obtain perceptions of the presenceand situation of surrounding bodies; but he ascribesthis extraordinary faculty to the great sensibility of the skinof the upper jaw, mouth, and external ear, which are furnishedwith very large nerves.*The wonderful acuteness and power of discriminationwhich many animals exercise in the discovery and selectionof their food, has often suggested the existence of new senses,different from those which we possess, and conveying peculiarand unknown powers of perception. An organ, whichappears to perform some sensitive function of this kind, hasbeen discovered in a great number of quadrupeds by Jacobson.t In the human skeleton there exists a small perforationin the roof of the mouth, just behind the sockets of theincisor teeth, forming a communication with the under andfore part of the nostrils. This canal is perceptible only inthe dried bones; for, in the living body, it is completelyclosed by the membrane lining the mouth, which sends aprolongation into it: but in quadrupeds, this passage is perviouseven during life, and is sometimes of considerablewidth. Jacobson found, on examining; this structure withsir Anthony Carlisle attributes this power to the extreme delicacy ofhearing in tjiis animal.•f See Annales du Museej xviii. 412.400 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.attention, that the canal led to two glandular organs of anoblong shape, and enclosed in cartilaginous tubes: each glandhas in its centre a cavity which communicates above withthe general cavity of the nostrils. These organs lie concealedin a hollow groove within the bone, where they arecarefully protected from injury: and they receive a greatnumber of nerves and blood vessels, resembling in this respectthe organs of the senses. Their structure is the same inall quadrupeds in which they have been examined; but theyare largest in the family of the Rodeniia, and next in thatof the Ruminant; in the Horse, they are still very large,but the duct is not pervious; while, in carnivorous quadrupeds,they are on a smaller scale. In Monkeys, they maystill be traced, although extremely small, appearing to formalink in the chain of gradation connecting this tribe withthe human race, in whom every vestige of these organs hasdisappeared, excepting the aperture in the bones already noticed.Any use that can be attributed to these singularlyconstructed organs must evidently be quite conjectural.The ample supply of nerves which they receive would indicatetheir performing some sensitive function; and their situationwould point them out as fitting them for the appreciationof objects presented to the mouth to be used asfood; hence it is probable that the perceptions they conveyhave a close affinity with those of smell and taste.The larger cartilaginous fishes, as Sharks and Rays, havebeen supposed by Treviranus to be endowed with a peculiarsense, from their having an organ of a tubular structure on thetop of the head, and immediately under the skin; Roux considersit as conveying sensations intermediate between thoseof touch and hearing; while De Blainville and Jacobson regardit merely as the organ of a finer touch.The perceptive powers of Insects must embrace a verydifferent, and, in many respects, more extended sphere thanour own. These animals manifest by their actions that theyperceive and anticipate atmospheric changes, of which oursenses give us no information. It is evident, indeed, thatPERCEPTIONS OF ANIMALS. 401the impressions made by external objects on their sentientorgans must be of a nature widely different from those whichthe same objects communicate to ourselves. While with regardto distance and magnitude our perceptions take thewidest range, and appear infinitely extended when comparedwith those of insects, yet they may, in other respects,be greatly inferior. The delicate discrimination of the moresubtle affections of matter is, perhaps, compatible only with aminute scale of organization. Thus, the varying degrees ofmoisture or dryness of the atmosphere, the continual changesin its pressure, the fluctuations in its electrical state, and variousother physical conditions, may be objects of distinctperception to these minute animals. Organs may exist in them,appropriated to receive impressions, of which we can haveno idea; and opening avenues to various kinds of knowledge,to which we must ever remain utter strangers. Art, it istrue, has supplied us with instruments for discovering andmeasuring many of the properties of matter, which our unassistedsenses are inadequate to observe. But neither ourthermometers, nor our electroscopes, our hygrometers, norour galvanometers, however skilfully devised or elaboratelyconstructed, can vie in delicacy and perfection with that refinedapparatus of the senses which nature has bestowed onthe minutest insect. There is reason to believe, as Dr. Wollastonhas show-n, that the hearing of insects comprehends arange of perceptions very different from that of the samesense in the larger animals; and that a class of vibrations toorapid to excite our auditory nerves, is perfectly audible tothem. Sir John Herschel has also very clearly proved that,if we admit the truth of the undulatory theory of light, it iseasy to conceive how the limits of visible colour may beestablished; for if there be no nervous fibres in unison withvibrations, more or less frequent than certain limits, suchvibrations, though they reach the retina, will produce nosensation. Thus, it is perfectly possible that insects, andother animals, may be incapable of being affected by any ofthe colours which we perceive; while they may be susceptible.II. 51408 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.able of receiving distinct luminous impressions from a classof vibrations which, applied to our visual organs, excite nosensation.* The functions of the antennae, which, thoughof various forms, are organs universally met with in this classof animals, must be of great importance, though obscurelyknown; for insects when deprived of them appear to be quitelost and bewildered.The Torpedo the Gymnotus, and several other fishes,are furnished with an electrical apparatus, resembling theVoltaic battery, which they have the power of charging anddischarging at pleasure. An immense profusion of nervesis distributed upon this organ; and we can hardly doubt thatthey communicate perceptions, with regard to electricity,very different from any that we can feel. In general, indeed,it may be remarked, that the more an organ of sensediffers in its structure from those which we ourselves possess,the more uncertain must be our knowledge of its functions.We may, without any great stretch of fancy, conceiveourselves placed in the situation of the beasts of the forest,and comprehend what are the feelings and motives whichanimate the quadruped and the bird. But how can wetransport ourselves, even in imagination, into the dark recessesof the ocean, which we know are tenanted by multitudinoustribes of fishes, zoophytes, and mollusca? How canwe figure to ourselves the sensitive existence of the worm orthe insect, organized in so different a manner to ourselves,and occupying so remote a region in the expanse of creation?How can we venture to speculate on the perceptions of theanimalcule, whose world is a drop of fluid, and whose fleetingexistence, chequered, perhaps, by various transformations,is destined to run its course in a few hours?Confining our inquiries, then, to the more intelligible intellectualphenomena displayed by the higher animals, wereadily trace a gradation which corresponds with the developmentof the central nervous organ, or brain. That theEncyclopedia Metropolitan, Article " Light."PERCEPTIONS OP ANIMALS. 403comparison may be fairly made, however, it is necessary todistinguish those actions which are the result of the exerciseof the intellectual faculties, from those which are calledinstinctive, and are referable to other sources. Innumerableare the occasions in which the actions of animals appearto be guided by a degree of sagacity not derivable from experience,and apparently implying a foreknowledge of events,which neither experience nor reflection could have led themto anticipate. We cannot sufficiently admire the providentcare displayed by nature in the preservation both of the individualand of the species, which she has intrusted, not tothe slow and uncertain calculations of prudence, but to innatefaculties, prompting, by an unerring impulse, to theperformance of the actions required for those ends. Wesee animals providing against the approach of winter, theeffects of which they have never experienced, and employingvarious means of defence against enemies they have neverseen. The parent consults the welfare of the offspringshe is destined never to behold; and the young discovers andpursues without a guide that species of food which is bestadapted to its nature. All these unexplained, and, perhaps,inexplicable facts, we must content ourselves with classingunder the head o^ instinct, a name which is, in fact, but theexpression of our ignorance of the nature of that agency, ofwhich wee cannot but admire the ultimate effects, while wesearch in vain for the efficient cause.In all the inferior orders of the animal creation, where instinctsare multiplied, while the indications of intellect arefeeble, the organ which performs the office of the brain iscomparatively small. The sensitive existence of these animalsappears to be circumscribed within the perceptions ofthe moment, and their voluntary actions have referencechiefly to objects which are present to the sense. In proportionas the intellectual faculties of animals are multiplied,and embrace a wider sphere, additional magnitude and complicationof structure are given to the nervous substancewhich is the organ of those faculties. The greater the power404 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.of combining ideas, and of retaining them in the memory,the greater do we find the development of the cerebral hemispheres.These parts of the brain are comparativelysmall, as we have seen, in fishes, reptiles, and the greaternumber of birds; but in the mammalia they are expanded inadegree nearly proportional to the extent of memory, sagacityand docility. In man, in whom all the faculties ofsense and intellect are so harmoniously combined, the brainis not only' the largest in size, but beyond all comparison themost complicated in its structure.*A large brain has been bestowed on man, evidently withthe design that he should exercise superior powers of intellect;the great distinguishing features of which are the capacityfor retaining an immense variety of impressions, andthe strength, the extent, and vast range of the associatingprinciple, which combines them into groups, and forms theminto abstract ideas. Yet the lower animals also possess theirshare of memory, and of reason: they are capable of acquiringknowledge from experience; and, on some rare occasions,of devising expedients for accomplishing particularends. But still this knowledge and these efforts of intellectare confined within very narrow limits; for nature has assignedboundaries to the advancement of the lower animals,which they can never pass. If one favoured individual beselected for a special education, some additional share of intelligencemay, perhaps, with infinite pains, be infused; butthe improvement perishes with that individual, and is whollylost to the race. By far the greater portion of that knowledgewhich it imports them to possess is the gift of nature,who has wisely implanted such instinctive impulses as arenecessary for their preservation. Man, also, is born withinstincts, but they are few in number, compared with those• All the parts met with in the brain of animals exist also in the brain ofman; while several of those fovmd in man are either extremely small, or altogetherabsent in the brains of the lower animals. Soemmen-ing has enumeratedno less than fifteen material anatomical differences between the humanbrain and that of the ape.PERCEPTIONS OP Animals. 405of the lower animals; and, unless cultivated and improvedby reason and education, would, of themselves, produce butinconsiderable results. That of which the effects are mostconspicuous, and which is the foundation of all that is nobleand exalted in our nature, is the instinct of Sympathy, Theaffections of the lower animals, even between individuals ofthe same species, are observable only in a few instances: forin general they are indifferent to each other's joys or sufferings,and regardless of the treatment experienced by theircompanions. The attachment, indeed, of the mother to heroffspring, as long as its wants and feebleness require her aidand protection, is as powerful in the lower animals, as in thehuman species: but its duration, in the former case, is confined,even in the most social tribes, to the period of helplessness;and the animal instinct is not succeeded, as in man,by the continued intercourse of affection and kind offices,and those endearing relations of kindred, which are thesources of the purest happiness of human life.While Nature has, apparently, frowned on the birth ofman, and brought him into the world weak, naked, and defenceless,unprovided with the means of subsistence, andexposed on every side to destruction, she has, in reality, implantedin him the germ of future greatness. The helplessnessof the infant calls forth the fostering care and tenderestaffections of the mother, and lays the deep foundationsof the social union. The latent energies of his mindand body are successively, though slowly developed. Whilethe vital organs are actively engaged in the execution oftheir different offices, while the digestive apparatus is exercisingits powerful chemistry, while myriads of minute arteries,veins, and absorbents are indefatigably at work inbuilding and modelling this complex frame, the sentientprinciple is no less assiduously and no less incessantly employed.From the earliest dawn of sensation it is ever busyin arranging, in combining, and in strengthening the impressionsit receives. Wonderful as is the formation of thebodily fabric, and difficult as it is to collect its history, still406 THE SENSORIAL FUNCTIONS.more marvellous is the progressive construction of the humanmind, and still more arduous the task of tracing thefiner threads which connect the delicate web of its ideas,which fix its fleeting perceptions, and which establish thevast system of its associations, and of following the long seriesof gradations by which its affections are expanded, purified,and exalted, and the soul prepared for its higher destinationin a future stage of existence.Here, indeed, we perceive a remarkable interruption tothat regular gradation, which we have traced in all otherparts of the animal series; for between man and the mostsagacious of the brutes there intervenes an immense chasm,of which we can hardly estimate the magnitude. The functionswhich are purely vital, and are necessary for even thelowest degree of sensitive existence, are possessed equallyby all animals: in the distribution of the faculties of meresensation a greater inequality may be perceived: the intellectualfaculties, again, are of a more refined and nobler character,and being less essential to animal life, are dealt outbynature with a more sparing and partial hand. Betweenthe two extremities of the scale we find an infinite numberof intermediate degrees. The more exalted faculties arepossessed exclusively by man, and constitute the source ofthe immense superiority he enjoys over the brute creation,which so frequently excels him in the perfection of subordinatepowers. In strength and swiftness he is surpassedby many quadrupeds. In vain may he wish for the powerof flight possessed by the numerous inhabitants of air. Hemay envy that range of sight which enables the bird to discernfrom a height at which it is itself invisible to our eyes,the minutest objects on the surface of the earth. He may-regretthe dulness of his own senses, when he adverts tothe exquisite scent of the hound, or the acute hearing of thebat. While the delicate perceptions of the lower animalsteach them to seek the food which is salutary, and avoidthat which is injurious, man alone seems stinted in his powersof discrimination, and is compelled to gather instructionINTELLECTUAL FACULTIES OP MAN. 407from a painful and hazardous experience. But if nature hascreated him thus apparently helpless, and denied him thoseinstincts with which she has so liberally furnished the restof her offspring, it was only to confer upon him gifts of infinitelyhigher value. While in acuteness of sense he issurpassed by inferior animals, in the powers of intellect hestands unrivalled. In the fidelity and tenacity with whichimpressions are retained in his memory, in the facility andstrength with which they are associated, in grasp of comprehension,in extent of reasoning, in capacity of progressiveimprovement, he leaves all other animals at an immeasurabledistance behind. He alone enjoys in perfection the giftof utterance; he alone is able to clothe his thoughts in words;in him alone do we find implanted the desire of examiningevery department of nature, and the power of extending hisviews beyond the confines of this globe. On him alone havethe high privileges been bestowed of recognising and ofadoring the Power, the Wisdom, and the Goodness of theAuthor of the Universe, from whom his being has emanated,to whom he owes all the blessings which attend it,and by whom he has been taught to look forward to brighterskies and to purer and more exalted conditions of existence.Heir to this high destination, Man discards all alliancewith the beasts that perish; confiding in the assurancethat the dissolution of his earthly frame destroys not thegerm of immortality which has been implanted within him,and by the development of which the great scheme of Providencehere commenced, will be carried on, in a futurestate of being, to its final and perfect consummation.408PART IV.THE REPRODUCTIVE FUNCTIONS.CHAPTER I.REPRODUCTION.Limits have been assigned to the duration of all livingbeings. The same power to whom they owe their creation,their organization, and their endowments, has also subjectedthem to the inexorable Law of Mortality; and has ordainedthat the series of actions which characterize the state of life,shall continue for a definite period only, and shall then terminate.The very same causes which, at the earlier stagesof their existence, promoted their development and growth,and which, at a maturer age, sustained the vigour and energiesof the system, produce, by their continued and silentoperation, gradual changes in the balance of the functions,and, at a later period, effect the slow demolition of thefabric they had raised, and the successive destruction of thefaculties they had originally nurtured and upheld.* Withthe germs of life, in all organized structures, are conjoinedthe seeds of decay and of death; and however great maybethe powers of their vitality, we know that those powersare finite, and that a time must come when they will be ex-seethe article " Age' in the Encyclopaedia of Practical Medicine, whereI have enlarged on this subject.Reproduction. 409pended, and when their renewal, in that individual, is nolonger possible.But although the individual perishes, Nature has takenspecial care that the race shall be constantly preserved, by-providingfor the production of new individuals, each springingfrom its predecessor in endless perpetuity. The processby which this formation, or rather this apparent creation,of a living being is effected, surpasses the utmostpowers of the human comprehension. No conceivable combinationsof mechanical, or of chemical powers, bear theslightest resemblance, or the most remote analogy, to organicreproduction, or can afford the least clew to the solutionof this dark and hopeless enigma. We must be contentto observe and generalize the phenomena, in silentwonder at the marvellous manifestation of express contrivanceand design, exhibited in this department of theeconomy of created beings.Throughout the whole, both of the vegetable and animalworld. Nature has shown the utmost solicitude to securenot only the multiplication of the species, but also the disseminationof their numbers over every habitable and accessibleregion of the globe, and has pursued various plans forthe accomplishment of these important objects.The simplest of all the modes of multiplication consistsin the spontaneous division of the body of the parent intotwo or more parts; each part, when separated, becoming adistinct individual, and soon acquiring the size and shape ofthe parent. We meet with frequent examples of this processof fissiparoiis generation as it is termed among theinfusory animalcules. Many species of Monads, for instance,which are naturally of a globular shape, exhibit at acertain period of their development a slight circular grooveround the middle of their bodies, which by degrees becomingdeeper, changes their form to that of an hour-glass;and the middle part becoming still more contracted, theypresent the appearance of two balls, united by a mere point.The monads in this state are seen swimming irregularly inVol. II. 52THE REPRODUCTIVE FUNCTIONS.the fluid, as if animated by two different volitions; and, apparentlyfor the purpose of tearing asunder the last connectingfibres, darting through the thickest of the crowd of surroundinganimalcules; and the moment this slender ligamentis broken, each is seen moving away from the other, andbeginning its independent existence. This mode of separationis illustrated by Fig. 462, representing the successivechanges of form during this progress. In this animalculethe division is transverse, but in others, for example in the462 Q8 3oVorticella, (as shown in Fig. 463,) and in most of the largerspecies, the line of separation is longitudinal. Each animalcule,thus formed by the subdivision of its predecessor, soongrows to the size which again determines a farther spontaneoussubdivision into two other animalcules; these, incourse of time, themselves undergo the same process, andso on, to an indefinite extent. The most singular circumstanceattending this mode of multiplication is that it is impossibleto pronounce which of the new individuals thusformed out of a single one should be regarded as the parent,and which as the offspring, for they are both of equal size.Unless, therefore, we consider the separation of the parts ofthe parent animal to constitute the close of its individual existence,we must recognise an unbroken continuity in thevitality of the animal, thus transmitted in perpetuity fromthe original stem, throughout all succeeding generations.This, however, is one of those metaphysical subtleties forwhich the subject of reproduction affords abundant scope,but which it would be foreign to the object of this work todiscuss.Reproduction. 411It is in the animal kingdom only that we meet with instancesof this spontaneous division of an organic being intoparts, where each reproduces an individual of the same species.All plants, however, are capable of being multipliedby artificial divisions of this kind; thus, a tree may be dividedlongitudinally into a great number of portions, orslips, as they are called, any one of which, if planted separatelyand supplied with nourishment, may continue togrow, and may, in time, reproduce a tree similar in all respectsto the one from which it had originated. This inherentpower of reproduction exists even in smaller fragmentsof a plant; for, when all circumstances are favourable, a stemwill shoot from the upper end of the fragment, and rootswill be sent forth from its lower end; and, ultimately, a completeplant will be formed.* These facts, which are wellknown to agriculturists, exhibit only the capabilities of vegetativepower under circumstances which do not occur inthe natural course of things, but have been the effect of humaninterference.Reproductive powers of a similar kind are exhibited veryextensively in the lower departments of the animal kingdom.The Hydra, or fresh water polype, is capable of indefinitemultiplication by simple division: thus, if it be cutasunder transversely, the part containing the head soon suppliesitself with a tail; and the detached tail soon shoots fortha new head, with a new set of tentacula. If any of the ten-macula,or any portion of one of them, be cut off, the mutilateAmong the conditions necessary for these evolutions of organs are, first,the previous accumulation of a store of nourishment in the detached fragment,adequate to supply the growth of the new parts; and, secondly, thepresence of a sufficient quantity of circulating sap, as a vehicle for the transmissionof that nourishment. It has been found that when these conditionsai-e present, even the leaf of an orange tree, when planted in a favourablesoil, sends down roots, and is capable of giving origin to an entire tree. Accordingto the observations of Miranda, the leaf of the Bryophyllum, whensimply laid on moist ground, strikes out roots, which quickly penetrate intothe soiL (De Candle, Physiologic Vegetate, ii. 677.) The leaves of themonocotyledonous plants often present the same phenomenon.412 THE REPRODUCTIVE FUNCTIONS.tion is soon repaired; and if the whole animal be dividedinto a great number of pieces, each fragment acquires, in ashort time, all the parts which are wanting to render it acomplete individual. The same phenomena are observed,and nearly to the same extent, in the Planaria. The *asturias,the Actiyiia, and some of the lower species of angelica,as the Nais, are also capable of being multiplied by artificialdivisions, each segment having the power of supplyingothers, and containing within itself a kind of separateand individual vitality.A power of more partial regeneration of mutilated partsby new growths, which is very analogous to that of completereproduction, exists in the higher orders of animals,though it does not extend to the entire formation of two individualsout of one. The claws, the feet, and the antennaeof the Crustacea, and the limbs of the Arachnida, are restored,when lost, by a fresh growth of these organs. If thehead of a Snail be amputated, the whole of that part of theanimal, including the telescopic eyes, and other organs ofsense, will be reproduced. Even among the Vertebrata wefind instances of these renovations of mutilated parts; as happenswith respect to the fins of fishes: for Broussonet foundthat in whatever direction they are cut, the edges easilyunite; and the rays themselves are reproduced, provided thesmallest part of their base has been left. The tails of Newts,and of some species of Lizards, will grow again, if lost: and,what is more remarkable, the eyes themselves, with all theircomplex apparatus of coats and humours, will, if removed,be replaced by the growth of new eyes as perfect as the former.We have seen that the teeth of Sharks and otherfishes are renewed with the utmost facility, when by accidentthey have been lost. Among Mammalia, similarpowers exist, although they are restricted within much narrowerlimits; as is exemplified in the formation of new bones,replacing those which have perished. When we advert tothe numberless instances of the reparation of injuries happeningto various parts of our own frame, we have abun-Reproduction. 413cant reason to admire and be grateful for the wise and bountifulprovisions which nature has made for meeting* thesecontingencies.The multiplication of the species by buds, or Gemmipa-rous reproduction, is exemplified on the largest scale in thevegetable creation. Almost every point of the surface of aplant appears to be capable of giving rise to a new shoot,which, when fully developed, exactly resembles the parentstock, and may, therefore, be regarded as a separate organicbeing. The origin of buds is wholly beyond the sphere ofour observation; for they arise from portions of matter toominute to be cognizable to our organs, with every assistancewhich the most powerful microscopes can supply. Theseimperceptible atoms, from which organic beings take theirrise, are called germs.Vegetable germs are of two kinds; those which producestems, and those which produce roots: and although bothmay be evolved from every part of the plant, the former areusually developed at the axilla of the leaves; that is, at theangles of their junction with the stem; and also at the extremitiesof the fibres of the stems; their development beingdetermined by the accumulation of nourishment aroundthem. They first produce buds, which expanding, and puttingforth roots, assume the form of shoots; and the successiveaccumulation of shoots, which remain attached to theparent plant,* and to each other, is what constitutes a tree.What are called knots in wood are the result of germs,which, in consequence of the accumulation of nourishmentaround them, are developed to a certain extent, and thenIn some rare instances the shoots are removed to a distance from the parentplant, by a natural process: this occurs in some creeping plants, whichpropagate themselves by the horizontal extension of their branches on theground where that dip, and strike out new roots, giving rise to stems independentof the original plant. This also sometimes happens in the case oftuberous roots, as the potato, which contain a number of germs, surroundedby nutritive matter, ready to be developed when circumstances are favourable.These portions are called eyes,- and each of them, when plantedseparately, are readily evolved, and give rise to an individual plant.414 THE REPRODUCTIVE FUNCTIONS.cease to grow. The Lemma, or common Duckweed, which,consists of a small circular leaf, floating on the surface ofstagnant pools, presents a singular instance of the developmentof germs from the edges of the leaves, and the subsequentseparation of the new plant thus formed. In this respectthe process is analogous to the natural mode of multiplicationmet with in the lower orders of Zoophytes, such asthe Hydra. At the earliest period at which the young ofthis animal is visible, it appears like a small tubercle, or bud,rising from the surface of the parent hydra: it grows in thissituation, and remains attached for a considerable period; atfirst deriving its nourishment, as well as its mechanical support,from the parent; then occasionally stretching forth itstentacula, and learning the art of catching and of swallowingits natural prey. The tube, which constitutes its stomach,at first communicates by a distinct opening with thatof its parent: but this opening afterwards closes; and the filamentsby which it is connected with the parent becomingmore and more slender, at length break, and the detachedhydra immediately movfcs away, and commences its careerof independent existence. This mode of multiplication, inits first period, corresponds exactly with the production ofa vegetable by buds; and may therefore be classed amongthe instances of gemmiparous reproduction; although at a laterstage, it differs from it in the complete detachment ofthe offspring from the parent.Another plan of reproduction is that in which the germsare developed in the interior of the animal, assuming, at theearliest period when they become animated, the form of theparent. In this case they are termed gemmules instead ofbuds. This mode of reproduction is exemplified in the Volvox,which, as we have already seen, is an infusorial animalculeof a spherical form, exhibiting incessant revolving movements.*The germs of this animal are developed, in greatnumbers, in its interior, having a globular shape, and visible,• Vol. i. p. 139. This animal is delineated in Fig. 79.REPRODUCTION. 415by the aid of the microscope, through the transparent covering;and while yet retained within the body of the parent,other still minuter globules are developed within these,constituting a third generation of these animals. After acertain period, the young, which have thus been formed,escape by the bursting of the parent volvox, which, in consequence,perishes. Similar phenomena are presented bymany of the Infusoria. In some of the Entozoa, likewise,as in the Hydatid, the young are developed within the parent;and this proceeds successively for an indefinite numberof generations.* In most cases of the spontaneous evolution• The mode in which infusory animalcules are produced and multiplied isinvolved in much obscurity. Many distinguished naturalists, adopting" theviews of Buffon, have regarded them as the product of an inherent powerbelonging to a certain class of material particles, which, in circumstances favourableto its operation, tends to form these minute organizations, and inthis manner they explain how the same organic matter which had composedformer living aggregates, on the dissolution of their union, reappears undernew forms of life, and gives rise to the phenomenon of innumerable animalcules,starting into being, and commencing a new, but fleeting career of existence.Yet the analogy of every other department of the animal and vegetablekingdoms is directly opposed to the supposition that any living beingcan arise without its having been originally derived from an individual of thesame species as itself, and of which it once formed a part. The difficultywhich the hypothesis of the spontaneous production of infusory animalculesprofesses to remove, consists in our inability to trace the pre-existence of thegerms in the fluid, where these animalcules are found to arise; and to followthe operations of nature in these regions of infinite minuteness. The discoveriesof Ehrenberg relative to the organization of the Rotifera go far towardsplacing these diminutive beings more on a level, both in structure andin functions, with the larger animals, of whose history and economy we havea more familiar and certain knowledge, and in superseding the hypothesisabove referred to, by showing that the bold assumption on which it rests, isnot required for the explanation of the observed phenomena. In many ofthese animalcules, he has seen the ova excluded in the form of extremelyminute globules, the 12,000th of an inch in diameter. When these hadgrown to the size of the tooth of an inch, or seven times their original diameter,they were distinctly seen to excite currents, and to swallow food.The same diligent observer detected the young of the Rotifer vulgaris, perfectlyformed, moving in the interior of the parent animalcule, and excludedin a living state, thus constituting them viviparous animals, as the former were416 THE Reproductive FUNCTIONS.of gemmules within the parent, channels are provided fortheir exit: but the gemmules of the Actinia force their way-throughthe sides of the body, which readily open to givethem passage; after which, the lacerated part soon heals.In the instances which have now passed under our review,the progeny is, at first, in direct communication with its parent,and does not receive the special protection of membranousenvelopes, containing a store of nourishment for itssubsequent growth. But in all the more perfect structures,both of animals and vegetables, the germ is provided withauxiliary coverings of this kind, the whole together composingwhat is called a seed or an ovum: the former termbeing usually applied to vegetable, and the latter to animalproductions; and, in both cases, the organ which originallycontained them is termed the ovary.The formation and evolution of vegetable seeds take place,not indiscriminately, at every point, as we have seen is thecase with simple germs, but only in particular parts of theplant. The Flies, or fern tribes, may be taken as examplesof this mode of reproduction, the seeds being formed atthe under surface of the leaves, apparently by a simple processof evolution; and when detached and scattered on theground, being farther developed into a plant similar to theparent. The Linnaean class of Cryptogamia includes all theplants coming under this description. In Animals, likewise,it is only in the particular organs termed ovaries, that ovaare formed, and they are generally divided into compartments,the whole being enclosed in a membranous covering,bearing a great resemblance to the seed-capsules of plants.The propagation of living beings by means of ova or seeds,is a process of a totally diflferent class from their multiplicationby mere slips or buds; and the products of the formeroviparous. Other species, again, imitate the hydra, in being what is termedgemmiparmiSy that is, producing gemmules (like the budding of a plant,)which shoot forth from the side of the parent, and are soon provided withcilia, enabling them, when separated, to provide for their own subsistence,although they are of a very diminutive size when thus cast off.REPRODUCTION. 417retain less of the peculiar characters of the individual fromwhich they spring, than those of the latter. This is remarkablyexemplified in the case of orchard trees, such asapples and pears; for all the trees which derive their originfrom shoots, or grafts from the same individual, partake ofthe same properties, and produce a fruit of the same flavourand qualities; whereas, trees of the same species, which growfrom seed, have the characters of distinct individuals, andlosing all the peculiarities that may have distinguished theparent, revert to the original type of the species to whichthey belong. Thus, from the seeds of the golden pippin, ornonpareil, arise trees bearing the common crab apple, whichis the natural fruit of the species. By continued gratings,after a long period, the vitality of the particular variety isgradually exhausted, and the grafts no longer bear fruit.This has already happened with regard to the two varietiesof apples just mentioned. For these curious facts, and thetheory which explains them, we are indebted to the observationand sagacity of Mr. Andrew Knight.*The plans hitherto noticed are suited only to the simplestof vegetable or animal beings: but for the continuance of thehigher races in both kingdoms of nature there is required amore complex procedure. The latent germ, contained inthe seed or ovum, is never developed beyond a certain point,unless it be vivified by the action of a peculiar fluid, whichis the product of other organs. Thus, there are establishedtwo distinct classes of structures; the office of the one beingthe formation of the seed or ovum, and that of the other theproduction of the vivifying fluid. The effect of this vivifyingfluid upon the dormant germ is termed Fecundation;and the germ, when fecundated, receives the name ofEmbryo.The modes in which the fecundation of the germ is accomplishedare exceedingly various in different classes oforganized beings. In all Phanerogamous plants (so named• See his various papers in the Philosophical Transactions.Vol. II. 53418 THE REPRODUCTIVE FUNCTIONS.in contradistinction to those which are Cryptogamous,) thewhole of the double apparatus required for reproduction iscontained in \he flower. One set of organs contains the rudimentof the seed, enclosed in various envelopes, of whichthe assemblage constitutes an ovary, and to which is appendeda tube, (the pistil,) terminated by a kind of spon-giole, (the stigma.) The fecundating organs are the stamens,which are columns, (ov filaments,) placed generallynear and parallel to the pistil, and terminated by a glandularorgan, (the anther.) This organ, when mature, contains,enclosed in a double envelope, a fine powder, (thepollen,) consisting of very minute vesicles, filled with a viscousliquor, (the fovilla,), in which are seen extremely smallgranules. Fecundation takes place by a portion of the pollenbeing received by the stigma, and conveyed through thetubular pistil to the seed, which it impregnates by impartingto it the fluid it contains.By far the greater number of plants composing the vegetablekingdom have these two sets of organs contained inthe same flower; or at least in flowers belonging to the sameindividual plant. In the animal kingdom this arrangementis also adopted, but only in a comparatively small numberof tribes. In these the ova, in their passage from the ovary,along a canal termed the oviduct, are fecundated by receivinga secretion from another set of organs in the same system,which is conveyed by a duct, opening into the oviductin some part of its course. In a limited number of plants,composing the class Dioecia, the individuals of the samespecies are distinguished by their bearing flowers which containonly one of the kinds of reproductive apparatus: so thatthe stamens and the pistils are situated on separate plants:and the impregnation of the ovaries in the latter, can be effectedonly by the transference of the pollen from the former.A similar separation of offices is established amongall the higher classes of the animal kingdom. In most Fishes,and in all Batrachian reptiles, the ova are impregnatedafter their expulsion from the body: in all other cases theirReproduction. 419impregnation is internal, and their subsequent developmenttakes place in one or other of the four following ways.1. The ovum, when defended by a firm envelope, whichcontains a store of nutriment, is termed an egg, and is depositedin situations most favourable for the development ofthe embryo; and also for its future support when it emergesfrom the egg. Birds, as is well known, produce eggs whichare incased in a calcareous shell, and hatch them by thewarmth they communicate by sitting on them with unweariedconstancy. All animals which thus lay eggs are termedoviparous.2. There are a few tribes, such as the Viper and the Salamander,whose eggs are never laid, but are hatched inthe interior of the parent; so that they bring forth livingoffspring, although originally contained in eggs. Such animalsare said to be Novo-viviparous. There are other tribes,again, which, according to circumstances, are either oviparous,or novo-viviparous: this is the case with the Shark.3. Viviparous animals are those in which no egg, properlyso called, is formed; but the ovum, after proceedingthrough the oviduct, sends out vessels, which form an attachmentto the interior of a cavity in the body of the parent,whence it draws nourishment, and therefore has attaineda considerable size at the time of its birth.4. Marsupial dimmd\s are those, which, like the Kangaroo,and the Opossum, are provided with abdominal pouches,into which the young, born at a very early stage of development,are received, and nourished with milk, secreted fromglands contained within these pouches. As the young, bothin this and in the last case, are nourished with milk preparedby similar glands, or Mammae, the whole class of viviparousand marsupial animals has received, from this characteristiccircumstance, the name of Mammalia.{ 420 )CHAPTER II.ORGANIC DEVELOPMENT.Although the study of organic structures in their finishedstate must tend to inspire the most sublime conceptions ofthe Great Creator of this vast series of beings, extendingfrom the obscurest plant to the towering tenant of the forest,and from the lowest animalcule to the stately elephantand gigantic whale, there yet exists another department ofthe science of Nature, removed, indeed, from the gaze of ordinaryobservers, but presenting to the philosophic inquirersubjects not less replete with interest, and not less calculatedto exalt our ideas of the transcendent attributes of the Almighty.To a mind nurtured to reflection, these divine attributes,whether of power, of wisdom, or of beneficence,are no where manifested with greater distinctness, or arrayedin greater glory, than in the formation of these variousbeings, and in the progressive architecture of their wondrousfabric.Our attention has already been directed, in a former partof these inquiries, to the successive changes which constitutethe metamorphoses of winged insects,* and of Batrachianreptiles, phenomena which arc too striking to haveescaped the notice of the earliest naturalists: but the patientinvestigations of modern inquirers have led to discoveriesstill more curious, and have shown that all vertebrated those belonging to the higher classes, such as birds,and mammalia, not excepting man himself, undergo, in theearly stages of their development, a series of changes fullyas great and as remarkable as those which constitute the• The Researches of Nordmann, on different species of Lerns^a., havebrought to hg-ht the most singular succession of forms during the progress ofdevelopment of the same individual animal.ORGANIC DEVELOPMENT. 421transformations of inferior animals. They have also renderedit extremely probable that the organs of the system,instead of existing simultaneously in the germ, arise in regulatedsuccession, and are the results not of the mere expansionof pre-existing rudiments, but of a real formationby the union of certain elements; which elements are themselvessuccessively formed by the gradual coalescence orjuxtaposition of their constituent materials. On contemplatingthe infinitely lengthened chain of means and ends,and of causes and effects, which, during the constructionand assemblage of the numerous parts composing the animalmachine, are in constant operation, adapting them totheir various purposes, and combining them into one efficientand harmonious system, it is impossible not to be deeplyimpressed with the extent and the profoundness of theviews of Omniscient Providence, which far exceed the utmostboundaries of our vision, and surpass even the powersof the human imagination.*The clearest evidence of enlarged and provident designsmay be collected from observing the order in which thenascent organs are successively brought forwards, and addedto the growing fabric: such order appearing, in all cases, tobe that best calculated to secure the due performance of theirappointed functions, and to promote the general objects ofthe system. The apparatus first perfected is that which isimmediately necessary for the exercise of the vital actions,and which is therefore required for the completion of all theother structures; but provision is likewise made for the " Si Iron applique," says Cuvier, when speaking of the anatomy of insects,** a chaciine de ces species, par la pense, ce qu'il seront bien impossiblequ'un homme entreprit de verifier en effet pour toutes, une organisationa-peu-pres gale en complication a celia qui a cic d^crite dans lachenille par Lyonet, et tout recommend dans le hanneton sir M. Straus, et cependantplus ou moins different dans chaque insecte, Imagination coni-generaa concevoir quelque chose de cette richesse efFrayante, et de cesmillions de millions de parties, et de parties de parties, toujours correlatives,toujours en harraonie, qui constituent le grand ouvrage de la nature** (Histoiredes Progi-es des Sciences Naturelles, iv. 145.)422 THE REPRODUCTIVE FUNCTIONS.banishment of those parts which are to give mechanical supportto each organic system in proportion as it is formed;while the foundations are also preparing for endowments ofa higher kind, by the early development of the organs ofthe external senses, the functions of which so essentially ministerto the future expansion of the intellectual faculties,embracing a wide range of perceptions and of active powers.Thus, in the early, as well as in all the subsequent periodsof life, the objects of nature vary as the respective necessitiesof the occasion change At first, all the energies of vitalityare directed to the raising of the fabric, and to the extensionof those organs which are of greatest immediateutility; but still having a prospective view to farther andmore important ends. For the accomplishment of this primaryobject, unremitting exertions are made, commensuratewith the magnitude of the design, and giving rise to a quicksuccession of varied forms, both with regard to the shape ofeach individual organ, and to the general aspect of the wholeassemblage.In the phenomena of their early evolution, Plants andAnimals present a striking contrast, corresponding to essentialdifferences in the respective destinations of these twoorders of beings. The primary object of vegetable structuresappears to be the establishment of the functions of nutrition;and we accordingly find that whenever the seed beginsto germinate, the first indication of development is theappearance of the part called the phcmula, which is a collectionof feathery fibres, bursting from the enveloping capsuleof the germ, and which, whatever may have been itsoriginal position, proceeds immediately to extend itself verticallyupwards; while, at the same time, slender filaments,or radishes, shoot out below to form the roots. Thus earlyare means provided for the absorption and the aeration ofthe nutrient matter, which is to constitute the materials forthe subsequent growth of the plant, and for the support andprotection of the organs by which these processes are to becarried on. But animal vitality, being designed to ministerORGANIC DEVELOPMENT. 423to a higher order of endowments, is placed in subordinationto a class of functions, of which there exists no trace in vegetables,namely, those of the nervous system. By intentlywatching the earliest dawn of organic formation, in the transparentgelatinous molecule, for example, which, with itsthree investing pellicle, constitutes the embryo of a bird,(for the eggs of this class of animals best admit of our followingthis interesting series of changes,) the first opaqueobject discoverable by the eye is a small dark line, calledthe primitive trace, formed on the surface of the outermostpellicle. Two ridges then arise, one on each side of thisdark line;* and by the union of their edges, they soon formacanal, containing a deposite of semi-fluid matter, which, onacquiring greater consistence and opacity, discloses twoslender and delicate threads, placed side by side, and parallelto one another, but separated by a certain space. These arethe rudiments of the spinal cord, or the central organ ofnervous power, on the endowments of which the whole characterof the being to be formed depends. We may nextdiscern a number of parallel equidistant dots, arranged intwo rows, one on the outer side of each of the filaments alreadynoticed: these are the rudiments of the vertebrae, partswhich will afterwards be wanted for giving protection tothe spinal marrow, and which soon form, for this purpose,a series of rings embracing that organsThe appearance of the elementary filaments of the spinalcord is soon followed by the development of its upper oranterior extremity, from which there arise three vesicles,each forming white tubercles; these are the foundations ofthe future brain. The tubercles are first arranged in pairsand in a longitudinal series, like those we have seen constitutingthe permanent form of the brain in the inferior fishes:• The pUcsR primitive of Pander; the laminas dorsales of Baer. See apaper on embrj ology by Dr. Allen Thomson, in the Edin. New Phil. Journalfor 1830 and 1831.f These rings have, by speculative physiologists, been supposed to beanalogous to those which form the skeleton of the Annelida.424 THE REPRODUCTIVE FUNCTIONS.but. in birds, they are soon folded together into a roundedmass; while, in the mean time, the two filaments of thespinal cord have approached each other, and united into asingle column, the form which they ever after retain. Evenat this early period the rudiments of the organs of the highersenses, (first of the eye, and next of the labyrinth of the ear,)make their appearance: but, on the other hand, those of thelegs and wings do not show themselves until the bi*^in hasacquired greater solidity and development. The nerveswhich are to connect these organs of sensation and of motionwith the spinal cord and brain are formed afterwards,and are successively united to the nervous centres.'Although the plan of the future edifice has thus beensketched, and its foundations laid in the homogenous jellyby the simpler efforts of the vital powers, the elevation ofthe vast superstructure demands the aid of other machinery,fitted to collect and distribute the requisite materials. Here,then, we might, perhaps, expect to meet with a repetitionof those vegetative processes, having similar objects in view,and the adoption of analogous means for their accomplishment;but so widely different in character is the whole organiceconomy of these two orders of beings, that we perceiveno resemblance in the mechanism employed for theirformation. For the purposes of animal life the nutrientjuices must be brought into active circulation by means ofvessels extensively pervading the system. Nature, then,hastens to prepare this important hydraulic apparatus, withoutwhich the work of construction could not proceed.What may be the movements of the transparent nutrientjuices at the very earliest period must, of course, remainunknown to us, since we can only follow them by the eyeafter the nutritive substance they contain has become consolidatedin the form of opaque globules. These globulesare at first seen to meander through the mass, unconfined byinvesting vessels; presently, however, a circular vessel isdiscovered, formed by the foldings of the membrane of theembryo, along which the fluids undulate backwards and for-organicDEVELOPMENT. 425wards, without any constancy.* A delicate net-work of vesselsis next formed in various parts of the area of the circle,which are seen successively to join by the formation of communicatingbranches, and ultimately to compose largertrunks, so as to establish a more general system of vascularorganization. But increased power for carrying on this extendedcirculation will soon be wanted; and for this purposethere must be provided a central organ of propulsion, orheart, the construction of which is now commenced, at acentral point, oy the folding inwards of a lamina of the middlemembrane, forming first a simple groove, but, after atime, converted, by the union of its outer edges, into a kindof sac, which is soon extended into a longitudinal tubesThe next object is to bring this tube, or rudimental heart,into communication with the neighbouring vascular trunks,and this is effected by their gradual elongation, till their cavitiesmeet, and are joined; one set of trunks (the futureveins,) first uniting with the anterior end of the tube; andthen another set (the future arteries,) joining its other end.The addition of this central tube to the vessels previouslyformed completes the continuity of their course: so that theuniform circulation of the blood is established in the directionin which it is ever after to flow; and we may now recognisethis central organ as the heart, which, under thename of the punctum sapiens, testifies by its quick andregular pulsations that it has already begun to exerciseits appropriate function. It is long, however, before itacquires the form which it is permanently to retain; forfrom being at first a mere lengthened tube, presenting threedilatations, which are the cavities of the future auricle, ventricle,and bulb of the aorta, it assumes in process of time arounded shape, by the folding of its parts, the whole of♦ These phenomena are similar to those which were noticed as presentedby the larvae of some insects and other inferior animals.f The discovery of this fact is due to Pander. See also the works of Rolando,Wolff, Provost and Dumas, and Serres.sol. II. 54■426 THE REPRODUCTIVE FUNCTIONS.which are coiled, as it were, into a Mot; hy which meansthe different cavities acquire relative situations more nearlycorresponding to their positions in the developed andfinished organ.The blood vessels, in like manner, undergo a series ofchanges quite as considerable as those of the heart, and totallyaltering their arrangement and distribution. Serresmaintains that the primitive coalition of all the organs, eventhose which are generally considered as single, is that of beingdouble, or being formed in pairs; one on the right, andanother exactly similar to it on the left of the middle, ormesial plane, as if each were the reflected image of theothers Such is obviously the permanent condition of allthe organs of. sensation, and also of the apparatus for locomotion:and it has just been shown that those portions of thenervous system which are situated in the mesial plane, suchas the spinal cord and the brain, consisted originally of twoseparate sets of parts, which are brought together, and conjoinedinto single organs. In like manner we have seen thatthe constituent laminae of the heart are at first double, andafterwards form, by their union, a single cavity. The operationof the same law has been traced in the formation ofthose vascular trunks, situated in the mesial plane, which areusually observed to be single, such as the aorta and the venacava: for each were originally formed by the coalescence ofdouble vascular trunks running parallel to each both-er, andat first separated by a considerable interval; then approachingeach other, adhering together, and quickly converted,A remarkable exemplification of this tendency to symmetric duplicationof organs occurs in a very extraordinary parasitic animal, which usually attachesitself to the gills of the Cyprus bra?na, and which has been latelyexamined by Nordmann, and named by him th-e Diphzoon paradoxes fromits having the semblance of two distinct animals of a lengthened shape, eachbent at an obtuse angle, and joined together in the form of the letter X. Theright and left halves of this cross are perfectly similar in their organization,Slaving each a complete and independent system of vital organs, exceptingthat the two alimentary canals join at the centre of the cross to form a single'Vanity, ^r stomach. (Annales des Sciences Naturelles, xxx. o7^.)ORGANIC DEVELOPMENT. 427by the obliteration of the parts which are in contact, intosingle tubes, throughout ^ considerable portion of theirlength.*Nature, ever vigilant in her anticipations of the wants ofthe system, has accumulated round the embryo ample storesof nutritive matter, sufficient for maintaining the life of thechick, and for the building of its frame, while it continuesin the egg, and is, consequently, unable to obtain suppliesfrom without: yet, with the same foresight of future circumstances,she delays not, longer than is necessary for thecomplete establishment of the circulation, to construct theapparatus for digestion, on which the animal is to rely forthe means of support in after life. The alimentary canal, ofwhich no trace exists at an earlier period, is constructed bythe formation of two laminae, arising from folds of the innermostof the pellicle which invest the embryo; that is, onthe surface opposite to the one which has produced the spinalmarrow. These laminae, which are originally separate,and apart from one another, are brought together, and bythe junction or soldering of their opposite edges, formed intoa tubes which, from being, at first, uniform in diameter, afterwardsexpands into several dilated portions, correspondingwith the cavities of the stomach, crop, gizzard, &c., intowhich they are to be converted, when the time shall come fortheir active employment. These new organs are, however,even in this, their rudimental state, trained to the performanceof their proper offices, receiving into their cavities,through a tube temporarily provided for that purpose, thefluid of the yelk, and preparing nourishment from it.In the mean time, early provision is made for the aerationof the fluids by an extensive but temporary system ofThese facts were first observed by Serres (Annales des Sc. Nat. xxi. 8,)and their accuracy has been confirmed by the observations of Dr. Allen Thomson.In Reptiles this union of the two constituent trunks of the aorta is effectedonly at the posterior part, while the anterior portion remains permanentlydouble. (See Fig. 357, vol. ii. p. 197.)I Wolff is the author of this discover'.428 THE REPRODUCTIVE FUNCTIONS.vessels, spread over the membrane of the egg, and receivingthe influence of atmospheric oxygen through the substanceof the shell, which is sufficiently porous to transmit it; andthese vessels, being brought into communication with thecirculatory system of the chick, convey to its blood this vivifyingagent. As the lungs cannot come into use till afterthe bird is emancipated from its prison, and as it was sufficientthat they be in readiness at that epoch, these organsare among the last which are constructed: and as the mechanismof respiration in this class of animals does not requirethe play of the diaphragm, this muscular partition,though begun, is not completed, and there is no separationbetween the cavities of the thorax and the abdomen.The succession of organic metamorphoses is equally remarkablein the formation of the diversified apparatus foraeration, which is required to be greatly modified, at differentperiods, in order to adapt it to different elements: of thiswe have already seen examples in those insects which, afterbeing aquatic in their larva slate, emerge from the waterwhen they have acquired wings; and also in the steps oftransition from the tadpole to the frog. But similar, thoughless conspicuous changes occur in the higher vertebratedanimals, during the early periods of their formation, correspondingto the differences in the modes of aeration employedat different stages of development. In the primevalconditions this function is always analogous to that of aquaticanimals, and requires for its performance only the simplerform of heart already described, consisting of a singleset of cavities: but the System being ultimately designed toexercise atmospheric respiration, requires to be graduallyadapted to this altered condition; and the heart of the Birdand the Quadruped must be separated into two compartments,corresponding to the double function it will have toperform. For this purpose a partition wall must be builtin its cavity; and this wall is accordingly begun around theinterior circumference of the ventricle, and is gradually carriedon towards the centre, there being, for a time, an aper-organicDEVELOPMENT. 429ture of communication between the right and left cavities;but this aperture is soon closed, and the ventricle is noweffectually divided into two. Next the auricle, which at firstwas single, becomes double; not, however, by the growth ofa partition, but by the folding in of its sides, along a middleline, as if it were encompassed by a cord, which was graduallytightened. In the mean while the partition, which haddivided the ventricle, extends itself into the trunk of themain artery, which it divides into two channels; and theseafterwards become two separate vessels; that which issuesfrom the left ventricle being the aorta; and the other, whichproceeds from the right ventricle, being the pulmonary artery;and each being now prepared to exercise its appropriatefunction in the double circulation which is soon to beestablished.*A mode of subdivision af blood vessels, very similar tothat just described, takes place in those which are sent tothe first set of organs provided for aeration, and which resemblebranchiae. These changes may be very distinctlyfollowed in the Batrachia;\ for we see, in those animals,the trunk of the aorta undergoing successive subdivisions,by branches sent off from it, and forming loops, which extendin length and are again subdivided, in a manner notunlike the unravelling of the strands of a rope; each subdivision,however, being preceded by the formation of a doublepartition in the cavity of the tube; so that at length thewhole forms an extensive ramified system of branchial arteriesand veins. Still all these are merely temporary structures;for when the period of change approaches, and thebranchiae are to be superseded in their office, every vessel,,one after another, becomes obliterated, and there remainonly the two original aorta, which unite into a single trunklower down, and from which proceed the pulmonary arteries,conveying either the whole, or a portion of the blood,to the newly developed respiratory organs, the lungs.The principal authorities for the facts here stated are Baer and Rolando-seethe paper of Dr. Thomson ab-lady quoted,t See the investigations of Rusconi, ^d of Baer, on thb subject.430 THE REPRODUCTIVE Junctions.By a similar process of continued bifurcation, or the detachmentof branches in the form of loops, new vessels aredeveloped in other parts of the body, as has been particularlyobserved in the finny tail, and the external gills of thefrog, and the newt, parts which easily admit of microscopicalexamination"*Progress is in the mean while making in the building ofthe skeleton, the forms of the principal bones being modelledin a gelatinous substance, which is converted into cartilage,beginning at the surface, and gradually advancing towardsthe centre of each portion or element of the future bone; andthus a temporary solid and elastic scaffolding is raised, suitedto the yielding texture of the nascent organs: lastly, thewhole fabric is surrounded by an outer wall, the building ofwhich is begun from the dorsal region, and conducted roundthe sides of the body, till the two portions come to meet inthe middle abdominal line, where they are finally unitedinto one general and continuous integument. The eyes,which were hitherto unprotected, receive special means ofdefence, by the addition of eyelids, which are formed by afarther extension and folding of these integuments; and thegreater part of the surface of the body gives rise to a growthof temporary down, which, as we have seen, is provided asacovering to the bird at the time it is ready to quit theshell. But this hard shell, which had hitherto afforded itprotection, is now opposed to its emancipation; and thechick, in order to obtain its freedom, must, by main force,break through the walls of its prison; its beak is, however,as yet too tender to apply the force requisite for that purpose.Here, again, we find Nature expressly interposingher assistance; for she has caused a pointed horny projectionto grow at the end of the beak, for the special object ofgiving the chick the power of battering its shell, and makinga practicable breach, through which it shall be able to creepout, and begin its new career of life. That this horn is prosSuch is the result of the concurring observations of Spallanzani, Fontana,and Domineer.ORGANIC DEVELOPMENT. 431vide only for this temporary use appears from the circumstanceof its falling off spontaneously in the course of threeor four days after it has been so employed.But though the bird has now gained its liberty, it is stillunable to provide for its own maintenance, and requires tobe fed by its parent till it can use its wings, and has learnedthe art of obtaining food. The pigeon is furnished by naturewith a secretion from the crop, with which it feeds itsyoung, iln the Mammalia the same object is provided forstill more expressly, by means of glands, whose office it isto prepare rnilk, a fluid which, from its chemical qualities,is admirably accepted to the powers of the digestive organs,when they first exercise their functions. The Cetacea havealso mammary glands; bit as the structure of the mouth andthroat of the young in that class does not appear adapted tothe act of sucking, there has always been great difficulty inunderstanding how they obtain the nourishment so provided.A recent discovery of GeoflTroy St. Hilaire appearsto have resolved the mystery with respect to the De/p/iiniisglobiceps; for he found that the mammary glands of that animalcontain each a large reservoir, in which milk is accumulated,and which the dolphin is capable, by the action ofthe surrounding muscles, of emptying at once into the mouthof its young, without requiring from the latter any effort ofsuction.*The rapid sketch which I have attempted to draw of themore remarkable steps of the early stages of organic developmentin the higher animals, taken in conjunction with thefacts already adverted to in various parts of this Treatise,and particularly those relating to ossification, dentition, theformation of hair, of the quills of the porcupine, of the antlersof the stag, and of the feathers of birds, will suffice toshow that they are regulated by laws which are definite, andpreordained according to the most enlarged and profoundThe account of this discovery is contained in a memoir which was readat the "Institut." March 24, 1834.432 THE REPRODUCTIVE FUNCTIONS.views of the future circumstances and wants of the system.The double origin of all the parts of the frame, even thosewhich appear as single organs, and the order of their formation,which, in each system, commences with the parts mostremote from the centre, and proceeds inwards, or towardsthe mesial plane, are among the most singular and unexpectedresults of this train of inquiries.* We cannot but beforcibly struck with the numerous forms of transition throughwhich every organ has to pass before arriving at its ultimatetmd comparatively permanent condition: we cannot but wonderat the vast apparatus which is provided and put in actionfor effecting all these changes; nor can we overlook the instancesof express contrivance in the formation of so manytemporary structures, which are set up, like the scaffold ofan edifice, in order to afford the means of transporting thematerials of the building in proportion as they are wanted;nor refuse to recognise the evidence of provident design inthe regular order in which the work proceeds, every organgrowing at its appointed time, by the addition of fresh particlesbrought to it by the arteries, while others are carriedaway by the absorbents, and gradually acquiring the formwhich is to qualify it for the performance of its proper officein this vast and complicated system.• The first of these two laws is termed by Serres, who has zealously prosecutedthese investigations, ** la hi de symm^trie;" and the second, "la hideconjugation." He maintains that they are strictly applicable to all theparts of the body having" a tubular form, such as the trachea, the Eustachiantube, the canals, and perforations of bones, &c. See the preliminary discourseto his "Anatomic coraparee du cei-veau," p. 25; and also his severalmemoirs in the « Annales des Sciences Naturelles," vols, xi. xii. xvi. and xxi.An excellent summary of the principal facts relating to the developmentof the embryo is given by Mr. Herbert Mayo, in the third edition of his'<• Outlines of Human Physiology."433 )CHAPTER III.DECLINE OF THE SYSTEM.•To follow minutely the various steps by which Natureconducts the individual to its state of maturity, would engageus in details incompatible with the limits of the presentwork. I shall only remark, in general, that during theperiod when the body is intended to increase in size, thepowers of assimilation are exerted to prepare a greater abundanceof nourishment, so that the average supply of materialsrather exceeds the consumption: but when the fabrichas attained its prescribed dimensions, the total quantitiesfurnished and expended being nearly balanced, the vitalpowers are no longer exerted in extending the fabric, butare employed in consolidating and perfecting it, and in qualifyingthe organs for the continued exercise of their respectivefunctions, during a long succession of years.Yet, while every function is thus maintained in a state ofhealthy equilibrium, certain changes are in progress, which,at the appointed season, will inevitably bring on the declineand ultimate destruction of the system.* The process ofIt would appear, from the researches of De Candolle, that the veg-tablesystem is not, like the animal, subject to the destructive operation of internalcauses; for the ag-ends which destroy veg-table life are always extraneous toits economy. Each individual tree is composed of an accumulation of theshoots of every successive year since the commencement of its growth; andalthough, from the continued deposition of lignin, and the consequent obliterationof many of its cells and vessels, the vitality of the interior wood may ^be destroyed, and it then becomes liable to decay by the action of foreignagents, yet the exterior layers of the liber still vegetate with undiminishedvigour; and unless injured by causes extraneous to its own system, the life ofthe tree will continue to be sustained for an indefinite period. If, on theVol. II. • 55434 DECLINE OF THE SYSTEM.consolidation, begun from the earliest period of development,is still advancing, and is producing in the fluids greater thickness,and a reduction of their total quantity; and in the solids,a diminution in the proportion of gelatin, and the conversionof this element into albumen. Hence, all the texturesacquire increasing solidity, the cellular substancebecomes firmer and more condensed, and the solid structuresmore rigid and inelastic: hence, the tendons and ligamentousfibres growing less flexible, the joints lose their suppleness,and the contractile power being also impaired, the musclesact more tardily as well as more feebly, and the limbs nolonger retain the elastic spring of youth. The bones themselvesgrow harder and more brittle; and the cartilages, thetendons, the serous membranes, and the coats of the bloodvessels, acquire incrustations of ossific matter, which interferewith their uses. Thus are all the progressive modificationsof structure tending, slowly but inevitably, to disqualifythe organs for the due performance of their functions.Among the most important of the internal changes consequenton the progress of age are those which take place inthe vascular system. A large proportion of the numerousarteries, which were in full activity during the building ofthe fabric, being now no longer wanted, are thrown, as itwere, out of employment; they, in consequence, contract,and becoming impervious, gradually disappear. The partsof the body, no longer yielding to the power applied to extendthem, oppose a gradually increasing resistance to thepropelling force of the heart: while, at the same time, thisforce, in common with all the others, is slowly diminishing.Thus do the vital powers become less equal to the demandsmade upon them; the waste of the body exceeds the supply,other hand, we were to regard each separate shoot as an individual organicbody, and every layer as constituting a distinct generation of shoots, theolder being covered and enclosed in succession by the younger, the greatlongevity of a tree would, on this hypothesis, indicate only the permanenceof the species, not the indefinitely protracted duration of the individual plant.Decline OF THE SYSTEM. 435and a diminution of energy becomes apparent in every function.Such are the insensible gradations by which, while glidingdown the stream of time, we lapse into old age, which insidiouslysteals on us before we are aware of its approach.But the same provident power which presided at our birth,which superintended the growth of all the organs, whichinfused animation into each as they arose, and which hasconducted the system unimpaired to its maturity, is still exertedin adjusting the conditions under which it is placedin its season of decline. New arrangements are made, newenergies are called forth, and new resources are employed,to accommodate it to its altered circumstances, to prop theshattered fabric, and retard the progress of its decay. Inproportion as the supply of nutritive materials has becomeless abundant, a more strict economy is practised with regardto their disposal; the substance of the body is husbandedwith greater care; the absorbent vessels are employed toremove such parts as are no longer useful; and when allthese adjustments have been made, the functions still go onfor a considerable length of time without material alteration.The period prescribed for its duration being at lengthcompleted, and the ends of its existence accomplished, thefabric can no longer be sustained, and preparation must bemade for its inevitable fall. In order to form a correctjudgment of the real intentions of nature, with regard tothis last stage of life, its phenomena must be observed in caseswhere the system has been wholly intrusted to the operationof her laws. When death is the simple consequence of age,we find that the extinction of the powers of life observes anorder the reverse of that which was followed in their evolution.The sensorial functions, which were the last perfected,are the first which decay; and their decline is found tocommence with those mental faculties more immediatelydependent on the physical conditions of the sensorium, andmore especially with the memory, which is often much DECLINE OF THE SYSTEM.paired, while the judgment remains in full vigour. Thenext faculties which usually suffer from the effects of age arethe external senses, and the failure of siojht and of hearingstill farther contributes to the decline of the intellectualpowers, by withdrawing the occasions for their exercise.The actual demolition of the fabric commences wheneverthere is a considerable failure in the functions of assimilation:but the more immediate cause of the rapid extinction of lifeis usually the impediment which the loss of the sensorialpower, necessary for maintaining the movements of the chest,creates to respiration. The heart, whose pulsations gave thefirst indications of life in the embryo, generally retains itsvitality longer than any other organ; but its powers beingdependent on the constant oxidation of the blood in thelungs, cannot survive the interruption of this function; andon the heart ceasing to throb, death may then be consideredas complete in every part of the system.It is an important consideration, with reference to finalcauses, that generally long before the commencement of this"Last scene of all,That ends this strange eventful history'*the power of feeling has wholly ceased, and the physicalstruggle is carried on by the vital powers alone, in the absenceof all consciousness of the sentient being, whose deathmay be said to precede, for some time, that of the body. Inthis, as well as in the gradual decline of the sensorial faculties,and the consequent diminution both of mental and ofphysical sensibility in advanced age, we cannot fail to recognisethe wise ordinances of a superintending and beneficentprovidence, kindly smoothing the path along whichwe descend the vale of life, spreading a narcotic mantleovei^he bed of death, and giving to the last moments of departingsensation the tranquillity of approaching sleep.437 )CHAPTER IV.UNITY OF DESIGN.The inquiries on Animal and Vegetable Physiology inwhich we have been engaged, lead to the general conclusionthat unity of design and identity of operation pervade thewhole of nature; and they clearly point to one Great andonly Cause of all things, arrayed in the attributes of infinitepower, wisdom, and benevolence, whose mighty works extendthroughout the boundless regions of space, and whosecomprehensive plans embrace eternity.In examining the manifold structures and diversified phenomenaof living beings, we cannot but perceive that theyare extensively, and perhaps universally connected by certainlaws oi Analogy; a principle, the recognition of whichhas given us enlarged views of a multitude of importantfacts, which would otherwise have remained isolated andunintelligible. Hence naturalists, in arranging the objectsof their study, according to their similarities and analogies,into classes, orders and genera, have but followed the footstepsof Nature herself, who in all her operations combinesthe apparently opposite principles of general resemblance,and of specific variety; so that the races which she hasunited in the same group, though possessed of features individuallydifferent, may easily be recognised by their familylikeness, as the offspring of a common parent.*facies non omnibus una;Nee diversa tamen? quale decet esse soronim."We have seen that in each of the two great divisions, or438 UNITY OF DESIGN.kingdoms of organic nature, the same general objects areaimed at, and the same general plans are devised for theiraccomplishment; and, also, that in the execution of thoseplans similar means and agencies are employed. In eachdivision there prevails a remarkable uniformity in the compositionand properties of their elementary textures, in thenature of their vital powers, in the arrangement of their organs,and in the laws of their production and development.The same principle of analogy may be traced, amidst endlessmodifications of detail, in all the subordinate groups intowhich each kingdom admits of being subdivided, both in respectto the organization and functions of the objects comprehendedin each assemblage, whether we examine thewonders of their mechanical fabric, or study the series ofprocesses by which nutrition, sensation, voluntary motion,and reproduction are effected. To specify all the exampleswhich might be adduced in confirmation of this obvioustruth is here unnecessary; for it would be only to repeat thenumerous facts already noticed in every chapter of this treatise,relative to each natural group of living beings: and itwas, indeed, chiefly by the aid of such analogies, that wewere enabled to connect and generalize those facts. Wehave seen that, in constructing each of the divisions so established.Nature appears to have kept in view a certain definitetype, or ideal standard, to which, amidst innumerablemodifications, rendered necessary by the varying circumstancesand different destinations of each species, she alwaysshows a decided tendency to conform. It would almostseem as if, in laying the foundations of each organized fabric,she had commenced by taking the exact copy of thisprimitive model; and, in building the superstructure, hadallowed herself to depart from the original plan only for thepurpose of accommodation to certain specific sand ulteriorobjects, conformably with the destination of that particularrace of created beings. Such, indeed, is the hypotheticalprinciple, which, under the title of unity of composition,has been adopted, and zealously pursued in all its conesOP DESIGN. 455quinces, by many naturalists, of the highest eminence, onthe continent. As the facts on which this hypothesis issupported, and the views which it unfolds, are highly deservingof attention, I shall here briefly state them; but inso doing I shall beg to premise the caution that these viewsshould, for the present, be regarded as hypothetical, and asby no means possessing the certainty of philosophical generalizations.The hypothesis in question is countenanced, in the firstplace, by the supposed constancy with which, in all the animalsbelonging to the same natural group, we meet with thesame constituent elements of structure, in each respectivesystem of organs, notwithstanding the utmost diversity whichmay exist in the forms of the organs, and in the uses towhich they are applied. This principle has been moststrikingly exemplified in the osteology of vertebrated animals;but its truth is also inferred from the examination ofthe mechanical fabric of Insects, Crustacea, and Arachnida;and it appears to extend also to the structures subservient toother functions, and particularly those of the nervous system.Thus Nature has provided for the locomotion of theserpent, not by the creation of new structures, foreign tothe type of the vertebrata, but by employing the ribs in thisnew office; and in giving wings to a lizard, she has extendedthese same bones to serve as supports to the superaddedparts. In arming the elephant with tusks, she has merelycaused two of the teeth in the upper jaw to be developedinto these formidable weapons; and in providing it with aninstrument of prehension, has only resorted to a greaterelongation of the snout.The law of Gradation in conformity to which all theliving, together with the extinct races, of organic nature, arrangethemselves more or less, into certain regular series,is one of the consequences which have been deduced fromthe hypothesis we are considering. Every fresh copy takenof the original type is supposed to receive some additionalextension of its faculties and endowments by the graduated440 UNITY OP DESIGN.development of elements, which existed in a latent form inthe primeval germ, and which are evolved, in succession,as nature advances in her course. Thus, we find that eachnew form which arises, in following the ascending scale ofcreation, retains a strong affinity to that which had precededit, and also tends to iniiDress its own features on those whichimmediately succeed; and thus their specific differences resultmerely from the different extent and direction given tothese organic developments; those of inferior races proceedingto a certain point only, and there stopping; while in beingsof a higher rank they advance farther, and lead to allthe observed diversities of conformation and endowments.It is remarked, in farther corroboration of these views,that the animals which occupy the highest stations in eachseries possess, at the commencement of their existence, formsexhibiting a marked resemblance to those presented in thepermanent condition of the lowest animals in the same series;and that, during the progress of their development,they assume, in succession, the characters of each tribe, correspondingto their consecutive order in the ascending chain:so that the peculiarities which distinguish the higher animal,on its attaining its ultimate and permanent form, arethose which it had received in its last stage of embryonicevolution. Another consequence of this hypothesis is thatwe may expect occasionally to meet, in inferior animals, withrudimental organs, which from their imperfect developmentmay be of little or no use to the individual, but which becomeavailable to some superior species, in which they aresufficiently perfected. The following are among the mostremarkable facts in illustration of these propositions.In the series of Articulated Animals, of which the Annelidaconstitute the lowest, and winged Insects the highestterms, we find that the larvae of the latter are often scarcelydistinguishable, either in outward form, or in internal organization,from Vermes of the lower orders; both beingequally destitute of, or but imperfectly provided with externalinstruments of locomotion; both having a distinct vas-unityOF DESIGN. 441ocular circulation, and multiple organs of digestion; and thecentral filaments of the nervous system in both being studdedwith numerous pairs of equidistant ganglia. In theworm all these features remain as permanent characters ofthe order: in the insect they are subsequently modified andaltered during its progressive metamorphoses. The embryoof a crab resembles in appearance the permanent formsof the Myriapoda^ and of the lower animals of its own class,but acquires, in the progress of its growth, new parts; whilethose already evolved become more and more concentrated,passing, in their progress, through all the forms of transitionwhich characterize the intermediate tribes of Crustacea; tillthe animal attains its last state, and then exhibits the mostdeveloped condition of that particular type.*However difierentthe conformations of the Fish, the Reptile,the Bird, and the warm-blooded quadruped, may be atthe period of their maturity, they are scarcely distinguishablefrom one another in their embryonic state; and their earlydevelopment proceeds for some time in the same manner.They all possess at first the characters of aquatic animals;and the Frog even retains this form for a considerableperiod after it has left the egg. The young tadpole is intruth a fish, whether we regard the form and actions of itsinstruments of progressive motion, the arrangement of itsorgans of circulation and of respiration, or the condition ofthe central organs of its nervous system. We have seen bywhat gradual and curious transitions all these aquatic charactersare changed for those of a terrestrial quadruped, furnishedwith limbs for moving on the ground, and with lungsfor breathing atmospheric air; and how the plan of circulationis altered from branchial to pulmonary, in proportion♦ This curious analogy is particularly observable in the successive forms assumedby the nervous system, which exhibits a gradual passage from that ofthe TalitruSy to its ultimate greatest concentration in the Maia. (See Figures439 and 441, p. 382 and 383.) Milne Edwards has lately traced a similarprogression of development in the organs of locomotion of the Crustacea.(Annales des Sciences Naturelles, xxx. 354. )Vol. II. 56442 UNITY OP DESIGN.as the gills wither and the lungs are developed. If, whilethis change is going on, and while both sets of organs aretogether executing the function of aeration, all farther developmentwere prevented, we should have an amphibiousanimal, fitted for maintaining life both in air and in water.It is curious that this precise condition is the permanent stateof the Siren and the Proteus, animals which thus exemplifyone of the forms of transition in the metamorphoses of theFrog.In the rudimental form of the feet of serpents, which are soimperfectly developed as to be concealed underneath theskin, and to be useless as organs of progressive motion, wehave an example of the first stage of that process, which, whencarried farther in the higher animals, gives rise to the limbsof quadrupeds, and which it would almost seem as if naturehad instituted with a prospective view to these more improvedconstructions. Another, and a still more remarkableinstance of the same kind, occurs in the rudimental teeth ofthe young of the Whale, which are concealed within thelower jaw, and which are afterwards removed, to give placeto the curious filtering apparatus, which occupies the roofof the mouth, and which nature has substituted for that ofteeth, as if new objects, superseding those athirst pursued,had arisen in the progress of development.Birds, though destined to a very different sphere of actionfrom either fishes or reptiles, are yet observed to pass,in the embryonic stage of their existence, through forms oftransition, which successively resemble these inferior classes.The brain presents, in its earliest formation, a series of tubercles,placed longitudinally, like those of fishes, and onlyassuming its proper character at a later period. The respiratoryorgans are at first branchiae, placed, like those offishes, in the neck, where there are also found branchialapertures similar to those of the lamprey and the shark; andthe heart and great vessels are constructed like those of thetadpole, with reference to a branchial circulation. In theirconversion to the purposes of aerial respiration, they under-unityOF DESIGN. 443go a series of changes precisely analogous to those of thetadpole.Mammalia, during the early periods of their development,are subjected to all the transformations which have been nowdescribed, commencing with an organization correspondingto that of the aquatic tribes, exhibiting not only branchiae,supported on branchial arches, but also branchial aperturesin the neck, and thence passing quickly to the conditions ofstructure adapted to a terrestrial existence. The developmentof various parts of the system, more especially of the brain,the ear, the mouth, and the extremities, is carried still fartherthan in birds. Nor is the human embryo exempt fromthe same metamorphoses, possessing, at one period, branchiaeand branchial apertures similar to those of the cartilaginousfishes,* a heart with a single set of cavities, and a brain consistingof a longitudinal series of tubercles; next losing itsbranchiae, and acquiring lungs, while the circulation is yetsingle, and thus imitating the condition of the reptile; thenacquiring a double circulation, but an incomplete diaphragm,like birds; afterwards, appearing like a quadruped, with acaudal prolongation of the sacrum, and an intermaxillarybone; and, lastly, changing its structure to one adapted tothe erect position, accompanied by a great expansion of thecerebral hemispheres, which extend backwards so as completelyto cover the cerebellum. Thus does the whole fabricarrive, by a gradual process of mutation, at an extent ofelaboration and refinement, unattained by any other race ofterrestrial beings, and which has been justly regarded asconstituting the climax of organic development.!These facts are given on the authorities of Rathke, Baer, Buschke,Breschet, &.c. Ann. des Sc. Naturelles, xv. 266, See, also, the paper ofDr. A. Thomson, already quoted.t A popular opinion has long prevailed, even among the well informed,that misshapen or monstrous productions, or lusus naturae as they weretermed, exhibit but the freaks of nature, who was believed, on these occasions,capriciously to abandon her usual course, and to amuse herself in theproduction of grotesque beings, without any special object. But it is nowfound that all defective formations of this kind are occasioned by the UNITY OP DESIGN.It must, I think, be admitted that the analogies, on whichthe hypothesis in question is founded, are numerous andstriking; but great care should be taken not to carry it fartherthan the just interpretation of the facts themselves maywarrant. It should be borne in mind that these facts arefew, compared with the entire history of animal development;and that the resemblances which have been so ingeniouslytraced, are partial only, and fall very short of that universality,which alone constitutes the solid basis of a strictly philosophicaltheory. Whatever may be the apparent similaritybetween one animal and another, during different periodsof their respective developments, there still exists specificdifferences, establishing between them an impassablebarrier of separation, and effectually preventing any conversionof one species into another, however "nearly the twomay be mutually allied. The essential characters of eachspecies, amidst occasional varieties, remain ever constant andimmutable. Although gradations, to a greater or less extent,may be traced among the races both of plants and animals,yet in no case is the series strictly continuous; eachstep, however short, being in reality an abrupt transitionfrom one type of conformation to another. In many instancesthe interval is considerable; as, for example, in thepassage from the invertebrate to the vertebrated classes; and,indeed, in every instance where great changes in the natureand arrangement of the functions take place.* It is in vainto allege that the original continuity of the series is indicatedby a few species presenting, in some respects, intermediatecharacters, such as the Ornithorhyncus^ betweenfeet development of some parts of the embryo, while the natural process iscarried on in the rest of the system; and thus it happens that a resemblancemay often be traced, in these machinations, with the type or the permanentcondition of some inferior animal. Hence, all these apparent anomalies are,in reality, in perfect harmony with the established laws of organic development,and afford, indeed, sinking confirmations of the truth of the theoryhere explained.Sec a paper on this subject, by Cuvier, in the Ann. des Sciences Naturelles,xx. 241.UKITT OP Design. 445birds and manilla, and the Ceiacea, between fishes andwarm-blooded quadrupeds: for these are but detached linksof a broken chain, tending, indeed, to prove the unity of thedesigns of Nature, but showing also the specific character ofeach of her creative efforts. The pursuit of remote andoften fanciful analogies has. by many of the continental physiologists,been carried to an unwarrantable and extravagantlength: for the scope which is given to the imagination inthese seductive speculations, by leading us far away from thepath of philosophical induction, tends rather to obstruct thanto advance the progress of real knowledge. By confiningour inquiries to more legitimate objects, we shall avoid thedelusion into which one of the disciples of this transcendentalschool appears to have fallen, when he announces, withexultation, that the simple laws he has discovered have nowexplained the universe;* nor shall we be disposed to lend apatient ear to the more presumptuous reveries of anothersystem-builder, who, by assuming that there exists in organizedmatter an inherent tendency to perfectibility, fanciesthat he can supersede the operations of Divine agency.!Very different was the humble spirit of the great Newton,who, struck with the immensity of nature, comparedour knowledge of her operations, into which he had himselfpenetrated so deeply, to that of a child gathering pebbles on• " L'univos est e:q)IJqu^ et nous le voy ons; crest un petit nombre deprinces general et seconds qiu nous en foot dominie la let*' Serres, Ann.cs Sc NaL xL 50.f Anusioo is here made to the celebrated theory of Lamarck, as exposedin his *philosophe Zocrfogique." He coocdves that there vas originallyno distinction of species, but that each race has, in the course of age beendenied from some other, less perfect than itself, by a ^xmtaneoos efibrt atimprovement; and be supposes that infusorial animalcules, spcmtaneoudjrfinned out of organic moleouks, gare birth, by suc cesare tnmafiinnatiooa^to an other aninab nov existing on the globe. He becomes that tnbes^ originallyaquatic, acquired by their own efforts, prompted by their desire towalk, both feet and legs, fitting them for progress on the ground; andthat these members, by the long continued operation of the wish to fly, weretransformed into wii^;a^ adapted to gratify that desire. If this be philosophy,it is such as migfat hare emanated from the college (rf'Laputa.446 UNITY OP DESIGN.the sea-shore. Compared, indeed, with the magnitude ofthe universe, how narrow is the field of our perceptions, andhow far distant from any approximation to a knowledge ofthe essence of matter, of the source of its powers, or evenof the ultimate configurations of its parts! How remotefrom all human cognizance are the intimate properties ofthose imponderable agents. Light, Heat, and Electricity,which pervade space, and exercise so potent a control overallthe bodies in nature! Doubtless, there exist around us,on every side, influences of a still more subtle kind, whicheye hath not seen, nor ear heard'' neither can it enter intothe heart or imagination of man to conceive. How scantyis our knowledge of the mind; how incomprehensible is itsconnexion with the body; how mysterious are its secretsprings, and inmost workings! What ineffable wonderswould burst upon us, were we admitted to the perception ofthe spiritual world, now encompassed by clouds imperviousto mortal vision!The Great Author of our being, who, while he has beenpleased to confer on us the gift of reason, has prescribed certainlimits to its powers, permits us to acquire, by its exercise,a knowledge of some of the wondrous works of hiscreation, to interpret the characters of wisdom and of goodnesswith which they are impressed, and to join our voiceto the general chorus which proclaims " His Might, Majesty,and Domi-non." From the same gracious hand wealso derive that unquenchable thirst for knowledge, whichthis fleeting life must ever leave unsatisfied; those endowmentsof the moral sense, with which the present constitutionof the world so ill accords; and that innate desire of perfectionwhich our present frail condition is so inadequate tofulfil. But it is not given to man to penetrate into the counsels,or fathom the designs of Omnipotence; for in directinghis views into futurity, the feeble light of his reason is scatteredand lost in the vast abyss. Although we plainly discernintention in every part of the creation, the grand objectof the whole is placed far above the scope of our com-unityOF DESIGN. 447prehension. It is impossible, however, to conceive thatthis enormous expenditure of power, this vast accumulationof contrivances and of machinery, and this profusion of existenceresulting from them, can thus, from age to age, beprodigally lavished, without some ulterior end. Is Man,the favoured creature of nature's bounty, " The paragon ofanimals," whose spirit holds communion with celestialpowers, formed but to perish with the wreck of his bodilyframe? Are generations after generations of his race doomedto follow in endless succession, rolling darkly down thestream of time, and leaving no track in its pathless ocean?Are the operations of Almighty power to end with the presentscene? May we not discern, in the spiritual constitutionof man, the traces of higher powers, to which those henow possesses are but preparatory; some embryo facultieswhich raise us above this earthly habitation? Have we notin the imagination, a power but little in harmony with thefetters of our bodily organs ; and bringing within our viewpurer conditions of being, exempt from the illusions ofour senses and the infirmities of our nature, our elevationto which will eventually prove that all these unsated desiresof knowledge, and all these ardent aspirations after moralgood, were not implanted in us in vain?Happily there has been vouchsafed to us, from a highersource, a pure and heavenly light to guide our falteringsteps, and animate our fainting spirit, in this dark anddreary search: revealing those truths which it imports usmost of all to know, giving to morality higher sanctions,elevating our hopes and our affections to nobler objectsthan belong to earth, and inspiring more exalted themesof thanksgiving and of praise.1 IV Ben.Abdomen of insects, i. 230.Aberration, chromatic, ii. 335.Aberration of parallax, ii. 325, 334.Aberration, spherical, ii. 324, 333.Absorption, vegetable, ii. 21, 23.Absorption, animal, ii. 17, 250.Absorption, lacteal, ii. 164.Absorption of shell, i. 174.Acalepha, i. 142; ii. 210.Acarus, i. 212.Achatina zebra, i. 175.Achromatic power, ii. 335.Acephala, i. 159 ; ii. 88, 215.Acetabulum, i. 282.Acid secretions, ii. 39.Acrid, ii. 155.Acridium, i. 236.Acoustic principles, ii. 294.Actinia, i. 136, 146 ; ii. 75, 272, 337,412, 41.5.Adipose substance, i. 97.Adductor muscle, i. 160.Aeration of sap, ii. 28.Aeration, animal, ii. 31, 428.^schna, i, 247.Affinities, organic, ii. 13.Gastric medusae, ii. 70.Age of trees, i. 73.Age, effects of, ii. 434.Agouti, i. 344.Agrion, ii. 174.Air-bladder, i. 298.Air cells of plants, i. 67.Air cells of birds, ii. 234.Air, rarefaction of, in birds, i. 384.Air tubes in plants, i. 65.Albumen, i. 85.Alburnum, i. 73; ii. 36.Algae, ii. 21.Alimentary canal, ii. 82.Alimentary canal, formation of, ii.427.Vol. II.Alitrunk, i. 243.Alligator, i. 317, 319 ; ii. 290.Amble, i. 342.Simulacra, i. 148.Amici, i. 68 ; ii. 42.Amphibia, i. 303, 336.Amphisbaena, i. 310, 311.Amphitrite, i. 201.Anabas, ii. 219.Analogy, law of, i. 49; ii. 437.Anarrhichas, ii. 96.Anchylosis, i. 267.Cancellaria, i. 175.Anemone, sea, i. 146.Angler, i. 293 ; ii. 276.Anguish, i. 310, 315.Animal functions, i. 42.Animal organization, i. 79.Animalcules. See Infusoria.Annelida, i. 194; ii. 180, 213, 272,338.Annular vessels, i. 66.Anton, i. 169.Ant, ii. 274, 341, 343.Ant-eater, i. 361 ; ii. 100.Antelope, ii. 109, 285.Antelope, horn of, i. 355.Antennae, i. 206 ; ii. 273.Antennae, ii. 93.Anther, ii. 418.Anthers, ii. 219.Anthophora, i. 247.Antipathies, i. 125.Antler of deer, i. 351.Antrum maxillary, ii. 284.Aorta, ii. 83, 426.Aphrodite, ii. 77, 94, 213.Aplysia, ii. 95, 124, 388.Abodes, i. 294.Apterous insects, i. 212.Aquatic animals, i. 113.Aquatic plants, ii. 41.INDEX.Aquatic larvae, L 220.Aquatic insects, i. 237.Aquatic birds, i. 407.Aquatic respiration, ii. 210.Aqueous humour, ii. 327.Arachnida, i. 202; ii. 91, 235» 276,343, 412.Aranea. See Spider.Arbor vita), ii. 393.Arenicola, i. 199; ii. 211.Argonauts, i. 185.Aristotle, ii. 394.Aristotle, lantern of, ii. 90.Arm, human, i. 375.Armadillo, ii. 271.Arteries, i. 44; ii. 82.Articulate, i. 193.Ascaris, ii. 86, 380.Arcadia, i. 106; ii. 212.Ass, i. 356.Assimilation, i. 43; ii. 16.Attacks, ii. 308, 346.Asterias, i. 147; ii. 76, 151, 171,212, 272, 387, 412.Ateles, i. 278, 368.^Atlas of Lion, i. 365.Atmosphere, purification of, ii. 32.Atmospheric respiration, ii. 221.Triple, ii. 40.Audouin, i. 207, 228, 230; ii. 177,226, 381.Audubon, ii. 288.Auricle, ii. 82, 187.Auricula, i. 181.Vincula, i. 171.Axillffi of plants, i. 76; ii. 413.Axelotl, ii. 231.Babiroussa, ii. 105.Bacculite, i. 192.Baer, ii. 338, 429, 443.Baker, ii. 337.Balcony. See Whale.Balance of affinities, ii. 13.Balistes, i. 300.Banks, i. 314.Barbels of fish, ii. 276.Bark, formation of, i. 73.Barnacle, i. 185 ; ii. 212.Bat, i. 380; ii. 101, 399.Batrachia, i. 303 ; ii. 418.Batrachospermurn, ii. 41.Bauer, i. 59.Bear, ii. 108.Beard of oyster, ii. 215.Beaver, i. 361; ii. 110, 135, 141.Bee, i. 247; ii. 275.Belckier, i. 269.Bell (Sir C.) ii. 375.Bell (Thomas) i. 333; ii. 290.Bellini, ii. 279.Berberis, i. 100.Berkeley, ii. 366.Berne, i. 144, 149.Berzelius, ii. 21.Bicuspid teeth, ii. 107.Pipes canaliculatus, i. 317.Birds, i. 382; ii. 97, 234, 287,, etpassim.Blind-worm, i. 315, 317.Blood, ii. 237.Blood vessels, ii. 201.Blumenbach, ii. 302.Boa, i. 310, 311.Boar, i. 53 ; ii. 105, 118.Bombyx, i. 215, 217, 222; ii. 343.Bone, i. 89, 256, 263.Bonnet, i. 51 ; ii. 20, 62, 70, 182,Borealis i. 405.Bos, i. 115.Stock, ii. 237.Bound of deer, i. 342.Bowerbank, ii. 174.Boyle, ii. 19.Braces), i. 78.Brady pus, i. 333; ii. 204.Brain, i. 40 ; ii. 260, 390, 404.Brain, formation of, ii. 423.Branching, ii. 192, 210, 214.Brassica, ii. 40, 44.Braula, ii. 341.Breschet, ii. 303.Brewster, i. 169; ii. 333, 349.Brocken, spectre of, ii. 374.Broussonnet, ii . 412.Bruguiere, i. 115, 179-Bryophyllum, ii. 411.Buccinum, i. 158, 167, 175; ii. 95,215.Auckland, ii. 149.Buds,i. 73;ii. 413.Buffon 137; ii. 372,415.Bulb of hair, i. 93.Bulboffeather, i. 397.Biilbus arteriosus, ii. 196.Bulbous glandulosus, ii. 135.Julius, r. 180.Bulla, ii. 123.Burrowing of the mole, i. 361-INDEX.Cabbage, ii. 40, 44.Cachalot, i. 334 ; ii. 105.Caeca, ii. 78, 1-50.Cecilia, ii. 351.Calamity, i. 182.Cullionymus, ii. 354.Calosoma, i. 227.Cambium, ii. .35.Camel, i. 87; ii. 129, 144.Cameleopard, i-332, 344; ii. 101.Camera obscura, ii. 324.Castrated shells, i. 190.Campanularia, ii. 170.Camper, ii. 310, 314, 394.Canada rat, ii. 1:30.Cancelli, i. 262.Cannon bone, i. 348.Capibara, ii. 118.Capillaries, ii. 190.Capsular ligaments, i. 86.Caput Medusas, i. 1-55.Carapace, i 207, 321.Carbon, non-absorption of, ii. 20.Carbonic acid, ii. 28, 239.Cardia, ii. 133.Calcium, i. 102, 162, 163, 164.Cards, i. 100.Carinated sternum, i. 390.Carlisle, I 296, 301 ; ii. 204, 399.Carnivora, i. 364; ii. 52, 108.Carp, i. 286, 298.Carpus, i. 282.Cartilage, i. 88.Caruncle, lacrymal, ii. 331.Cams, i.257; ii. 151, 158, 174, 182,356.Cassowary, i. 404; ii. 161.Cat, ii. 278, .3-55.Caterpillar, i. 217, 224; ii. 342.Caudal vertebrae, i. 281.Caroline, i. 121.Celandine, in 41.Cells of plants, i. 60,62.Cellular texture, animal, i. 81.Centaurea, i. 100.Cephalic ganglion, ii. 381.Cephalic-thorax, i. 202.Cephalopoda, i. 186; ii. 159, 388.Cerambyx, i. 233 ; ii. 322, 323.Cercaria, i. 138 ; ii. 338.Cerebellum, ii. 391.Cerebral ganglion, ii. 381.Cerebral hemispheres, ii. 391-Cerithiura, i. 180.Ceroxylon, ii. 40.Cetacea, i. 332, 333; ii. 105, 128,140, 313, .390, 431.Charter, I 88, 244.Chain of beinsr, i. 51 ; ii. 439.Chalices, i. 311, 317.Chameleon, i. 320 ; ii. 97, 277, 351.Chara, ii. 42, 183.Chelidonium, ii. 41. •Chelonia, i. 321 ; ii. 97, 198, 229,311.Chemistry, organic, ii. 12, 236^Cheselden, ii. 366. 'Chevreuil, i. 97.Children, i. 12,226; ii. 347.Chine, i. 226.Chladni, ii. 296.Chondrilla, ii. 43.Choroid coat, ii, 326.Choroid gland, ii. 349.Chromatic aberration, ii. 335.Chromate, i. 63.Chrysalis, i. 219.Chyle, ii. 82, 148.Chyme, ii. 132.Cicada, i. 240.Cicindela, ii. 1-54.Cilia, i. 99, 117, 119, 129, 144,185.Ciliary ligament, ii. 327.Cimex, i. 235.Cimex, ii. 93.Cineritious, ii. 395.Circulation, ii. 16, 167.Cirrhi, ii. 276.Cirrhopoda, i. 185.Classification, i. 50 ; ii. 437.Clausilia, ii. 226.Claudius, i. 18.3.Clavicle, i. 281, 293, 390.Claviger, ii. 341.Claw in lion's tail, i. 366.Clio, i. 186; ii. 103.Coquet, ii. 351.Clypeaster, i. 155.Comitis, ii. 221.Cobra de capelle, i. 378 ; ii. 121.Coccygeal bone, i. 281.Cochlea, ii. 303.Cockchaffer. See Melolontha.Cockle, i. 162. See Calcium.Cod, lens of, i. 56; ii. 394.Coenurus, ii. 65.Coexistence of forms, i. 40.Coffin-bone, i. 356.Coleoptera, i. 245 ; ii. 271.INDEX.Collar-bone, i. 281.Colours of insects, i. 226.Colours, perceptions of, ii. 373.Colder, i. 311, 312; ii. 120.Columella, i. 176; ii. 311.Comatiila, i. 155.Commissures of brain, ii. 395.Compares ii. 177, 309.Complementary colours, ii. 373.Compound eyes, il 341.Concha of the ear, ii. 298.Collar, ii. 235.Conger eel, ii. 392,Conglomerate eyes, ii. 341.Conjunctiva, ii. 329.Consumption of animal matter, ii.48.Contractility, muscular, i. 98.Conus, i. 181.Convolutions of the brain, ii. 393.Convolvulus, ii. 41.Cooper, ii. 308.Coracoid bone, i. 281, 390.Coral, i. 125.Coral islands, i. 26.Corium, i. 89.Cornea, ii. 326.Corneille, ii. 344.Cornu Ammonia, i. 192.Coronet bone, i. 356.Corpora quadrigemina, ii. 391.Corpus callosum, ii. 396.Corpus papillae, ii. 268.Cortical substance, ii. 395.Cossus, i. 214, 222, 249.Cotunnius, ii. 303.Cowrie, i. 179.Crab, i. 207; ii. 186, 21^, 226, 347.Cranium, i. 278, 307, 326.Cranium of insects, i. 228.Craw, ii. 124.Cray-fish, ii. 308, 346.Cribriform plate, ii. 284.Crinoidea, i. 156.Crocodile, i. 317, 318, 320; ii. 105,119, 199, 290, 312, 392.Crop, ii. 130.Cross-bill, ii. 98.Crotalus, i. 312.Crust, i. 89.Crusta petrosa, ii. 113.Crustacea, i. 204; ii. 194, 211, 214,381, 412.Cryptogamia, i. 64; ii. 416.Crystalline lens, i. 56 ; ii. 327.Crystalline needles in biliary ducts,ii. 159.Curculio, i. 233.Cushions of insects, i. 235.Cuticle, vegetable, i. 67.Cuticle, animal, i. 90; ii. 268.Cuttle-fish. See Sepia.Cuvier, passim.Cower, (F.) i. 95,396.Cyclidium, i. 138.Cyclocaela, ii. 74.Cyclops, ii. 41, 169.Cyclostomata, ii. 88.Cymbia, i. 175.Cymothoa, ii. 382.Cyprsea, i. 179.Cyprus, i. 93, 286.Cysticule, ii. 310.Daldorf, I 301 ; ii. 219.Darwin, i. 75.Darwin (Dr. R.,) ii. 372.Davy, ii. 20, 240.Davy (Dr.) ii. 197.Death, ii. 43.5.De Blainville, I 59, 179, 257 ; ii.182, 303, 340, 351, 400.De Candolle, i. 78; ii. 21, 2-5, 27,28, 34, 43, 433.De Candolle, (junior) ii. 40.Decapoda, ii. 186.Decline of the system, ii. 433.Decollated shells, i. 180.Deer, i. 350 ; ii. 285.Defiance, i. 184.De Beer, i. 240.Deglutition, ii. 127.Deiaroche, ii. 221, 350.De Montegr^, ii. 134.Demo-skeleton, i. ^.57.De Saussure (Th,) ii. 28.Des Cartes, ii. 259, 394.De Serres, ii. 153, 173, 342.Design, evidence of, i. 35.Design, unity of, ii. 437.Development, vegetable, i. 63.Development, animal, ii. 420.Diaphragm, ii. 232, 428.Diffusion of animals, ii. 51.Digestion, i. 43 ; ii. 132.Digitigrada, i. 367.Diodon, i. 301.Dioecia, ii. 418.Donee, i. 100. •^•Diplozoon, ii. 426.INDEX.Litera, i. 229, 248; ii. 87.Diquemare, i. 161.Distoma, ii. 86.Divisibility of matter, ii. 281.Dollinger, ii. 430.Dolphin, ii. 105, 313, 357, 431.Dora cristatus, ii. 219.D'Orbigny, i. 190.Doris, ii. 95,212.Dormouse, ii. 139.Dorsal vessel, ii. 171.Dory, i. 292.Dove, ii. 390, 392.Down of plants, i. 78, 79.Down of birds, i. 394.Draco volans, i. 53.Dragon-fly, i. 221, 246; ii. 343.Dreaming, ii. 376.Dromedary, ii. 161.Duckweed, ii. 414.Dufour (Leon,) ii. 156, 223.Duges, ii. 177, 182, 338, 343,347.Ducronor, ij. 106, 200, 313.Duhamel, ii. 19, ^,Dumas, ii. 279.Domicil, ii. 291.Mortier, i. 257.Duodenum, ii. 151.Dutrochet, i. 66, 141 ; ii. 224.Dytiscus, i. 35, 221, 236, 238; ii.222, 223.Eagle, ii. 97.Ear, ii. 299.Ear-drum, ii. 299.Earle, i. 386.Earths in plants, ii. 38.Earth-worm. See Lugubrious.Echinodermata, i. 147.Echinus, i. 149, 153; ii. 76,90, 212,272.Edwards, ii. 226, 381, 441.Eel,i. 294;ii. 219,Ego, ii. 419.Ehrenberg, L 25, 138, 140; ii. 71,338,41.5.Hermann, ii. 221.Elaboration, successive, ii. 17.Elastic ligaments, i. 87.Elater, i. 240.Elaine, i. 97.Electric organs, i. 36.Electricity, ii. 248.Elements, organic, ii. 12.Elephant, i. 53, 87, 339, a58; ii.10.5, 113, 119, 145, 161, 278,355, 394.Ellis, i. 115.Elytra, analysis of, i. 226, 246.Embryo, ii. 417.Emu, i. 404.Emydes, i. 328.Enamel of teeth, ii. 111.Endogenous plants, i. 71.Entomology, i. 92, 226.Entomostraca, ii. 348.Entozoa, i. 202; ii. 64, 86, 171,211, 380, 415.Ephemera, i. 221 ; ii. 174.^Epidermis, vegetable, i. 75.Epidermis, animal, i. 90, 168.Epiphragma, i. 183.Equivocal generation, ii. 415.Equorea, ii. 65.Erato, i. 179.Erect vision, ii. 367.Erpobdella, i. 195; ii. 182.Eryx, i. 310.Esox, i. 296.Ethmoid bone, ii. 283.Eudora, ii. 69.Euler, ii. 33-5.Eunice, ii. 338.Euphorbia, ii. 48.Euryale, i. 155.Eustachian tube, ii. 301.Evil from animal warfare, i. 47 ; iL53.Excretion, ii. 16.Excretion, vegetable, iL 39, 43.Exhalation by leaves, ii. 27.Exocetus, i. 377.Exogenous plants, i. 71.Eye, i. 37; ii. 325, 412, 413.Eye, formation of, ii. 424.Eye-lids, formation of, iL 430.Patricius, i. 144.Facial angle, ii. 394.Fairy rings, ii. 45.Fallacies of perception, ii. 362.Fangs of serpents, iL 120.Faraday, ii. 363.Fasciola, ii. 86.Fasciolaria, L 180.Fat, i. 97.Fata Morgana, ii. 374.Feathers, i. 392, 407.Fecula, i. m.INDEX.Fecundation, ii. 417.Feelers, i. 206 ; ii. 273.Feet-jaws, i. 207.Feet of birds, i. 403.Femuci. 205, 232,282.Fenestrae of ear, ii. 302.Ferns, i. 71 ; ii. 416.Fibre, animal, i. 81, 85.Fibula, i. 282.Fig-tree, ii. 41.% Fig Marigold, ii. 40.Filaments of feathers, i. 392.Filaria, i. 59.Flies, i. 71;ii. 416.Final causes, i. 17, 31, et passim.Fins of fishes, i. 292.Fins of cetacea, i. 336.Fishes, i. 88, 284; ii. 86, 196, 276,290, 348, et passim.Viviparous reproduction, ii. 409.Flea, i. 212.Flight, i. 242, 376.Flour ens, ii. 218.Flower, ii. 418.Fluidity, organic, i. 57.Frustra, i. 125, 127, 129.Flying fish, i. 377.Flying lizard, i. 378.Flying squirrel, i. 380.Focus, ii. 320.Johann, ii. 251.Follicles, i. 91 ; ii. 135.Fontana, ii. 430.Food of plants, ii. 19.Food of animals, ii. 47.Foot of mollusca, i. 163.Forces, physical, i. 20.Fordyce, ii. 126.Villa, ii. 418.French bean, ii. 43.Frog, i. 303; ii. 96, 160, 197, 311.Fucus vesiculosus, i. 61.Functions, i. 39, 42 ; ii. 55.Fungi, ii. 45.Circular bone, i. 390.Furcularia, i. 58.Fusiform roots, ii. 22.Future existence, ii. 407, 447.Gaede, ii. 66.Gaimardy i. 80.Cercopithecus, i. 380.Galileo, i. 70.Gallinffi, ii. 390.Gallop]. 342.Galvanism, ii. 362.Ganglion, ii 255.Gasteropoda, i. 166; ii. 128, 215,339.Gastric juice, ii. 1.34.Gastric teeth, ii. 123, 155.Gastric glands, ii. 134.Gastrobfanchus, i. 283, 289; ii. 88,351.Gay Lussac, ii. 224.Gecko, i. 319; ii. 277.Gelatin, i. 85.Gemmiparous reproduction, ii. 413.Gemmule, i. 119; ii. 414.Geometer caterpillars, i. 224.Germs, vegetable, i. 73 ; ii. 413.Verona, ii. 70.Gillaroo trout, ii. 147.Gills, i. 304; ii. 199, 214.Cymbals, i. 233.Gizzard, ii. 124, 155.Glands, vegetable, i. 67 ; ii. 39.Glands, animal, ii. 247.Glands in crocodile, ii. 290.Glands, gastric, ii. 134.Gretchen, ii. 71.Globules, i. 59, 81.Glossa, ii. 93.Glossopora, ii. 78.Gmelin, i. 115.Gnat, ii. 87.Goat, ii. 285.Goeze, ii. 337.Gonium, i. 138.Goose, ii. 127, 352.Gordian, i. 59, 198.Gorgon ia, i. 125.Gradation of being, i, 51; ii. 439.Grampus, ii. 105.Grallffi, i. 403, 407.Grant, i. 113, 115, 127, 129, 131,144,149, 185, 404; ii. 338.Gray, i. 161, 174, 183.Growth, vegetable, i. 72; ii. 21, 420.Gruithuisen, ii. 338.Gryllo-talpa, i. 241 ; ii. 273.Gryllus, ii. 177.Guinea-pig, i. 344.Justinian lectures, ii. 374.Gum, ii. 33.Gurnard, ii. 390.Gymnotus, i. 294;ii. 402.Hffimatopus, ii. 98.Harbinger, i. 151.INDEX.Hair, vegetable, L TO.Hair, animal, L 93, 226.Hair-worm, L 19B.Hales, it 26.Haliotus, i. 169.Haller, I 61.Halteres, i. 249.Hamster, ii. 138.Hancock, ii. 219.Hand, i. 375; il 278.Haiww, ii. 337.Hare,L^43;iL110, 1.39.Hartley, it 396.Harwood, ii 2^, 287.Hatchet ii.38.Hauksbeet iL 295.Haunch in insects, L 2(^ 232,Hawk, iL 97.Head of insects, L 228LHearing, iL 294, dolHeart, L 43, 107 ; iL 186, 425.Hedge-hog, L 361, 363.Hedysanim gyrans, L 100.Hewitt L 66.Helix, L 176, 183; iL 95, 339.HeUxnojL, iL 277.Hemiptera, L 220, 247; iL 87.Hemisphere cerebral, iL 391.Henbane, iL 4S.Henderson, iL 240.Hepatic vessels, iL 151, IM.Herring, i. 292.Herschel (Sir W ) iL 371.Hence (Sir John,) L 169; iL 38,dolHarvey, iL 206.Hesperia, L 250.Hexastoasa, iL 86.Hippopotamus, ii. 105, 112, 119,140, 314, 35.3.Hinido, L 106, 201; iL 78, 94, 182,21.3, .339.Hodgkin, L 81, 99.Hodgson, iL 2S5.Hog, L 280, a59; iL 140, 27aHolothuria, iL 151, 171, 212, 387.Home (Sir Everard,) passim.Honey-comb stomach, iL 142.Hooded sake, L 378.Hooks on feet of insects, L 234Hop, L 76.Horn, L 92, acornon beak of chick, iL 4^.Horae, L 356 ; iL 139, 284, 400.Hone-fly, iL 88.Hostilities of animals, L 47 ; iL 53.Houston, ii. 97.Huber, iL 274, 292.Human fabric, L 369; iL 39aHumboldt, iL 220, 224,240.Havens, L 2^2.Humours of the eye, iL 326.Hunter, L 87; iL 126, 137, 235.Hyena, L 344; iL 49, 110.Liberation, ii. 377.Hydatid, iL 6-5, 66, 41.5.Hydatina, ii. 74, 338, 379.Hydra, i. 123, 132; iL 58, 337, 379,411, 414. ^Hydrogen, iL 39.Hydrocephalus, L 22LHydrostatic acalepha, L 145.Hyla, L 309.Hymenoptera, L 229, 247; iL 88,177.Hyoid bone, ii. 99, 216.Hyrax, iL 139,Ichthyasaarus, L 3^.Ilium, L 281.Imlgp. L 219, 225.Incisions of insects, L 231.Incisor teeth, ii. 106.Incus, iL 302.Indian walrus, iL 106.Individuality of polypes, L 130.Infusoria, L 136; iL 379, 409.Injuries, reparation of, iL 10, 412.IiKH^nic world, L 2LInsects, i. 24, 88. 212; u. 150, 171,290, 309. 400.Insectivora, L 362.Instinct, iL 403.Integuments, L 89; iL 268.Intercellular spaces, L 63.Intermaxillary bone, iL 106, 443.Interspinous bones, L 276.Intestine, iL 77.Iriartea, ii. 40.Iridescence, L 169.Iris, L 105; ii. 327.Ischium, L ^2.Isis, L 126.Ivy, L 7aJacobson, iL 399, 400.Jerboa, i. 34.3, 371.Johnson, ii. 79.Julus,L213; iL ^42.Jurine, u. 399.INDEX.Kaleidescope, ii. 374.Kangaroo, i. 278, 343, 371 ; ii. 140,419.Eater, ii. 347.Verona, i. 138.Kidd, i. 241 ; ii. 223, 247, 273.Pierian, ii. 248.Riser, i. 61, 66.Kirby, i. 229 ; ii. 293, 342.Knight, ii. 417. ^Knots in wood, ii. 413.Koala, i. 363.Kolpoda, i. 139.Labium of insects, ii. 93.Labrum of insects, ii. 93.Labyrinth, ii. 303.Lacerta, i. 317.Lacrymal organs, ii. 330.Lacteals, ii. 82, 164.Lamarck, i. 115; ii. 71, 445.Lamina spiralis, ii. 305.Lamouroux, i. 115.Lamprey, i. 289; ii. 88, 218, 310.Lancets of litera, ii. 87.Language of insects, ii. 274.Lark, i. 401.Larva, i. 217, 218.Lassaigne, i. 226 ; ii. 134.Latham, ii. 134.Latreille, i. 207; ii. 225, 276, 347.Laws of nature, i. 20.Law of mortality, i. 44.Law of coexistence of forms, i. 50.Law of gradation, ii. 439.Law of analogy, i. 49 ; ii. 437.Leach, i. 161.Leaves, ii. 27, 38.Leech. see Hirudo.)Lemur, i. 367, 380; ii. 204, 355.Lens, crystalline, i. 56; ii. 327, 350.Lenticular, i. 78.Leas, i. 185; ii. 212.Lepidoptera, i. 217, 249; ii.87, 157.Lepisma, i. 212, 250.Lernffia,i. 216; ii. 421, 426.Leuchs, ii. 340.Leucophra, ii. 73.Leuret, ii. 134.Leeuwenhoek, i. 251 ; ii. 190.Libellula, i. 221, 247; ii. 343.Liber, i. 74; ii. 36.Lichen, ii. 21.Life, i. 39, 44.Ligaments,' i. 86.Ligamentum nuchse, i. 87, 346.Light on plants, i. 76 ; ii. 27.Lignite, i. 63 ; ii. 36.Lilium, i. 68.Limaxx, ii. 95, 226.Limpet. See Patella.Link, i. 66.Lion, i. 87, 342, 365; ii. 101, 278,392.Lister, ii. 169, 215.Liver, ii. 159, 248.Lizards. 97,277, 351,412.Lobster, i. 208 ; ii. 123, 186, 214,308, 383.Lobularia, i. 122.Loche, ii. 221.Locomotion, i. 110.Locusts, ii. 91.Loligo, i. 188, 283; ii.l95.Longevity of trees, ii. 434.Lophius, i. 293 ; ii. 276, 310.Loxia, ii. 98.Lucan, i. 252.Lumbricus marinus, i. 199, 210.Lumbricus terrestris, ii. 77, 87, 184,Lungs, ii. 192, 428.Lycopodium, i. 68.Locris, ii. 338.Lymphatics, ii. 250.Lymphatic hearts, ii. 251.i.?/07ief, i. 214, 222, 249.Macaire, ii. 43, 45, 47, 238.Macartney, i. 406; ii. 234, 235, 396.Macao, ii. 266.Mackerel, i. 295.Maclean, i. 52.Madder, i. 269.Madrepore, i. 126.Magendie, ii. 356, 375.Magnus, i. 180.Maia, ii. 194, 383.Malleus, ii. 302.Malpighi, ii. 268.MammsB, ii. 419, 431.Mammalia, i. 330 ; ii. 230, 312, 419.Man, i. .369; ii. 394.Man of war, Portuguese, i. 145.Manatee, ii. 10-5.Mandible, i. 206.Mantis, ii. 153.Mantle, i. 90, 172.Many-plies stomach, ii. 143.Marcel, ii. 47, 164, 238, 328.INDEX.Marginal, i. 179.Marmot, ii. 110.Marsigli, I 115.Marsupialia, ii. 199, 419.Marsiipium, ii. 352.Mastication, ii. 104.Mastoid cells, ii. 301.Matrix of feather, i. 397.Matter, ii. 363.Manor, ii, 370.Maxilla, ii. 93.Mayer, L 310.Mayo, ii. 432.Meatus auditors, ii. 299.Mechanical functions, i. 41.Meckel, i. 333 ; ii. 339.Medulla oblongata, ii. 391.Medullary substance, ii. 260.Medullary rays, i. 73.Medusa, i. 60, 143; ii. 51, 56, 65,210, 337.Meibomian glands, ii. 331.Melolontha, i. 214; ii. 92, 154, 171,223, 343, 345.Oesophagus, ii. 341.Membrana nictitans, ii. 352, 353.Membrane, i. 83.Menobranchus, ii. 231.Mercurial, ii. 44.Merges, ii. 98.Merry-thought of fowl, i. 390.Mesembryanthemum, ii. 40.Mesenteric glands, ii. 164.Mesentery, ii. 82.Mesothorax, i. 229.Metacarpus, i. 282.Metals in plants, ii. 37.Metamorphoses, i. 216, 303 ; ii. 442,443.Metatarsus, i. 282.Metathorax, i. 229.Milk, ii. 431.Millepedes, ii. 342.Millepora, i. 125.Mimosa, i. 100.Mint, ii. 20, 29.Miranda, ii. 411.Michel, i. 62, 6.5.Mite, i. 212.Mitre, i. 180.Modiolus, ii, 305.Molar teeth, ii. 107.Moldenhawer, i. 66.Mole, i. 361, 362; ii. 278, 356.Mole cricket, i. 241.Vol. II.Mollusca, i. 157 ; ii. 176, 276, 387.Monads, i. 2.5, 137 ; ii. 78, 409.Monkey, i. 367; ii. 110, 279, 400.Monoculus, ii. 348-Monothalamous shell, i. 191.Monotremata, ii. 199.J/onro, i. 97, 103; ii. 217.Mordella, ii. 34-3.Morphia, i. 249.Morren, ii. 182, 184.Mortality, i. 44; ii. 408.Mother of pearl, i. 169.Motion, voluntary, i- 41 ; ii. 375.Motion, vegetable, i. 100. ^Motor nerves, ii. 375.Mucous membrane, i. 90.Mucous glands, ii. 135.Mulberry, ii. 48.Muller, i. 136; ii. 70, 251, 340.Mullet, ii. 147.Multilocular shells, i. 190.Cultivates, i. 185.Mursena, ii. act, 392.Murex, i. 178, 182 ; ii. 95, 215, 340.Mus, ii. 130, a56.Musca, i. 235.Muscle, (shell fish,) i. 162, 164.Muscle, i. 97, 100, 214.Muscles of eye, ii. 328.Muscular power in plants, ii. 254.Muscular power in birds, i. 408.Mushroom, ii. 21.Musk shrew, ii. 101.Musical tone, ii. 297.Mya, i. 163.Myriapoda, i.212; ii. 180.Myrmecophaga, ii. 100.Mysis Patricii, i. 206.Mytilus, i. 162.Myxine, i. 283, 289 ; ii. 88, a5I.Nacreous structure, i. 168.Nais, ii. 78, 182, 338, 412.Narwhal, i. 53 ; ii. 105.Nature, i. 20, 25.Nautilus, i. 175, 191 ; ii. 194.Necrophorus, ii. 293.Needles in biliary ducts, ii. 159.Nereis, i. 195, 197, 201 : ii. 182.Nerve, i. 40; ii. 261.Nervous system, ii. 260, 378, 388^Nervous power, ii. 252.Nettle, ii. 40.Neuro-skeleton, i- 257.Neuroptera, i. 245.5SINDEX.Newport, i. 247; ii. 78, 155, 157,177, 385.Newt, ii. 311, 412.Nightshade, ii. 48.Nitrogen, ii. 18, 240.Nordmann, ii. 420, 426.Notonecta, i, 35, 238.Nursling sap, ii. 25.Nutrition, ii. 9, 15, 17, 47.Nutrition in lower orders, ii. 58.Nutrition in higher orders, ii. 80.Nutritive functions, i. 42.Nycteribia, ii. 341.Octopus, i. 188; ii. 348.Ocular spectra, ii. 361.Oder, i. 226.(Esophagus, ii. 76, 82, 129.Open, i. 246, 279.Olfactory nerve, ii, 281.Olfactory lobes, ii. 391.Oliva?, i. 175, 180.Priscus, ii. 382.Onocrotalus, i. 384.Operculum of Mollusca, i. 182.Operculum of fishes, ii. 217.Ophicephalus, ii. 219.Ophidia, i. 310.Ophiosaurus, i. 315, 317.Ophir, i. 155.Opossum, ii. 101, 419.Optic axis, ii. 354.Optic ganglion, ii. 345.Optic lobes, ii. 391.Opuntia, i. 100.Orache, ii. 40.Orbicular bone, ii. 803.Orbicular muscle, i. 105.Orchids, i. 62.Organic Mechanism, i. 58, 79.Organic development, ii. 420.Ornithorhyncus, i. 276; ii. 101, 130,277, 313, 350.Orobanche, ii. 45.Orthoceratite, i. 192.Orthoptera, i. '220, 245.Os hordes, ii. 99, 216.Osier, i. 152, 162, 163, 199, 201.Osseous fabric, i. 2.56.Ossicula, tympanic, ii. 302.Ossification, i. 263, 383.Ostracism, i. 300.Ostrich, i. 388, 404,407; ii. 135,162, 234, 390.Otter, sea, ii. 110.Ovary, ii. 416, 417.Oviduct, ii. 418.Oviparous animals, ii. 419.Novo-viviparous animals, ii. 419.Ovula, i. 179.Ovum, ii. 416.Owen, i. 388.Owl, ii. 235, 312, 354.Ox, horn of, i. 355.Oxygen, ii. 28.Oyster, i. 102, 161, 162.Oyster-catcher, ii. 98.Paces of quadrupeds, i. 339.Pachydermata, i. ^57; ii. 271, 278.Package of organs, i. 83.Pain, ii. 262.Salmon, ii. 383.PflZey, i. 83, 394;ii. 205.Palinurus, ii. 383.Pallas, i. 115; ii. 244.Palms, i. 72.Palm squirrel, ii. 130.Palmer, ii. 28.Palpi, i. 206; ii. 93.Pancreas, ii. 160.Pander, ii. 425.Panniculus carolus, i. 363.Panorama, i. 231.Paper nautilus, i. 191.Papilio, i. 251 ; ii. 343.Papilla, ii. 269, 279.Par vague, ii. 386.Parakeet, ii. 98.Parallax, aberration of, ii. 333.Parrot, ii. 130, 277.Pastern, i. 356.Patella, i. 167; ii. 167, 388.Patellaofknee, i. 282.Cancellaria, ii. 39.Paunch, ii. 142.Pearl, i. 169.Peccary, ii. 140.Pediculus, i. 212.Pelican, i. 383; ii. 130.Pelvis, i. 281.Pencil of rays, ii. 320.Penguin, i. 407.Penitentiary, ii. 138.Pennatula, i. 131 ; ii. 63.Penniform muscle, i. 103.Pcntacrinus, i. 1.56.Perca, i. 93, 301 ; ii. 219, 291, 349,392.Perception, i. 40; ii. 264, 358.INDEX.Perch. See Perca.Perennibranchia, ii. 230.Perilymph, ii. 303.Periosteum, i. 172.Peristaltic motion, ii. 148.P<fron, i. 80 ; ii. 56.PfaJ, ii. 240.Phalanges, i, 282.Phalaena, ii. 1^7, 348.Phanerog-amous plants, ii. 417.Phantasmagoria, ii. 374.Phantasmascope, ii. 368.Pliaseolus, ii. 43.Phenakisticopo, ii 369.Philip, ii. 13S, 256.Phoca, i. 336.Pholas, i. 161, 185.Phosphorescence of the sea, i. 143;ii. .50.Phrenology, ii. 397.Phyllosoma, ii. 382.Physalia, i. 14-5.Physiology, i. 30.Physsophora, i. 145.Phytozoa, i. 113.Pierced, ii. 145.Pigeon, ii. 131, 431.Pigments of skin, i. 90.Pigments of the eye, ii. 327.Pike, i. 296.Pileopsis, i. 182.Pineal gland, ii. 394.Pinna, i. 171, 164.Pistil, ii. 418.Pith plants, i. 73.Pithofquill, i. 399.Placing, i. 169.Planaria, ii. 86, 171, 181, 211, 338,402.Planorbis, i. 166, 17-5.Plantigrada, i. 367.Plastron, i. 321.Pleurobranchus, ii. 159.Pleuronectes, i. 299 ; ii. 3.54.Plexus, nervous, ii. 25.5.Pliny, ii. 394.Plumula, ii. 422.Plumularia, ii. 170.Pneumo-branches, ii. 225.Pnq^ mo-gastric nerve, ii. 386.Podura, i. 212.Powers, i. 249.Poison of nettle, ii. 40.Poli, i. 165, 171.Pollen, ii. 418.Polygastrica, ii. 73.Polypi, i. 122 ; ii. 58, 63, 210, 272.Polystoma, ii. 86.Polythalamous shell, i. 190.Portia brassica, i. 249.Pontobdella, i. 195.Poppy, ii. 41.Porcupine quills, i. 95.Porcupine, i. 363 ; ii. 110, 140.Porifera, i. 113.Porta, i. 144.Porpus, ii. ia, 140.Copperfield, i. 262.Potato, ii. 413.Prehension of food, ii. 86, 89.Priestley, ii. 28, 238, 240.Priests, i. .53; ii. 122.Pritchard, ii. 174.Privet Hawk moth, ii. 157.Proboscis of insects, ii. 87.Proboscis of mollusca, ii. 95.Proboscis of Elephant, i. 359.Progressive motion, i. 112.Process, i. 223Promontory of ear, ii. 302-Proteus, 1. 139 ; ii. 231, 442.Prothorax, i. 229.Prout, ii. 33, 36.Provencal, ii. 220.Proximate principles, ii. 12.Pterocera, i. 178.Pteropoda, i. 185.Pteropus, ii. 101.Pubic bone, i. 282.Pulmonary organs, ii. 192-Puncta lacrymal, ii. 331.Punctum salient, ii. 425.Pupa, i. 217, 220.Pupil, ii. 327.Pupipara, ii. 341.Pyloric appendices, ii. 160.Pylorus, ii. 82, 133.Pyramidalis muscle, ii. 353.Python, i. 310.Quadratus muscle, ii. 353.Quadrant, i. 367; ii. 110.Quadrupeds, i. 3.36.Quagga, i. 356.Quail, i. 401.Quills of porcupine, i. 95.Quillsoffeathers, i. 392.', i. 80.Rabbit, i. 343 ;ii. 110, 133.INDEX;Racoon, i. 90.Radiata, i. 124.Radishes, ii. 422.Radius, i. 282.Ranunculus, i. 69.Rape, ii. 337.Rat, ii. 110, 140.Rathke, ii. 443.Rattle-snake, i. 312.Ray, i. 24.Ray, i. 292, 293, 294; ii. 354, 400.Rays of fins, i. 294.Razor-shellfish, i. 162.Reaumur, i. 147, 149, 165, 173, 208 ;ii. 87, 125, 134.Receptacles of food, ii. 130.Receptaculum chyli, ii. 82, 165.Reed of ruminants, ii. 143.Refraction, law of, ii. 321.Regeneration of claw, i, 212.Rennet, ii. 143.Reparation, ii. 10, 14, 412.Repetition of organs, i. 54.Reproduction, i. 45; ii. 408.Reptiles, i. 302; ii. 197.Resinous secretions, ii. 40.Respiration, i. 44; ii 16, 191, 208.Rete muscosum, i. 90.Reticulated cells, i. 62.Reticule of Ruminants, ii. 142.Retina, ii. 266, 317, 327.Returning sap, ii. 32.Revelation, ii. 447.Reviviscence, i. 58; iL 184.Rhea, i. 404.Rhinoceros, i. 356 ; ii. 101, 112, 271,278, 355.Hemiptera, i. 246.Rhizostoma, ii. 67.Rhyncops, ii. 98.Ribs, i. 280; ii. 233.Ricinus, i. 212.Rings of angelica, i. 195.Potentia, i. 361; ii. 109, 112, 119,128, 139, 354.Roesel, ii. 337.Roget, ii. 368, 373, 408.Rolando, ii. 429.Roosting, i. 405.Roots, i. 78 ; ii. 22.Ross, i. 27.Rostrum, ii. 93.Rotifer, i. 58, 140^ ii. 70, 338, 379,415.Roux, ii. 400.Rudimental organs, i. 52 ; ii. 442.Rudolph, i. QQ.Rumford, i. 67.Ruminant, i. 345; ii. 142, 354.Rusconi, ii. 429.Isabella, i. 198.Sacculusofear, ii, .305. ^Sacrum, iTr'28T? J '^*2^o fSt. Ange, ii. 200.St. Hilaire, passim.Salamander, i. 309 ; ii. 96, 351, 419.Salicaria, ii. 45.Saline substances in plants, ii. 37.Saliva, ii. 128.Salmon, ii. 160.Sand-hopper, ii. 381.Sap, ii. 25.Sauria, i. 317; ii. 199.Savigny, i. 197, 207; ii. 90, 92.Saw-fish, ii. 122.Scala tympani et vestibuli, ii. 306.Scales of lepidoptera, i. 249.Scales of fishes, i. 92.Scansores, i. 404; ii. 390.Scapula, i. 281.Scarabaeus, ii. 343.Scarf skin, i. 90.Scarpa, IS'^; ii. 291, 305.SchcBfer, ii. 337.Schneiderian membrane, ii. 283.Schultz, ii. 41.Scours, i. 379; ii. 130.Sclerotica, ii. 326.Scolopendra, i. 213; ii. 180, 342.Scores, i. 143.Scorpion, ii. 224, 342.Scuta, abdominal, i. 314.Stella, i. 1.55.Scylla, i. 167.Sea, phosphorescence of, i. 143 ; ii.50.Sea-hare, ii. 95, 123, 388.Sea-mouse, ii. 77, 94, 213.Sea-otter, ii. 110.Seal, i. 336; ii. 285, 813, 356.Sebaceous follicles, i. 91.Secretion, ii. 16, 38, 243.Seed, ii. 416.Segments of insects, i. 227. \Semble, ii. 176.Semicircular canals, ii. 303,Senecio, ii. 44.Sennebier, ii. 22, 28.Sensation, ii. 258.INDEX.Sensibility, variations of, ii. 369.Sensitive plant, i. 99.Ser|prial power, ii. 256.Sensorium, ii. 358.Sepia, i. 188; ii. 95, 147, 293, 348.Seps, i. 317.Series of organic being's, i. 51.Serous membranes, i. 83.Serpents, i. 310; ii. 97, 120, 277.Serena, i. 198; ii. 211.Serves, ii. 427, 432.Sertularia, i. 124; ii. 170.Serum, i. 83.Sesamoid bones, i. 282.Sense, i. 197.Shark, ii. 119, 149, 189, 349, 400,412, 419.Sheep, ii. 113, 141, 293.Shell, i. 89, 168.Sheltopusic, i. 317.Shrapnel, ii. 302.Shrew, ii. 110, 278.Shuttle bone, i. 357.Silica, ii. 21, 38.Silk worm, i. 217; ii. 48.Silurus, ii. 219, 276.Sinistral shells, i. 176.Siphonaria, i. 182.Siren, i. 317; ii.231.Skate, ii. 216, 291, .349.Skeleton, i. 257, 279.Skeleton, vegetable, i. 76; ii. .36.Skimmer, ii. 98.Skin, ii. 268.Skull. See Cranium.Slack!. 61.Sleep, ii. 376.Slips, propagation by, ii. 411.Sloth, i. 333, 344, 361 ; ii. 204.Slug, ii. 95, 226.Smell, ii. 281.Smith, ii. 122.Snail, ii. 226, 287, 412.Snake-lizard, i. 311,Snout, i. 359.Snow, red, i. 27.Stammering, ii. 404.Soils, fertility of, ii. 21.Solar light, ii. 29.Solen, i. 122.Solipeda, ii. 256.Solly, ii. 251.Sorexx, ii. 101, 314, 356.Sound in fishes, i. 298.Sound, ii. 294.Spallanzani, i. 68; ii. 63, 125, 134,239, 399, 430.Spatangus, i. 151, 15.5.Spectra, ocular, ii. 369, 372.Spectre of the Brocken, ii. 374.Speed of quadrupeds, i. 343.Spermaceti, i. 334.Spherical aberration, ii. 333.Sphincter muscle, i. 105.Sphinx, ii. 157,245,384.Spicula, in sponge, i. 118.Spider, i. 202, 203 ; ii. 179.Spider-crab, ii. 383.Spider-monkey, i. 278,368.Spine, i. 271, 275.Spinal cord, or Spinal marrow, ii.388, 423.Spiracles, ii. 221.Spiral threads in plants, i. 62.Spiral vessels, i. 6.5.Spiral growth of plants, i. 76.Spiral valve in fishes, ii. 149.Spirits, animal, ii. 396.Spicula, i. 17.5.Six, ii. 182.Spleen, ii. 162.Splint bone, i. 1357. ^Spokes, curved spectra of, ii. 368.Sponge, i. 113; ii. 6.5.Spongiole,i. 69; ii. 22, 2.3.Spotted cells of plants, i. 62.Spring-tail, i. 213.Spur of cock, i. 404.Squalls. See Shark.Squalls priests, ii. 122.Squirrel, i. 361,379; ii. 130.Stability of trees, i. 70.Stability of human frame, i. 373.Stag, skeleton of, i. 350.Stamen, ii. 418.Stapes, ii. 302.Star-fish, i. 147. See Asterias.Starch, i. 63; ii. 36.Staunton, ii. 373.Stearine, i. 97.Steifensand, ii. 340.Stems, vegetable, i. 70.Stemmata, ii. 341.Stentor, ii. 74.Sternum, i. 280.Stevens, ii. 134. •Stigma, vegetable, ii. 418.Stigmata of insects, ii. 221.Sting of bee, i. 247.StipulsR, i. 78.INDEX.Stomach, ii. 57, &c.Stomata, i.68;ii. 21.Stones, swallowing of, ii. 125.Stone-wort, ii. 42.Stork, i. 406.Stratiomyp, i. 221, 245.Straus Durckheim, i. 214, 229; ii.Strepsiptera, i. 246.Striated structures, i. 169.Strombus, i. 178; ii. 215.Styloid bone, i. 357.Subbrachieni, i.294.Suckers, i. 105, 187, 235.Sugar, ii. 12.Sun, action of, on plants, i. 76.Surveyor caterpillar?, i. 224.Sus ethiopians, ii. 116.Suture, i. 267.Swammerdam, i. 247; ii. 293, 340.Swan, i. 385, 408 ; ii. 124.Swimming of fishes, i. 286.Swimming bladder, i. 298.Symmetry, lateral, i. 54; ii. 426.Sympathy, ii. 405.Sympathy of ants, ii. 276.Sympathetic nerve, ii. 254.Synovia, i. 84.Syphon of shells, i. 192.Systemic circulation, ii. 192.Tabanus, i. 235; ii.88.Tadpole, i. 303; ii 161, 229, 441.Tenia, ii. 64, 86, 171.Tail, i. 278, 361, 366, 402; ii. 278,443.Talitrus, ii. 383.Tapetura, ii. 356.Tapeworm, ii. 64, 86, 171.Tapir, 1.359 ;ii. 278.Tarsus, i. 205, 233, 324, 282.Taste, ii. 279.Teeth, ii. 104.Tegmina of Orthoptera, i. 246.Telegraphic eyes, ii. 347.Telling, i. 164.Temperature, animal, ii. 241.Tendons, i. 86, 104.Tendrils, i. 78.Tentacula, i. 122, 129; ii. 272.Terebella, i. 198, 199.Terra, i. 180.Teredo!. 171; ii. 211.Testaceous, ii. 226.Testudo, i. 325;ii. 392.Tetrodon, i. 292, 300.Textures, vegetable, ii. 60.Textures, animal, ii. 74.Thetis, ii. 212.Thoracic duct, ii. 82, 165.Thorax, i. 229; ii. 231.Thorns, i. 78.Thought, ii. 364.Threads, elastic, in plants, i. 62.Tibia, i. 232, 234, 282.Tick, i. 213.Tiedemann, ii. 171.Tiger, i. 342; ii. 101, 108, 109, 278.Tipula, i. 234.Tone, musical, ii. 297.Tongue of insects, ii. 93.Tongue, strawberry, ii. 279.Torpedo, i. 36; ii. 402.Tortoise, i. 321 ; ii. 352.Tortrvx, i. 310, 311.Toucan, ii. 98, 235.Touch, ii. 268, 375.Trachea of animals, ii. 210, 221.Trachea of plants, i. 65.Tradescantia, ii. 42.Trapezius muscle, i. 105.Tremble, i. 132 ; ii. 62, 337.Treviranus, i. 65, 66 ; ii. 400.Trichecus, i. 336.Trichoda, ii. 74.Trigla, ii. 392.Trionyx, i. 329.Tristoma, ii. 86.Triton, i. 182, 310.Trito;iia, ii. 182.Trituration of food, internal, ii. 122.Trochanter, i. 232.Trochilus, ii. 88.Trophy, ii. 92.Trot, actions in, i. 341.Trunk-fish, i. 300.Trunk of elephant, i. 358.Tuberose roots, ii. 413.Tubicolse, i. 199.Tubipora, i. 124.Tubular, ii. 169.Turbinated shells, i. 159.Turbinated bones, ii. 284.Turkey, ii. 127, 312.Turriteila, i. 180.Turtle, i. 321 ; ii. 146, 392.Tusks, ii. 105.Tympanum, ii. 299.Type, i. 48 ; ii. 439.Typhlops, i. 310.INDEX.Ulna, 1. 282.Ungual bone, i. 282.Unto batavia, i. 159.Unity of design, ii. 437.Uranoscopus, ii. .354.Urceolaria, i. 139.Urchin, sea. See Echinus.Utricle of labyrinth, ii. 305.Uvea, ii. 327.Valves, i. 36, 85; ii. 188, 206.Vampire bat, ii. 88,Van Helmont, ii. 19.Vaneoffeather, i. 392.Variety, law of, i. 2o, 48; ii. 438.Valley, ii. 183.Vascular circulation, ii. 170.Vascular plexus, ii. 268.Vauquelijiy ii. 166, 239.Vegetable kingdom, i. 25, 43.Vegetable organization, i. 60.Vegetable nutrition, ri. 19.Veins, i. 44; ii. 82.Velella, i. 144.Velocity of fishes, i, 301.Velvet coat of antler, i. 252.Vena cava, ii. 190.Ventricle of heart, ii. 82, 187.Ventricles of brain, ii. 391.Cerebellum, ii. 63, 337.Vertebra, i. 271 ; ii. 423.Vertebrata, i. 254.Reticulated arrangement, i. 76.Vesicles of plants, i. 61.Vespertilio, i. 379; ii. 101, 399.Vessels of plants, i. 64.Vessels of animals, i. 84; ii. 424429. 436.Vestibule of ear, ii.30aVibrations, ii. 396.Vibrio, i. 58, 138.Vice d'Azyr, i. 141.Villi, ii. 246.Viper, i. 310 ; ii. 419.Vision, ii. 315.Vision, erect, ii. 366..** Visual perceptions, ii. 366.Vital functions, i. 42; ii. 55.Vital organs, ii. 254.Vitality!. 29.Vitreous humour, ii. 327.Vitreous shells, i. 172.Viviparous reproduction, ii. 419.Voltaic battery of torpedo, ii. 402.Voluntary motion, i. 41 ; ii. 375.Volute, i. 170; ii. 95, 340.Volvox, i. 138,139; ii. 414.Voracity of hydra, ii. 61.Vorticella, i. 58, 136; ii. 74, 410.Vulture, ii. 131, 288.Wading birds, i. 403, 408.Walking, i. 340, 374.Waller, ii. 100.Walrus, i. 336; ii. 105.Warfare, animal, i. 47; ii. 53.Warm-blooded circulation, ii. 199.Water, not the food of plants, ii. 19.Water-beetle. See Dytiscus.Water-boatman, i. 35, 238.Wax, vegetable, ii. 40.Web-footed birds, i. 408.Weber, ii. 305, 339.While, i. 5;3; ii. 130, 313, 355,394.Whalebone, ii. 102.Wheel animalcule, i. 140.Wheel spokes, spectre of, ii. 368.Whelk. See Buccinum.Whiskers, ii. 278.Whorls of plants, i. 76.Whorls of shells, i. 176.Willow, i. 69.Wings, i. 243, 391.Winged insects, i. 214.Withers, i. 257.Wolf-fish, ii. 96.Wollaston, i. 77 ; il 45, 346, 401.Wombat, i. 363.Workhouse, ii. 28.Woodpecker, ii. 98.Woody fibres, i. 64, 66.Worms. See Annelida and Entozoa.Darrell, ii. 98.Young, ii. 335.Zebra, i. 356.Zemni, ii, 356.Xanthus, i. 123, 136.Zoocarpia, i. 119.Zoophytes, i. 113 ; ii. 337, 378.Nostra, ii. 146.Zygodactyli, i. 404.THE END