THETOURIST IN ITALY,THOMAS ROSCOE.ILLUSTRATED FROM DRAWINGSBYJ. D. HARDING.Onward we moved,The faithful escort by our side, alongThe border of the crimson-seething flood,Whence from those steeped within lord shrieks arose ;Some there I marked, as high as to their browImmersed, of whom the mighty Centaur thus : —These are the souls of tyrants, who were givenTo blood and rapine. Here they wail aloudTheir merciless wrongs." Cary's Dante.LONDON :JENNINGS AND CHAPLIN, 62, CHEAPSIDE.1832.LONDON :PRINTED 1)V J. IJAUDON, C ASTI.E-STH l:LT, FINSBURY.HER GRACETHE DUCHESS OF NORTHUMBERLAND,THIS VOLUMEOFTHE LANDSCAPE ANNUALis,BY PERMISSION',RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED.TO THE READERThe very general approbation bestowed by thepublic upon the two preceding volumes of the LandscapeAnnual has encouraged the Proprietors of thispublication to make exertions which, they trust, will,this year, secure for it a still higher character thanit before enjoyed. They have felt bound, indeed,to redouble their efforts to render this volume of thework, if possible, still more worthy of the presentrefined and enlightened era of the arts.Scenes of the most inspiring beauty — historiesequally connected with the brightest and the darkestperiods of man's career — fields strewed with therelics of many a perished city and generation — havesupplied subjects for the pencil of the artist, andthese have been elaborated with a degree of careand assiduity which, it is hoped, will reflect thehighest credit both upon the conductor of the plates,and upon the engravers. The Proprietors have atlength therefore rendered the work as perfect, ofits kind, as the genius of the arts can produce, andequally adapted to amuse and to instruct the generalII TO THE HEADER.reader and the tourist. To these, they have the gratificationof presenting accurate and spirited views,with descriptions founded not simply upon a passinginspection of the scenes, but on the most varied andcarefully collected information from numerous authorities,giving the different impressions they havemade on highly educated and classical minds, withrespect to their antiquities, their local traditions, andhistorical events.Switzerland, and the northern districts of Italy,have already been delineated in the Landscape Annualsfor 1830 and 1831. The brighter region of thesouth is now before us ; and the fourth volume, forthe year ensuing, will complete the Tour of Italy,embracing the most celebrated places situated on theeastern and western rivers of Genoa, with the no lessinteresting and magnificent scenery of the Val d'Aosta ; thus closing the series of Italian landscape', bythe passage of the Great St. Bernard, so as to formone connected and uniform work.The author of the Landscape Annual begs againto return his warm acknowledgments to several highlyrespected friends, his obligations to whom it wouldbe a far easier task to recount than to repay ; inparticular, to the distinguished and classical authorof " Italy," — and to the biographer of the " ItalianPoets"* He is also not a little indebted to someremarks on Italy by the late ingenious Mr. Bell.Lives of the Italian Poets. — By the Rev. H. Stabbing.CONTENTSPageMilanAgo Maggiore . . . . .29Florence38Ponte Santa Trinity .81Pelago112Temple of the Clitumnus .140Spoleto• 148Neri157The Lake of Semi161Gensano166Cliigi Palace, Alicia169Naples, from the Sea . . . .173Naples, Santa Lucia195Naples, from the Strata Nova207Puzzuoli .219Puzzuoli, with the Bridge of Caligula228The Castle and Bay of Bare236The Bay of Bailee246Castell-a-mare254Person257The Bridge of Vico267Sorrento .272Plain and Bay of Sorrento279Yietri .285Cetera .287LIST OF PLATES,ENGRAVED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF MR. JENNINGS.Frontispiece, — Milan Cathedral — Interior.Vignette, — Tivoli.1. LAGO MAGGIORE.2. FLORENCE, FROM THE Casting.3. PONTE SANTA Trinity, FLORENCE.4. PELAGO, NEAR FLORENCE.5. TEMPLE OF THE CLITUMNUS.6. SPOLETO.7. Neri.8. LAKE OF Semi.9. GENSANO.10. THE GHIGI PALACE AT L'ARICIA.11. NAPLES, FROM THE SEA.12. SANTA LUCIA, NAPLES.13. NAPLES, FROM THE STRADA Nova.14. PUZZUOLI.15. PUZZUOLI, WITH THE MOLE OF CALIGULA.16. CASTLE AND BAY OF BALE, TEMPLE OF MINERVA.17. BAY OF BALE.18. CASTELL-A-MARE.19. Person.20. BRIDGE OF VICO.21. SORRENTO, ENTRANCE TO.22. BAY AND PLAIN OF SORRENTO.23. VIETRI.24. Cetera.MILAN.Omnia qmv magnus opium velut .iMimla formalBzceUant; nee jnncta remit virginia Rowe. Ausoit.To walk the studious cloister pale,And love the high embowed roof,With antique pillars massy proof,And storied windows richly digCasting a dim religious light. Milton.Italy possesses attractions for the traveller not to befound in any other country of the world. Others mayretain the relics of nations great in glory as the Romewhich rose from her bosom. There may be others tooas beautiful in aspect, as rich or richer in flowers andfruits, and others more than her rival in the spirit-stirringrecollections of patriotic history. There is nothing sogrand or solemn in her ruins as in those of Egyptand Greece ; nothing so lovely in her valleys as inmany lands farther south ; nor, unfortunately for herhappiness, can the records even of her republicsinspire for an instant the same high and stern delightwhich is felt in the perusal of histories less deeplystained with the traits of private revenge and infamy :of histories in which, if deeds of blood be recorded — thewild fierce struggles of man with man, forgetting everyattribute of his nature but his love of liberty or ofpower — some conquest for humanity may be discoveredin the result, some answer to the sacrifice which hadbeen offered up, — the people that suffered renderedfreer and wiser ! But the states of Italy shed theirBI THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.blood in contentions of which the loss of independencewas to be the sole result; war ploughed deep everyfoot of her soil, and the furrows have been ever sinceleft open ! Even the struggles and sufferings of farholier men than politicians and warriors fill but a melancholychapter in the history of this unfortunate land.The blood of martyrs during one eventful period fell incopious streams in her various cities; but it was there,and there only, not the seed of the church — to humanapprehension it was lost like rain upon the desert.Still, though thus inferior in many particulars toother nations, Italy must ever be the most attractiveof all countries to the traveller; for it has a charm tobe found in no other, that, namely, of an almostendless variety in the character of its scenes, and ofthe details of its multiform and remarkable history.Within the circle of a few hundred miles, the Italiantourist views cities, each of which might be regardedas the capital of a distant kingdom. Rome has nolikeness to any other place either in Italy or theworld. Magnificent by its structures of later days,solemn and melancholy by its ruins, it lies buried inthe shadows of its former greatness, and its modernedifices derive therefrom a vastness of proportion inappearance which they would not possess if placed inany other situation. An ancient and a modern Romecan only exist in words. The power of her republicsand her Caesar will be felt to the last days of herchurch ; and it is not an extravagant conjecture thatthe influence of its recollections on the imaginationof its rulers was the first cause which convertedpontiffs into princes, and subjected the eagle to thecrosier. But how strange is the contrast between thiscity and Venice — as changed almost in her state, butbearing her loss of power and dignity like a queenthat cared more for her pleasure than her royalty !And nearly as great is the contrast between her andNaples, whose antiquity is that of the poets, as thatof Rome is of the historians; and through whose blue,sunny air, clear and tranquil as a mountain lake, weseem to see to the very depths of her classic ages. Andwhat likeness, even of the remotest kind, can betraced between Naples and Florence — the bright andbusy city in which liberty and art triumphed simultaneously,and the splendour of whose triumphs, withoutany aid either from antiquity or imagination, holds boththe reason and the affections in willing captivity to herfame ? Different again from these are the learnedBolognaromantic, ducal Ferrara — Genoa, still looking forthon the sea as if rejoicing in the victories of her admirals,and, lastly, ecclesiastic Milan, unlike any in particular,yet combining in some respects the features of all.In the Landscape Annual for 1830, we had occasionto touch upon some very remarkable points in thehistory of this city, and we then gave some noticesrespecting its magnificent cathedral. The subject ishowever so extensive that we think we hardly needto apologize for devoting a few additional words to it.The view given in the preceding plate is takenfrom the interior of the cathedral, an edifice wellworthy the fame which that noble building hasacquired throughout the world. When we go back toTHE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.the times in which it was commenced, this splendidmonument assumes a still more imposing grandeur inour eyes. Neither St. Peter's at Rome, nor our St.Paul's, was then in existence, — the only two templeswhich can vie with that of Milan, the idea of whichwas first conceived by the little Prince who thenlorded over that and a few other cities of Italy. GiovanniGaleazzo Visconti, who, as we formerly remarked,was the sovereign to whom the honor belongs of havinglaid the foundation of that church, was chiefly moved toitby that immoderate desire of glory, or rather by thatvanity, which prompted all his actions. His characterpresents a miserable picture of human weakness,though naturally a man of strong mind, brave, clever,and to the utmost degree ambitious. The sameambition which urged him to lay the foundation of theDomo of Milan, made him weak enough to accept astruth and approve as undoubted a most flattering andfabulous genealogy of his family. The name Viscontiis one of the most ancient, not only of Italy but of theworld, and he would not have found many who couldhave equalled his nobility, even had he been satisfiedwith the mere truth. But this was not enough,and nothing less than a Trojan origin couldsatisfy his silly pride. It was therefore gravelyattested that a grandson of aeneas called Anglo(Angles) founded Anglia, now Angeraa, or Anghiera,or the Ago Maggiore ; from Anglo descended theCounts of Angeraa or Anghiera, and from them theVisconti, following a long generation of kings, heroes,knights, saints, popes, and vagabonds of all ranks.MILAN. . r >It is a pity that no such grandson of Tenets wasknown to old English genealogists; he would havebeen honored as the first sovereign of Anglia with asgood a title as Brutus, from whom they say came theframe of Britannia. Several descendants or successorsof the Visconti were so proud of this title that,to the one of Duke of Milan, they added that of Countof Angeraa, and some of them, Latinizing according totheir fancy the words from Angeraa, called themselvesAngle. Lodovico Sforza added the word Angles tohis titles on his coins, and indeed he might be mistakenfor an Englishman by those who are not in the secretof his Trojan descent.A prince, however, who is ambitious of a long andsplendidly emblazoned genealogy, is seldom in want ofhistorians or poets ready to gratify him in his wish.The chronicles therefore of the Visconti are not wantingin that species of political allegory which favors thedreaming of imagination so necessary to keep up thekind of self-deception on which the pride of ancestrydepends. Thus it is related that in the year 400 apestiferous dragon existed in the neighbourhood ofMilan, which bore destruction to the inhabitants bothby its fiery breath and its daring invasion of theirretreats. The home of this dreadful monster, accordingto the tradition — and we see no reason why, likeother arbitrary monsters, the dragon should not haveexisted — was in a solitary, savage thicket, which coveredthe spot on which at present stands the Church of St.Dionigi. From this gloomy lair he was accustomed tocome forth into the peopled parts of the town, diffusingTHE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.pestilence as he stole along with heavy tread, anddevouring like a czar whoever came across his path.For a considerable time, the terrified citizens remainedsunk in the stupor of despair. No one thought ofencountering the monster any more than he wouldhave thought of combating with a storm, daring thedemons of etna, or defying the plague. Silenceand terror reigned throughout the place. The streetswere deserted, the doors of the houses closed ; and,when a traveller from some distant part chanced topass through, his heart sank at the melancholy aspectof the city, and he hurried on, deeming that a pestilencehad swept away the people, and that the houseswere filled with the dead or dying. This was the stateof the town even by day, but, when the evening fell, ithad a still more dreadful appearance ; for throughevery window streamed the small trembling ray of thewatch lights which were kept dimly burning throughoutthe night. In the streets, the crosses which hadbeen erected against the doors were seen glimmeringamid the tapers which were placed around them, butwhich being left untrimmed only served to make thedarkness and silence of the night more gloomy. Theonly signs which existed that any living being remainedin the city appeared in the vicinity of the old, solemn-lookingcathedral. The lights placed round its highaltar were numerous as on a grand festival day of thechurch, and every nook of its aisles and cloistersshone with the tapers and offerings with which thepiety and care of different citizens had adorned them.Through the high-arched and painted windows of thebuilding, the mingled stream of these numerous lightsmight be seen flickering like the red, uncertain rays ofa northern meteor, and with as strange and unnaturala beauty. The inhabitants of the neighbourhood, asthey occasionally peeped from their iron casements,crossed themselves with redoubled earnestness wheneverthey beheld their cathedral ; but at the hour ofmidnight, and after the city had remained throughoutthe long day and half of the night hushed inmelancholy silence, its heavy repose was suddenlybroken by the loud and solemn peals of the Miserere,which burst from the lips of a hundred choristers attie altar, was repeated by the crowds of suppliantsthat filled the aisles, and was re-echoed from everyhouse in which two or three trembling citizens withtheir families were gathered together, to encourage andcomfort each other in their sorrow.Several successive days and nights passed away inthis manner, and terror was beginning to be a worseenemy than the tyrannic monster which occasioned it ;the business of life was altogether at a stand; the fruitsof the field fell ungathered, and were left to rot on theground ; the cattle, forgotten by their keepers, sunkfamished in their stalls, and the flocks, which had beenpenned by their terrified shepherds, bleated in vain forthe pasture. Even the calls of charity reached onlydeaf ears, such was the effect of fear on the peoplewho had never hitherto failed in that Christian duty.The sick and the aged, who had not friends in their ownhomes, cried in vain for the help of their accustomedvisitors; and, as a still greater instance of the terror8 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.which prevailed, when a cry was heard in the streetsfrom some miserable creature whose temerity hadexposed him to the dragon, there was no one who durstgo forth from his house to help him.Such was the condition of the city, and the neighbouringdistrict, when the brave and magnanimousUberto Visconti formed the noble resolution of attemptingthe destruction of the cruel monster by his singlearm. Clothing himself therefore in a coat of mail, andtaking his sword and shield with which he had performedmiracles in battle, he prepared to proceedwithout attendant to the lair of the dragon. Thenight was far advanced when the perilous designentered his mind, and his youthful wife sunk on herknees in an agony of grief to dissuade him from theenterprise ; but he was resolved, and, disengaginghimself from her embrace, ordered the porter at thegate to withdraw the bolts. As he stepped into thestreet the chilliness and gloom which prevailed in theair had the effect of occasioning a momentary depressionin his spirits, and, he paused to commend himselfagain to heaven. He then resumed his way, and, as hepassed the cathedral, the midnight anthem burst on hisear with deep and unusual solemnity. The Misererethrilled through his bosom as if it were the appeal ofa whole people to heaven for his safety. The samefeeling was rendered still stronger as he hastenedalong the streets and heard the same sounds repeated,though with low and faultering voices, in almost everyhouse he passed. At length he approached themonster's retreat. The grave of a person long out ofpoind is scarcely so silent as was that melancholy spotThe air was wet with a heavy rain, but no drops fell,and no pattering was heard either among the trees oron the earth. The air itself seemed dead — it wasmoist, cold, and motionless. Uberto would have sunkto the ground, but he roused himself by striking hissword briskly and heavily on his shield. The clangof the weapon appeared to startle the country formiles around, and the warrior, awakened to new life,firmly awaited the coming of the monster. It soonapproached him ; huge, grim, and horrible, such as thepoets have described all of the same progeny; and theconflict between Uberto and him was in all its pointslike that waged between other knights and tyrant-dragonsof later ages. It is sufficient for the purposesof the Visconti genealogists that Uberto gainedthe victory, and that the city of Milan was restored byhis means to its former state of tranquillity.Other early heroes of the same race performeddeeds of valour equally renowned, and of a lesssuspicious character. The celebrated Aliprando Visconti,the son of Obizzo, was made general of militiaby the Archbishop Robert, and at the head of hislittle band defied for many months the whole strengthof the imperial forces under Conrad II. Eightthousand Germans fell beneath the swords of theMilanese on that occasion, and Aliprando himself, notcontent with the general triumph of his arms,challenged to single combat a German of extraordinarystrength and stature, named Beavers, and who wasnephew to the Emperor. The conflict took place under10 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.the walls of the city, and, coming to swords, Aliprandospeedily dispatched his enemy, after which he cut offhis head and carried it with his armour in triumph intoMilan, where he was hailed as the father of his country.The son of this prince inherited his valour, and waschosen on account of this and his other virtues to leadthe seven thousand Milanese who had taken the vowsof Crusaders to the Holy Land. Some time after thearrival of the army before Jerusalem, and while theywere preparing for the siege, a Saracen of giganticform was seen to cross the Jordan, and defy any ofthe Christian soldiers to single combat. The strengthof this warrior, it appears, had become a theme ofcommon conversation among the faithful, and no oneseemed willing to accept the challenge, till the son ofAliprand stepped forth and offered to support thehonor of the Christian army against the taunts of theinfidel. The combat was long and fierce, but theardour of the Milanese lord prevailed, and the Saracenfell dead beneath his sword. The fame of this andother similar deeds raised the heroes of Milan to thehighest rank among the warriors of Italy, and, poetryand romance uniting their efforts with signora vanity,it became an easy matter for the lords of later days todecorate their genealogies as they chose.But, to return to the cathedral, — although it hasalways been intended that the cathedral of Milanshould be finished according to the original plan, andconsistently with the style of architecture adopted inits earliest parts, yet the length of time which had beenspent upon it, the frequent interruptions to its progress,Mil, W -IIthe lore of change and of finding fault with cadiether's drawings which animated the different architects,have occasioned a departure from a strict adherence tothat plan. Notwithstanding this temple was begunso early as 1386, it is not yet completed, and thenumber of architects who have been employed orconsulted concerning it is incredible. The enormousexpense which was repaired to finish the work, independentlyof the length of time necessary for sculpturingso many statues and alias, bas-reliefs, and otherornaments in marble, was the main cause of this delay.Various inhabitants of Milan left most munificentdonations for assisting the progression of the building,and amongst others one Carcase bequeathed the sumof 230,000 crowns of gold for that purpose.In earlier times not only the tyrannical power of theDukes of Milan, but that of the Popes, and the produceof indulgences, were employed to forward the completionof the cathedral, and it was by the will of adespot that a powerful impulse was given to the speedieraccomplishment of the work. The facade of thecathedral had been often projected, and its erectionbegun, but as often interrupted, when in 1805Buonaparte ordered that 5,000,000 of Milanese livres,proceeding from the sale of the property belonging to thechurch itself, should be applied for that object. Nooriginal drawing existed of this part of the church, andafter long discussions the plans presented by CarloAmati and Giuseppe Zanoja were approved of, and inabout three years the facade was completed, as well asseveral other parts of the building. For the facade12 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.only there were produced more than 250 statues,forty-two bas-reliefs, and an immense number of otherornaments in marble suitable to the principles ofGothic architecture, which prevailed in this temple,and which was generally persevered in.The boldness of Giovan Galeazzo Visconti will appearin its true light, when we consider that he waslord of a small part of Italy, that his power was butof recent date, and that he was engaged in the mostdangerous wars during the whole time of his government.Although the family Visconti was ancient, itwas, however, inferior to many which it afterwardssubjected, even so late as the middle of the thirteenthcentury. Its elevation may be dated from about 1260,when Pope Urban IV. caused Tone Visconti to bechosen Archbishop of Milan, at the insinuation of CardinalOctavian degli Ubaldini, a furious Libelling,and the same whom Dante places in Hell among thematerialists ; as he is reported to have said that's if hehad a soul, he had lost it for the Ghibellines.The family della Torre, who then lorded over the city,and a member of which had been supported by the Guelphparty in his claims to the Archbishopric of Milan,would never allow the elected prelate to take possessionof his church, spite all thebulls and excommunicationsof Clement IV., who succeeded Urban IV. in the pontificalchair. Gregory X., who mounted the throne afterClement, was so pleased with the manner in which he wasreceived at Milan, on his way to the Council of Lyons in1274, by Napoleon della Torre, then the head of thefamily, that he forsook the protege of the Holy Church,MILAN. 13Visconti, and conferred the dignity of Patriarch ofAquileia on Itaimondo della Torre, brother to Napoleon,the same person who had aspired to be elected,instead of Visconti, Archbishop of Milan. This circumstancegreatly increased the influence of the house ofdella Torre, on account of the temporal power whichthen belonged to the see of Aquileia; but Visconti, findingthat the spiritual arms had been of little use to him,and now having lost even this support, determined totry other weapons to obtain possession of his church,and to humble his enemies. He left Rome, where hehad been staying to plead his cause and to solicit assistance,and, having arrived in the neighbourhood ofthe city, all the enemies of della Torre joined him. Byhis talents and activity he succeeded in driving himand his family from Milan. His episcopal charactergave him the support of the populace, who were accustomedto see the bishops at the head of the Guelphss ;and his principles, his connexions, and the hatred of thedella Torre family, gave him the command of the Ghi-bellies, and of the nobility. His commanding talentsrendered it easy for him to master both parties. Onhis entering Milan he was not only received by the inhabitantsas their Archbishop, but it was unanimouslyagreed to proclaim him temporal lord of the city.Visconti was endowed with great prudence and aconsummate knowledge of the world and of government; to which he united a mild, though firm, disposition; so that he succeeded in seizing the sovereignpower without bloodshed, and preserved it withoutstaining his episcopal character : a very rare occurrence14 The LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.in those times. When, soon after his entrance intoMilan, the family della Torre tried to muster theirpartisans to recover possession of their city, the Archbishopconcluded an alliance with William Lungaspada(Long-sword), Marquess of Montferrato, one of thebravest generals of his day, who was chosen governorof Milan for five years. The della Torre were by thismeans prevented from entering Milan, and subsequentlythey made their peace with the Archbishop, who stipulatedthat they should retire from his dominions andenjoy their property far from Milan.The Marquess of Montferrato then formed the designof depriving the Archbishop of his power in Milan,which he fancied the more easy as he had contrived toobtain the government of some of the cities near Milan,without opposition from the Milanese. He had, moreover,appointed one of his vassals as governor of Milan ;and possessed ample means from his other dominionsfor enforcing obedience to his will. But the Archbishop,having seized the occasion when the Marquesshad left the city for a short time to go to Vercelli, droveout of Milan the governor left there by him, and letLungaspada understand that his services were nolonger wanted, and that he was not to approach Milanagain.Although the Marquess was highly exasperated at sounceremonious a proceeding, yet he did not find himselfstrong enough immediately to avenge it. Hetherefore began to collect his forces for effecting it ona fitting occasion, and spared no pains to increase hispower and diminish that of the Archbishop, by meansMILAN.of treaties and alliances. The town of Asti, which hadmainly contributed to the elevation of the Marquess,being dissatisfied with him, joined several of the smallrepublics against him, and engaged in a war to accomplishhis destruction, together with the Count ofSavoy. The Marquess was moreover informed thatthe people of Asti had some secret negociationswith those of Alexandria, to induce them to revoltagainst him; and he hastened to that city to crushthe rebels. On seeing themselves discovered, the conspiratorswere driven by desperation into rebellion,and succeeded beyond their most sanguine expectations.They took the Marquess prisoner, and put himinto an iron cage, in which he was confined till hedied, about two years afterwards.The Archbishop Visconti, now perceiving the riskof trusting strangers with the command of his forces,had a nephew of his own elected commander of theforces of Milan and of some of the neighbouringcities. Neither the uncle nor the nephew (MafTeo orMatter Visconti) forgot to profit by the misfortunes ofthe Marquess of Montferrato. They seized upon suchparts of the dominions of Lungaspada as were convenientlysituated with respect to their own territory, andobtained the largest share of the spoil.On the election of Adolph of Nassau to be King ofthe Romans, the Archbishop succeeded in obtainingthe appointment of his nephew MafTeo as Imperial vicarlocum tenens) in Lombardy ; and the dignity wasconferred with unusual splendour, and accompanied withthe most ample powers. MafTeo, not to give grounds16 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.of suspicion to the good people of Milan, affected notto accept the honor till he had been permitted, or ratherrequested, by them. This imperial vicar, raised toso high a power, was ten years before an exile, andnearly reduced to beggary.On the death of his uncle, Maffeo preserved the dominionof Milan, notwithstanding the endeavours of hisenemies to wrest it from him, and also obtained from theEmperor Albert, who succeeded Adolph, a confirmationof his vicariat of Lombardy . Such was his influence thattowards the end of the thirteenth century he acted as asovereign arbitrator between the republics of Veniceand Genoa. But not satisfied with his present power,and being ambitious to become absolute master ofLombardy, he thought of connecting himself closelywith Azzo VIII. of Este, one of the most powerfultyrants of Italy, and the chief of the Guelph party.Azzo had no children ; but a sister of his, Beatrice,was then widow of Nino da Gallery, a powerful chiefof Pisa, and lord or Judice of the judgeship of Gal-laurain Sardinia, that is, one-fourth of that island.Although Beatrice was of a certain age, yet Maffeoand Azzo agreed that she should marry Galeazzo, son ofMaffeo ; by which alliance the two families of Este andVisconti expected to become absolute lords of Italy.But they were deceived ; for the other Italian princes,becoming jealous of Maffeo Visconti, supported thedella Torre in retaking possession of Milan, andMaffeo was obliged to withdraw to the court ofEste, where, resigned to his loss of power, he wassupported only by Azzo's generosity.MI1.W. 17Ridotto della Torre, then lord of Milan, sent a personto watch his actions, and promised to the emissarythe present of a palfrey and an embroidered dress, ifhe would bring him Maffeo's answer to two questions;first, How he fared? Secondly, When he thought ofreturning to Milan ? The emissary went to MafTeo,and found him living in a very retired manner; and,thinking that it would be easier to get the answer to theabove questions by telling him at once why they wereasked, requested him to help him in getting a palfreyand a new dress. Maffeo said that he was so poor thathe could not assist him ; but, when he was told that hewas only required to answer two questions, he understoodwho put them, and he therefore replied : As tothe first, that he fared well enough, as he was able toaccommodate himself to circumstances. With respectto the second, he said that he hoped to return toMilan when Ridotto's sins were greater than his.The marriage of Galeazzo Visconti with Beatriceteste was considered by Dante a death-blow to theLibelling party, and he bitterly inveighed against it.Although Nino of Gallery was originally a Guelph, hespoke of him not only with respect, but with affection,on account of his misfortunes. Nino was son of adaughter of Ugolino della Gherardesca, and, togetherwith his grandfather, commanded the Guelphss of Pisa.The Archbishop Ruggieri degli Ubaldini, with Lanfranc,Gualandi, and Sismondi, were the chiefs ofthe Ghibellines. Ugolino, wishing to become masterof Pisa, joined the Archbishop, and consented to sacrificehis grandson Nino, who was to be exiled or mure18 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.tered if taken. On being informed of this, Ninowithdrew from Pisa, and, having united himself withthe Ghibellines of Florence and Lucca, waged a waragainst Pisa, in which he lost his life. The ArchbishopRuggieri would not allow Ugolino to enjoy the fruit ofhis treachery. After Nino had fled from Pisa, Ugo-lino was proclaimed lord of the city ; but the Archbishopaccused him soon after of having entered intoan understanding with his grandson, and delivered uptohim some castles belonging to Pisa. The populaceran to his house, killed a natural son and a grandsonof his, drew out of Pisa all his relations, and havingtaken him, two of his sons, and two (others say three)of his grandsons, threw them into a dungeon, nailed thedoor, and starved them to death. It is on this factthat the splendid passage in the thirty-third canto ofDante's Inferno is founded ; and it is because Ugolinohad betrayed his grandson Nino that Dante places himin the sphere destined to traitors in the infernal regions.The passage of Dante which alludes to the marriageof Galeazzo with Beatrice is full of beauty. It occursin the eighth canto of the Purgatory. The affectionwith which Dante speaks to Nino, whom he is glad tomeet in Purgatory, when he was afraid lest he mighthave been lost for ever — the bitterness of his reproachto Beatrice, whom he detested as belonging to thehouse of Este, the object of Dante's unrelenting anddeep abhorrence — his silence against Visconti, whoseconduct he could not approve, and yet, not to lower thecharacter of a Sibylline chief, he would not openlycondemn, — all these are points which should neverMilan 19eioape the reader's attention in perusing those noblelines where Dante, walking with Sordello throughPurgatory, is represented as inviting him to descendinto the valley, and hold converse with the mightyshadows below.Maffeo Visconti returned to Milan a few years afterwards,and though he, as well as his family, wasrepeatedly expelled from it, his power could never bedestroyed. Maffeo survived till more than ninetyyears of age. The dominions of his descendants weregreatly increased before the time when they were dividedbetween Bernard and Giant Galeazzo, the latter of whomcontrived to take the former prisoner, and united hisdominions to his own, which he augmented still moreby conquest. At his death, Giant Galeazzo was masterof the principal towns of Lombardy, besides Padova,Bologna, Siena, and Bellona. His conquests arenow forgotten, and his family extinct ; but his namewill continue fresh as long as the cathedral of Milan —a magnificent record of his munificence, of his princelygrandeur, of his power, and of his vanity — shall meetthe traveller's eye.The catalogue of royal sufferers contains few namesthat more demand our pity than that of the unfortunateGiovan Galeazzo Sforza. This persecuted prince wasweak in body, and more amiable in disposition thanstrong in intellect. In the stormy period when helived, such a sovereign had little chance of remaininglong in possession of his authority. The ambition ofneighbouring rulers, and the constant struggle inwhich they were engaged, left little time for the patientc 220 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.cultivation of the arts of peace, or the establishmentof a system of policy, mild and tranquillizing, suchas could alone preserve a prince of Galeazzo's characterin the safe possession of his throne. But he hadanother enemy to encounter, far more formidable eventhan the most ambitious and powerful of his neighbor- s. His uncle, Ludovico Sforza, was the veryreverse of himself, both in mind and character. Bold,talented, and enterprising, he was one of those menwho, if not heirs to a crown, seem destined to win onefor themselves, or, if they are born to a kingdom, toextend their authority over empires. Had he been therightful sovereign of Milan, his lofty spirit and endowmentswould at once have placed him at the head ofthe Italian potentates, and in that situation hisambition would have been more characterized bymagnanimity than selfishness. But, with the consciousnessof guilt in his mind, the operation of hisabilities was continually interrupted. Though daringin his general conduct, he could not escape the influenceof those inward reproaches to which the boldbad man and the cowardly deceiver are equallyexposed. The splendour which he cast round hisstate was from the first like a glaring and uncertainmeteor, and the termination of his career was likethe extinguishing of a torch which had lit up this cityfor the night of a carnival.The young Duke Galeazzo had been left to the chargeof this ambitious man, by his father, the late sovereign,and had been kept from his youth under a tutelagewhich increased in strictness with his years. AnMILANalliance, however, was formed for him with the princessIsabella, the daughter of Alphonso of Arragon, andhis nuptials with that lady were celebrated with -apomp well calculated to deceive both the youthful pairthemselves and the assembled princes, as to the trueintentions of the crafty but magnificent Ludovico.The rejoicing with which the ceremony was attendedwere continued for a considerable time after the event.Peace reigned at the time through all the neighbouring-states,and opportunity was thus given for carrying onthe entertainments with unexampled grandeur. Noblemenfrom all quarters crowded to the tournaments, andthe court was filled with ladies and poets whose wholeoccupation was to keep up the gaiety and splendour ofthe scene. While pleasure thus reigned paramountthrough the state, many men, eminent for higherqualifications than those sufficient to grace the morefrivolous inmates of the court, sought Milan as offeringthe fairest prospects of fame and advancement.Thus it often happened that the company, who hadbeen amusing themselves at beholding a conflict ofknights, were entertained, on their return from thetournament, with the learned discourse of some famousdoctor, whose arguments, when he ceased, were combatedwith venturous scholarship by some otherprofessor of less notoriety, but greater skill. Paintersand sculptors at the same time vied with each other inendeavours to carry their arts to a higher degree ofexcellence than they had been yet known to attain ;and every class of artizans, whether employed inproducing the gay ornaments of luxurious dress, in22 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.ministering to the pampered appetites of feast-makers,or in manufacturing the necessaries of humble life,caught the spirit of the times, and the city, and everyclass of its inhabitants, seemed subjected to the spellof an enchanter, bent on keeping them in one continuedwhirl of giddy pleasure. It was in the midstof these festivities that the ambitious Ludovico laidhis deep scheme of usurpation. His unfortunatenephew, weak in intellect and naturally inclined todissipation, allowed himself to be easily dragged intothe vortex prepared for his ruin ; indulging his appetitefor pleasure, without regard to his dignity or health, hebecame every day less capable of either governing orresisting the aggressions made on his rightful authority.II Moro thus seemed of necessity to take upon himselfthe direction of public affairs ; and his vigilance andstrength of mind, his eloquence and profound capacityfor business, when seen in opposition to the weaknessand indolence of the unfortunate Giovan Galeazzo,could not fail of causing him to be recognized in theminds of men as the true sovereign of Milan.But Ludovico, not satisfied with the advantageswhich he might have lawfully enjoyed, deemed itnecessary to the continuance of his authority to employaspecies of coercion with his nephew which at oncestamped his character with cruelty, and degraded thepower he had attained into usurpation. With all hismanagement he was still but guardian to the Duke,and ambition urged him to seek possession of thesceptre itself as well as the authority of which it wasan emblem. His measures for effecting this objectMii w. 23were laid with a policy strongly characteristic of hisshivwd and penetrating mind. Aware of the financialcircumstances of Maximilian, Emperor of Austria, heoffered the sister of the Duke, Bianca Maria, inmarriage to that sovereign, with a dowry of 400,000florins in money, on condition of receiving a promisefrom Maximilian, that, as feudal lord of the duchy ofMilan, he would grant him the investiture of thesovereignty. The plea on which this transactionrested was drawn from the consideration that Ludo-vicowas the eldest son of Francis I. as a prince, thelate Duke having been born while their father wasstill in a private station. The talents of II Moro,and the splendour which attended his actions, blindedevery class of persons to the injustice of these proceedings; but, while the public thus easily forgot therights of Giovan Galeazzo, there was one who beheldthe injuries that were done him with burning indignation,and a deeply seated resolution to avenge hiswrongs. This was the high-spirited and much to bepitied Isabella, now the mother of two children, whomshe saw with herself and consort deprived of theirbirth-right and the common privileges of their royalty,and left to endure the contempt or forgetfulness of thepeople even while in the midst of them, and stillretaining the external decorations of sovereignty.The letter which she wrote to her father, while sufferingunder the two-fold distress of anxiety for herchildren and the most passionate sorrow for her belovedhusband, is conceived in a strain of mingledindignation and affliction. Her husband, she said,24 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.was old enough to govern his subjects without assistancefrom another, and desired to exercise his rightfulauthority, but was prevented by the usurpations foLudovico. The condition in which they were therebyplaced, she continued, was degrading in the extreme;and I would rather perish by my own hand, exclaimedthe indignant princess, than remain longer in such astate.This appeal roused the attention of the King ofNaples, who immediately sent ambassadors to Milan,desiring Ludovico to resign the authority he hadusurped into the hands of its lawful possessor; buttheir address was treated with indifference, and theKing commenced preparations for restoring GiovanGaleazzo to his throne by force of arms. Aware ofthese proceedings on the part of his enemies, II Morowrote to Charles VIII. of France, offering him hisassistance in attacking the kingdom of Naples, towhich that monarch had pretensions founded on apapal brief. Charles accepted the invitation withouthesitation, and his arrival in Italy was hailed byLudovico as the establishment of his throne. Nomeans, consequently, were spared to receive him withallimaginable honor. The inventions of poets andpainters were tasked to the utmost to aid the counselsof II Moro by the illusions or attractions of their art.The treasures of the state were again freely lavishedon magnificent feasts and spectacles ; and Charles, inhis progress through the duchy, every where beheldappearances of almost unexampled wealth and luxury.But at Paria the monarch beheld a spectacle of aMILAN. 25different kind. In the fortress of that town, themiserable Galeazzo, now in the last stage of a consumption,resided with his afflicted wife and childrenin a state of utter helplessness and desertion. Charlescould not be in the town without paying the prince avisit, and Ludovico, tremblingly alive to the suggestionsof jealousy, accompanied him to the apartment of hisnephew. Isabella saw the King enter her husband'schamber with a sudden feeling of hope, but it was asspeedily dissipated by the presence of the usurper, whowith an air of commiseration spoke to the monarch ofGaleazzo's health, as if he feared the occurrence of theleast circumstance that might discompose his spirits.All the feelings of resentment of which the heart of ahigh-spirited and injured woman is susceptible flushedthe countenance of Isabella at this spectacle of basedissimulation, and, throwing herself at the feet of themonarch, she besought him in an agony of grief tosave her husband and her children from the destructionwith which they were menaced, and to cease fromprosecuting his enterprise against Naples. Charles, itis said, was deeply affected at the despair whichappeared both in the countenance and words of thelady, and, though not allowing her to hope that hewould change the measures he had undertaken , he assuredher that he would not fail to mitigate, if possible,the misfortunes which seemed to impend over herfamily.Soon after this interview, and while II Moro and hisconfederate were at Piacenza, intelligence was broughtthem that Giovan Galeazzo had breathed his last. On26 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.hearing this acceptable news, Ludovico set out immediatelyfor Milan, and, having prepared his friends forthe event, he was declared, without opposition, rightfulsuccessor to the sovereignty. His injustice anddissimulation render the colour of his character andhistory sufficiently dark, and contemporary chroniclersrecord that he long laboured under the suspicion ofhaving added to the crimes of which he was guilty inthe eye of truth and honesty that of murder ; but evenambition can be patient when the prize is sure to fallwithin her grasp, and is too wise to place an unnecessaryburden on the conscience. Ludovico saw the hand ofdeath on his nephew, and he was too good a politicianto interfere with the work of so sure a minister.Till the death of Charles VIII. , II Moro reignedover Milan in tranquillity and splendour, and learningand the arts flourished beneath his protection, as if hehad been the monarch of a vast empire, instead of asmall principality. But on the accession of Louis XII.his fortunes suddenly changed ; his right to the duchywas disputed by that sovereign, and, after a vain effortto form a confederation against France, he was compelledto flee with his family, and seek an asylum inAustria. In his exile he received intelligence that thepeople of the capital had revolted against their newmaster, and he immediately collected a small force,and returned to Milan ; but misfortune still attendedhim ; the band of Swiss which formed the main strengthof his little army turned against him, and he saw himselfbetrayed without the power of resistance into thehands of his enemies. The remainder of his life .27seats a gloomy blank to the historian. For ten yearshe lay a miserable captive in the castle of Loches, inFiance, and there expired ; his mind, even to the lastmoment of his existence, occupied with schemes ofambition, of which he had already proved the fataldeceit, and which had converted his bosom (naturally,it appears, fitted for the nurture of many high andnoble dispositions) into a hiding-place for the worstand most dangerous passions.But it was to this man that Milan owed the loftysituation it once held among the cities celebrated asnurseries of the arts ; and it was he who first patronized,with just and princely generosity, the great master whocarried Italian art to a degree of perfection hithertoconceived in the minds of its professors. Leonardoda Vinci was a Florentine, and exercised his genius formany years of his youth, with distinguished success, inhis native province ; but owing either to the number ofartists at that time rising into celebrity in Florence, orthe inferiority of his income to his expenses, he foundit necessary, about the thirty-fourth year of his age, toseek another field for the exertion of his talents. Milan,at that period beginning to experience the effects of IIMoro's magnificence, offered the greatest attractions tothe ambitious artist, and he accordingly wrote to theprotector, expressing the desire he felt to enter his service,and setting forth in somewhat glowing terms thequalifications he possessed for becoming a useful ministerto so wise and magnanimous a prince. The fameof Leonardo was already spread over Italy, and availed himself of the opportunity of adding a28 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.man of such distinguished genius to the number of hisfavorites.The painter was no sooner established at Milan thanhis varied talents were called into constant use. Therewas no public festival but he was the master of theceremonies, the inventor of the spectacles, the machinistof the shows. As the counsellor and privatefriend of the protector, he was called upon to give hisadvice in affairs which most nearly concerned theinterests of his ambitious master, and, in addition tothese calls upon his attention, he was employed inerecting many public edifices and other works of importance,and in the continual exercise of the art whichhe more particularly professed.To the credit of Ludovico be it spoken, the subjectson which he employed the pencil of this admirable artistwere worthy of his genius ; and the universallycelebrated Last Supper, painted at his request, for theDominican convent at Milan, still bears testimony tothe liberal and enlightened patronage of U Moro, aswell as to the surpassing ability of Leonardo.The ruin of his patron's fortunes had nearly provedthat of the painter's. Da Vinci's habits of living werescarcely less luxurious than those of his master; and soonafter the flight of the latter he returned to Florence, wherehe assiduously pursued his art, and was, on the accessionof Leo X. to the pontifical throne, invited to Rome;but he received little satisfaction from this change ofresidence, and, returning to Milan, he became thepainter and distinguished favorite of Francis I., whocarried him to France, and in whose bosom he expired.LAGO MAGGIORE.I know a bank whereon the will thyme blows,Where cowslips and the nodding violet grows,Quite over-canopied with lush woodbine,\\ it ti sweet musk roses, and with eglantine,There sleeps Titania, some time of the night,Lulled in these flowers, with dances and delight.Midsummer's Niciit Dream.Echo non lnagi on bel cespuglio vedaI)i spin ficoriti e di vcrmiglie rose,Che delle liquid onde al specchio side,Chuse dal Sol fra I* alter queries ambrose ;Cost vote nel mezzo, che concedeFresco stanza fra l* ombre pin nascose :E la folia coi rami in modo e mist,Che 1* sol non v' entra, non che minor vista.Ariosto. Or. Fu. c. 1, 37.This noble collection of waters rivals in beauty theloveliest of the world. Language might exhaust itselfin searching for epithets to describe the exquisite clearnessof its waves, the sylvan grandeur of its verdantscenes, or the varied aspect which its vast and lovelypanorama presents of green solitudes and smiling villages— of woods where silence and meditation love todwell, and villas the resort of all that is bright andelegant in social life.The ancient name of this magnificent piece ofwater was Lacus Germanus, an appellation for whichantiquaries are at a loss to account, some ascribing it30 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.to the vernal sweetness of the air upon its shores, andothers supposing it to have been derived from the nameof some village in the neighbourhood. Its presenttitle of Maggiore is also accounted for in different waysby various writers ; some of them believing that it wasoriginally so described from the great accommodationit affords the inhabitants of the country for carrying ontheir trade ; and others, with a far better show of reason,asserting that it is so termed on account of itsbeing the largest lake in Italy. According to the measurementadopted by Paolo Morigia, it is forty-fivemiles in length, and seven in width at its broadestpart. The only lakes which come in competition withit are those of Como and Garda. But the former ofthese is only thirty-seven miles and a half long, andbetween four and five broad. The latter is wider thanthe Ago Maggiore, being from fourteen to fifteen milesacross, but considerably shorter, its length being aboutthe same as that of Como.The celebrity, however, of Ago Maggiore does notdepend entirely either on the beauty of the scenerywhich adorns its shores, or on its superiority in extentto the other lakes of Italy. In the towns andreligious houses which line its banks, men havelived and died whom their own church designates assaints, and whom both religion and humanity maywell regard as an honor to their race. Accordingto the calculation of writers who have described thislake, ten celebrated saints repose in its neighbourhood,which is also enriched with a more than usualproportion of venerable relics. Besides the saintsLAGO MAGGIORE.aiabove mentioned, seven of a lower order, termed beati,six men and one woman, were natives of its shores.The number of bishops, archbishops, preachers, anddoctors, who first saw the light in the same district, isincalculable ; and, to complete the fame of the Ago,it has been scarcely inferior in the production of greatcaptains and statesmen, so that Morigia perhapsspeaks truth when he says that it has ever been celebratedas the birth-place of men signalized in everykind of virtue, and qualified for every species of highdesign, in letters, arms, and science.If climate, indeed, or the general character of acountry, may be supposed to exercise any influence onthe dispositions of men, the moral and intellectualcharacter of the inhabitants of these lovely shoresought to be of the highest kind. The air, which alwaysbreathes with a gentle warmth, seems tempered by natureexpressly to keep the banks always covered with verdure,the waters always sparkling and pure, and the grovesever cool and fragrant. Nor is the land a churlishreceiver of the fertilizing dews which the lake furnishesfrom her bosom. The vine and the olive flourish on itsbanks in almost unexampled luxuriousness ; and grovesof cedars and lemons, and all the delicious and odorousshrubs of more southern lands, give to the country,when seen from the lake, the appearance of a flowerywilderness, only here and there broken and diversifiedby some small and fairy temple. The fruits equal, inflavour, the sweetness of the flowers and shrubs inodour, and Morigia says that if the gods, whom Homerrepresents journeying to partake of the banquet of the32 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.ocean, had known of the Ago Maggiore, they wouldhave gladly remained on its shores.Mention has been made in a former volume of theLandscape Annual of the Borromean family, of whomSan Carlo Borromeo was the most distinguished member.His relatives, however, were not all of the samenoble and benevolent character. One of them especiallywas as much celebrated for his gross andflagitious life as San Carlo for his wisdom and charity.As the good qualities of the other members of thisnoble family obtained little admiration, when comparedwith those of the excellent man just named, it has beensaid that ' one Borromeo belonged to heaven, anotherto hell, and the remainder to earth.'The three islands in the lake which have receivedtheir appellation from the family of Borromeo are fitjewels for the bosom of such bright and placid waters.That known by the name of Isola Bella is usually consideredas the most beautiful, and has been describedas ' a pyramid of sweetmeats, ornamented with greenfestoons and flowers;' a simile which Mr. Hazlitt sayshe once conceived to be a heavy German conceit, butwhich he afterwards found to be a literal description.The character of this fertile little island may be henceeasily imagined. It consists of eight terraces risingone above another, each of which is thickly coveredwith foliage of the richest hues and fragrance, whilestout branching forest trees spread their arms overthese exquisite and delicate gardens, and small silveryfountains stream continually down the slopes, and losethemselves in the lake. From the midst of this naturalLAGO M kOGIORE. 33furniture of [sola Bella rises a beautiful palace, therooms of which contain several paintings by Peter Molyn,commonly called Tempestaa, an artist of considerable genius,and who found refuge in this island, when pursuedalike by the sword of justice and the terrors of hisown evil conscience. The history of this painter is asdark and melancholy as that of any of his race. Hewas a native of Harlem, and was born in the year1637. The earliest efforts of his genius were employedin copying the hunting pieces of the celebrated animalpainter Fr. Sneers, but he soon became discontentedwith this branch of his art. His mind, passionateand imaginative, ceased to take any delight in the milderscenes of nature, or in representations which couldamuse men of a less warm or licentious disposition.Leaving the haunts in which he had before looked forthe subjects of his pencil, he sought the loneliest woods-andheaths within his reach, and there, or on the shoreof the sea, would pass whole hours listening with breathlessanxiety for the first murmur of the tempest, thesigns of which had attracted him from home. It wasin the midst of the storm that his mind appeared to acquirethe highest degree of strength and activity ofwhich it was capable, and, having treasured up theimages with which his excited fancy and the tempesthad supplied him, he would return to his study, andexecute pictures of storms and shipwrecks, of whichit would be difficult perhaps to say whether they weremore calculated to excite a feeling of the sublime orof simple terror. The power of his genius was thussufficiently striking to obtain him very extensive part.'J4 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.laity, and he received the name of Tempestaa, as theartist of the whirlwind and the storm. But, not satisfiedwith the praises of his own district, he travelled throughHolland, and studied with care the works of the mostdistinguished masters of his country. Having by thesemeans considerably improved his style, he set out forItaly, and settled himself at Rome. There his abilitiesattracted the notice of several men of rank and eminence,and he found himself rapidly advancing to thehighest station in his profession, in the very city which hadfostered Michael Angelo and Raphael, and which wasstill full of memorials of their greatness. It is not easyto tell how much influence this must have had on theambitious and enthusiastic disposition of Tempestaa ;but the dreams of ambition, and the natural characterof his mind, united to give Rome and all it containedan irresistible power over his thoughts, and he renouncedthe Protestant faith in which he had been brought up,and embraced Catholicism — a system in itself stronglyadapted to his character.This conversion of the artist was regarded by theprincipal persons at Rome with acknowledged satisfaction,and the count Bracciano almost immediately afterbecame his warm and munificent patron. The increasedemployment which he now found for his pencil appearsto have prevented him from indulging himself in theenjoyment of his capricious fancy, to the neglect of themore customary exercise of the art, and his paintings oflandscapes and animals were sought for with avidity byhis numerous and wealthy admirers. Thus successfulin acquiring reputation, his fortune rapidly increased,Lao MAOOIO&S. A5and lie was enabled to live in a style of magnificenceresembling that of the best and most prosperous of hispredecessors. His patrons, moreover, not content withcontributing to his affluence, employed their interest toobtain him personal honors, and he was dignified with achain of gold, and the high-sounding title of Cavaliers,after acquiring which he removed to Genoa.But the consequences of this prosperity were ruinousto a man of Tempestaa's character ; his feelings, naturallyvehement and licentious, gained strength withevery advance he made in wealth and influence; and acircumstance at length occurred which broke down theslight barrier which had ever existed, to prevent theirbursting forth in a torrent of destructive passion. Hehad, at the period of which we are speaking, been sometimemarried, but, a separation having taken placebetween him and his wife, he allowed his affections tobecome the sport of every object to which they mightbe casually attracted. While in this unsettled state, hechanced to meet with a lady whose beauty inspired himwith a deeper passion than he had experienced for theother objects of his dissolute intrigues, and, finding hisadvances repulsed with virtuous indignation, his love becamein an instant characterized by the wild, dark, anddesperate disposition which formed the basis of his mind.Finding at last that neither intreaty, nor all the resourcesof the most cunning intrigue, availed any thingwith the young and lovely Genoese, he ceased from hisdishonorable importunity, and pretended, with contrition,to demand her in marriage; but he was againrepulsed : his union with the Roman lady whom he hadr>236 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.espoused some time before was known to some personsat Genoa, and, when he pressed his suit, the friends ofthe signorina silenced his applications by confrontinghim with the disagreeable information that they were acquaintedwith his state. Furious with disappointment,Tempestaa sought his home, ready for the darkest deedsin order to effect the one wild purpose which wholly occupiedhis soul. After communing with himself forsome time in the retirement of his chamber, he wentforth in the same gloomy mood in which he was accustomedto leave the forest or the cliff, after witnessing astorm, and the ruin of the fairest objects in nature. Hebent his steps to the house of a man in whom he had discovered,by the intuitive penetration of such minds ashis, a recklessness and villany of disposition whichwould fit him for the execution of his design.Having explained to this person the object of his visit,and found him open to his wishes, he sat down and penneda letter to his wife, full of affectionate expressions, andrepeated assurances that he was sighing in painful solitudefor her company. He knew that the heart of theinnocent and much injured Bianca would leap with delightat the prospect of reconciliation with her husband,whom she most tenderly loved, and, trusting to this, hesent the letter by his accomplice, with whom Biancawas directed to hasten immediately to Genoa. Theevent turned out as he expected. His wife was in ecstasiesof joy at hearing of the return of his affections,and, without delay, set out with the messenger forGenoa. But Genoa she was destined never to reach.On the road the villain by whom she was accompaniedI AGO MAOOIORB. 37stabbed her to the heart, and she perished, as it was supposed,unnoticed by any earthly eye. It was, however,not so. Tempestaa was suspected, apprehended, foundguilty, and sentenced to be hung ; but the interest of hisfriends was sufficient to save him from an ignominiousdeath, and his sentence was changed into one of perpetualimprisonment. For sixteen years he lay in closeconfinement in one of the cells of the common prison, hismind retaining all its wonted activity, and his skill aswell as his imagination becoming every year more andmore conspicuous. Would, there is little doubt, haveremained to the end of life in confinement, but for thebombardment of Genoa by Louis XIV., when the prisonswere set open, and he escaped to the Borromean Islands.This remarkable man closed his evil but distinguishedcareer in 1701, and his paintings, which are rarely to bemet with out of Italy, are highly valuable.FLORENCE.Month superb, la cui fronte AlpineFa di se control i vent argive e sponte !Valle beate, per cui d' onde in ondeL' Anno con pass signor carmina !Search within,Without, all is enchantment ! 'Tis the pastContending with the present ; and, in turn,Each lias the mastery.Rogers.The Campagna about Florence presents few ofthose stern, melancholy features, that wild anddesert air, breathing around tombs and ruins, whichcast a gloom over the soul on the approach to thecapital of the ancient world. It gives a picture ofcomparatively busy and happy life, — of energy in theaction and vivacity in the voice and countenance ;the Arno and its banks, unlike the low sullen Tiber,sluggish and deserted, partake of animation if not ofcommerce ; the contains may be seen urging on hisdove-coloured steers, preparing the ground for anotherharvest ; the boatmen are on the river ; and womenand children are among the vines ; the careless jest,the song, the laugh of peasant girls, enliven the clearand sunny air, while the fairest of earthly cities is seenwith its grey-tinted hills, and Fiesole gently swellingin the distance, — its domes and towers and pinnacles,I'l.ORKNCK. 39—its olive groves, its gardens, and white painteddwellings, lying stretched, as if by enchantment, atyour feet. In the spirit of Italy's true illustrator, andour own favorite poet, —\\ ell pleased could we pursueThe Arno from bis birth-place in the clouds,So near the yellow Tiber's — springing upFrom bis four fountains on the Apennine,That mountain-ridge, a sea-mark to the shipsSailing on either sea. Downward he runs,Scattering fresh verdure through the desolate wild,Down by the city of Hermits,* and the woodsThat only echo to the choral hymn ;Then through these gardens to the Tuscan sea,Reflecting castles, convents, villages,And those great rivals in an elder day,Florence and Pisa — who have given him fame,Fame everlasting, but who stained so oftHis troubled waters.'In all continental cities, the public walk is invariablyan object of superior attraction ; nor is it conceived ofless importance in the charming environs of Florence.On the right of the Arno, a little beyond the citygates, is situated the Fascines a considerable tractof ground combined of wood and pasture, on whichwas erected a casino, or royal farm of the grand dukes,in 1787, the wings of which include buildings appropriatedto rural employments. Here, whence the viewgiven in the preceding plate was taken, through aspacious shady path, admitting a throng of carriages,II Sago Eremo.t Derived from the word cacao, cheese ; and signifying a rural tract for adairy farm, chiefly devoted to the use of producing that article.40 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.opens a variety of splendid and diversified walks, embracingat once the character of refreshing sylvan solitude,and a place of public resort and entertainment.Here also, amidst groups of lofty trees and floweringshrubs, is gathered the vintage, with other productsof the domain, and occasional entertainments aregiven by the court. At the evening hour, when thenightingale's song begins first to be heard, in themoonlight, or the lonely midnight watch, different objectsand passions render the Casting a favorite resourceto natives and visitors of all ranks. The dayis enlivened by the bustle and diversion of driving inevery style, from the grand ducal equipage down to themodest little calash ; while the paths on either side,under a canopy of rich trees, abound with persons ofevery rank, all elegantly attired, and apparently animatedand happy. After a smart and rapid movementof the equipages and cavalcade, there is often a simultaneouspause, when they draw nearly in front of thepalace, and enter on a series of recognitions, salutations,enquiries, nodding and passing over to each other,with all the appearance of a set conversazione in the openair. The deeper current of the Arno is here too seen enlivenedby the sails of little vessels on their inlandvoyage to or from Leghorn ; and on another side thehills, surrounding the vale, gently swelling in variousforms, appear crowned by the grand relics ofFiesole.A republic which can boast among its free-bornoffspring an order of intellectual nobility like that ofDante, Michael Angelo, Galileo, and some of theELORBNCB-IIMedici, may claim rank above the proudest Aristocraciesof the earth, and that fame which is the onlytrue nobility, of having through her gifted sonsministered to the instruction and delight of all ages —a praise too seldom disputed with them by crowns andcrosiers. It is thus we find that the history of Florencecombines many of the most splendid details of loftyindividual action with a narrative in the highest degreeinteresting to the political inquirer. Her citizensnumbered in their ranks poets and philosophers towhom all Europe turned when the light of learningwas first reviving on its shores ; and their love offreedom, their bold, restless activity, mixed with theirveneration for whatever was great or beautiful in art,have gained them the honor of a frequent comparisonwith the free and polished Athenians. Although it maybedifficult to calculate with accuracy how much realgood can be produced, or rendered permanent, amidstcontinual revolutions ; and it may be philosophicallyenough questioned whether Athens and Florence,in their proudest eras, had not more of the shadowthan the substance of social freedom and prosperity ; itis enough that they felt, and held that power of freedomin their hands, and cast not lots either with barbariansor with slaves. So long as one large portion of apopulation are deprived indeed of their rights, or haveno certain security either for their persons or professions,liberty, however preferable to abject slavery,assumes a very questionable shape ; and such assuredlywas too often the case in regard to both the celebrated42 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.republics of which we are speaking, through a longperiod of their existence.Florence owed, it is recorded, its foundation to Fiesole,and its increase to Roman colonies composed forthe most part of veteran soldiers from the armies ofScylla, of Julius Caesar, and the Triumviri. During theinvasions of the Goths, it was one of the foremost toresist the ravages of the barbarians ; and the heroismof its inhabitants entitled them to the admirationof their despairing countrymen. The ruin, however,which shortly afterwards swept, like a desolating blast,over the whole face of Italy, levelled its bravest citadel ;and, till Charlemagne changed the fortunes of Europeby his wise policy as well as conquering arms, Florencelay reduced to poverty and obscurity. Fromthe period of its re-establishment under that monarchto its becoming settled in a republican form of government,after razing Fiesole to the ground and incorporatingthe inhabitants with its own citizens, it sufferedgreatly from the contests carried on, with little intermission,between the nobles and the people; and itpaid the heavy penalty of blood and civil turmoilfor the freedom which it scarcely ever enjoyed inpeace.In the wars of the Guelphss and Ghibellines, or thepartizans of the Popes and the Emperors of Germany,Florence took a decided part; — but, in addition to thenatural difficulties of such a struggle, it suffered thoseof intestine divisions, — its citizens ranging themselvesunder the opposite standards of two principal families,FLORE time.the Neri and the Bianchi, of which the former wereGuelphss and the latter Ghibellines.The origin of these ferocious civil feuds is to betraced to the offended family pride of the Amadei andthe Donati, the Buondelmonti and the Alberti; — therewas scarcely a foot of ground between their noble residenceswhich drank not deep of their fiery blood ; thevery echoes had caught from the loaded air the frequentcries uttered in the sudden death-struggle withtheir rivals; and even the assassin cared not longer toshroud himself under the veil of night. A widow ladyof the Donati had a daughter of exquisite beauty,whose hand she had designed to confer on the eldestson of the house of Buondelmonte. Unhappily hehad already a betrothed bride in one of the daughtersof the Amadei; on hearing which the lady-mother,though extremely disappointed, did not despair of attainingthe object she had in view. Her house wassituated in a narrow street to the east of the magnificenttemple of Santa Croce, where rest the remainsof most of the honored great of Florence ; and by thisway she knew that on a certain day the young Buon-melmotte was likely to pass.fatal was the dayTo Florence, when at morn, at the ninth hour,A noble dame in weeds of widow-hood,Weeds by so many to be worn so soon,Stood at her door ; and, like a sorceress, flungHer dazzling^sjpell.'Confident of success, she stood with her lovely girlready to catch his eye, and addressing him as he44 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.went by: "I am glad, indeed, to hear that you areabout to marry, though I had reserved this daughterof mine purposely for you ;" and at the same timethe wily enchantress, lifting up her daughter's veil, exhibitedto him a countenance full of charms. Hestopped; he gazed, and was lost; — regardless of hisformer vows, the sight of her kindled in his heart suchan ardent desire of possessing her that he instantlyreplied upon the spot, " Since you have reserved herfor me, I should be most ungrateful, while there is yettime, to refuse such an offer. " The same day witnessedtheir secret nuptials; but, the affair having reachedthe ears of the Amadei, listening only to their rageand indignation, they leagued with the Alberti to takespeedy and signal revenge upon the author of theirdishonor. On the next Easter morning, a party concealedthemselves in a palace of the Amadei, betweenthe old bridge and the Church of S. Sterno, andwhile the young Buondelmonte was passing the footof the bridge, richly appareled upon a white charger,he was suddenly surrounded and assaulted under thestatue of Mars, and there slain.This was the signal for civil discord, and the contentionswhich were thus occasioned were only intermittedby the successive banishment of the leastpowerful among the combatants. Neither virtue, patriotism,nor genius, was a safeguard against theeffects of political animosity; and, among the manywhose lives were rendered dark and hopeless by condemnationand exile, was the poet Dante, who, after avain endeavour to repress the violence of popular fury,KLOKI \i Iwas driven from his home, and compelled to seek theshelter of foreign courts.His, alas ! to leadA life of trouble, and ere long to leaveAll things most dear to him, ere long to knowHow salt another's bread is, and the toilOf going up and down another's stairs.'After various turns of fortune the Guelphss were expelled,and retreated into the Vale of Arno; but, on*the death of some of their leaders, the parties becamereconciled, and united for a period in the formationof several orders intended to establish Florence as afree state. Military honors and the national armswere decreed, and the first act of this union was tocompel the states of Pistoia, Aretino, and Siena, toenter into a treaty of peace. It was of short durationat Florence; for the Ghibellines, to accomplish theutter overthrow of their enemies, leagued with Manfredking of Naples, who with a large force met theFlorentines near the river Arabia, where they sustainedso dreadful a defeat and slaughter, that those whoescaped, not daring to stop in their own city, soughtrefuge in the town of Lucca. Falling before Manfred'svictorious arms, Florence lost even the semblanceof her liberties ; and a council of the Ghibellines washeld to debate as to the policy of razing the entire cityto the ground.Farniata, a noble soldier, and the head of the Ghi-bellies, was the only one who opposed and overruleda design so vindictive and unnatural. The Guelphss46 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.who had fled to Lucca, having joined those at Parma,recovered several of their possessions; the Pope presentedthem with his own banner; and finally EarlGuido, the governor appointed over Florence by Manfred,was, after a severe contest with the people, drivenout with every mark of ignominy, and a regular andfree government under the Guelphss restored. Twelvemagistrates, a council of eighty citizens called theCredenza, and 180 forming the commons, were elected,and the possessions of the Ghibellines were dividedinto three parts, one of which was assigned to thepeople, the next to the magistrates of divisions, calledcaptains, and a third to the Guelphss, in recompence ofthe losses they had sustained. Shortly afterwards theFlorentines were excommunicated by Pope Gregory X.,and continued under his ban during the whole of thatPontiff's life, till they were absolved by his successorInnocent V.Added to the jealous power of the Pontiffs, the nobilityof the Guelph faction were now grown by successinsolent and tyrannical. Assassinations and otheroutrages were daily committed, and the offendersallowed to escape ; men of rank were screened fromjustice; and fierce dissensions between the patriciansand the commons ensued, the result of which led to theappointment by the latter of a Gonfaloniere, or standardbearer,whose office it was to assist justice andmaintain the rights of the community. His first act wasto bring forth the standard, followed by his men at arms,and raze to the ground the house of Glottis, because anindividual of that family had put to death a Florentineiix)iu'.N( i 47citizen in France. Severe laws against the nobleswere enacted, till, indignant at the checks placed upontheir power and dignity, they flew to arms under threeof their greatest leaders; while the people also in vastnumbers thronged to their colours, under the palace ofthe Lord Priors, near the Church of St. Proclus, andthey there deputed six citizens to govern with them.The patricians made head in three divisions of thecity, and, while both parties thus stood prepared foraction, a few religious men, seconded by some citizensof best repute, effected, though with extreme difficulty,a reconciliation; — those on the side of thepeople crying out for the charge, with every expressionof exasperation. At length both sides were induced tolay down their arms, though their mutual insults andjealousies continued.Yet never did the city of Florence present a moreformidable and imposing aspect than about this period,— abounding in population, in public edifices, andreputation in arms ; — the trained bands exceeded 30,000,and those of the country amounted to 70,000; whilethe whole of Tuscany was either in subjection to or inalliance with her. Fearless alike of Popes, of Emperors,and of her own exiles, Florence vied in powerwith the proudest states of Italy, and, could she havefreed herself from the demon of internal discord, shemight alone have bade defiance to the hosts of slavesthat have since deluged Italy's fair plains, and levelledthe wonders of her power, her intellect, her beauty, inthe dust. But in a country devoted to discord, — sacred,as it were, only to the Furies, — fresh divisions48 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.and dissensions, like the heads of the hydra, will renewthemselves ; and the most trivial accident is enough tofire the train which throws cities and kingdoms into ablaze. Among the leading families of Pistoia was thatof the Cancelled ; and it happened that Lori son ofGuglielmo, and Germ son of Bertaccio, both of thatfamily, being at play fell to words ; and, passing farther,Germ received a slight wound, an accident which muchdispleased Messer Guglielmo, who, imagining that bycourtesy he might remove any ill feeling, commandedhis son to go to the father of his wounded companionand request his pardon. The young Lori obeyed hiscommand; but an act of so much humility and humanityfailed to impress the harsh mind of Bertaccio, whocommanded his servants to seize on the youth even ashewas expressing his father's sorrow and his own forwhat had passed. Unmoved at his entreaties, the inhumanBertaccio only replied by having his handplaced upon a dresser, and severed from his arm withan axe; after which, with a stern air, he said: " Nowgo back to thy father, and tell him that wounds are tobe salved with steel, and not with words!" On hearingof the savage deed from the lips of his mutilated son,the father, summoning all his friends, implored themwith arms in their hands to revenge him ; while, Bertaccioassembling his, not only these families but the wholecity of Pistoia were divided upon it, and the factionsoon spread into Florence.In the month of May, while the festivals and popularsports were being celebrated, a party of young men ofthe house of Donati, accompanied by their friends onI InUI'.NCK. 49horseback, stopped to see some women dancing neatthe piazza <>f Santa Trinita ; and others of the Cerchicoming up at the moment, also attended by manyfriends, they spurred their horses and a little inconveniencedthem ; on which the Donati conceivingthemselves affronted drew their swords, and, the Cerchias eagerly following the example, much blood wasdrawn on both sides.Such were the disastrous results of this accidentalrencontre that both the nobles and people of Florencemixed with the Neri or the Bianchi ; and so great wasthe animosity thus excited that the magistrates, apprehendingthe total ruin of the city, dispatched delegatesto intreat the holy Pontiff to find some remedy forthese extreme disorders, and that one of the bloodroyal might be sent to reform Florence, and quell thepride of the Bianchi. The Pope's Legate at lengthsucceeded in bringing about a reconciliation ; but, onthe Neri refusing to admit their rivals to a share of thegovernment, he left the city in anger, after putting itfor its disobedience under excommunication. The attemptseems only to have added fresh vigour to thespirit of discord, and both Florence and the adjacentplaces continued for some time in a state of the mostrevolting animosity and confusion ; to all which a terrificconflagration added its climax of devastation andmisery. It was believed by many that it had been kindledby the Abbot Neri, Prior of S. Pietro Scarragio, a dissolutewretch, abandoned to every species of enormity,who, taking advantage of the people being engagedin conflict, perpetrated the desperate deed by first50 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.setting fire to the dwelling of a lady whom he hadseduced.About the same period a distinguished citizen, namedCorso Donato, was condemned to death, under the pleaof attempting to bring Florence into subjection.Being a brave soldier, and supported by his friends,he resolved to defend himself to the last ; barricadedhis house, and gave the populace so hot a receptionthat they were glad to withdraw, after many had beenkilled on both sides. Not liking to renew the assault,they next possessed themselves of the adjoining houses,and, taking him both in flank and rear, entered intohis mansion. Though thus encompassed with enemiesthe valiant Corso, cheering his friends once more to theattack, charged furiously upon his besiegers, and cuttingtheir way they actually reached the gate of Santa Croce.Most of his friends were slain ; he himself was hotlypursued and overtaken at Rovezano ; but, scorning tobe made the gaze of his victorious enemies, he flunghimself from his horse, when one of the guard of Cataloniadispatched him on the spot with his lance.An event now occurred which threw Florence intothe utmost alarm ; the Emperor Henry was preparingto enter Italy at the head of all the Florentine rebels,whom he had promised to restore to their country. Witha view to break the fury of the impending storm, the chiefmen of the city resolved to recal those who had notbeen banished by special name ; among the last of whomhowever were nearly the whole of the Ghibellines, someof the Bianchi, and the celebrated Dante. They fartherapplied for aid to the King of Naples, and, unableto obtain it on other terms, they agreed to deliver overto him the city for the space of five years. But theEmperor after being crowned at Rome, and declaringthat he would tame the fierce spirit of the Florentines,encamped his army at the monastery of San Salve,within a mile of the city. Here he remained for fiftydays without striking a blow, after which, despairingof success, he repaired to Pisa, where he entered intoan agreement with Frederick of Sicily to invade thekingdom of Naples, and soon after died.Freed from this danger, a series of fresh tumultsand excesses paved the way for the tyranny of Landof Agubbio, a ferocious soldier, who turned againsthis employers the arms which the Florentines hadhired. Scarcely had they begun to breathe, afterthrowing off this new kind of yoke, when appearedthe famous Castruccio Astrachan, who became lordof Lucca and of Pisa, and whose rising greatnessand military genius struck terror into the hearts ofthe Florentines. Their discord ceased ; Castrucciowas at the head of the Ghibellines, and already layingsiege to Prato, which however they succeeded in relieving,and he retired. The life of this man aboundsin extraordinary exploit, and still more extraordinaryadventure. Banished, and left destitute in youth, hemet the rebuffs of fortune with scornful and unyieldingspirit; set out on his travels, and first visited England.But meeting only with cold looks from a wealthy relative,settled there as a merchant, he boldly presentedhimself at the court, where his natural capacity andaccomplishments speedily recommended him to thee2.V2 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.notice not only of the English nobles, but of King Edwardhimself, from whose side he was seldom absent,either in the gay carousal or the stormier sport ofwar. It so happened that, playing one day at billiardswith a favorite courtier, he was struck by thelatter a blow on the face, when, indignant at the injury,he drew his sword, and laid the proud insulterdead at his feet. He was forthwith compelled to consulthis safety, the friendship of the monarch, whomhe had made cognisant of the whole affair, affordinghim time to effect his escape.Withdrawing to Flanders, and thence to France,Castruccio entered the service of King Philip, Edward'ssworn enemy, where he distinguished himself inseveral campaigns, and rose rapidly into higher rank,till, a favorable opportunity occurring, he returned tohis native Lucca, and was received by Uguccione, thegovernor of that city, with every mark of attention andrespect. These he requited by expelling his enemiesthe Obizzi, with the partizans of Robert, King of Naples,who favored the Guelphss and Bianchi ; and bysubjugating the rest of the citizens to his patron's dominion.Several sanguinary combats however ensued,among which the terrible day of Monte Catini, if weareto believe historians, witnessed full 30,000 soldiersstretched upon the field of slain. Among the deadwere also Piero Tempestaa, brother of the King of Naples,and Francesco, son of Uguccione ; the Prince ofTarentum was made prisoner ; and Castruccio himselfgrievously wounded. Victory declared in his favor;but, jealous of his influence with the people of Lucca,I I.OlU'.M I . 53l guccione dow eagerly sought his destruction; notwas an occasion wanting, for, Castruccio repeating hisEnglish experiment of killing a favorite courtier ofthe tyrant, the latter gave orders to his son to seize theculprit, and throw him, heavily ironed, into one of hisgloomiest towers. There he was condemned to death;but, fearing a tumult of the Lucchesi, the tyrant's sondelayed the execution; on hearing which Uguccione,then at Pisa, rode post to Lucca, and, bitterly reproachinghis son, declared he would hasten and himselfput in force the sentence. But, his ferocious intentionbecoming known, the people flew to arms, attackedhis palace, and, overpowering his guards, drove him andhis family from the city ; after which they lost no timein bursting open the prison of their brave fellow-citizen,Astrachan. He was instantly appointed general of theirarmy, and marched to oppose the Florentines, overwhom he achieved several brilliant victories, and returningin triumph was declared by common consentthe prince and patron of Lucca. Being next calledupon to head the whole of the Libelling force in Italy,he was equally successful, captured many cities belongingto theGuelphs, and reinstated some of the oppositefaction in Genoa. In his subsequent campaign againstFlorence he made himself master of Volterra, Prato,and Pistoia, often threatening the Tuscan capital itself;and such was the power of his name as to induce theEmperor Frederick to appoint him commander andvicar-general in Italy against the forces of King Robertof Naples. He was also invested with the dignityof a Roman senator; but the daring and eccentric54 TIIF LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.genius of the man shone conspicuous above all thetrappings by which he was surrounded. He caused tobe carried before him a banner, on which was inscribed," Fu quel che Dio voile," It hath been asGod willed it! and behind him was borne another,bearing the words, " Sara quel che Dio verra," Itwill be as God shall decree it. By the former, it isthought, he meant to express the perils through whichhe had passed, and by the latter a sort of contemptand indifference for the future, which, when foundedon so true a maxim, evinces as much sound philosophyin it as religion.It is humiliating to contemplate, as we proceed, thereverse of this noble character, and to learn that, seducedbv the blandishments of fortune and the acquisitionof power, Castruccio exercised much the samedespotism over his native city as had been employed byhis predecessor. Yet, eccentric even in the tyrannicaland barbarous practices which he employed, we areinformed that, on capturing a party attached to theAvogadri, he selected thirty from among the mostnoble, and causing them to be placed on as manyasses with their faces the wrong way, and the tail ofeach animal in their hands, he marched them in processionthrough the streets of Lucca; and on theirarrival he had the whole of these unhappy prisonersinhumanly hung. By this and similar excesses, healienated from him the minds of the Lucchesi ; manyconspiracies were formed against his person, but, thesebeing detected, he poured upon the authors the full vialof a tyrant's wrath and revenge. As if the states ofFlorence I .Lucca and Pish were too mean a theatre for his savageBwaj , he formed the design of possessing himself, bymeans of treachery, of the city of Florence, havingvainly attempted to carry it by assault. He seducedfrom their fidelity two Florentine chiefs; but, the conspiracycoming to light, the traitors were seized andput to death in the public square. The Florentines ingreat alarm now applied for succour to the King ofNaples, who dispatched his son Charles with a largeforce to assist them against their powerful and talentedenemy. The rival armies met at Serravalle, whereCastruccio, more experienced in arms, though with inferiorforce, having possessed himself of the castle andtaken his position upon the hill, engaged the allied troopsat so much advantage that he achieved a complete victory,routing the Florentines and making prisonersmany of their chief nobles and citizens. Hasteningnext to Pistoia, which had revolted from him, he tookit by storm, and inflicted a cruel retribution on theunfortunate inhabitants.The Florentines, shortly afterwards receiving strongreinforcements from Naples, again took the field; but,not choosing to confide wholly in their arms, they bribedtwo Italians and an Englishman in Castruccio's serviceto assassinate their master. This plot also wasdetected; and, while one day reviewing his troops, hedemanded of them in a fierce tone what penalty wasdue to the servants who dared to betray their sovereign? The reply of death ! death ! resounded fromthe ranks; and, beckoning with his hand, the publicexecutioner, prepared for his office, stepped forward.56 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.followed by the three conspirators, whose heads hesevered from their bodies in sight of the whole army.On approaching the banks of the Arno, the allies,headed by Charles of Naples, again advanced manfullyto the attack, but were again routed with stillgreater slaughter; after which the invincible captainreturned in triumph to Lucca, to give his troops repose.Threatening next to subdue all Tuscany, and refusingthe proffered terms of peace, Castruccio waspublicly excommunicated by the Holy Pontiff as a persecutorof the church and an enemy to all mankind.The fearless captain only laughed to scorn the armwhich was raised but could not strike, and, on receivingthe ban, he simply enquired whether excommunicatedpersons could eat; and, being answered in theaffirmative, he said: " Well, I prefer to live an outlawwith my friends to receiving absolution and starvingamong traitors." In vain did the Florentines attempt torecover their lost possessions ; they were constantly metand foiled by the daring and unsubdued genius of theirrival. Stung by these repeated efforts to throw off hisyoke, he became desperate and cruel, putting the noblestfamilies to death, and inflicting the most singularpunishments which his extravagant and atrocious geniuscould devise. When a city revolted, he wouldoften ride post and enter it at full gallop attended byonly twenty horsemen, and, his army being deemed athand, his presence alone produced obedience ; and asudden silence reigned throughout the streets. The Florentineswere finally reduced, at considerable sacrifices,to offer terms of peace; which being accepted, soonFLORENCE. 57afterwards the famous Castruccio, their invincible andimplacable foe, the foe of his country, and, according tothe apostolic ban, of all mankind, breathed his lastsigh, dying a natural death , Fortune having never,as it were, deserted the side of her favorite son to thelast. This event occurred in the year 1328.The war with the church continued for some timewith various success ; dreadful commotions ensued,and to such excesses did the parties proceed that theGonfaloniere, or chief magistrate, unfurling the popularstandard, proceeded to address the people, beseechingthem to spare the city from destruction. On theother hand a plebeian orator rose up, and incited them,with perfect sang froid and some wit, to commit everyspecies of mischief and spoliation, proposing to changeclothes with the nobility, and set them to some usefulwork. The seignory were drawn out of the palace, andMichael de Land, a wool-comber, was appointedGonfaloniere and lord of the triumphant people.Bearing the standard of Justice, he ran barefoot, followedby his ragged subjects, up the palace steps, and,mounting the place where the nobles used to give audience,he exclaimed, turning to the multitude, " Yousee that this palace is yours, this city is yours, and allisin your hands ; what is now your opinion as to howthey shall be disposed of?" " We will have you," wasthe cry, " for our Gonfaloniere, and you shall governthe city as you think fit." Being an acute and wilyrogue, more indebted to nature than to fortune, hetook them at their word. " Be it so," he replied,and first make speedy search for one Ser Nato, whom58 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Messer Lap deCastiglionchio meant to have made Bar-gallo,or head serjeant, over us ; we will hang him forthwith."Most of the ragged troops that were about himreadily obeyed this injunction, which he followed up byissuing a proclamation that none should dare to burnor steal any thing; and, as a sign he was in earnest,he caused a gibbet to be erected in the public square.He next declared that, as he was king, he would havea radical reform ; he annulled the syndics of the tradesand made new, deprived the lords and colleges of themagistracy, and burnt the purses of offices. MeanwhileSer Nato was brought into the square, and beinghung by one foot on the gibbet, every one slashing apiece from his body, there was very shortly nothing leftbut his foot. The Council of Eight believing themselves,since the lords were departed, to be the chief magistratesof the city, had already begun to make a new electionof peers ; which coming to Michael's ears, he sentto tell them to desist and get out of the palace, as heintended it for their betters, and would let every onesee that he knew how to govern Florence without theircounsel. Like the celebrated Parliament of Saints, thecouncil were fain to follow the Protector's orders, andquickly gave place. Taking possession, he assemblednew syndics of the people, and created a Seignory ofFour for the labouring people; two for the greater,and two for the lesser trades. Besides this he made anew Quitting; that is, an importation for the choiceof magistrates, and divided the state into three parts.To Messer Silvester de' Medici he gave the rent of theshops upon the old Bridge, and conferred on himselfFLORENCE. 59the Porfcttiuia, or Bailiwick of Empoli. On thecommon people he bestowed gifts, in order to inducethem to be prompt and ready in defending him fromenvious attacks.Spite of all this, however, the people began to thinkthat Michael's plan of reform leaned too much towardsthe nobles, and that they, the rabble, had not beenadmitted to so great a share in the government as theydeserved. Again, therefore, they took up arms, and,marching into the piazza, they sent word to the lordsto come down to the Ringhiera, or place of audience,to debate concerning new matters. It was now theMasaniello of Florence began to experience some ofthe cares as well as the sweets of sovereign power;and, to humour his ungrateful subjects, he assured themthat they should have what they wished, if they wouldonly lay down their arms and go home. To this theyreplied by electing eight deputies from the trades, whoshould sit with the lords in the seignory to decide uponpublic affairs; and they revoked the grants which Michaelhad conferred upon Silvester de' Medici and himself.They next sent a commission to the lords,requiring them to ratify what had been done; andeven summoned their late favorite to account for hispublic proceedings.Irritated beyond measure, Michael resolved to punishtheir arrogance, and first, drawing his sword, he smotedown the insolent orator who had dared to dictate tohis sovereign, commanding his body guards to seizethe rest of the ringleaders. On this the populace inthe utmost rage flew to attack the seignory ; but King60 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Michael, aware of the approaching storm, judged itmore honorable to attack them in the rear thanto wait their assault, like his worthy predecessors,within the walls of the palace. He put himself atthe head of the more respectable citizens, who cameforward to defend their property, and, followed bymany men at arms, he led them, mounted on a whitecharger, to engage the enemy towards S. Maria Maggiore.But, by a manoeuvre, the rabble army reachedthe palace unseen, by another direction; and, on retracinghis march, he found they had already occupiedthe square, and were busily scaling the walls. Takingthem at once in flank and rear, after a hot skirmish heput them to the rout, some throwing down their arms,and others hiding or scampering away.Having gained this victory, he proceeded with singularmoderation, and, remarking the general dispositionto shake off the plebeian yoke, he yielded to it,and by means of a few of the better quality contrived toretain part of the power he had enjoyed under thepreceding administration, thus displaying a degree ofstatesmanship far superior to that of the Rienzi andMasaniellos of their times.This tragi-comic episode being closed, the restlessspirit of the Florentines engaged in new intrigues anddissensions. A grand conspiracy of the nobles and chiefcitizens came to light, the heads of which, includingPietro Albizzi, a man feared and honored by thepeople, were condemned to death. While the guest of aparticular friend, Pietro not long before had been presentedat table with a silver cup full of confects, undern.our.Ni I'. <>lwhich he found hidden a groat, iron spike, and, handing i(.to his companions, it was interpreted by them as an admonitionfor him to ' stop and fix the wheel ; for, Fortunehaving brought him to the very top of it, it was impossible,if it continued its career, that he should not fallto the very bottom,' — an interpretation fully verified byhis sudden ruin and death.About the end of the fourteenth century, the Florentines,more successfully to resist foreign aggression,took into their service Sir John Haywood, an Englishmanof great military reputation and experience inthe Italian wars. He fulfilled too well the expectationsthey had formed of him, having basely betrayedthe Pisans ; but the real enemy to their glory andrepose did not attack them from without, — discordand jealousy continued to rage in the heart of Florence,to wield the dagger, to drug the bowl, and fillto overflowing the heavy measure of confiscation, banishment,and death. Among these martyrs to theircountry was the noble Benevento Alberti, who, ontaking his departure for eternal exile, called together hisconsort, with the whole of his relatives and friends, andseeing them, says the historian, sad and full of tears, hetold them that they " ought not to grieve nor wonder,for it ever happens thus to men who among a greatmany wicked strive to be good, or would support whatmany seek to destroy. Love of my country makes mecontent with my banishment ; I shall be free from myenemies ; and they will be free from the fear which theyhad, not of me only, but of all who they know are sensibleof their wicked and tyrannical government. The62 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.honors conferred by my country when free, she cannotnow a slave take away from me ; and, of a truth, Ishall ever find more delight in the memory of my pastlife than sorrow for the infelicity of my exile. Thatmy country should become a prey to bad men, and beforced to submit to their tyranny and avarice, indeedgrieves me ; and I am grieved for you ; for, being nolonger near you, I fear that they will persecute youwith greater tyranny than they have persecuted me.Resolve within yourselves, therefore, to bear a mindsteadfast against all misfortunes, and carry yourselvesso that if any adversity befal you (as much certainlywill) the world may know you to be innocent, andthat not by any fault of yours had you deserved it."He then tenderly embraced his weeping family andfriends, and, having gained as great a reputation forgoodness abroad as he had enjoyed in his native place,he finally ended his travels by visiting the holy sepulchre,and on his return thence died at Rhodes.The persecutions. Alberti had predicted soon followed;but, having exhausted the noblest blood andenergies of Florence, the demon of discord slumberedfor a period, allowing an interval of nearly fifteenyears' repose. From this she was roused bya disastrous war with the Milanese, and the rabbleagain flew to arms, when scenes similar to those alreadydescribed occurred. Some of the most virtuouscitizens were driven into exile, others put to death,while numbers were only what was termed Ammonites,or admonished to show greater deference to the sovereigntyof the people. A war with Ladislaus, King ofFLORENCE. 63Naples, proved equally unfortunate, and would probably,as in that of Milan, have ended in the fall of theTuscan capital, had it not been for the death of thatmonarch; affording another remarkable instance of thehappy fortune of the most turbulent of Italian republics,a fortune which seemed to bid defiance alike to its owninternal distractions and to its disastrous campaignsin the open field. Previous to his death the Florentineshad invited Charles, Duke of Calabria, to assumethe reins of government ; but, being engaged in theSicilian wars, he deputed Gualtieri, Duke of Athens,to act for him, who, having succeeded in holding theinvincible Castruccio at bay, was elected captain generalin 1334, with the title of Preserver of the Florentinepeople. This he soon exchanged for that of theirmaster, and one of his first acts was to arrest Giovannide' Medici, captain of the Lucca guards, who fell avictim to his power. The ruin of most of the principalfamilies followed, and such was the intolerable tyrannyhe exercised, both over the nobles and the people, that,having fixed the day, they simultaneously rose in arms,and, displaying the standards of the people, rushed inthrongs to attack the tyrant and his troops at thepalace.Sensible of the impending storm, his adherents flewto their posts, and with their hired myrmidons engagedthe people ; while the Duke defended himself valiantlyin his palace, already surrounded by the people. Theprisons were burst open, the public archives burnt,and the houses of his obnoxious ministers sacked andrazed to the ground. ' Liberty,' and ' Death to our Ty-64 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.rants!' re-echoed through the city; and, finding; himselfhard pressed, Gualtiero ordered down the ducal banner,and the ensigns of the people floated over his palace.It was, however, too late; his troops gave way on allsides, and the people now called upon him to deliverinto their hands his two ministers and one of their sons,the instruments of his cruel power. He yielded ; andthe moment they were thrust out of the palace theywere torn into pieces by the indignant citizens, whosewives or daughters they had dishonored ; whose sonsor brothers they had slain. They then entered intoconditions with the Duke, consenting that he and hisfamily should retire free and unhurt upon renouncingevery kind of claim to the seignory of Florence and itsstates. Even his foreign guard and other troops werespared, and conducted out of Florence through denseranks of murmuring citizens ; and they trembled lestthey should share the fate inflicted before their eyes uponthe higher ministers of the tyrant's will. Nor is this asolitary instance of the generous and magnanimousspirit of a triumphant people, after ages of lingeringand intense oppression ; while we may seek in vain foran act of clemency on the part of despots and theblood-hounds of their tribe, when they once succeedin fixing or recovering the terrific power which crushesdown the energies of man, violates all human ties, andbids him prostrate his free soul and erect forehead —the image of deity — before his fellow, lower than thedust. More modern times, as well as those of whichwe are speaking, help to corroborate this honorableand cheering truth, while they have as amply provedFLORENCE. 65how destitute of all honor, religion, truth, or sympathywith any of those ties that hind mankind in general— with any thing good or great — are those usurpersof the rights and property of others, the despots, orrather monsters, of their species, who establish theirkingdom in blood, yet on a base of sand. It is bythis impious and reckless doctrine that modern Italy,Spain, Portugal, France, and unhappy Poland, afterachieving the most glorious victories over their oppressors,have been induced by appeals to their nationalhonor, by their moderation and humanity, to sparethose who never yet spared them, and to relinquish thefruits of that independence so dearly bought ; oftenwitnessing the return of the royal ingrates at the headof hired legions, spies, executioners, and bonds, to revive,in renewed vigour, those blessings of monarchywhich their people vainly spurned.Having recovered their liberty, a succession of fiercecontests for pre-eminence took place between the noblesand the people, which terminated in. the signaltriumph of the latter. New laws for each order wereenacted, and they were particularly severe against thenobles ; but, from this period to nearly the middle ofthe fourteenth century, there was an interval of unusualtranquillity, when Florence perhaps lost in generosityof manners, and splendour of arts and arms, asmuch as she had gained in democratic ascendancyand a more fixed form of government. It was now,too, that occurred the memorable pestilence whichBoccaccio with so much eloquence has described, andwhich carried off 96,000 people, spreading terror and66 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.desolation throughout Tuscany ; yet, in the midst ofscenes like these, that enchanting novelist, with a forceof contrast true to the reckless spirit of such times,represents a party of Florentine ladies and cavaliersassembled in a pleasure garden to amuse themselveswith recounting tales of chivalry and love.^Yho has not dwelt on their voluptuous day]The morning banquet by the fountain side,The dance that followed, and the noon-tide slumber ;Then the tales told in turn, as round they laytoncarpets, the fresh waters murmuring ;And the short interval of pleasant talkTill supper-time, when many a syren voiceSung down the stars ; and, as they left the sky,The torches, planted in the sparkling grass,And every where among the glowing flowers,Burnt bright and brighter.He,* whose dream it was(It was no more) sleeps in a neighbouring vale ;Sleeps in the church, where in his ear, I ween, .The friar poured out his wondrous catalogue ;tA ray, imprimis, of the star that shoneTo the wise men! a phial full of sounds,The musical chimes of the great bell that hungIn Solomon's Temple ; and, though last not least,A feather from the angel Gabriel's wing,Dropt in the Virgin's chamber. That dark ridge,Stretching south east, conceals it from my sight.'It was not long before the distracted state of affairsled to the appointment of a committee of safety on therepresentations of the people, while the Holy Pontifftook advantage of their sufferings to invade Florence.Boccaccio. + Delamere, VI. 10.FLO K KM I 67No sooner was the dread of foreign aggression removed,than faction again reared its serpent crest, andfinally accomplished the ruin of a republic which hadacquired so much glory in arts and arms, had wagedso many important wars, and finally subjugated somany other states and cities to its dominion. Whatmight it not have achieved had it only been true toitself, combined its energies, and fostered its noblestchildren, instead of thrusting them forth, like an unnaturalparent, from its bosom, into exile and despair.Towards the close of the fourteenth century, thetreachery of Philip Visconti, Duke of Milan, who hadinfringed the conditions of peace entered into with theFlorentines, again compelled them to prepare for war.Having taken into pay Count Alberto, in order torelieve the town of Zoganara they came to action withthe Duke's forces, and sustained a defeat, renderedalmost ludicrous from the circumstance of the loss ofonly three persons, Lodovico Albizzi and two others,who fell off their horses and were stifled in the mud !This famous battle, so justly ridiculed throughoutItaly, gave the people fresh cause for murmuring, andinduced the Florentines soon after to take into theirservice Count Do, son of Brachia, with the celebratedNiccolo Piccinino as his military governorand leader in the field. In early youth, the latter hadbeen remarked by Sestio Capo, the head of a companyof horse, for his daring spirit in managing a fierysteed, and was by him invited to become a soldier.Such were the ability and valour he displayed that,though of obscure origin, Sestio did not scruple tof268 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.confer on him the hand of his daughter, a confidence,however, he had reason to regret, the young lady soonafter falling a victim to the jealousy of her husband, bywhom, like poor Desdemona, she was smothered duringthe night. Sestio, with just indignation, withdrewfrom him his former favor, and they continued on theworst terms together till the father's death. Unlikehis great predecessor, Cavalcade, Niccolo suffered manysevere reverses in his campaigns, but he rose fromthem with unconquered spirit; and soon afterwards,at the head of 1200 horse and 200 Florentine foot, heentered Romagna to assist Guide' Antonio against theDuke of Milan. Having reinforced his army, he attackedthe enemy from an ambuscade, and put himcompletely to the rout ; but, finding his services unresistedby the Florentines, he went over to the Duke, aproceeding which so incensed the Republic that by apublic decree an exact likeness was ordered to bepainted of him in the great square, with the headplaced undermost, as marking a violator and spurnerof all faith.This did not prevent his obtaining a series of successesover his angry caricaturists, after which he proceededto winter at Milan. There an attempt was made tocarry him off by poison ; but he partook too slightly ofthe viands; the cook and another accomplice werethrown into prison, and they then confessed that theyhad been instigated to the attempt by several Florentineresidents. Piccinino was next opposed to thefamous Carniola, the captain-general of the Venetians,who had joined Florence, and in this campaignFLORENCE. <>!>he also came off with the advantage, and captured severalplaces of strength. The Duke, his patron, however,suffered a severe defeat, but this did not preventhis sending a strong force under Piccinino to thesuccour of Lucca, then besieged by the Florentineforces. By a stratagem he took their camp bysurprise, put them utterly to the rout, and raised thesiege. He next made himself master of numeroustowns and territories belonging to their confederates ;and his reputation as a consummate soldier soonspread throughout Italy.The Florentines, aided by Venice, renewed the warin Lombardy ; while the great captain fell upon Pisa,and, after uniting his forces to the Sense, entered andlaid waste the Florentine territories. Astonished atthe rapidity of his movements, and his splendid successes,the Duke of Milan appointed him to the commandof all his forces, and adopted him into the familyof the Visconti. The celebrated sea fight near Cremona,between the Duke and the Venetians, tookplace at this period, in which the latter were overthrownwith the loss of eighteen ships of war, 1500slain, and 6000 prisoners. Almost as tremendous anengagement was fought between their land forces inthe territory of the Valtellina, in which Piccinino, afterrouting the Venetians, took the whole of their castlesin that vicinity. He next encountered the troops ofthe Church, over which he was equally successful ; andhe even formed the design of possessing himself of theHoly Pontiff's person by entrapping him. But theFlorentines, penetrating his secret, not only foiled70 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.he attempt by putting Genius IV. upon hisguard; but actually, it is said, dispatched a numberof bravos to cut off, by any means, however execrable,the man whom they could not cope with in thefield. Niccolo, incensed at such dark and relentlessanimosity, bitterly retorted on his Florentine prisoners,whom he caused to be put to death in the most strangeand revolting forms, even making targets of theirpersons, by binding them to trees and shooting atthem with arrows. He also caused their mangledremains to be divided and hung up in different partsto terrify their countrymen — acts by which he wellmerited the title of Piccinino il Cruel, or the cruellittle man.He now took the field against the celebrated FrancescoSforza, who had invaded Romagna ; and a seriesof stratagems and sharp skirmishes ensued ; but withoutfarther results, owing to the Duke offering termsof peace to the Pontiff. They were again opposed toeach other ; but the question of military superiorityremained still undecided. The Venetians also dispatchedagainst him the able Gattamelata, and a severeaction was fought, night only dividing the combatants.Combining their powers to crush the domineering geniusand pride of Piccinino, the Florentines and Venetiansnow renewed their league, and induced Sforzato lead their forces once more against their formidableenemy. After various successes they met in the mountainsof Verona, where a fierce and sanguinary battletook place, which terminated in favor of Piccinino,Sforza and his troops making a speedy retreat. HeFLORENCE. 71followed it up by another victory; and, proceedingalong the banks of the Ago di Garda, he assaultedand sought to fire the enemy's fleet; but the men leftin guard of the vessels crying to arms, and unitingwith the Venetian soldiers and sailors, fell on the smallforce of Piccinino in advance, and routed it: he himselfnarrowly escaped being made a prisoner. But amore serious defeat was at hand ; hearing that Sforzahad a convoy going to Brescia, he laid an ambuscadein the Vale of Ladrone, which being by an accidentdiscovered, he was suddenly set upon by the enemy'shorse; and, to effect his escape, he had recourse tothe aid of a faithful German, who conducted him in disguiseto a fisher's boat, in which he embarked on thelake and regained his own party. Not long after, he wasdefeated in a second engagement, and was so completelysurrounded that he could only save his life by orderinghimself to be thrust into a sack (a process which hisdiminutive person greatly favored) and carried on theshoulders of the same faithful German, through theenemy's camp, to a place of safety.But, not in the least dismayed, the little hero soonre-appeared in the field, and, carrying Verona bystorm, was among the first to mount the walls, andbecame master both of the city and the state. FrancescoSforza, however, marching with a superior forceto its relief, he was compelled to resign his conquest,and in his retreat through the territories of Brescia,Parma, and Bologna, he levied heavy contributions,pillaging and destroying many of the towns on his way.At Anghiari, in Lombardy, another well-contested THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.engagement took place, in which Piccinino was again routedby the pontifical troops, with the loss of 1800 horseand 1300 foot;* after which he retreated through Milanto the great terror of the inhabitants, from whomhe exacted enormous sums. Next passing the Po andthe Olio, before Sforza with a fresh army could againbring him to action, he recovered all the possessions hehad lost, thus making even his retreat a series of freshsuccesses. As Sforza was on his march, Niccolo withhis usual impetuosity approached to meet him, takingup a position within a mile of his camp. Such wasthe alarm he excited, that the enemy dared not ventureforth to provide themselves with water and foragefor their horses; but, just when he conceived himselfsure of victory, tidings arrived of the conclusion of apeace.Violently irritated, and abhorring repose, Piccininothen entered the service of the Church, and, havingbrought several places under its subjection, he arrivedat Macerated, where his old enemy Sforza, at war withthe Pontiff", advanced to attack him. A tremendousconflict ensued, during which the ambassadors of KingAlfonso and the Duke arriving, with instructions for atruce, Piccinino was once more disappointed of hisprey; and, enraged beyond measure, he withdrew hisforces, seizing on Tolentino, Gualdo, and Assisi, whichhe pillaged on his route.On reaching Terracina he was received by KingAlfonso, who advanced beyond the gates to escort him» The s'ibjcct of Da Vinci's famous cartoon, representing a battle ofcavalry.FI.OR11NCT 73with every mark of honor, and, handing him into thePalace, he addressed the people, holding Niccolo by thehand, and extolling him as the great captain of his age.He became allied also to the royal family, was declaredgeneral of the king's forces, and in three days resumedhis campaign. Pursuing Sforza, he arrived at Monte-lord,where he offered battle to the enemy, who declinedit. But the Venetians having sent a strong reinforcement,under Taddeo da Este, the Earl prepared forthe encounter, and each commander was seen everywherein the field, animating his soldiers, and frequentlyheading them, with the impetuous rivalry of militarygenius, and long personal emulation and envy, to thecharge. The contest was fierce and protracted, theEarl's army, though out-manoeuvred and in a badposition, fought bravely, and, Sforza himself making asudden effort to retrieve his ground, they charged theenemy with such impetuosity that the troops of Picci-nine gave way at the moment when victory seemedalready his, and he with difficulty saved himself andreached Fossombrone. Despite of fortune, he againappeared in the field, harassing his more fortunateenemy with indefatigable spirit and skill, till when oncemore on the eve, as he conceived, of a decisive victory,he was recalled by a mandate of the prince whosebattles he then fought. This seemed almost too tryingeven for the great soul of the little hero ; justly indignant,he poured forth a torrent of reproachful invectivein the presence of his princely employer, declaring thathis weak and dastardly policy had deprived him of theentire sovereignty of Italy. In a few days he retired to74 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.one of his villas, where, being seized by a slow fever, heshortly after expired in 1446, in the 54th year of his age,not without suspicions, though most likely unfounded,of having been poisoned.Numerous other examples from the line of Tuscanheroes might be adduced of high military genius, andheroic exploit. Never were devotion to country, andcontempt of cowardice, more signally displayed than byBragging, governor of the fort of Monte Petrosain the Florentine service. When the enemy had set fireto the place, and he saw no means of saving it, hethrew down all the beds and household stuff from thepart above, which had not yet taken fire, and, castingdown upon them his little children, cried out to hisenemies : — " Here! take these goods which fortune hasgiven me, and of which you may bereave me, but thegoods of my mind, where glory and honor reside, I willneither give you, nor can you force them from me."The enemy, hearing this, instantly ran to rescue thechildren, and brought him ropes and ladders to savehimself, but he would not accept them, "choosing," saysthe historian, "rather to fight to the last, and die in themidst of the flames, than live by the favor of theenemies of his country." Yet such was the versatilecharacter of the Florentines, that amusing instances ofan opposite spirit are not wanting, when they seemedto consider war as a sort of holiday pastime, ratherthan a contest for country and for fame. We morethan once read of their making " cautious approachesto the enemy, and coming to a set battle which continuedhalf the day, neither party giving ground tolUMlliNCL. 75the other, yet was there not one slain, only some fewhorses wounded, and a number of prisoners taken onboth sides, and both remaining masters of the field ofbattle."From the close of the fourteenth century, a series offoreign wars and intestine divisions, less interestingboth in their character and in that of the men whofigured in them, introduces us to the most refined andglorious periods, sacred to the genius of poetry andart, that are to be found in the Florentine annals.Notwithstanding the confusion which reigned inthe city from popular causes, it continued to increasein wealth and importance ; an active and successfulcommerce supplying it with exhaustless resources. Inthe meantime, also, the Medici were acquiring powerand distinction ; and the virtue and patriotism whichinspired successive generations of this distinguishedfamily at length established them as the ruling citizensof their free city. The spirit with which theywere actuated shone forth in the patriarchal admonitionwith which Giovanni, the excellent and distinguishedancestor of the celebrated Lorenzo, took leaveof his sons on his death-bed : "I feel," said he, " thatI have lived the time prescribed me. I die content ;leaving you, my sons, in affluence and in health, andin such a station that, whilst you follow my example,you may live in your native place honored and respected.Nothing affords me more pleasure than thereflection that my conduct has not given offence toany one; but that, on the contrary, I have endeavouredto serve all persons to the best of my power and abilityTHE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.ties. I advise you to do the same. With respect tothe honors of the state, if you would live with security,accept only such as are bestowed on you by thelaws and the favor of your fellow-citizens ; for it isthe exercise of that power which is obtained by violence,and not of that which is voluntarily given, thatoccasions hatred and contention."The conduct of Cosmo, the eldest son of this wiseand venerable old man, was in conformity with thecounsel of his father. The government of the city wasnow strictly republican in its constitution, and whateverauthority he or his family exercised was at firstso freely granted by the people that it seemed to betherepresentative only of their own power. Enjoying,however, as Cosmo did, the general esteem of the citizens,he was more than once exposed to the dangerswhich the intrigues of ambition so easily excite in arepublic. He was at length even seized, confined in acastle for more than a month, and finally condemned,together with his friends, to banishment for ten years.Another change in the magistracy of the city occasionedhis recall after only one year's absence, and hereturned with fresh ardour to the work of improvinghis fellow-citizens by his princely encouragement ofthe sciences and liberal arts. Under his fosteringcare, Florence made her first rapid advances in literaryglory, and his name appears adorned with the highestencomiums of contemporary writers. " You haveshown," says one, " such humanity and moderation, indispensing the gifts of Fortune, that they seem to havebeen rather the reward of your virtues and merit thanii.oki.m i . 77conceded by her bounty. Devoted to the study ofletters from your early years, you have by your examplegiven additional splendour to science itself.Although involved in the weightier concerns of state,and unable to devote a great part of your time tobooks, yet you have found a constant satisfaction inthe society of those learned men who have always frequentedyour house." By another he is described asacitizen who, whilst he exceeds in wealth every othercitizen of Europe, is rendered much more illustrious byhis prudence, his humanity, his liberality, and, what ismore to our present purpose, by his knowledge ofuseful literature, and particularly of history.Nor was this high praise either dictated or over-colouredby flattery. Cosmo was not only the liberalpatron of men of letters, but the permanent benefactorof the city, by first establishing in it a library,designated by the name of the Laurentian. The numerousconnections which he enjoyed by his mercantiletransactions with almost every portion of. the worldgreatly facilitated his views in regard to this admirableundertaking; and Florence became enriched by hismeans with some of the most valuable manuscripts inexistence." He corresponded," says the historian ofthe Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, " at oncewith Cairo and London, and a cargo of Indian spicesand Greek books was often imported in the same vessel."His example was followed by other wealthy citizens ;but Cosmo united their collections to his, and in thismanner, more than one library of manuscripts beingformed, rendered the most valuable aid to the cause of78 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.learning. By such munificence he well merited thetitle of Pater Patriae.It was about this period, also, that the empire in theeast was broken up, and many of the most learnedamong the Greeks were obliged to seek a shelter inthe different cities of Europe. Florence had alreadyobtained a wide-spread reputation for the advancesher citizens had made in letters and the arts, as wellas commerce, and thither, therefore, several of theaccomplished refugees repaired, and the knowledgeof Greek literature thus became a favorite and profitablepursuit in this foremost city of republican Italy.But while these elegant employments were diffusingthe lights of philosophy through the state, and thenceover many neighbouring countries, its merchants werenot the less devoted to its aggrandizement. About thistime, according to most writers, Florentine banks andother houses were established in almost every part ofEurope. The number of the inhabitants capable ofbearing arms was nearly 80,000, which, if it be estimatedby the usual mode of computation, will give400,000 persons as the total amount of the population.Every citizen, almost, we learn from contemporaryauthors, was, at this prosperous era of the republic, inthe enjoyment of a good income, and, none of thembeing void of a particular feeling of regard for a statein which they enjoyed so many advantages, a considerablesupply was always at hand for any sudden emergency;and Florence thus acquired the respect of itsneighbours not only for its success in literature, andthe luxury and elegance which pervaded its palaces1 l.OKKM I - 71)and streets, but for its importance as a wealthy ally tostates of greater extent and better provided with a nativemilitary force.On the death of Piero de' Medici, son of Cosmo,the celebrated Lorenzo acquired the chief direction ofaffairs among hi fellow-citizens, and, to the respectand admiration for literature which had distinguishedhis grandfather, he added the enthusiasm and influencewhich belonged to him as a poet and philosopher.The Pulci, Poliziano, and several other great men,owed their prosperity and fame to his protection andfavor; and in their society this master citizen of therepublic instituted a school of philosophy which wasintended to revive the doctrines of Plato's academy.His own poem on the subject is regarded as worthyof being placed among the best of the class, eitherin Italian or any other language ; and the re-establishmentof the famous Platonic festival, which wasowing to his admiration of the philosopher, is a stillfurther proof, not only of the enthusiasm, but of thelearned spirit which was at that time general throughoutFlorence. The literary men of all Italy delightedat being present at this institution, and, the writingsof Plato being closely examined by so many acuteand fervent inquirers, their meetings were remarkablefor the spirit and ingenuity which they called intodisplay. As, however, might have been expected fromany design to engraft a system of ancient philosophyon modern modes of thinking, the institution was,after a short time, productive of injurious effects, andreal learning became mixed with visionary and illsTHE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.supported doctrines. During the revival of knowledgeand art in Europe, no other Italian city produced somany distinguished men in every department of scienceand literature. The noble monuments and innumerablespecimens of exalted genius, whether in architecture,sculpture, or painting, with which the publicedifices and private mansions of Florence became enriched,bear ample testimony to so honorable a distinction.In the ensuing sketches of Florentine history will befound some brief notices of the most distinguishedartists and poets of Tuscany, who threw lustre roundthe sceptre of her political power, and by their talents,their grandeur of mind, or their eccentricities, serve towithdraw the mind from the painful contemplation ofcivil violence, crimes, and disasters.PONTE SANTA Trinity.Da cotta mano In varie forme sculti,Picture, e gttti, e taut' alto lavoro.Ariosto.-Neque ego detrahere ausim,Hveientera capite multa cum laude corona.HORACE.The Bridge of the Santa Trinita, erected over theArno, rivals the most beautiful structures of a similarkind known throughout Europe. Yet, beautiful andnoble as it is, we owe the first regular description of itto a countryman of our own — the talented Mr. Vultwho, while residing at Florence as one of thetravelling students of the Royal Academy, measured itwith great accuracy, and, on his return, published theinteresting drawings he had taken of its architecturalstructure and dimensions. According to the work of thisgentleman, the accounts given of it previous to his ownare of the most inaccurate kind, and no exact measurementof it was ever taken.Florentine genius, however, appears to have exerteditself with distinguished success in raising the bridge,though its men of science have not since thought ofdirecting their attention to the investigation of theprinciples on which it was so ably constructed. Onthe extremities of its marble exterior stand four eleganto8$ THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.statues, representing' the Seasons. At the centre ofeach arch there is also another marble figure; andthese ornaments, as we are informed by Mr. Vultwere intended to conceal the interruptions ofthe arched line by the intersection of the two curveswhich form the arch. But nothing, says the same gentleman,can exceed the beauty of the effect producedby the lightness of the arches, contrasted with themassiveness of the piers and the cut-waters, the strengthof which, it seems, was necessarily great, owing to theforce with which the Arno frequently overseers itsusual current. It was formerly believed that the bridgewas unequal to the support of any great weight, and onthis account carriages were not suffered at one time topass over it; but the French, on obtaining possessionof Florence, taught the citizens to be less careful oftheir bridge, and it was thence discovered that therewas little or no reason to suspect its solidity.The history of this bridge, however, presents a formidableidea of the power of the Arno; for the earlieststructure of which mention is made was destroyed byits floods in 1252. It was thrice rebuilt and twice destroyedin less than a hundred years from that period.The bridge which was built in 1346 cost 20,000 goldflorins; but on the first of March, 1566, the presentstructure was commenced, and was finished in thespring of 1569, on a plan which has enabled it to resistall the force of the stream, while it is unsurpassed forbeauty and lightness of appearance. The completionof the entire undertaking is stated to have cost above40,000 silver florins.PONTE SANTA tiumita. 83The character of Tuscan architecture is that ofsimple grandeur. Imposing in its aspect, its principleis one of power and security; and, in the lapse of time,the great masters of the Medical age threw an air ofGrecian grace and nobility round the old Etruscanstyle, without depriving it of the firm square form andheavy projecting cornices. To Michael Angelo is duethe honor of combining the different styles so as topreserve the basis of the Etruscan, varied by Romanand Grecian lightness. At once grand, and suited towarlike times, by its deep massy walls, it appealed alsoto national taste by its old hereditary character.To this early and massive style is to be attributedthe sombre air which not all the grace and splendourof more modern art has wholly removed from thegeneral aspect of Florence. The ground stone line,coarse rustic base, iron rings, and stone seats, with thesquare front and projecting cornices, affording a retreatfrom the glowing noon-tide sun, serve still to remindus of the days when every house was a castle, andFlorence herself was one formidable garrison. Wallsembracing the circumference of five miles, commandedby sixteen towers with as many gates, frowned defianceon her enemies, till the middle of the fifteenth century.Not a bridge but what was equally well defended, andthe grand imposing effect produced by these towershas been often mentioned by writers with regret, aboutthe period of their demolition under Cosmo de Medici.On more important grounds, however, it was a salutaryand politic measure, at once removing a source ofcivil broils, and the more fearful ravages of theG 284 THE Plan DSC aim: annual.plague. The possession of a tower, rising over hispalace, and threatening some hereditary foe, was nolonger the marked distinction of a Florentine noble.It is recorded that, when Totila sacked the city, it wasdefended by two-and-sixty towers, filled only with thegentlemen of Florence.Unquenched by civil discord or by foreign aggression,Freedom soon opened to Florence the path to greatnessand renown, — her merchant princes secured her wealthfrom the most distant shores, and she assumed herrank in the presence of Pontiffs and of Kings. Herambassadors were to be seen in every European Court,and her fortunes exercised a marked influence on thecouncils and destiny of the most powerful states.This moreover was effected by the singular union of thewarehouse and the palace, and those arcades that werethe scene of midnight factions became, by day, thegreat mart and exchange for trade.In a city of bridges, palaces, and churches, most ofthem on a rich and magnificent scale of architecture,the effect is not so imposing as would be produced on awider theatre than is presented by the view of Florence.It seems too contracted for the bold masculine taste ofthe Tuscan, and the scene which opens on the eye ofthe tourist from the bridge of S. Trinita — combined ofmassy squares, domes, spires, pinnacles, with the Arnobroadly swelling beneath its noble arches — is almostoppressive and overwhelming. It conveys the impressionof a giant city of nobles and of serfs , — superb,massy, but with its edifices heaped as it were together,and encroaching on each other ; a profusion that•oNi'i: SANTA Tunica.detracts from the effect of individual majesty andbeauty. Besides the proportions, the huge dark greystones throw a heavy and gloomier aspect on all theminor objects around. Thus, in the older palaces, agrooved line of stone, forming a seat, sets off thewhole length of the front ; and there, under the broaddeep cornice, did the dependents of the family infeudal days seek shelter from the mid-day sun. Fromthese, too, were often displayed the banners of thefamily, fastened in the huge iron rings; or the midnighttorches, which cast a wild and lurid glare on the vastline of walls below. The windows are high andarched, so that the besieged party were obliged tomount up to them in order to annoy their enemy. Thegates are massy and splendid, opening into a court ofwhich the entire base is surrounded by a high archedcolonnade, supported by marble fountains. Gardensof great beauty next lead to a corresponding gate, ongoing through which a rich and verdant foliage relievesthe eye.Under the arcades, cooled by the waters of thefountains, were spread the rich treasures and merchandiseof the east, mingled with Tuscan manufactures ;while large vaulted chambers beneath contained otherand rarer stores of wealth. A noble staircase leadsfrom the court into a suite of halls and saloons,profusely adorned and hung with silks. The loftyceiling is painted, — splendid galleries extend abovethe arcades of the court, decorated with a profusion offine paintings, statues, vases, and specimens of antiqueart.86 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.In palaces like these did the noble, the magistrate,and the merchant of Florence, surrounded by theirfriends and adherents, meet for public or social views.A frank manly simplicity stamped the character of thetimes, throwing into nobler relief their splendour, richpossessions, and almost imperial sway. No meandistinctions of birth obtained : all rested upon character,to which a public deference was shown; and the visitorstook their seats in order as they arrived. Thus MichaelAngelo would be found seated by the side of Lorenzothe Magnificent; Position by that of the Gonfalonier;and the Pulci among a knot of the most celebratedpreachers of the day. Nor is this fine and freecharacteristic of Florentine manners yet passed away;it is still observable in the intercourse between thewealthy and the poor, the lord and his domestic,though their palaces are now deserted, and a deathlikesilence reigns through the once animated streetsthe bankers of Kings, and the protectors ofPopes, being dwindled into a passive and contentedrace. The works of her great early masters, — thepoems, the paintings, statues, temples, palaces, — wereframed with ideas of a race of freemen and giants;they could not even have dreamed of the existenceof an age so effeminate and so spiritless as our own.Arnolfo Lap, and Cimabue, drew and built not for arace of singers, but of men, and ushered in a splendidline of successors, who threw a far-off glory and immortalityaround Florence. We have seen that thespace of half a century brought her, like Athens, to thesummit of power. The noblest of her minds in everyPONTE SANTA TlilNTI A. 87pursuit rose and flourished nearly at the same period.Learned societies, schools, academies, and galleries ofait anil science, sprung up and again disappeared,after a period of knowledge and high refinement.The simple and massive style of Arnolfo, giving astern dignified air to the city, was subdued by themilder taste and genius of Giotto, the refined Tuscanof Brunelleschi, and the decorous union and magnificenceof Michael Angelo. Almost every pursuit, andevery kind of knowledge, formed the characteristic ofminds like theirs. Alberti was also one of the firstscholars of his times. Arcana, whose name is identifiedwith the Piazza Lanzi, inscribed on his statuesface dal Picture," and on his paintings " dal Culture ;"and Michael Angelo was the Proteus even of thoseearly days.About the year 1250 Arnolfo raised the grandedifice of the Palazzo del Podesta, since called IIBargello — the residence of the chief magistrates, andthe scene of many tragic and appalling events. At theportal was fixed a silent monitor, named Tamburazione,through whose medium, as in the era of the FrenchRevolution, were conveyed secret communications tothe state. The accused were thus often hurried, withoutnotice, into swift and inevitable destruction.Another of the oldest masterpieces of architecturalskill is the Palazzo Vecchio, surmounted by a loftytower, the work also of Arnolfo Lap, a disciple of thegreat Cimabue. Before the vestibule stands a marblestatue of David in the act of slaying Goliath, byMichael Angelo, and a group, also in marble, repressTHE LANDSCAPE ANXIWTsetting Hercules destroying Caius, by Bandinelli.The grand hall is decorated with frescos commemoratingthe exploits of the republic and the family of theMedici, the whole executed by Vasari ; there is agroup of Victory with a captive at her feet by MichaelAngelo ; and another by Gio. di Bologna, representingVirtue exulting over prostrate Vice. In the Sala dell'Udienza Vecchia, we see the exploit of Furies Camillus,nobly painted bySalviati. The Loggia of this splendidpalace was erected from a design of Andrea Arcana,and is decorated with the works of Donatello, Giovannidi Bologna, and Cellini : — a group in marblerepresents a young warrior carrying off a Sabine virgin,and near it are two lions, also in marble, from theVilla Medici at Rome, and six antique statues ofSabine priestesses. The name of the Richard palaceis celebrated for having been erected from the designof Michael Angelo, and as having been originally theresidence of Cosmo de' Medici and his descendants.An inscription is still seen over the entrance whichrecals the virtues and the patriotism of these itsillustrious inmates: — " Hospes, medical olim aedes inquibus non solum tot principes viri, sed et Sapientiaipsa habitable cedes, omnis erudition quae hie revisitnotices — grates venerate." "Stranger! be grateful,and venerate these Medical halls, the abode not onlyof many princely men, but of Wisdom herself, whohere dwelt and nursed the infancy of learning." Thename by which this venerable edifice is distinguishedis derived from its present possessors — the Richardfamily, who are generally spoken of as deservingI'iin I I Santa TKI\ EtI. 89the honor of occupying a mansion so early devotedto the patronage of the arts and of literature. Thenoble gallery and library it contains are open to theinspection of the curious, and thus the Medici may yetbe regarded as adding glory to their native city.But, among all the public buildings in Florence, theRoyal Gallery is the most celebrated, and the mostdeserving perhaps of the reputation it has obtained.It was built by Vasari, and forms part of the splendidedifice called Fabric degli Ufizi. It is supported byDoric columns, and forms two porticos, united by anarchwhich supports the chambers occupied by thecourts of Justice. Over this arch is a statue of CosmoI., Pater Patriae, by Giovanni di Bologna, with tworecumbent figures of Equity and Rigor, by VincienzoDate. In the gallery are contained the noblestcollection of curiosities in Europe, and in everydepartment of science or arts. Under the same roof isthe famous Magliabecchi Library, abounding in raremanuscripts and early editions of printed books. Itis open from nine in the morning till three in theafternoon, and here the Florentine Academy is accustomedto hold its sittings.The Hall of Niobe is distinguished for containing agroup of sixteen figures, which, it is supposed by manyantiquarians, are the original statues mentioned byPliny the elder as the productions of Zeuxis or Praxiteles.Winkelman regarded them as the most splendidtriumphs of the sculptor's art, but his opinion has beencontroverted, and neither extreme antiquity nor suchperfection of beauty has been ascribed to them by his90 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.opponents. In one of the apartments also of thisgallery stood the far-famed Venus de Medicis, thename of which has been made the type of all that ismost perfect in female loveliness. The room itself ishighly ornamented, its dome being ceiled with motherof pearl, and its pavement formed of various colouredmarbles.The general arrangement of paintings and statuesin this vast gallery is intended to convey a knowledgeof the progress made by the arts, from their ruderevival in the eleventh century, through their mostflourishing periods, till the commencement of theirdecline towards the close of the seventeenth. Somedegree of confusion is said to be caused by this attemptto preserve an exact historical series, useful perhaps tothe student, but not to the mere lover of art, who findshimself disturbed by the heterogeneous mixture thusbrought under one view. In regard to the. edificeitself, it has been also objected that, notwithstandingits regularity, its appearance is somewhat heavy, theceiling being too low, and the entablature, which isdisproportioned to the size and number of the pillarswhich support it, adding to the defect. It is howeverconsidered, on the whole, as only inferior to that of theVatican at Rome, whether in point of extent, grandeurof architecture, or the richness of its collections.The Cathedral of Florence is also in harmony withthe grandeur and luxurious elegance of its other buildingsand general appearance. Michael Angelo, it iscommonly said, was so delighted with its dome that hedeclared it to be a matchless specimen of ecclesiasticalPONTE SANTA Tunica. !)1architecture, and copied from it when he constructedthat of St. Peter's at Rome. The foundation of thechurch was laid in the latter end of the thirteenthcentury, but the dome was not built till the followingone, when the architect Brunelleschi completed theentire edifice. Notwithstanding the general beautyand solemnity of its appearance, it is deficient in theclassical simplicity and imposing grandeur of laterstructures. The dome is octagonal, and wanting inlight and airiness of effect, while the nave, owing tothe absence of pilasters, and the smallness of thewindows, is liable to the same objection.The historical recollections connected with thiscathedral are numerous, and some of them deeplyaffecting. It was in its aisles that the conspiracyexcited by Pope Sixtus IV., against Lorenzo de' Mediciand his brother Julian, was consummated by theassassination of the latter. The details of the affairare too extended for this place, but they are highly interesting,as will appear from the following briefoutline.After the preliminaries of the insurrection to takeplace at Florence had been arranged, it was determinedthat the assassination of Lorenzo should becommitted to one Monte Secco, while that of hisbrother was to be perpetrated by Francesco de' Pazziand Bernardo Bandini. The former however, onfinding that the murder was to be committed within thewalls of a church, shrunk from the design, and hisplace was supplied by two priests. The plan beingthus far agreed upon, the conspirators anxiously92 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.awaited the approach of the Sunday on which theyintended to put it into execution. The day at lengtharrived ; Lorenzo proceeded to the church, attended bythe Cardinal Riario ; but Julian was not present.His two assassins, fearful lest they should lose the expectedopportunity, proceeded to his house in order tohasten his arrival. Meeting him on the way, they embracedhim, with the intention, it is said, of ascertainingwhether he had armour under his clothes. Unfortunatelyas it happened, he was so far from being thusprotected that he had left even his dagger at home ;and he took his seat at the church without any suspicionof the fearful fate that awaited him. Thesignal agreed upon by the murderers was the elevationof the Host, or, as some authors assert, the breaking ofthe Eucharist, by the officiating priest. With the mostgloomy anxiety they expected this part of the solemnceremony, and the moment the wafer was raised, andthe congregation was bowed in mute adoration beforethe sacred emblem, .Bandini drove his poniard into thebreast of his unsuspecting victim. Notwithstandinghis immediate fall beneath the blow, Francesco de'Pazzi flew upon him, plunging his dagger, with all thefury of hereditary hate, into every part of his body,and even wounding himself in the repeated blowsgiven in the blind passion with which he was instigated.Lorenzo, in the mean time, had been attacked by theconspirators who had undertaken to dispatch him, but,the wound he received not being mortal, he had timeto draw his sword and defend himself against theassassins. Before Bandini could reach him a secondComte SANTA TB1NITA. 93time, a number of friends had rushed to his protection,and hurried him into the sacristy, where, having closedthe doors, one of his most faithful attendants suckedthe wound lest the weapon should have been poisoned,a practice recently introduced into Italy by the Saracens.They then bore him in safety, escorted by alarge body of noble youths, to his own palace. Theconspirators, nearly all of them, met with the attributespunishment merited by their crime ; those whowere not torn to pieces, by the indignant and ferociouspopulace, falling by the hand of the executioner, notsparing an archbishop hung in his sacerdotal robesfrom the palace windows.The campanile or belfry, which stands near thefront of the church, but detached from it, is conspicuousfor its grace and variety of ornament, whilethe baptistery, with its granite pillars, beautiful mosaics,and brazen portals, which Michael Angelo with characteristicenthusiasm called the gates of Paradise, hasclaimed the admiration of successive generations oftravellers. But the spectator will turn from theseornaments of sculpture and architecture, to gaze withveneration and delight on the sacred spots whichcontain the ashes of the most illustrious Florentines .Yet a painful feeling passes across the mind whileindulging in these contemplations, as the eye fixes itselfon the picture which recals to memory that Dante wasa citizen of Florence, but that his remains are committedto a foreign soil. It has been already mentionedthat this oldest and most magnificent of Italian poetswas driven to seek an asylum from the fury of his politTHE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.tical enemies in the states of neighbouring princes.Ravenna was the last place of his abode ; and there,some time after his death, a monument was raised tohis immortal memory by Bernardo Bembo. To thecredit, however, of the later Florentines, be it spoken,that they sought for many ages to recover the ashes oftheir poet. The gifted Michael Angelo exercised hisinfluence to effect this purpose, but nothing could inducethe people of Ravenna to give up the sacred possession,and Florence was obliged to content itself withpassing a vote for raising a splendid monument to thehonor of her exiled son. Whether want of means, orthe agitations to which the republic has been since exposed,or both these causes, have prevented its beingerected, is uncertain; but it has never been carriedinto effect ; and a picture is all the monumental famewhich the great Dante enjoys in his native city.Painting, however, when the master-pieces containedin this cathedral are contemplated, can hardly be consideredas less fitted to honor the memory of poets andpatriots, than sculptured monuments of marble.Petrarch and Boccaccio are absent also from thismausoleum, which ought to have been the sacred templeof the departed genius of Florence ; and the kindredheart which glows with the recollection of their namesfeels all the force and noble truth of these lines : —But where repose the all Etruscan three,J)ante and Petrarch, and — scarce less than they —The bard of prose, creative spirit ! heOf the hundred tales of love ; where did they lavTheir bones, distinguished from our common clayPOWTB SANTA Tllisn A. 9 'lii dental or life ' Ari' they resolved to dust,Ami have their country's marbles nought to say ?Could not her quarries furnish forth one bust?Did they not to her breast their filial earth entrust? "The church of San Lorenzo is regarded as deservingthe particular attention of the tourist. Its sacristy wasplanned by Michael Angelo, and contains numerousstatues by that celebrated master. Several princes,also of the house of Medici, are interred here ; and behindthe chancel of the church is a magnificent but yetunfinished mausoleum for the same family. It wasbegun in the year 1604, and was intended, it is said,to exceed in size and grandeur every structure of thekind in the world. Its plan is an octagon; its diameterninety-four feet ; its elevation to the vault 200feet ; and it is described as being literally lined withjasper, onyx, agate, lapis lazuli, and other preciousstones ; while its granite pilasters with their richcapitals of bronze, and its porphyry sarcophagi, aregenerally admired for their elegance and grace. Stillmore worthy of admiration are the sculptures by Giovannidi Bologna, representing the Crucifixion ; astatue of the Virgin by Michael Angelo, and one of St.John by a scholar of his. It is feared that this edificewill now never be completed ; the feeling of venerationfor the Medici, unlike that for the name ofDante, having long since been weakened, and slightmeans remaining for carrying on so expensive an undertaking.From the middle of the thirteenth century, Florence,despite of her popular ebullitions and protracted96 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.wars, made rapid strides towards the maturity of hergreatness, her wealth, and her surpassing renown inletters and the arts. Under the Augustine sway ofthe Medici, sculpture and painting realized all thatthe brilliant dawn of Italian art had promised to theworld; and, though the age of her divinest poets wasgone by, the fathers of Italy's poetry and language, arace of classic scholars, novelists, and wits, had sprungup — the Popes and Swifts of Florence — whose worksof high refinement were crowned by the more romanticglory of Ariosto's and Tasso's verse.Florence, for the first time, was not ungrateful to afamily whose spirit and munificence were congenial toits temper ; and felt an awe mingled with its admirationof a citizen who deported himself like a prince,and of a man who bore among his rivals and hisequals the title of the Magnificent. Lorenzo supportedthe reputation and influence of his familyduring many years, and Florence, under the directionof his counsels, continued to advance in wealth andrefinement, without compromising her liberty by thusendowing him with the first honors of the state. Whileperishing his life for his country, which he more thanonce saved from ruin, he ceased not to cultivate lettersand the arts, and became the associate as well as thepatron of her artists and poets. His conversationswith Michael Angelo in his garden, and with Position,Pico, and the Pulci, reciting their verses to him overthe festive board, display a character attached topoetry and the arts for their own sake — above allostentatious and mercenary views of lordly patronage.PONTE santa Trinity. 97There is hardly a spot in Florence that does not exhibitsome vestiges of its former power and magnificencein these its golden days ; — palaces and churcheswith their domes, and splendidly decorated chapels,its noble sculptures and paintings, still breathing ofthe creative spirits that gave them birth, and recallingthe extinguished race of genius and valour whichraised her name high among the proudest capitals ofEurope. Her history no less abounds in scenes ofdomestic interest, of thrilling passion, deep tragedy,and humorous incident or adventure. Of these it maynot be unamusing to give a few remarkable instances,and more particularly of the latter, in which the olderpainters are more rich and racy than any other classof men.In the dawn of art, about 1285, Cimabue, one of itsearliest restorers, in going through the Campagnafrom Florence to Perpignan, saw a shepherd boy,who, instead of attending to his flock, was busily engagedin tracing figures with a piece of pointed stoneupon a rock. He stopped, and, surprised at the skillwhich the child evinced, asked if he would go homewith him and become his pupil. The boy readily assented; and to this circumstance did Italy owe hercelebrated Giotto, the father of modern painting, andDante a friend and solace in his exile, whom he hasextolled in his immortal poem : —Credere Cimabue bella PictureTender lo campo, ed ora ha Giotto il gride ;Si che la fama di celui obscura.n98 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Giotto, indeed, not only surpassed his master, butsoon filled Italy with the fame of his works. Rome,Naples, Florence, Padua, and Avignon, abounded inthe master-pieces of his hand, and in every branch ofthe art. His reputation induced Pope Benedict IX.to depute one of his courtiers to invite him to decorateSt. Peter's ; but first he was to obtain some specimensof his skill. By the way, this trusty agent selectedother specimens from every artist he could find, intendingto compare them with Giotto's, and, arrivingat Florence, he walked into the painter's shop, where heexplained the Pope's wishes, concluding with a demandto see him make a design. Giotto took his pencil, andusing it like a pair of compasses made a circle perfectlyequal with his hand. Then, with a facetious air, hehanded it to the courtier, observing : " See a wonder !this is your design." " I must have a different kindof design to this," returned the courtier coolly. —Enough, and too much," retorted the painter ;put it up with the rest, and you will see the result."The deputy, declaring that he would report his conductto his Holiness, in a great passion left the place,in the firm belief that Giotto was making a fool of him.He was agreeably surprised, therefore, when somewiser heads at Rome assured his Holiness there wasnot another artist in Italy who could do the same ; andfrom that time came in use the popular proverb, whenwishing to designate a person of the courtier's taste :Tu sei piu tondo che 1' O di Giotto." — You aremore round (thick-headed) than Giotto's great O, —Ponte SANTA Trinity. 99the word " tnndo," in Tuscany, being; expressive bothof a circle and of little wit.The poet Dante, in exile at Ravenna, hearing thathis distinguished fellow-citizen was then staving atFerrara, sent to invite him to come and join him, andhe painted for the lords of Polenta several frescos inthe church of San Francesco. It was here a friendshipwas formed between these extraordinary menwhich served to soothe the grief and bitter feelings ofthe poet's mind. From Giotto he is said to haveacquired that knowledge and skill in matters of art inwhich he is known to have been no mean proficient,and which may perhaps have given to his poem thatvivid and picturesque force which, while striking terrorto the soul of the reader, brings the shadowy formsbefore the eye.While at Florence, in the year 1322, tidings werereceived by Giotto of the death of his friend — thecelebrated poet — whose ashes have twice refused torest in the bosom of his ungrateful country: —Even in his ashes live his wonted fires ;"as if his spirit, speaking from the urn, spurned thefutile offer of being reconciled to his hated persecutors.Though in the midst of his successful and splendidcareer, Giotto was much concerned at this event ; andsome of the next works he executed for the King ofNaples — comprehending the Apocalypse and otherhistories, at Assisi — he is stated to have owed, fromthe conversations he had held with him, to the fineinvention of Dante, who thus amply repaid him.h 2100 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.So highly did the King of Naples estimate Giotto'ssocial qualities, as well as his genius, that he wouldspend hours with him, while painting in his studio,delighted with his acute remarks. The King one dayobserving that he was determined to make him the firstman in Naples, " It was for that reason," repliedGiotto, " that I took up my quarters at Porta Real,to be ready to receive myself."On another occasion the King said to him, " Giotto,if I were you, I would not labour so hard this hotweather." — " Nor I, certainly," returned the painter,if I were the King."One day, as he was completing a picture, the monarchobserved in jest : — " Now, Giotto, I should likeyou to paint me something on a larger scale ; for instance,my own kingdom." Giotto did as he wasrequested ; and, setting to work, soon after presentedthe King with the painting of — an ass suffering undera heavy bastinado, which instead of resenting, thebeast was busy with his paws and nose snuffling upanother and larger flagellum than that he felt upon hisback, as if desirous of making an exchange. On boththe instruments of good order were painted the royalcrown and sceptre of magisterial sway.Whether or not the King thought he had carried thejest too far, it is certain Giotto soon after set out tovisit other cities of Italy. At Rimini he painted, in thechurch of San Francesco a number of noble pictures,as they are described, for that age; and in particularone in the cloister a fresco of B. Michelina — a wonderfulperformance in point of beauty and expression.Ponte: SANTA TKIMTA. 10 LIt represented an exquisitely lovely woman engaged inappealing to heaven, and kissing a book with ferventexpression, her eyes fixed in solemn earnestness uponher husband, on whose features were written scorn anddoubt, finely contrasted with the gentle calm simplicityand innocence depicted in the wife, and which madethe spectators feel the wrong he did her in exhibitinga suspicion of crime in one so fair and perfect. Thestory is cleared up by the appearance of a little black-complexionchild, which it is quite plain the husbandcannot prevail on himself to believe to be fairlyhis own.Another painting, of the Death of the Virgin, witha Christ and Saints, was so highly extolled, in particularby Michael Angelo, that he declared that, in truthand propriety of expression, it was so true to nature asto challenge the powers of any artist, an admissionthat stamps the fame of Giotto — the self-taught geniusof his times. Like his great successor — painter, sculptor,and architect in one — it is enough that the Campanileof Santa Maria del Fire, the model, and theentire sculptures, all teaching the principles of art tohis followers, were the work of shall you ! I was thinking of other things, not aboutpainting, Cod help me ! I am going to leave this house,Buonamico." The ensuing night, the compassionatepupil introduced only three devils to his master, but theywere enough to keep him quiet till morning. Buona-mice rose very comfortably at eight o'clock, and hismaster, hearing some one stirring, followed him downstairs,and walked — straight out of the house. It waswith difficulty he was prevailed on to return ; and thenhe begged Buonamico not to go to work, but to goand bring him the parish priest. To his consolations,his pupil added, " You say well, holy father ; I havealways heard that these demons are the sworn enemiesof our Lord, and consequently that they are equallybitter and spiteful against us painters, the reason ofwhich doubtless is, that we make them so horribly like,so brutally ugly, while we every where draw the saintsin the most beautiful and attractive forms. No doubt,they hate you, my excellent master, for rising so earlyto fulfil this task." In this reasoning the priest perfectlyagreed, and persuaded the painter that he would infalliblybe lost one time or other, if he rose to paint beforeday light. After a bitter struggle between fear andavarice, the latter gave way ; and Tail's example ofsleeping till day light was followed by all the othermasters and pupils in the city.On setting up for himself, our friend Buonamicofound he was annoyed by a certain noisy neighbour, theconsort of Messer Capo d'Oca — Mr. Goosehead, whobegan to ply her wheel even earlier than his ancient108 THE LANDSCAPE AXXUAI,,master had done his brush. It was close against Buffbeheld, and clatter clatter it began at threeo'clock every morning. This also he resolved to remedy,and, forthwith boring a hole through the partition wall,he introduced a long hollow cane, by which he couldreach the cooking apparatus, and, in the absence of thegood housewife, down this pipe he sent such a superabundanceof salt into her dinner pots, that poor Capod'Oca, on his return, could touch neither soup, fish,flesh, nor pudding, so horribly were they salted. Againand again he entreated she would not put so much saltin his provisions ; and, finding the evil only grow worse,in a fit of passion he one day gave her a sound beating.The neighbours, hearing her cries, ran to the place, andBuonamico was among them. On hearing the meritsof the case, the cunning painter exclaimed, " My goodSir, you have no right to complain ; it is only a wonderhow your wife can do any thing like another woman,when I can witness that she does not get a single hour'srest of a night. It is enough to make any one's headlight, spinning as she does from three in the morning tillnight-fall. Pray let her have her natural rest, and shewill no longer make these strange blunders, I will bebound for her. You see how pale and wild she looks ! "and the whole company cried out shame on MesserGoosehead. " She may be in bed till noon, for me,"cried the indignant husband, " provided she will notsalt me, till I am nearly pickled, and preserved — nay,ready for hanging." Buonamico and the neighbours,laughing heartily, took themselves off; and, when anyI 'ON IT. SANTA TIUN1TA. 109undue repetition of the spinning-jenny perplexedhim, a new prescription of salt remedied the evil ; forMesser Capo d'Oca then insisted on his wife's keepingher bed.Bishop Guido, lord of Arezzo, employed Buffaloto paint one of his churches. During the progresshe frequently came, accompanied, not by a courtier,but by a tame baboon, a very intelligent animal,who, perceiving the interest his master took in the pictu res, evinced much the same sort of admiration. Intentupon the whole process, the ape would often remainwatching the painter after the bishop departed ; andone Saturday evening, Buffalmacco, having concludedhis work, retired, when Messer Jack instantly seizedthe brush. With a daring hand he first made a unionof all the colours he could find, which he applied to thecanvass with so much energy and rapidity, using allthe strangest gestures and grimaces, that in a fewminutes not a trace of the original was to be seen.What was the horror of Buffalmacco, who had sooften passed his jests on others, when he came on theMonday morning, and witnessed the catastrophe. Secretlydetermined to discover the author of so atrociousan act, he hid himself in the chapel ; nor did he waitlong, before Messer Jack, tripping into the place, ranup the ladder, and recommenced his labours on thescaffold. Buffalmacco went forthwith to the bishop,and tendered his resignation : " Your reverence, I find,is already provided with a court painter ; and one Icannot pretend to compete with ; " and, after presentingthe bishop with a painting of the lion tearing an1 1 THE LANDSCAPE Annualeagle, instead, as he had been told, with that of aneagle on the back of a lion, he hastily left Arezzo.His friend Bruno one day complaining that he couldnot throw sufficient expression into his faces ; " put itinto their mouths then," replied Buffalmacco : " labelyour saints, and they will speak like Cimabue's."The next exploit of Buffalmacco shows how far credulitycould be carried in a Catholic country, and duringthe fourteenth century. Calandrino was a man moredistinguished at Florence for his excessive bonhommiethan for his skill as an artist. Such a character offeredtoo strong a temptation to his friends, Bruno and Buffto try their favorite art of playing upon theweak points of their companions. Accordingly theygave our hero to understand that, at a certain spot nearFlorence, a species of enchanted stones was to befound, which gave their possessor the power of makinghimself invisible. Instances, they declared, had alreadyoccurred in which the invisibles had pocketed a largesum from the bankers without a cheque, and entertainedthemselves in the first style at a public hotel withoutever paying the waiters.The simple Calandrino was in raptures, and by thepromise of a dinner and half a dozen lacrymal Christ ontheir return, induced Bruno and our painter to accompanyhim. On reaching the spot, Calandrino, havingfilled his pockets as directed, reproached his friends fortheir indolence; and, converting his mantle into a bag,he began to fill it also with the precious stones. Whenhe had gathered enough to load an ass, they helpedhim with it on his shoulders ; and, toiling and panting,ION I I SANTA Till NIT A. I I Ii he poor Calandrino retraced his steps back to Florence.On their way Bruno, accosting Buffalmacco, suddenlycalled out : " What has become of Calandrino ? " Theother, looking round in great surprise, replied that hewas certainly gone. " I lay you what you please,"exclaimed Buffalmacco in an angry tone, " that he hasgone home, and has made fools of us for our pains."Calandrino, hearing this assurance of his invisibility,resolved indeed to go home without saying anotherword to his friends. " He is a great villain," exclaimedBruno, " for acting in such a way ; I have long knownhim ; he has more of the knave than the fool." " Werehe only here," returned Buffalmacco, " I would makehim feel ; " at the same time hitting the invisible a severerap on the legs with a stone. " And so would I,"said Bruno, launching another which hit Calandrino inthe small of the back, who consoled himself, however,for all, with the consciousness of his invisibility.The sufferings a painter named Spinello Aretino, fromthe effect of terror on the imagination, were still moreremarkable than Calandrino's. He painted the Fall ofthe Angels, in which picture Lucifer appeared in suchhideous colours as even to affect the artist's mind, andhaunt his sleep. One night he awoke in an agony ofterror, exclaiming that the demon had appeared to him,and demanded how he had dared to paint him in sucha horrible shape. This vision repeatedly returned,until the wretched artist, deprived at once of his peaceand his reason, fell into a lingering atrophy, and in thatstate died.THE VILLAGE OF PELAGO.Ben provide natura al nn*tro stato,Secundo dell' Alps SchemePose fra noi e la Teresa rabbit.Ma '1 desio eieco, e' n contra '1 sno ben sermoSee poi tanto ingegnato,Ch' al corps sand ha proeurato swabia.Petrarch.Next to the public walks and gardens round theducal palace of the Casting, Florence can afford fewexcursions more attractive to the tourist than such asare to be enjoyed on the Perugia road, among theneighbouring little towns and hamlets which enliventhe banks of the Arno. It stretches along the windingsof the river for a space of five or six miles, and at everyturn presents prospects of a very varied and pleasingdescription. The eye is relieved, as you proceed, fromthe somewhat too uniform, gray and olive-coloured, —nay, almost monotonous aspect of the Tuscan capitaland its suburbs, by a more rich and agreeable diversityof sylvan scenery — wood and hill, and grassy glade —with elegant villas, farms, or single houses scattered atintervals on the borders, or little eminences along theenchanting waters which glitter through the foliage thatskirts their banks.After passing L'Incisa, the first post-town, beautifullysituated on a knoll, gently sloping towards then.i.u.o. I 13Arno, with the remains of a castle overlooking the town ;the landscape combining with the river becomes stillmore striking and picturesque. Here a fine ruralbridge, built of brick, opens on the road leading toPelago, suddenly diverging to the left over a steep anddifficult acclivity, which continues for a mile and ahalf. The village is very delightfully seated on aneminence, which overhangs the brink of a valley luxuriantlywooded with magnificent chestnut trees, and isskirted by a small stream running from the mountains,which in summer is nearly dry, but in winter its fulland rapid current adds much to the picturesquescenery.From this site the surrounding view is variegatedand extensive, embracing the windings of the Arnowith its combination of woods, villages, vineyards,castles, and mountains, almost as far as Florence.The country round Florence has thus all the charmswhich the bright sun and gentle breezes of Italy canbestow ; and the loveliest of her cities may be compared,without extravagance, to some elegant templebuilt amidst the luxurious shades of a noble and richlycultivated domain. Poetry, as well as her sister art,has shed her sweetest influence around these sunnyscenes ; and the names of Fiesole, and the Arno, andVallombrosa, are fraught with magic memories, evento our northern ears. The very sound of the latter,the Italian of our Shady Valley, is, like the spot itself,one of the most romantic in the world, — the entire valeand mountains of Vallombrosa presenting a combinationof the sublimest and most beautiful features 1 14 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL,longing to natural scenery. Winding up a steep ofvast height, the vale is in most parts rendered wildand gloomy by the rocks and heavy shades of the ancientforests which overhang it. Here and there, however,these barriers are separated by small unexpectedfissures, and the eye is charmed by the sight of littlegrassy glades, the deep repose of which is only brokenby the breath of the breezes escaping through theopenings.From the summit of the mountains which enclosethe romantic valley, a prospect of wide extent attractsthe sight ; but the eye is speedily drawn back to thegreen and sylvan shades beneath, where the wildmountains, and their dark curtain of gnarled oaks,firs, and beeches, are seen surrounding a dell — thebest visible representation of Paradise which the mostimaginative of our poets could find to assist his fancy.It is from this eminence that Milton, recliningamidst its sublime solitudes, is supposed to have picturedon his soul those images which were afterwardsformed into his noble descriptions of Paradise. Morethan one traveller have remarked the striking resemblancebetween these scenes and the following lines,which may perhaps give the reader a truer feeling, ifnot a more defined idea, of Vallombrosa, than the languageof prose could do.So on he fares, and to the border comesOf Eden, where delicious ParadiseNow nearer crowns with her enclosure jjreen —As with a rural mound — the champaign headUfa steep wilderness, whose hairy sidesn i. IGO. I 15With thicket overgrown grotesque and wild\< m less de (1, and overhead up grew,Insuperable height of loftiest Blade,Cedar, and pine, and fir, and branching palm ;A sylvan scene, and as the ranks ascend —Shade above shade — a woody theatreOf stateliest view.If thus rich and magnificent in natural scenery, inhistoric associations, and the lives of her illustriousmen, Florence will be found no less abounding.Towards the close of the fifteenth century, Florencewitnessed a very singular spectacle, productive of momentarysurprise and terror. It was the work of anartist of most eccentric genius, Pietro Cosmo, a beingmade up of sympathies and antipathies, and endowedwith a peculiar wildness of imagination. On the approachof a storm he trembled and sought to hidehimself, with a sort of instinctive fear; and, when thethunder rolled, wrapt in his cloak, he would be foundconcealed in the obscurest corner of his mansion. Thecry of a child, the sound of a clock, the song of themonk, and even the noise of a person coughing werehis antipathy, while one of his greatest pleasures waswatching the silent fall of a shower of rain. His actionspartook of the same singularity ; and, the ideahaving struck him of impressing the Florentine peoplewith greater devotion and seriousness of character, heset earnestly about the means, and having providedevery thing necessary he fixed upon the period of theapproaching Carnival for its execution.On the evening of the last day that terminated itsrejoicing and excesses, there suddenly appeared ini 2116 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.the streets of Florence a grand triumphal car hung withblack crape, surmounted with white crosses, ten hugeblack banners streaming down to the earth, and drawnslowly by four buffaloes, the whole rendered doublyterrible by the night, and being crowned with all theemblems proclaiming the triumph of Death. A hugeskeleton appeared crowned and stationed high abovethe car, a scythe in his hand, and with his feet apparentlyresting upon half-opened tombs, from whichwere seen rising up the squalid, fleshless forms of emperors,pontiffs, conquerors — the subjects of the all-imperialKing, their despot ruler of the Shades. Athrong of strange figures arrayed in black, their facescovered with a mask, consisting only of his chief emblemof past mortality, and bearing torches that illuminedthe silent terrors of this nocturnal vision, onlyhalf revealing the mysterious shadows of time to mortalview, — ushered in, and closed, the strange procession,attended by a wild and melancholy music, as if comingfrom some other than an earthly sphere. The spectaclewas closed by a band of shadowy figures of knightsand soldiers mounted upon skeleton steeds, whosetrappings wore all the sorrowful emblems of the pompand circumstance which marshal the way to the grave.From time to time were heard the " slow, solemnsounds that wake despair;" and at the voice of thetrumpet's blast the whole triumphal procession paused ;there were then observed to rise from out their tombsthe figures of the dead, and in weak, mournful voices,they joined in a hymn that fell like unearthly soundsupon the ear.iM.i.wio. 117Soon again the sad procession resumed its solemnmarch, keeping up the same feeble and tremblingstrain — the chaunt of the Miserere — till the wholearrived, and halted on the fatal bridge, — that Bridgeindeed of Sighs, where in some former Carnival theassembled ranks of Florence, while representing asi low of mimic terrors, had been plunged headlong intothe Arno, and realized the disastrous fates they paintedto view, and which suggested, it is said, the appallingvisions of Dante's Inferno.An apparition thus extraordinary startling the ear ofnight, and fighting the city from its propriety, appearedwith tenfold force and credibility from this lastresource of appealing to human sympathy by its connectionwith a fore-gone fearful tragedy, familiar to therecollection, and which weighed heavy at the hearts, ofmany a bereaved lover, parent, child, or friend. Butit is time to turn to something of less startling andappalling interest — to contemplate a character freefrom fanatical extravagance, pure and elevated in religionand moral dignity, amiable and beneficent, grandand unrivalled in his profession. Need we pronouncethe name of Michael Angelo, the glory of Italy and ofhis birth-place — the friend of Lorenzo — the patriot son,and ornament of his country ? Painter, sculptor, architect,and poet, all in the loftiest sense, like the aeneasof his class, he stands out among his countrymen inmarked and majestic relief, in proportions as greatabove all his contemporaries as in those which exhibitedthe wonders of his hand.118 Till: LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Sprung of noble Tuscan blood — that of the SimonMichel Agnolo Buonaroti was born in the year 1474.Nurtured by the wife of a stone-mason, he was in thehabit of saying that he sucked in sculpture with hismilk. His father vainly attempted to combat the impulsesof nature and genius ; he became the pupil ofGhirlandaio, and, at sixteen, the famous academy andthe gardens of Lorenzo, filled with the works of antiquity,were opened to his view. There the first specimenof his sculpture — the head of a satyr — attracted theadmiration of Lorenzo; and, after conversing togetherfor some time, he became the protege and the guestof that remarkable man. So far did he soon outstriphis fellow pupils, as to excite their envy and resentment; and one of them, a youth of ungoverned passions,fixing on him a quarrel, struck him so violent a blowas to break the bridge of his nose, the marks of whichhe bore with him to the grave. Yet such washes benevolencethat he sought no means of secretly avenginghimself; and when able, in after-life, he was accustomedto give sums to portion out orphan children,in order to preserve them from the effects of destitutionand want.This great artist was often so attached to solitudethat he would adjourn at some periods to a monasteryamong the hills, to commune the better with natureand his own thoughts; for he was heard to declarethat the art was a jealous mistress, and would sufferno rival. Possessed both of wit and good sense, healways asserted his opinions with astonishing singlenessri.i ui(). ll!»and fearless frankness of manner, Charles V. oneday inquiring his opinion respecting Albert Durer, anable German painter and writer, — ■" Such is my esteemfor him," he replied, " that, were I not Michael Angelo,I would prefer to be Durer, even before Charles ofSpain."On being treated with want of courtesy and attention,by Pope Julius II., Michael Angelo sent him wordthat if he wanted him he must come to seek him,and not he the Pope ; after which he immediately tookhis departure from Rome.In the grand ducal gallery there is preserved a headof Brutus, only roughly chiselled, by the great artist.At the edge of this unfinished bust we read theselines : —Dum Brute effigies sculptor de marre dicit,In mentes sceleris venit ; et abstinuit.Whilst Brutus' form the sculptor's hand recals,His crime came o'er him ; and the chisel falls.An English traveller, Lord Sandwich, we are told,on reading these lines was heard to observe, in turningto the attendant Cicerone, that there was certainly amistake in the inscription, for that the lines shouldhave run thus : —Brutum effinxisset sculptor, sed mente recursMulta viri virtus ; sistit et obstupuit.The patriot form breathed— lived ; but, while the handOf Michael waved the sculptor's magic wand,The Roman's virtues rose before his view ;He paused astonished ; nor the likeness knew.120 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.With the view of ascertaining the extent of knowledgepossessed by some antiquarian connoisseurs ofhis time, Michael Angelo is said to have made use ofa curious experiment, and one which was crownedwith perfect success. He executed at Florence thestatue of a Cupid ; and then, despatching it to Rome,caused it to be inhumed in a certain spot in the vicinity,where he knew that researches were then makingafter the antique. He had first, however, detachedfrom the bust one of Cupid's arms, which he took careto preserve. It was not long before the discovery ofthe modern antique began to make some noise, — acommittee of antiquarians was held upon it, and theseRoman connoisseurs agreed that it was a genuine antique,by an ancient Greek master, and regretted onlythat it had lost one arm. It was purchased by theCardinal San Giorgio at a prodigious price, as beingone of the best specimens yet discovered.What was the surprise and chagrin of the wholeparty when the ancient sculptor made his appearance,as if following his work out of the earth, with the godof Love's arm in his hand, and claimed the statue forhis own. The Cardinal, who had paid dearest for thejest, was the least satisfied ; the work had lost allmerit in his eyes ; and, as if to revenge himself, heinvited Michael Angelo to his residence, where heamused him with a number of grand projects, not oneof which he put into execution, during the space of ayear.On the death of Lorenzo, in 1492, Michael Angeloreturned to his father's house ; but was prevailed uponPEL Vigo.1-21Boon after by Pietro de' Medici to resume his formerapartments in the palace, where he dined at the sametable, and was treated with every mark of respect. Pietro,however, had none of the noble qualities and cultivatedtaste which distinguished his father, and one of hisfirst requests to Michael Angelo was, that he wouldmake him a colossal statue of snow to adorn the courtyardof the Medici palace. Pietro then boasted that hehad two of the most extraordinary men living at thattime in his house, namely, Michael Angelo who hadmade a snow man, and his handsome Spanish footman,so celebrated for swiftness of foot, and so long-winded,that even when riding full speed he could not overtakehim !The revolution in the fortunes of the Medici, in theperson of Pietro, was attended with some singularoccurrences, of which the following may be adducedas none of the least strange and marvellous. In thezenith of his power and reputation, Lorenzo was accustomedto entertain at his table a certain improvisatore ofhigh ability, named Cardiere, who sang to him on thelyre, in the evenings, when surrounded by Michael Angeloand his literary friends. Previously to Pietro'sbanishment, we are told by Connive, that one dayCardiere accosted his friend Michael Angelo with avery disturbed air, stating that he had had a vision thepreceding night which gave him no little uneasiness.The apparition of Lorenzo, he declared, had appearedto him in his sleep, his form arrayed in a black andtattered robe, — and had commanded him to go andacquaint his son that he would shortly be driven intoTHE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.exile, never to return. Perceiving Cardiere's distress,our painter advised him to disburden his mind byobeying the injunction, while his friend, aware ofPietro's violent disposition, was terrified at the idea ofrunning so great a risk.Not long after, Michael Angelo, while in the courtyardof the palace, observed Cardiere walking about,pale and sorrowful, quite opposite to his accustomedmanner, and inquiring the cause was told thatLorenzo had again appeared to him, and that he hadbeen suddenly awoke by a blow on the face, the apparitionangrily asking why he had not before acquaintedPietro with what he had seen. ' Michael Angeloreproached him for not having already done so, and, byencouraging him, his friend seemed comforted, anddeclared he would then set out for the Villa Carnegie onfoot, so eager was he to relieve his mind. On the wayhowever he met Pietro with a grand retinue coming toFlorence. The unhappy ghost-seer stopped him, andboldly told all that-he had seen and heard. Pietrolaughed aloud, and turning to his attendants repeatedCardiere's story, not a little amused at his expense,while his chancellor, afterwards Cardinal of Bibiena,exclaimed: — "Cardiere, you are out of your senses.Think you that Lorenzo is more attached to you thanto his own son ? If to his son, see you not that hewould have appeared rather to him than to you, ifindeed it were of importance to appear at all?" ButCardiere, having thus obeyed the wishes of his deceasedmaster, returned home, apparently so impressed with asense of the reality of what he had seen, and of havingPELAGO.performed a severe duty, that Michael Angela himselfwis persuaded that the strange prediction would hefulfilled, and in a few days, taking with him two ofhis friends, he departed for Bologna. As if to he convincedof the wisdom of this measure, he was shortlyjoined there hy the whole family of the Medici, thehead of which never lived to return to Florence, meetingafter a series of bitter reverses an untimelydeath.On completing his colossal figure of a David, Vasarirelates that the artist's friend Soldering, the chief magistrate,was attempting to criticise it, observing that thenose was somewhat too large. Michael instantlymounted the scaffold with a chisel and some sand, and,while he affected to be chipping the edges, he let fall alittle dust, as if just broken from the statue. "Is itbetter?" inquired the artist. Delighted at this proof ofdeference, Soldering repeated, "There! that will do; it isquite well now— you have given David fresh life!" alesson to the hypercritics of all times.The same great artist once painted a holy family forAngelo Doni, an avaricious citizen, and required for itthe payment of seventy ducats. Quite shocked, theman of numbers told the messenger he could not thinkof giving more than forty ; on which Michael sent forhis picture back, or for 100 ducats. Doni nowagreed to pay the first demand of seventy; but MichaelAngelo, growing indignant at this species of chattering,demanded 140 ducats, which, after many struggles withPlutus, the unhappy Doni paid to him.124 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Next to his magnificent productions in the SistineChapel, his works of sculpture and architecture, — allin the noblest spirit, — the grand Cartoon of the battleof Pisa acquired for Michael Angelo the highest celebrity.To describe the scene it commemorates in thewords of a distinguished living poet, —Oft, alas ! were seen,When flight, pursuit, and hideous rout were there,Hands, clad in gloves of steel, held up imploring,The man, the hero, on his foaming steed,Borne underneath, already in the realmsOf darkness. Nor did night, or burning noon,Bring respite. Oft, as that great artist sawWhose pencil had a voice, the cry " To arms !"And the shrill trumpet, hurried up the bankThose who had stolen an hour to breast the tide,And wash from their unharnessed limbs the bloodAnd sweat of battle. Sudden was the rush,Violent the tumult; for, already in sight,nearer and nearer yet the danger drew,Each every sinew straining, ever)' nerve,Each snatching up and girding, buckling onMorion and greave", and shirt of twisted mail ;As for his life —-no more perchance to taste,Arno, the grateful freshness of thy glades,Thy waters — where exulting he had feltA swimmer's transport, there alas ! to floatAnd welter.'Like his eccentric contemporary Cellini, who defendedthe castle of St. Angelo, this great artist wascalled on by his countrymen to command as the headengineer at Florence, when it was besieged by the emperorand the Prince of Orange. He long held theP] loo. 125enemy at bay, and it was only by the dissensionsof other commanders that the city was finally lost.Several anecdotes have survived, relating to thejealous feeling which is said to have existed betweenMichael Angelo and Raphael. Meeting one day tin-latter,attended by a numerous retinue of scholars andadmirers, Michael Angelo called out to him jestingly,You march along like a Provost followed by a band ofpolice." "And you," returned Raphael in the sametone, "walk by yourself like the executioner." Onanother occasion it is said that while conversingtogether, and admiring a work of Andrea del Sarto,Michael Angelo turning to him exclaimed, " Yes, thereis that little fellow in Florence who, if he had beenemployed in great matters as thou art, would havemade thee siceat again."There is an account also of a curious scene whichtook place between Pope Julius and the painter, when,after a bitter quarrel, they again became reconciled. Acertain bishop attended our artist as a sort of peacemakerinto the pontiff's presence. Fixing on him astern look, Julius cried out, " So, instead of comingback to us, sir, you have obliged the Pope to wait uponyou— what think you?" Michael Angelo having repliedwith an air of noble frankness, the good bishop then interposedin his favor: — " Did your Holiness only knowhow ignorant persons of his profession are; mere ideotsout of their own art !" — "Silence !" exclaimed the Pope,at the same time hitting the bishop a smart rap on theshoulders; "it is thou who art the ignoramus, — notMichael Angelo, and you do him much wrong — see you126 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.not that we ourselves wish to be friends with him?" andfrom that time he ceased not to lavish on the painterfresh testimonials of his favor. Yet this great man, weareamusingly told by an old traveller, " had a mostunhappy itch of pilfering, not for lucre (for it wasgenerally of mere trifles), but it was what he could nothelp ; so that the friends whose houses he frequentedwould put in his way rags of cloth, bits of glass, andthe like, to save things of more value (for he could notgo away without something), and with such as these,at his death, a whole room was found filled."When at a loss to account for the author of anyinvention you happen to admire, an Italian has alwaysa resource in Michael Angelo. An English tourist,praising the plan of some cart-wheels, inquired whowas the inventor? Michael Angelo, to be sure, wasthe reply, else why was he named Buonarroti ?When Michael Angelo was made chief architect ofSt. Peter's, he stipulated, from a religious feeling, thathe should reap no sort of worldly profit in dischargingthat high duty. He survived, and retained all hisfaculties to an extreme old ashe, and was interred withdistinguished honors in the Church of Santa Croce,where so many of his most honored countrymen alsorepose.The descendants of the great Lorenzo were speedilyreinstated in the authority early acquired for them byenlightened and liberal conduct; but an ambition, asvain as it was dangerous, began at length to infect theblood of his family, long distinguished for its patrioticlove of freedom. From that period the prosperity andrn.u'.o. 127influence of Florence seem to have rapidly declined,and subsequent wars and revolutions reduced it to itspresent state of comparative indigence, — its chief dignityand wealth being thenceforward derived fromrecollections of its past freedom and patronage oflearning.Towards the middle of the fifteenth century, aidedby foreign force and intrigue, the Medici assumed thetitle of princes ; and with the life of Cosmo, the firstGrand Duke of Florence, are connected events whichproclaim the dark inauspicious reign of tyranny thatensued. The chambers of the old ducal palace, themost sacred edifices, and even the delightful retreatswhere the father of his country and the great Lorenzodevoted their leisure to rural and literary pursuits,became the scene of tragic passions, and deeds thatmake the blood run cold. The Duke Cosmo had twosons — Giovanni and Garzia, the latter and youngerof whom had conceived a bitter jealousy against hisbrother. The elder had not yet attained his nineteenthyear. They one morning went out to the chasetogether, and, having withdrawn from the rest of theparty, it was not till towards evening that Garzia wasobserved to return alone. In vain did they search, invain did they blow the hunter's horn, no Giovanniappeared, — till at length, after a minute search, thebody was discovered in a lonely spot deluged inblood.These tidings reached the ear of Cosmo, who knewenough to divine the author of the deed, — he had losthis favorite son. He commanded the corpse to be128 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.conveyed to a certain chamber, the same whichcontained the portraits of his two boys.*On the night of that fearful day, fatal to the reposeof Cosmo, when all but the mother of these fatedyouths lay buried in slumber (and she herself did notlong survive) — the father, going into Garzia's chamber,commanded him to arise and follow him. In one handthe unhappy tyrant held a key, in the other a lamp ;and leading the way, followed by his trembling boy, heentered a dark and gloomy part of the palace. Closingand locking the dungeon door, he took his son by thehand, and, looking him earnestly in the face, questionedhim as to the manner in which he had spent the day.But not the least change of colour in the fair boy'scheek betrayed the traces of guilt or fear. The Dukethen suddenly lifting up a blood-stained sheet, " Seethere," he cried, " now know you not your day's work?now answer me. Blood calls for blood, — a brother'sblood; and, unless thou wilt spare him that dread office,the hand of a father must spill it. Ah ! dost thoushudder at the sight? — it is all then but too true.""Father," stammered out the youth, "I stood onlyupon my guard." " Dearest thou calumniate him thouhast murdered, and who never injured thee?" interruptedCosmo; — "he would not have hurt the smallestthing that lives, how much less his brother? It needsbe thou must die, or thou wouldst be worse than Cain,and be the slayer of us all." With these words he» A picture which was afterwards seen by the historian De Thou upon hisvisit to Florence, and again brought to light by the indefatigable research ofthe classical and accomplished author of " Italy."pel u.ip. [29seized the dagger from Garzia's belt, the same haplywhich had drank his brother's blood, and, going on hisknees, folded his hands, appealing to heaven forstrength to bear him through the terrific task. Then,folding the wretched youth in his arms, he wept longand bitterly upon his neck, breathing out only wordsof tenderness, yet true to his awful purpose. " Ohcursed doom — and most cursed father ! " he cried outas he thrust his son from him, and, turning away hisface, buried the dagger deep in his heart's blood.Caffagiolo and Poggio Caiano, the favorite seats ofthe elder Medici, were equally the witness to deedsthat shunned the light. The bowl, the dagger, andthe noose were the usual instruments of jealousy andrevenge employed by the little despots of their nativestates, when genius and valour had alike faded underslavery's withering frown. Let man no more be reproachedwith accusations of popular tumult and revolution— the most glorious works of genius were everthe offspring of free times, when mankind bowed to nomaster but the Deity, and when all things were alikeopen to all. Homer, Dante, and Milton were thebeacon-lights of tumultuous times, and all the noblestspirits of Rome had plumed their wings for an immortalflight before the degrading days of Augustus Caesarmade Romans forget the ancestors from whom they hadsprung. It was only from the hydra root of moderndespotism that —Came the unpledged bowl,The stab of the stiletto. Gliding byUnnoticed, in slouched hat, and muffling cloak,K130 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.That just discovered, Caravaggio like,A swarthy check, hack brow, and eye of flame,The Bravo stole."Misnamed, to lull alarm,In every palace was the Laboratory,Where he within brewed poisons swift and slow,That scattered terror, till all things seemed poisonous,And brave men trembled if a hand held outA nosegay or a letter ; while the greatDrank only from the Venice-glass, that brokeAnd shivered, scattering round it as in scorn,If aught malignant, aught of thine was there,Cruel Tophana ; and pawned provincesFor that miraculous gem, the gem that gaveA sign infallible of coming ill,That clouded, though the vehicle of deathWere an invisible perfume. Happy thenThe guest to whom at sleeping-time 'twas said,But in an under voice (a lady's pageSpeaks in no louder) pass not on. That doorLeads to another which awaits thy coming,One in the floor — now left, alas ! unlocked.No eye detects it — lying under-foot,Just as thou interest, at the threshold stone,Ready to fall and plunge thee into nightAnd long oblivion."Such unfortunately were among the terrific instrumentsand devices employed by the petty despots ofmodern times, who rose " to their bad eminence" onthe ruins of European constitutional government, andthe free republics of Italy. The fate of Leonora deToledo, who was stabbed by her tyrant husband atCafFagiolo, on the 11th of July, 1576, presents a remarkableinstance of royal treachery, which, afterinveigling and welcoming its victim with caresses, cancoolly deal the fatal blow. Another case is that ofii i IGO. 131the unhappy Isabella de' Medici, the wife of PaoloOrsini, who was put to death at. the villa of Certo.Both these unhappy ladies were residing at Florence,when they were sent for at different times under thepretence of joining a party of pleasure in the country.Isabella was a remarkably beautiful and accomplishedwoman, and was also celebrated as the first Improvisatriceof her age. On her arrival at the fatal villa,her husband presented her with two beautiful greyhounds,inviting her to join him in making a trial oftheir speed the next morning. While at supper, hewas remarkably lively and agreeable. He was the firstto retire, and, soon after withdrawing, he sent for her tocome to his apartment, and there, while affecting tocaress her, he slipped a cord round her neck and thusinhumanly executed his horrid purpose ; she was interredat Florence with the usual pomp, but previouslyto her interment, according to Varchi, thecrime was divulged, by her face appearing almostblack as she lay on the bier.The wretched Leonora, we are told, appears to havehad some presentiment of her fate. She obeyed thesummons that called her from her family and friendsat Florence, to join her husband; but, on setting out,she took a tender leave, for the last time, of her son,then a boy, beseeching those around to treat him withgentleness and care, as she should never behold hisface more. Weeping long and bitterly on his neck,she then tore herself away, to die by the assassin handof her lord.k 2132 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.On the capture of Florence by the Pontifical troops,in the sixteenth century, the most terrific scenes tookplace, and the most barbarous excesses were committed.Neither age nor sex was spared, numbers ofnoble ladies fell victims to military licentiousness; norwere there wanting examples worthy of Sparta andof Rome, of high-souled virgins who voluntarily diedto save their honor from the brutal violation of Germanbarbarians. The historian Nardi relates the instance ofan unhappy girl who had already fallen into the handsof those dastardly hirelings. Crying and full of pain,she dissimulated as much as possible the excess of hergrief, and, while being caressed and consoled by thesevery soldiers, she gradually drew nigh to a high balcony,and, throwing herself over by a sudden effort, providedat the critical moment for the preservation of her chastity,by the bitter remedy of death. Another whosename is likewise unknown, and not belonging to thepatrician class, having been dishonored by an officer,who forcibly took her along with him as a servant intoLombardy, took signal vengeance on her despoiler.Seizing his poniard, she stabbed him on his attemptingto renew his violence ; then, rifling his tent,she mounted one of his best horses, dressed in man'sclothes, and, returning to her husband, asked himbefore dismounting if he were content to take heragain, and treat her as a good wife, with the new dowryshe had brought him. The husband answered gladlythat he would, and they thenceforward lived in peacetogether.PEL AGO. 133In the celebrated battle of Ravenna, which precededthe storming of Florence, the victory gained by DeFix was in great measure attributed to the talents ofAlphonso, duke of Ferrara, of whom a somewhat invidiousanecdote is related : — His disposition of theartillery, it is said, was such, that not only the army ofthe allies, but a part of the French on advancing beforethe line of the enemy, would be exposed to it. Alphonso,being made to observe this danger in the heatof the contest, only called out to the artillery-men :Fire away, without fear of doing wrong, becausethey are all our enemies."Never, perhaps, was the same national feeling moreunanimously displayed than by the people of Florencein their last struggle for liberty against the overwhelmingpower of the Pope and the Emperor. Opposedto the troops of three nations, commanded by thePrince of Orange, who laid close siege to the Tuscancapital, the daring spirit and true patriotism of itssoldiers and its citizens shone conspicuously in a seriesof brilliant actions and exploits, not unworthy the bestdays of Athens, when singly wrestling with the despothordes of Persia. But for the basest secret treachery,Florence too would have achieved equally glorious results.Thrice did the brave youth and soldiery issueforth and give open battle to the veteran troops of halfEurope ; but they were betrayed, when on the point ofvictory, by their infamous commander Malatesta .The names, on the other hand, of Ferruccio,Signorelli, Luigi Martel, Dante of Castiglione,Monte, Rudolf, and the great Buonaroti, live THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.calmed by fame, in the history and recollections oftheir grateful countrymen.The fate of the city was chiefly decided by the famousbattle of Gavinana. Ferruccio, the patriot,though sick and wounded, was approaching to relieveFlorence, and supersede the traitor Malatesta in hiscommand. As if to crown the blackness of his guilt,the latter, it is averred, betrayed the patriot's march tothe Prince, assuring him that he would not attack theallied camp during his absence ; and, at the head of hisveteran legions, the Prince of Orange hastened to meetFerruccio. When Ferruccio knew that he had in frontof him the Prince, with a body of chosen troops threetimes superior to his own, he exclaimed, " Oh Traitor,Malatesta, it is thy work ! " The Prince, Ferruccio, andMaramaldo in pursuit of the patriot, arrived at Gavinalmost at the same time. The two latter enteredthe castle fighting; while the Prince marched to attackthe 500 Florentines, who took post in a thick chestnutgrove, where the cavalry could not act. The Princefought on a bay horse, and confronted Nicholas Mashin single combat, the Prince brandishing his sword, andMash an iron mace, with which he struck him severaltimes upon the helmet. But, Mash having retired tothe chestnut wood to avoid the men in armour comingto the succour of his adversary, two musket shots werefired at the Prince, who fell dead on the ground. TheFlorentines on this shouted out victory ; but the disproportionbetween the combatants was too great.Ferruccio and Paolo, after having given the greatestproofs of valour, surrounded by the killed andl'ULAGO.wounded, at last retired into a house, where, theystill continued to defend themselves, till they wereoverpowered and taken. Ferruccio was brought beforeMaranialdo, who, remembering the disgrace he hadBuffered before the city of Volterra, and irritated at thedeath of the Prince, disregarding every law of humanityand honor, upbraided the patriot with bitterwords, and, striking his sword into his throat, despatchedhim on the spot. Such a deed might well beheldup to execration in those noble lines of Ariosto : —Schiavon cruel, ont' hai tu il modo oppressDelia militia I in qual Scizia s' intended,Ch' cider si debba un, poco' eli e press,Che rende 1' arme, e piu non si defence 1Dunque uccidesti lui perche ha difesoPatria? Can. 30.Caitiff, and cruel, where learnt thou the artOf glorious war 1 What more than Scythia rudeTaught thee to slay one that with thee had partIn all its laws, to spill the captive's blood?What ! didst thou stab, to reach the patriot heart,Because it loved its country 1The ancient glory and freedom of Florence thus fellbefore the bad pre-eminence of princes, who cast ablot on the distinguished name and character of theolder Medici. Restored again to power, Alexander,the first of her petty despots, gave full loose to his nativedepravity and love of pleasure. The beauty andthe honor of Florence were the speedy victims of hislust and his tyrannic pride. Among the daughters of136 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Filippo Strozzi, his relative and rival, who had marriedChalice de' Medici, was Louisa, the consort of LuigiCapon. She was very beautiful, adorned with gentlemanners, discreet, and virtuous ; yet the Duke Alexanderappeared to look upon her with an impassionedeye. One Salviati, a friend and creature of the Duke,frequently made use of words and manners towards heratvarious festivals, not to be tolerated by a noblelady, whether he acted for himself or as the guiltieragent of the Duke. He had the folly too to boast ofthis conduct in presence of Leo Strozzi, the brother ofLouisa, and after some sharp words the subject dropped.But, returning one evening on horseback from the palace,Salviati was assailed by three persons, andbadly wounded in the head and thigh. Suspicionfell upon the Strozzi, several of whom were arrested,but after a strict examination they were acquitted;Pietro even ridiculed his accusers ; and the whole of theStrozzi indignantly left the city and retired to Rome.The unfortunate Louisa, after supping in perfect healthwith her sister Rudolf, was suddenly seized with dreadfulpains, of which she died, and, as it was given outbypoison ; whether administered by the creatures of theDuke, irritated at her refusals, or by her own relativesto protect her from a more dishonorable fate, still remainsa mystery.The end of Alexander was one well merited by thetenor of his life and reign. Lorenzo de' Medici, calledLorenzo from his small stature and slight limbs, afteringratiating himself into his relative's favor by thebasest arts, became his assassin. Que evening he .l<37formed the Duke that he had at length succeeded inpersuading a noble lady, who had uniformly rejectedhis overtures to meet his wishes, and, if he wouldwait for her in his house, he would then conduct herthither. Having dismissed his attendants, he accompaniedLorenzo to his chamber, who in untiringhis sword took care to secure it fast in the sheath ; andthen hastened to bring — not the lady, but the terribleaccomplice of his guilt. Scoronconcolo was one of themost daring of his savage tribe. Lorenzo told him that theintended victim was a great friend of the Duke. " Wereit the Duke himself," replied the other, " I would do thebusiness I have undertaken." " You have guessed well ;it is the Duke ; " said Lorenzo. " It is right — let usgo to him," was the answer. On re-entering the room,the Duke, in full expectation, doubtless, that it was thelady, appeared to take no notice of their entrance.My lord, are you asleep," called Lorenzo, at thesame time hitting him a furious blow with his swordacross the loins. Starting up, the Duke defended himselfwith a stool : Scoronconcolo gave him a deep cutacross the face, and Lorenzo, pushing him back uponthe bed, sprung upon him, and thrust his hand into theDuke's mouth to prevent his cries. The Duke seizedthe fore finger of Lorenzo so sharply between his teeth,that the latter, fainting with pain, cried to his companionto release him. Fearful of wounding Lorenzoif he struck, the savage coolly laid aside his dagger,and, taking out a knife, cut the Duke's throat as he lay,extricated Lorenzo, and wrapped the dead body in thecurtains.138 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.His unnatural relative did not escape ; pursued byjustice, and his steps every where dogged during aspace of ten years, he was at length overtaken andassassinated at Venice, in the thirty-second year of hisage, his ill-planned enterprize only opening the way forafar more politic tyrant than the last. The ducal annalsof Florence abound in those domestic crimes and excessesthat stamp the reign of all despotic families,from the grand signor to the czar of Muscovy, writingtheir familiar history in characters of blood. It was thus,in the seventeenth century, that the lovely and nobleCatalina Canacci fell a victim to the jealousy of ducalrank. Incensed at the loss of the Duke's affections,his consort resolved to wreak her utmost vengeanceon the fair cause ; and, not satiated by the assassinationof the unhappy girl, she had the head severed from thebust, and brought to her to contemplate. On daysof festival she had been accustomed to send to theDuke some little present, elegantly adorned and presentedin a rich silver vessel. On that morning, beingnew year's day, she took the head of the ill-fated lady,and, decking it out in the usual manner, covered it, andsent it by her handmaid to the Duke.Unconscious of her fate, and dreaming probably ofpresenting the new year's gift just arrived to his bestbeloved, the Duke approached it, and withdrew thecoverlet. Imagine all the accusing horrors of thatmoment ; the pangs he felt as he stood rivetted to thespot, with his eyes fixed in fearful enchantment onthe fiendish spell-work before him ! He knew thesorceress, for frequently had she warned both him andPELAGO. 139his beloved mistress ; ami he uttered no cry, no complaint.The authoress of his misery consulted herSafety by flight, and he was left to the comfortlessreflections from which no tyrant is exempt — whetherdisappointed in ambition, in oppression, or in royalseduction and adultery.From the period when Florence fell under the swayof a petty despot, her history becomes a blank ; agloomy peace, like the sleep of death, shrouded allbut her past fame ; the genius of her poetry and herarts declined; the ages of her Dante, her MichaelAngelo, and her Lorenzo were for ever fled, and, withher liberty, even valour, and beauty itself, decayed.TEMPLE OF THE CLITUMNUS.Along the cried shade and bowers,Revels the spruce and jocund spring,The Graces and the rosy-bosomed hoursThither all their bounties bring ;That there eternal summer dwells,Aud west winds with musky wingAbout the ccdaru alleys thins;N aid's and Cassia's balmy smells.Milton's Cum s.Italy, bright and beautiful as it is, has few spotswhich the wanderer leaves with more regret than thecalm, fertile, district of the Clitumnus. No where inthe world, perhaps, has the genius of pastoral life had amore favorite abode. In the ages of antiquity, when theinfluences of nature were the chief source of poetic feeling,it was peopled by the fairest creations of rural fancy,and might vie with Arcadia in the gaiety and beautyof its shades and grottos, haunted by nymphs whosemortal beauty derived a deep and inexpressible charmfrom the lovely scenes around them, and the sparklingdreams which the poets had sung beneath their bowers.The river had no rival for limpid clearness ; its amberwaves stole along with a gentle murmur which thelistening ear of fancy might well convert into music; —and what was there in its bright, azure depths, whisperingonly to the winds as gentle as itself, which couldITMIM.L OF Till'. C'Lll'l MNLS. Illlead the mind t<> doubt for a n um unit what the Imaginationhad suggested, — that it was the home of a fair andbeneficent being, the pure, gentle minister of a higherdivinity? There is a beauty too and virtue in riverswhich prevent onr regarding; them, except when fancyis more than ordinarily cool, as a mere collection ofwaters. They spring from the deep recesses of theearth, where imagination would fain believe a busytribe of other beings are at work, tempering the shiningmetal, and scooping the marble rocks into urns andcisterns for the precious dews of heaven. Science, even,when speaking of rivers, is not content with her usuallysimple language, and Pliny gravely ascribes thesnowy whiteness of the cattle which fed in his time onthe fertile banks of the Clitumnus to the influence ofits crystal waters. An effect of a similar kind wasalso attributed to other celebrated rivers by the nationsof antiquity. Thus the Melts in Boeotia was said togive black fleeces to the flocks which ranged its banks ;the Ephesus, the favorite river of the Graces, beheldlike the Clitumnus only milk-white herds strayingalong its pastures ; the yellow-flowing X an thusimparted its own dusky hue ; and the Peneus, runningamong dense groves of laurel, tinted, like the Melts,the fleeces of the flocks with black.If Science could thus speculate on the virtue ofrivers, how easy must it have been for the mythologistsof the day to obtain credit for their beautiful inventions,and an assent to the favorite maxim of Seneca :Wherever a spring rises, or a river flows, altars shouldbe built and sacrifices offered ! " The sacredness of the142 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Nile and the Ganges is proverbial, and the adorationpaid them is in conformity with the gloomy characterof the religion professed by the people on their shores.But the holiness of the Grecian and Italian rivers wasof a different kind ; it was the holiness of a sweet andbeneficent nature — the holiness we still in our heartsascribe to the light and the other elements in theirpurity. Thus it was that the Peneus was worshippedfor its beauty, and thus that the clear placid Clitumnushad a temple raised upon its banks famed throughoutthe country for its elegance.In no part of Italy, indeed, did the religious orpoetical feelings of the inhabitants so nearly resemblethose of the more intellectual Grecians, as on the banksof the Clitumnus. The people in the neighbourhoodretained the character of their ancestors of the isles ofthe sea, long after the original cause of that similaritymay be supposed to have ceased from operating.Pliny, in his elegant panegyric on the district, hasalluded to this circumstance, and justly as well aspoetically attributes it' to the Grecian loveliness of thescenery. The happy, and even, as he terms it, theblessed amenity of the soil and climate, gives to naturehere the aspect of universal delight. Fertile fields,sunny hills, innocuous groves, refreshing shades,vindicate the justice of this description, and hisbeautiful expressions, munifica sylvanus genera,montis afflatus, omnium fontiumque libertas, &c,afford as clear a mirror as the copiousness oflanguage can produce, in which to contemplatethe graceful Clitumnus and its lovely district.i imim.1'. OF THE CLITUMOT S. 143Bui if at the Bight of ruined castles, or the gray,sombre, pomp of old cathedrals, the mind becomesinstantaneously filled with images of feudal war, ormonastic pageantry, not less instinctively does it recal,at the view of a lovely and interesting country, theforms of the gentle and happy people whom imaginationpictures as the inhabitants of its shades. Itis to this feeling that we owe all that is most pleasantin pastoral poetry, and which raises this speciesof composition above simple description. The pastoralromances, in fact, of some of the later Greekwriters, are full of incidents as well as pictureswhich appeal very strongly to our affections; and thewanderer along the banks of the Clitumnus, andamong the fertile pastures which extend from itswillowy marge into the heart of the land, will delightto recal the dreaming of the days when the spirit ofthe old world was still hovering in the woods, andbreathing over some favored spot the deep and solemnbeauty which it once poured freely forth as the air,so that every thought of the human mind caught ahue of brightness and heaven.The green steep on which stands the temple of theClitumnus forms, with its surrounding glades, a scenewell fitted to make us believe that the tales of thepastoral writers were far from being altogetherfictitious, and the beautiful romance of Longus mayberead here with a feeling of its more than traditionalreality. It was on one of those lovely mornings, in theearly spring, when Nature, awaking from her bed ofhalf-opened roses, seems to convert every sight and144 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.sound into an emblem or expression of love, that theyouthful Daphnis and Chloe chanced to drive theirflocks under the brow of the same hill. The formerwas fifteen, the latter but twelve years of age, and fatehad placed them both in a station which it seemedprobable was far lower than the one to which theirbirth entitled them. They had been found whileinfants by shepherds in the neighbourhood, who hadbrought them up with tenderness, but had revealedsufficient to them of the manner in which they hadfallen into their hands to raise their thoughts abovethe usual ideas of those among whom they lived.Scarcely, therefore, had they greeted each other in thevalley, when they conceived a friendship which neitherhad yet felt for the other youths of the neighbourhood.From that hour their only pleasure consisted in sittingtogether under the shade of the cedar groves, orwandering, hand in hand, through the tranquil andflowery valleys, in which the song of the nightingaleand the deep, thick, blooming of the roses, spoke tothem in a language surpassingly sweet, though as yetunintelligible. It was thus with each other that theyfirst learnt to feel the loveliness of nature, and whateverthey met with beautiful on their path, the blush ofthe flowers, the music of the birds, made each lookmore lovely in the eyes of the other.But the winter came and they were separated.Their foster-parents, watching them with the anxiouscare with which they tended the youngest and weakestnurslings of their folds, feared to expose them to thechilling blasts which swept over the plains and valleys,TEMPLE or THE CLITUMNUS. 145now covered with snow; they had no consolation leftthem, therefore, but to recal, as they sat and wove theirwillow baskets over the fire, the pleasant scenes andhappy hours of summer ; and, rapid as had been thegrowth of their affections while together, they seemedto acquire a still more rapid maturity with only theirbright thoughts to ripen them. But at length the sunshot a warmer ray through the leafless trees; thesnow was twisted into light gossamer folds by thefavonian breezes, which dissolved the glisteningwreaths as fast as they formed them ; the brooks wereheard just breaking into a murmur at noon-tide, andthe swallow twittered among the tendrils of the vine.Each day gave birth to some new sign of the approachingspring, and at last the white sails of many a lightskiff were seen floating over the bosom of the sparklingClitumnus.With the first murmur of the bees among theflowers, Daphnis drove his goats to the slope of thesunny hill beneath the brow of which, in the heat ofautumn, he and Chloe had so often sought refreshingshade. Every bud that opened appeared to give him afresh promise that she would soon rejoin him, and helistened to the song of their favorite birds, as if it werethat of her own sweet voice. But the roses were nowalmost in full bloom , the morning and evening galeeven had ceased to be chill ; not a particle of snow wasto be seen in the deepest clefts of the rocks, and thegrass in every glade and valley seemed spread in itsdewy richness for more flocks than were led to thepasture. Daphnis, however, looked in vain for the fairL146 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.sulphide form of his little mistress. The summer came,but he still saw her not, and he for the first time feltthe agonies of disappointment. Through the long dayhe would lie listlessly on the ground, forgetful of hisflock, till the deepening shades of evening warned himto seek the stragglers which his neglect had exposed tobe lost among the crags or in the woods. His foster-fathersaw with sorrow the change which had takenplace in his bright countenance, but ascribed it to therising spirit of the noble youth grieving over his humblelot, and Daphnis was allowed to indulge his melancholyhumour undisturbed. One day however, as hestood looking over a rock into a deep ravine, in whichone of his goats lay killed, and the fate of which hefelt strongly inclined to envy, he was startled by thesound of voices near him, and, on turning round, sawsome persons whose noble air and costly habiliments atonce proved that they were strangers to the neighbourhood.Among them was a young and lovely female,the splendour and beauty of whose robes and the jewelswhich adorned them were only exceeded by the lustreof her exquisite form and countenance. Daphniscould scarcely believe either his eyes or ears when hefound himself addressed in a familiar voice of tendernessby the lovely girl, nor could he restrain himselffrom expressing the most violent joy on discovering thatit was indeed his own Chloe. But the recollectionof their now changed condition, in respect to eachother, cast a sudden gloom over his features, and hedrew back with an air of sullen despair. It wasnot however of long duration. One of the personsTEMPLE OF rill CLITUMNUS. 147present, a man of dignified look, stepped forward andembraced him as his son, while another, the father ofChloe, put her hand into his as his affianced bride.The circumstance which had led to their being exposedwas an invasion of the district by the Etruria,during which their parents, persons of high nobility,were obliged to save themselves by a precipitateflight.t 2Politestubi plus tcpeant hyenas ! ubi orator auraLtniat et rabies Canis et momenta Leonis,Cum semel accept solem furibundus acuttim.Hon.Where fair Clitumnus bids his waters flow,Through arching groves, and bathes his herds of snow.Proper.In exploring the wildly romantic and mournfulscenery of the Clitumnus, passing by the site of thesacred grove and ruined chapels, once breathing onlyreligious solemnity and repose, the traveller approachesthe ancient town of Spoletum. It is distant from LeRene, and the temple already described, about ninemiles, and is situated, on the sides and summit of ahill. The vicinity for miles around, especially on theside of Pesignano, affords rich and diversified prospects,often agreeably interspersed with little villages, farms,and single houses. From Folio to Spoleto the entirecountry was at one period richly planted with vines,on every side, trained to run up the trees in the samemanner as they are observed in Lombardy ; but thesemarks of cultivation and happy life have more recentlybegun to disappear. Forming a portion of the ancientUmbria, afterwards called the duchy of Spoleto, thetown formerly stood high in political importance, andSPOLETO. 15Jrather to promote than detract from the blamelessnessof their quiet and exemplary lives.The aqueduct is of Roman structure, dating about theyear 560, but is said to have been repaired under Theodoric,king of the Goths. It was then that the pointed-archedstyle of architecture was introduced into Italy,sprung doubtless from the round-arched style, such asis exhibited in the palace of Diocletian at Spalatro, andin the church of Santa Constans, erected in the reignof Constantine, near Rome. The architrave mannerin use among the Egyptians, the ancient Greeks, andRomans, is known to have ceased in Italy in the fourthcentury; and round arches rising from the columns, asin the fabrics of Spoleto, to have replaced it. The samewas adopted by the Emperor at Constantinople, and inthis form was erected the famous Santa Sophia by Justinian.So far, however, from its meriting the title ofGothic or barbarous, the best writers — Curator, Tira-bosch,and Maffei, give their joint testimony to thefact, that, in place of introducing this or any otherstyle, both Goths and Lombards only made use ofthe arts and architects found established on theirarrival in Italy; and they continued the same convenientplan throughout the middle ages.The old town of Spoletum lay on the road betweenthe emperor Theodoric's royal seat at Ravenna andthe city of Rome, then ranking only as second underthe imperial sway. It was in his reign that the countryround Spoleto put on so improved an aspect by thedrainage of the low marshy grounds, among the deeperdells and ravines of the valley. The more modern152 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.town, though for the most part neat and well-built, bearsoccasional marks of the ravages of Italy's fierce scourge —the earthquake ; a truth made too evident by numerousinscriptions left on public edifices, previous to the erectionof many noble palaces and mansions of more recentdate. A new bridge has also been constructed on the sidewhere the Folio road opens into Spoleto. Whileforming the foundations for it, two arches of an oldRoman bridge were uncovered, known to be the PonteSanguinaria, a name bestowed from the number ofChristian martyrs reported to have been th»wn headlongfrom its walls. One or two old and classic lovelegends pertain also to the same spot.In the time of Tiberius, the town of Spoletum issupposed to have been the first place of refuge soughtby a young Roman knight named Decius Munus,after being banished from Rome by that emperor,who about the same period is recorded to haveabolished the worship of the goddess Isis, for reasonsconnected with the same edict. An amusing accountof the whole affair is given by Josephus at some length,of which the following is a feeble abstract. Deciuswas violently in love with a noble Roman lady namedPaulina, the consort of Saturnine, belonging to theSenatorial order. Virtuous as she was beautiful, themisguided lover sighed and courted, intreated, flattered,and even made presents, it seems, in vain. As a lastresource, he had recourse to gold, and if two hundredthousand attic drachmas — about £6000 sterling — couldhave touched the heart of her he loved, he was readyto lay both that and himself at her feet. All in vain ;8P0LBT0. 1 53for the lady remained obstinately virtuous, and trueto lier first vows. On finding no remedy, the youngRoman resolved as obstinately and heroically to starvehimself to death. Fortunately for him, a good naturedfreed woman of his father's, called Ide, who hada dexterous turn in affairs of that nature, sawhow it was with him, and, seeing, she sympathisedwith him : — " Come," says she with the saintly chronicler— "don't pine thyself to death; cheer up, andnever fear but I'll find some means to help you." Hehearkening%ery attentively, she added : " Give me butafourth part of what you offered the lady, and I'll layit out so that, my life for yours, I'll soon put it allright between you." She received the money, and,knowing that Paulina was prodigiously devoted to theservice of Isis, away she goes to the temple of thatgoddess with her purse of gold, and found no difficultaccess to the priests. " Holy Fathers," says she, "I'mcome to beg a little of your assistance ; there's moneyto be got, only be you hearty in the business ; it is alove affair :" and then she tells her tale. "Fifty thousanddrachmas is the sum; here's half in hand, and therest ready when your work is done." There was nowithstanding such a temptation. " Tis very well,mistress, go your way ; the business shall be done."Paulina's devotion to the goddess was such that thepriests had access to her when they would. The eldestundertakes to manage the matter with her ; he desiresa conference, and, breaking the matter, informs herthat he was sent to her by the god Anubis ; who wasdelighted with her excellent qualities, and had THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.nified his pleasure that she should submit to his wishes.All devotion, she received the message with transport,boasted of the honor to her friends and acquaintance,and informed her husband of what was in store for her.With perfect reliance on her virtue, he bade her to dowhat she considered best. So to the temple she goes ;the priests are ready to receive and conduct her to herapartment. The doors of the temple are locked, thelights taken away, and Decius represents the false divinitywithin. Early the next morning, ere the priestswere stirring, the lover retired. Paulina m\ repairinghome acquainted her husband how the god Anubis appearedto her ; and the account was variously received,some believing, others mistrusting some roguery. Aboutthree days after this affair was over, Decius meetinghis beloved Paulina could not forbear letting her knowthat he was her Anubis ; though Decius Munus couldnot be received with the same favor. Paulina onlearning his villany, and amazed at his assurance, in afury of tears tore her. hair and clothes, rushed to herhusband, and unfolding the matter besought him toprosecute her revenge to the utmost. He needed notmuch entreaty, but went straight to the Emperor andlaid each particular before him. The Emperor upon afull examination of the matter ordered the priests andIde to be hanged, pulled down the temple of Isis, castAnubis' statue into the Tiber, and banished Munus,his punishment being less than that of the others,considering his crime proceeded from extreme love. —About the twelfth century, the family of the Orsini,tracing its origin to Spoleto, rose into high repute and1 r . r .SPOLETO. lOOpower. The chiefs of a powerful faction, and the bitterenemies of that of the Colonia at Rome, the dissensionsbetween these rival families kept that capitalin a state of continual commotion for a space of 250years. It was during the seventy years' incessant warexcited by this animosity that the holy Pontiffs, unablelonger to restrain these excesses, were compelled to leaveRome and fix their residence at Avignon. The Colonia,joining the faction of the Hirelings, espoused theinterest of the German Emperors, while the Orsini,adopting tlfat of the Guelphss, allied themselves to theChurch of Rome. The real object, however, which bothhad in view, was to obtain superior influence in the dominionof the Church and to accomplish the downfallof their rival, to effect which their ambition shrunk atnothing which secret treachery and open violence woulddare to perpetrate. It is no way surprising thereforethat two members of the Orsini family — Celestina III.and Nicholas III. — should have ascended the pontificalchair.After leaving Spoleto the road on the right is overhungby finely wooded hills, on which the oak, box,Spanish broom, and Clematis viorna, flourish in all theglowing richness and variety of their sunny hues. Onthe left of these winds a clear, deep, stream, and abouttwo miles from the town commences the ascent of theMonte Somma, supposed to have taken this namefrom a temple of Jupiter Summons, situated on itssummit. It is nearly 5000 feet high, and affords asplendid and extensive view over the whole of Spoleto,the vale and river of Clitumnus on one side, and the156 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.plains of the Nar as far as the fields of Terni on theother. The declivities of this magnificent mountainare clothed with almost every variety of forest trees,from the gray tinge of the olive, to the deep hues of theilex and the fir ; while, embosomed beneath the woodycurtain above, are seen several little hamlets andfarms, which, enlivening the scene, draw their existencefrom its fertile soil.Next.Oh whither art thou fled, Saturnian age 1Roll round again, majestic years !To break the sceptre of tyrannic rage,From Woe's wan cheek to wipe the bitter tears.Ye years, again roll round !Hark, from afar what desolating sound,While echoes load the sighing gales,With dire presage the throbbing heart assails !Battle.The romantic little town of Nepi challenges therespect of the traveller, more for its rank in the melancholypages of early ecclesiastical history than for anythingremarkable in its antiquarian remains. Itscastle is a picturesque object, but not historicallyinteresting. The cathedral, however, is one of themost ancient churches in Europe, and an inscriptionon one of its entrances purports that it was erected inthe middle of the second century. It may perhaps bereasonably doubted whether the church in its presentform arose at that period, but there appears littlereason for doubting the general assertion of the inscriptionrespecting the early foundation of a religiousedifice on this spot, and at a time when the groundwas still reeking with the blood of lately slaughteredmartyrs. If, according to the inscription, the church158 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.was built in the year 150, and numbers of the townspeoplefell either shortly before or immediately afterthat event, we may suppose the martyrdoms to havetaken place in one of those casual and local risingsagainst the Christians with which even the reign of thevirtuous and almost Christian Antoninus Pius wasunfortunately stained. Supposing this to be the case,the sylvan and varied scenery about Nepi may beregarded with a degree of interest certainly not inferiorto that inspired by the annals of Rome and its neighbouringstates, when struggling for their existence as apeople, but under circumstances far less untoward thanthose of the early Christians. All the sympathies ofour nature awake at the recital of sufferings bornelong and patiently in the defence of elevated principles,and it is natural that they should be felt with doubleforce when the people for whom they are awakenedare very far inferior in strength and numbers to thosewith whom they contend, and when for some slightsacrifice of truth or virtue they might at once purchasean exemption from persecution and its consequentmiseries. It was soon after the time specified by theinscription on the door of the cathedral at Nepi thatthe Christians had to endure several of the fiercestattacks that ever desolated the infant church. Thereign of Marcus Antoninus deluged both the east andthe west with Christian blood; and, from the enormitiesperpetrated in the provinces at some distance fromRome, it is not difficult to estimate the sufferingswhich must have been endured by that portion of thepersecuted people who resided within the very view ofsin. 159the imperial capital. " Audacious sycophants," — saysone of the boldest and most eloquent of their advocatesto the Emperor — "audacious sycophants, and men whocovet the possessions of others, take advantage of yourproclamations openly to rob and spoil the innocent bynight and by day. If this be done through your order,let it stand good ; for a just emperor cannot actunjustly, and we will cheerfully submit to the honorof such a death ; this only we humbly crave of yourmajesty, that, after an impartial examination of us andour accusers, you would justly decide whether wedeserve death and punishment or life and protection.But, if these edicts be not the effect of your personaljudgment, edicts which ought not to be enacted evenagainst barbarian enemies, in that case we entreat younot to despise us while thus unjustly oppressed." Itneed scarcely be added that this sober and powerfulappeal to the Emperor's justice was countervailed bythe prejudiced representations given him by the pagangovernors of the towns in which the Christians hadplaces of worship; and it was doubtlessly at the instigationof some bigoted and interested magistrate thatthe unfortunate inhabitants of Nepi, whether under thereign of Antoninus Pius or his successor, paid fortheir devotion in raising a church in the town bypouring out their blood on its steps.Nepi does not hold any conspicuous figure inhistory; but, unfortunately for it, in the year 1798the ancient scenes of sanguinary persecution wererenewed, and the aisles of the cathedral were stained,as in the second century, with the blood of Christians160 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.engaged in worship. The soldiers of, we will not sayrepublican, but of infidel France, seemed at that perioddesirous of emulating the fame of pagan praetors intheir revengeful hatred towards all who could remindthem of the religion they had cast off, and Nepi feltalmost more than any other town the dire effects oftheir apostasy.The traveller, with the recollections of these scenesin his mind, will wander among the delightful environsof the town with an interest peculiar to the place ; andits green solitudes, now secure and tranquil, willinspire him with thoughts strikingly in contrast withthe wild passions which have so often desolated thefair face of nature, and retarded the progress ofcivilization.THE LAKE OF Nemo.Here bills and vales, the woodland and the plain,Hi ire earth and water seem to strive again;Not chaos-like together crushed and bruised,Hut as the world, harmoniously confused :Where order in variety we sec,Anil where, though all things differ, all agree.Pope.The Lake of Nemi and its surrounding shoresabound in objects of interest both to the traveller andthe antiquary. Roman mythology has scarcely anythingso purely, so mentally, beautiful in its creationsas the fables respecting the goddess Egeria ; and, atthe base of the rock which supports the little town ofNemi, the tourist sees the fountain still pouring outits cool, clear waters in which the bride of the contemplativeNumb is supposed to have sighed out herown pure and delicate spirit, when lamenting thedeath of her consort. The murmurs of the fountain,the calm, sylvan loveliness of the scenery, and thedeep shade of the woods, all serve to give thatspecies of conviction, not to the mind, but to theimagination, which renders fictions such as these sointeresting to the heart.From the rock on which the town is built, a view iscommanded, rivalled by few in Italy. The lake, lyingM162 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.in its glassy smoothness below, gives an appearance ofremarkable wildness to the dark, rocky banks whichsurround it. Like many other similar collections ofwaters, it is the offspring of a volcano ; and like thebright, fair-haired daughter of a stern, rude warrior,its placid beauty affects the imagination the more fromthe recollection of its parentage. But the eye, onleaving the scenes immediately before it, embraces apanorama as various as it is beautiful. Towards thesouth-east swells the Monte Artemisia, covered withthe old, romantic forest, which erst shielded the chasteDiana and her nymphs, and, if tradition speak true,once resounded to the shrieks of many a humanvictim sacrificed in gloom and solitude at her shrine.The rites practised in her worship resembled in thisrespect the mysteries of the ancient Druids. Likethem, her priests sought the depths of the gloomiestwoods as their sanctuary ; the solemn echoes of far-extendedsolitude seemed a necessary accompanimentto their supplications, and darkness and horror weremade the frequent emblems of her for whom the rosybowers and the thrilling harmonies of divine love weregiven in vain. It is a great pity that the wanderingsof Salvator Rosa, while in the heyday of his fancy, didnot lead him to the grove of Diana. A painter couldscarcely find a fitter subject for the exercise of a boldpencil, than the traditions afford of the manner inwhich the priests of this goddess took possession of herfane on the Monte Artemisia. It is generally relatedthat the priest was always a fugitive, whose only chanceof escaping the penalties of the law for his crimesnil LAKE OF \k.mi. I6Udepended on his making himself master of the templeof the goddess. As the fane was never without aresident, the outlaw's sole hope of success dependedon his superior strength and address, and he wasobliged to wage battle with his sacerdotal rival till heeither buried his dagger in his bosom or was himselfslain. It is not difficult to imagine the terrific natureof the conflict which must have taken place, when abold and desperate man besieged the priest. Everystratagem was no doubt employed to render successcertain, and fancy trembles as she depicts the gloomyfelon stealing at midnight through the most tangledparts of the wood ; the wild start with which the solitarytenant of the fane would hear his approaching step ;the fierce and silent struggle which would follow ; andthe shout of triumph with which the conqueror wouldtake possession of his new but perilous dignity, as thegroans of his slaughtered predecessor echoed throughthe depths of the forest.But the Lake of Nemi presented, during theflourishing reign of Trajan, a scene of gaiety andsplendour on its bosom which reminds us more of thetales of fairy-land than of those connected withclassic mythology. Delighted with the beauty of thesurrounding country, Trajan resolved on establishing asummer residence for himself ar his court in the verycentre of the lovely lake. For this purpose he had avessel constructed which is stated to have measuredmore than 500 feet in length, about 270 in width, andsixty in height. The strength of this enormous barge,if so it may be called, was in proportion to its size.M 2164 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Wood of the hardest kind was employed in itsconstruction, while the beams were bound togetherwith brass and iron nails, and covered with sheets oflead, which on the parts most exposed to the waterwere double. The interior was fitted up in the style ofa magnificent palace ; the rooms into which it wasdivided being both paved and lined with marble, andthe ceilings resting on pillars of polished brass.But the palace of ice built by the Empress Catherineonly shared the same fate as the more solid structureof the Roman sovereign. Not a speck of the palace-shipis now to be seen on the lake of Nemi; and hadit not been for the enterprising spirit of a learnedantiquary named March, who lived in the earlierpart of the sixteenth century, we should only have hadthe doubtful testimony of tradition respecting thisremarkable edifice. But the Signor March, descendingthe lake in a diving machine, discovered it remainingstill sufficiently entire to enable him to give a veryinteresting description of what it must have been in itsoriginal splendour ; and the author of the ClassicalTour very properly remarks that it is much to belamented that some method has not been taken toraise this singular fabric, as it would probably contribute,from its structure and furniture, to give us amuch greater insight into the state of the arts at thatperiod than any remnant of antiquity which hashitherto been discovered. The most interesting circumstance,however, connected with this edifice, is theaid it affords us in estimating the character of Trajan,whose disposition, did we know little else of him, mightTHE LAKE 01 MM I. 165be favorably estimated from the care which he took torender the walks on the border of the lake an agreeableresort for his subjects — no trouble, it is said, havingbeen spared to adorn them with all the ornamentswhich rural scenery is capable of receiving from thehand of classical taste.GENSANO.Namque rubescebat radius mare, et aether ab alto,Aurora in roses fulgcbat lutea biggs ;Cum vent poanere, onmisque repent creditFlatus, et in lento luctantur marre tonsae.Time hie eneas invented ex require locumProspect : bine inter flnvio Tiberius amceno,Vortices rapids et multa slaves arenaIn mare prorumpit.JExmv, Lib. VII.Tins town is about four miles distant from Alicia,and like that village and Albany is situated in themidst of scenes consecrated by interesting recollections.The neighbouring Lake of Nemi and its picturesquebanks have been already described as abounding inobjects worthy of notice; nor will the traveller feel lessinclined to wander with slow and pilgrim step amongthese hills, when the spot is pointed out to him on whichonce stood the town which aeneas dedicated to his wifeLatina, and at a short distance that of Laurel turn,erected on the part of the coast where it is said heoriginally landed with his Trojan companions.Nothing can exceed, indeed, the interest attached tothis part of the country by the beautiful dreaming ofancient poetry. Virgil has peopled it with heroic forms,which will haunt its shades as long as the spell of geniushas power over the mind and its sympathies. It wasGENSANO.Hihere we may believe he wandered and held communionwith his muse when most impressed with the grandeurof his theme; and the visions which rose before him inhis solitary rambles can hardly tail to await on thereaders of his breathing verse, less like the voice ofheroes perhaps than that of Homer, but as full of thedeep, powerful spirit of humanity. The latter half ofthe aeneid has done that for this interesting districtwhich history strives in vain to do, and like Ilium itchiefly owes to poetry its existence in the memoriesof men as the cradle of a by-gone civilization.It is however somewhat to be regretted, perhaps, thatVirgil did not adhere to the style in which he composedthe first six books of this noble poem. Many critics ofacknowledged eminence contend that the interest of thework is considerably less in the latter than in the formerpart; and, though they may have been mistaken in thecauses they assign for this circumstance, few readersprobably would be inclined to dispute the generaljustness of the observation. The fact appears to bethat Virgil desired to unite the plans of the Iliad andOdyssey in one poem, and that the materials withwhich he had to work were far better calculated toenable him to imitate the latter than the former.The wanderings of Ulysses over sea and land werenot more fitted to inspire a deeply interestingnarrative than those of aeneas ; but the war of Troy,and that of Latins with the Rutuli, a struggle betweentwo petty chiefs of a half-inhabited and not veryhighly civilised country, were very different subjects forthe high-sounding verse and magnificent displays of168 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.heroic fiction. The poet in the latter instance is alwaysin danger of the reader's knowledge of the truth gettingthe better of his imagination ; while, in the former, thejudgment is only discontented with the imaginationbecause it may sometimes fail of realizing all theglory of the mighty struggle of which the poet sings.At any rate, the wanderer among the shades ofGensano will much more readily follow the bard in hismild and tender mood, than in that in which he wokethe song of battle. The wide plain over which thewinds have free course, seem necessary to the imagingof conflicts between nations : — to people the peacefulvalley, the solitary grove, the brow of the sunny hill,with furious combatants, is to do violence to the rulesby which even fancy, capricious as she is, consentsto be governed.GHIGI PALACE, Alicia.These are the haunts of meditation ; theseThe Scenes where ancient bards the inspiring breathEcstatic felt. „,1 h our sox.The palace of which the annexed plate is a representationforms the principal part of one side of thesquare which occupies the centre of the town of Alicia.Though not possessing in itself more claim to particularattention than the generality of Italian villas, itselevated situation, and the numerous groves andshrubberies which surround it, render it an object, ofgreat picturesque beauty. The town of Aricia itself isone of the most ancient in Italy, and is said to havebeen founded long before the settlement of the Greeksand Latins in the country. In the time of Cicero ithad obtained municipal honors, and was greatly celebratedon account of its contiguity to the NemusArcanum, with which were so intimately connected thetraditions respecting Egeria, Diana, and Hippolytus,the object of the latter's parental care.But, while we are presented with most romantic viewsof this neighbourhood by both Virgil and Ovid, then-greatcontemporary Horace represents himself as somewhatdifferently affected by the aspect of Aricia. Itwas here he made his first halt in his eventful journey to170 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Brundusium; but, instead of breaking forth into someexpression of awe or admiration at his near approachto the sacred empire of Trivia, he stammers forth, inthe tone of a tired and discontented traveller, thatthe place afforded him but scanty comfort for the toilhe had endured : —Egress magna me except Aricia Roma,Hoepitis medico."The antiquary, however, finds numerous objects tointerest him in this neighbourhood, independent evenof the associations so plentifully furnished by the poets.Aricia, as originally built, occupied the lower part ofthe hill, the summit of which is now crowned by itspalace and church, and small neat streets. Somescattered but interesting ruins of the ancient town arestill visible, and, yet more interesting, the foundationsof the noble Appian Way, one of the most strikingevidences that exist of the aspiring and confidentspirit which animated Rome in its early days. Theprodigious breadth and height of these foundations, andtheir rude appearance on the side of the hill, contributegreatly to the general effect of the landscape aboutAricia, and the least contemplative mind can scarcelyfail of being moved by the contrast which existsbetween the little town and its gay villa and thesemighty remains of a people who seemed to personifyempire in all they did, and to think of Rome as of abeing destined to shake the earth by her step, and toform whose path-way to dominion it was necessary tobind rocks together with bands of iron.NAPLES FROM THE SEA.This region, rarely, is not of Hie earth,*\\ .is it not dropt from heaven t Not a grove,Citron, or pine, or cedar, not a grot,Sea worn and mantled with the gadding vine,But breathes enchantment.Rogers.La Beat spiaggea,Che di Virginia, e Sannaear nascondeII center sacro.The view on approaching Naples from the sea, —its magnificent bay, and its sweeping amphitheatre ofa glowing land on which nature and art have alikelavished their profuse treasures, — has more thestartling aspect of a vision than of mere reality,such is the air of enchantment that seems to investevery object, and throw fresh brilliancy into everyprospect, near or remote. Castles, convents, spires,temples and palaces, glowing gardens, green sunnyisles, and romantic shores, the syren retreats of theworld's masters, of the sword or of the lyre, openaround you on all sides; while the most vividcolours, attractive forms, and fervid spirit of lifeand animation, filling the imagination and dazzlingthe sight, seem no where to proclaim that here, in thebosom of scenes like these, is the mighty cemeteryUn mezzo di ciel cadatu in terra. Sannazaro.174 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.of cities and of kings. Nature, in all her beauty andmajesty, is still as lavish of her flowers and fruits;still asserts her everlasting reign through the farsolitudes of her hills and lakes and woods, andblooms again over the ruins of the wild, — the soleimmortal queen surviving the triumphs of Death andTime. It is man only and his works that are thesport of destiny : — a tradition, a relic, and a tomb,and their brief history is told.One of the most conspicuous objects that first arreststhe eye is the castle of St. Elms, towering from itsrock-based eminence over the city and the sea. It isclose to the Carthusian monastery, and was erectedby Charles V., to hold in awe the subject town inquiet submission to Spanish sway. Nearer and moreancient, rises Castle Novo, so called from its ovalform, and said to have been built by William III. ofNormandy, upon a rock in the sea. The third is CastleNuovo, the work of Charles of Anjou, who aspired tothe Neapolitan crown. It is situated near the mole,and being on a level with the town and sea, commandsa view of both. Formerly these castles stoodbristling with cannon, the great and final argument ofkings; and it has been quaintly observed, by an oldtraveller, "that such a wanton courser as Naples is notto be ridden with snaffles ; it hath often plunged underthe King of Spain, but could never fling him quiteout of the saddle, mere a gli tre castella." On thesweep of the left shore is seen the Chiaja, and publicgardens opening to the Strata Nuova, and near whichso many English now reside. Beyond these lies the\ mm .1 IS rim THE SEA. 17. r »road to Posilipo, passing near Virgil's tomb, andunder the grotto, with the mountains stretchingbetween and along the shore. As we approach thestrand, Santa Lucia, the Strata di Toledo, the King'spalace, the Teatro di S. Carlo, become more distinctlyvisible; and the tourist finds himself in the midst ofthe modern Capua.Naples owes its fame, the character of its inhabitants,and perhaps its very existence, to the superlativeloveliness of its situation. In no spot on earth are theskies brighter or the waters more pellucid and serene.Her hills and grottos, her luxurious groves andgardens, are the sojourn of summer in its mostvoluptuous moods; and Poetry, seeking in Vallombrosafor the caves and dells of romance or pictures of theearth in its first sylvan beauty, haunts the vicinity ofNaples for images of a wide and sunny elysium.The origin of this celebrated city is ascribed to aGreek colony, the parent establishment of which wasat Cumse. In the early struggles between Rome andher neighbours, she took part with the latter, but, aftersuffering severely from the contest, entered intoalliance with the republic, and under its wing roserapidly into populousness and wealth. Through allthe wars which the senate waged with the Carthaginian,and other enemies of the republic, shepreserved her fidelity unbroken, and more than oncerendered powerful assistance to her noble ally. In thetime of Augustus, the favorite winter residences of thenobility were in her neighbourhood, and the names ofthe most celebrated of the Roman poets are connectedj 7(i THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.with her history. For centuries after, the beauty ofthe coast continued to attract the Emperors and theircourtiers, and it was not till the terrific eruptions ofVesuvius began to spread ruin among their rich andelegant villas that this fashionable population desertedher lovely plains.In the sixth century Naples had again acquiredconsiderable wealth, and was a city of some extent andrenown. The distinguished Belisarius, in the secondyear of the Gothic war, made it the object of hisattacks, and invested it with his powerful fleet andarmy. The citizens, it is said, terrified by the fame ofthe General and the threatening appearance of hisformidable host, implored him to leave their townunmolested and seek his enemy, the Gothic monarch, inthe field. "When I treat with my enemies," he isreported to have said with a haughty smile, " I ammore accustomed to give than to receive counsel, but Ihold in one hand inevitable ruin, and in the other peaceand freedom, such as Sicily now enjoys." Belisarius,however, was eager to press his conquests, and wouldhave granted the inhabitants the most favorable termshad they at once offered to capitulate ; but, at thatearly period of their history, they were torn by factions,and, owing to the influence of the party who hadreason to dread or hate the yoke of the Emperor, hisoffers were rejected, and they prepared to meet hisattack in the best manner they were able. Twentydays were passed by the besieging army in fruitlessattempts on the fortifications, and by this time itsprovisions and water were nearly consumed. Thus\ \ I'll s FROM THE SEA. 177circumstanced, the commander had begun to form theresolution of abandoning the siege, when an [saurianin his army discovered that an entrance might be madeinto the city through an old aqueduct, the channel ofwhich was soon rendered sufficiently large to admit aparty of armed men. Four hundred adventurersundertook the enterprise, and, having made theirgloomy passage in safety, they ascended, by means ofa rope fastened to an olive tree, into the garden of ahouse, inhabited by a solitary female. The conquestof the city was now easily effected : the sentinels weresurprised, and the army of Belisarius was admittedwithout delay to revel amid the spoil. A scene moreterrible even than that produced by the raging ofher Vesuvius was about to be witnessed in thestreets of Naples, but the General repressed the furyand rapacity of his troops. "The gold and silver,"he said, "are the just rewards of your valour; butspare the inhabitants ; they are Christians, they aresuppliants, they are your fellow-subjects. Restore thechildren to their parents, the wives to their husbands,and show them by your generosity of what friendsthey have obstinately deprived themselves."The more modern history of Naples also, like that ofmost of the Italian states, is replete with incidents oflong and fearful contention. The feudal form ofgovernment was established there at a very early period ;and, in addition to the sources of discord thus boundup with its civil constitution, there were others resultingfrom its connection with Sicily, which formed anintegral part of the kingdom. Revolution after revolt178 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.tion was the result of these untoward circumstance?,and, no dynasty being sufficiently long established onthe throne to settle the affections of the people in itsfavor, the barons had full opportunity to aggrandisethemselves by the ruin of successive princes. Thesedisturbances had their commencement in the usurpationof Manfred, natural son of the Emperor Frederic II.,who, it is generally reported, murdered his brotherConrad, in order to obtain possession of the crown ofNaples. The hatred excited against him, by the realor supposed commission of this crime, encouraged theRoman Pontiff, already at enmity with the Arabianline, to attack him in the very beginning of hisreign. In order to do this the more effectually, hecalled in the assistance of Charles of Anjou, brotherof Saint Louis, King of France. That adventurousPrince readily undertook the affair, advanced againstManfred, and was crowned on the way.The unfortunate Manfred heard of Charles's coronationwith mingled feelings of indignation and despair.His situation was hopeless, but his courage supplied insome degree the place of hope, and, deplorable as werethe circumstances in which he stood, he resolved tospare no exertions in preparing to meet his enemy. Hewas astonished, says the historian, that his subjects wereso inconstant and fickle ; for it seemed to him that theyall cried out Charles, and that the name of that princeand of the French was echoed again from every corner !On the arrival of Charles on the bank of the Carigli-ano, Manfred's apprehensions were all realized ; theCount of Caserta, to whom he had given the commandNAPLES l'llo.M THE SEA. 179of the pass, refused to fight, and the unfortunate King,seeing no means of resisting his enemy, surrounded ashewas by the weak and the treacherous, proffered tohis rival terms of accommodation. But Charles wastoo sure of a triumph to listen to proposals of peace,and he haughtily said to the messengers, as he dismissedthem from his presence, " Tell the Sultan of Lucerathat I will make neither peace nor truce with him, andthat very quickly I shall either send him to hell or heshall send me to heaven ! " In conformity with thespirit of this speech, he assured his soldiers that theywould reap the highest rewards for fighting againstManfred ; that they were thereby to be regarded as thesoldiers of Christ, and that they must consequentlyeither obtain a glorious victory or a crown of martyrdom,which would secure them immortal fame.Defeat attended all the measures on which Manfredhad placed his dependence. Fortress after fortressopened its gates to the French, and he at last foundhimself reduced to the necessity of hazarding his crownand his fate on the issue of a single battle. Whenprinces fight for a crown, it is seldom that the contestfails in exhibitions of furious prowess, and Manfred onthis last day of his reign seemed to feel all his royalty.Finding at length the battle going against him, hedetermined upon endeavouring to rally his army bymaking a desperate charge on the enemy with thesquadron of Publicans which he headed, and which wasstill entire. But his hopes were again frustrated bythe treachery of his officers, and, seeing no furtherpossibility left him of retrieving his ruined fortunes, heN 2180 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.rushed, sword in hand, into the midst of the enemy,and fell pierced with innumerable wounds.Such, however, was the confusion which prevailed onthe field, at the moment when Manfred exposed himselfto the enemy, that it was not known either by hisfriends or his enemies that he was fallen. For threedays a rumour prevailed that he had fled ; but Charles,anxious to discover the truth, directed an examinationto be made of those who were killed, and his body wasfound lying among the heaps of dead who had falleneither by his hand or in his defence. Charles, on itsbeing brought to him, desired some of the noblemenwho were prisoners to tell him if it were indeed thebody of Manfred. Most of them, it is said, answeredhim in a low and trembling voice; but the CountGiordano Lancia, on beholding it, put his hands to hisface, and throwing himself on the corpse, and kissingit, exclaimed in an agony of grief, "Alas! my Lord,what is this I see? My good Lord ! my prudent Lord !who has been so cruel as to kill thee ? The prop ofphilosophy, the ornament of warriors, the glory ofkings ! why am I denied a knife, wherewith to put anend to my days, that I may accompany thee in thegrave as I have done in thy misfortunes ?" The Frenchchevaliers who witnessed this scene could not represstheir sympathy at the affliction of the Count, andthey united with him in petitioning Charles that thebody might be decently buried in holy ground ; butboth the King and the Pope's legate objected to theirrequest that Manfred had been a rebel to the Church,and the remains of the noble-hearted but imprudent\ v 1-1,1 s riiii.M THE BE A. I 8 IPrince were deposited in a ditch near the bridge ofBenevento, every soldier, it is said, being ordered tofling a stone over the grave, that it might not beforgotten that Manfred lay there. Rude, however, aswas the resting-place awarded the unfortunatemonarch, it was regarded as too good for him by hispious enemy, the Archbishop of Cosenza, whocontended that, though he had not been buried inconsecrated ground, he reposed within the holyterritory of the Church, and that he, or the dead dog,as he termed him, ought to be dug up, carried out ofthe ecclesiastical dominions, and exposed to theelements. The Pope praised the Archbishop for hiszeal, and the body was according to his directionsexhumed, and carried with extinguished torches tothe banks of the river Marino, where it was soonso entirely consumed that no vestige, it is said,was to be discovered of it by those even who hadmade the most diligent search. Dante makes anallusion to the treacherous conduct of the Publicanstowards their chief in the twenty-eighth canto of theInferno; and, in the third of the Purgatory, he thuspathetically speaks of Manfred and his misfortunes: —"Then of them one began, — ' Whoe'er thou art,Who journey 'st thus this way, thy visage turn,Think if me elsewhere thou hast ever seen. 'I towards him turned, and with fix'd eye beheld.Comely, and fair, and gentle of aspectHe seem'd, but on one brow a gash was marked.When humbly I disclaim'd to have beheldHim ever, 'Now behold !' he said, and show'dHigh on his breast a wound : then smiling spake.I am Manfred, grandson to the Queen182 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Stanza : whence I pray thee, when return 'd,To my fair daughter go, the parent gladOf Aragon, and Sicilia's pride;And of the truth inform her, if of meAught else he told. When by two mortal blowsMy frame was shattered, I betook myselfWeeping to him who of free will forgives.My sins were horrible, but so wide armsHath goodness infinite, that it receivesAll who turn to it. Had this text divineBeen of Cosenza's shepherd better scanned,Who then by Clement on my hunt was set,Yet at the bridge's head my bones had lain,Near Benevento, by the heavy moleProtected ; but the rain now drenches them,And the wind drives out of the kingdom's bounds.Far as the stream of Verde, where, with lightsExtinguished, he removed them from their bed.Yet by their curse we are not so destroyed,But that the eternal love may turn, while hopeRetains her verdant blossom. True it is,That such one as in contumacy diesAgainst the holy Church, though he repent,Must wander thirty fold for all the timeIn his presumption past, if such decreeBe not by prayers of good men shorter made.Look therefore if thou canst advance my bliss ;Revealing to my good Stanza howThou hast beheld me, and beside the termsLaid on me of that interdict ; for hereBy means of those below much profit comes. "Care.The Neapolitans received their new monarch withevery demonstration of joy, and seemed to imaginethat his reign would be to them a reign of gold.But the days of feasting were scarcely over whenthey found how greatly they had mistaken thenIPLBS I'lUtM THE SEA. 183character of Charles. Taxes of every description wereimposed upon them without mercy, and complaintsbegan pretty generally to supersede the voice ofcongratulation and patriotism. Discontent is of rapidgrowth when the seed is sown in a soil heated intofermentation by extravagant expectations. In a briefperiod Charles of Anjou saw himself both feared andhated by the people to whom he chiefly owed hiselevation, and it was evident that it only requiredthe appearance of some leader, who had any claimswhatever on the nation, to bring about anotherrevolution.It was not probable that these circumstances shouldescape the observation of the party opposed to theHouse of Anjou, and Charles suddenly heard hisright to the throne disputed by the young Conrad, ayouth of fifteen years of age, but aspiring and enthusiastic,urged to attempt the enterprise by manymen of power and influence, and the only remainingrepresentative of Frederic. His mother, Elizabethof Bavaria, whose affections were all expended on herson, opposed almost irresistible arguments against hiscommencing so perilous an undertaking, and it wassome time before either Conrad or his friendssucceeded in obtaining her reluctant assent to hisdeparture. It was, however, at length gained, andhe set out for Italy in company with the young Dukeof Austria, who had generously volunteered his servicesin the desperate enterprise. His forces consistedof 10,000 cavalry, and on his arrival at Pisa,which he reached in the month of February, he was184 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.received by his partizans in a manner strongly calculatedto confirm him in his hopes of success.Having advanced thus far in his way to the scene ofaction, Conrad, by the advice of his associates,published a manifesto, in which he boldly inveighedagainst the conduct not only of Charles of Anjou,but of the reigning Pope and his predecessor, andcalled upon the people to aid him in his design. Themost violent excitement was produced in Puglia,Calabria, and Sicily, by the publication of thisdocument, and the popular voice was loud in thepraise of young Conrad. The Pope, alarmed atthese appearances, issued a summons which directedthe youth to desist immediately from his enterprise,and proceed to Rome, where, it was said, he would beatliberty to set forth the claims on which he foundedhis right to the crown of Naples. It need scarcely beadded that this summons was treated with perfectneglect, and the Pontiff shortly after solemnly excommunicatedhim in the cathedral of Viterbo. It woulddetain us too long on this subject to detail the variousminor circumstances which took place in the periodintervening between the excommunication of Conradand the day which beheld his army and that ofCharles opposed on the plain of Tagliacozza. Thesequel of the tale is short, as the sequels of such talesgenerally are. The unfortunate youth and hiscompanion, the Duke of Austria, were left after anobstinate engagement prisoners in the hands of theenemy. Neither their early age, their reputed virtues,nor their now melancholy condition, touched the heart\ \i'i.i:s i BOM THE si. a. ]H, r >of the conqueror with any feeling of compassion ; theywere immediately thrown into prison, treated withextreme severity, and not allowed to cherish theslightest hope of deliverance.Charles however, though now sure of his prey, doesnot appear to have been able to decide at once inwhat manner he should dispose of the two princes.The most vindictive and tyrannical of victoriousmonarchs usually prefer the sword to the scaffold, andwould rather see their enemy lifeless on the field ofbattle than alive in their dungeons. But Charles wasas little troubled with the weaknesses of the humanheart as most men, and was not long before he cameto the conclusion that both Conrad and the Duke ofAustria ought to suffer death by the hand of theexecutioner. A process was accordingly commencedagainst them, and a judge was found sufficiently lostto shame to pronounce upon them a sentence ofdeath. When led to the scaffold, the instrumentwhich ordered their execution was read by the personwho had urged the King to the measure, but no soonerhad he finished it, than a nobleman who stood by,after bitterly reproving him for his conduct, struck hima violent blow with his sword, and laid him dead athis feet. Conrad, in the mean time, had earnestlycontended that, as he was himself a King, Charles ofAnjou could have no power to condemn him ; but hisprotestations availed him little, and he was compelledto witness the execution of his friend and companionas a prelude to his own.186 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Finding that death was inevitable, the youthfulConrad prepared himself to receive the fatal stroke;but before laying his head upon the block he drew offhis ring, or according to some authors his glove, and,flinging it among the crowd, begged that some personpresent would bear it to Peter of Aragon, as a signthat he left him his heir to the crown of Naples. Theonly expression of complaint which is recorded to haveescaped him during this painful scene was when, onbeholding the head of his friend roll from the block ,he took it up, and, as he kissed it and bathed it withtears, lamented that he had allowed him to leave hisafflicted mother. In respect to himself also heexclaimed, " alas ! my poor mother, what will be thythoughts when thou hearest of this my end! " Havinggiven way to this burst of feeling, he composed himself,knelt down and begged God to forgive him hissins, and then, laying his head on the block, it wassevered from his body at a single stroke.The hate with which Charles had been for sometimeregarded by his subjects was rendered still deeperby this barbarous execution, and the unfortunateManfred was remembered with an affection as poignantas it was fervent. But Charles, by his vigorous policy,was in a short time able to set his enemies at defiance,and his prosperity went on increasing withoutinterruption till the accession of the Cardinal Greta,to the pontifical throne under the title of Nicholas III.,in November, 1277. Offended at the King's refusal toform an alliance with his family, he omitted noNAPLES FROM THE SEA. Isopportunity of humbling his pride, and deprived himof the office of Roman senator, and lieutenant of theempire, which lie had enjoyed under the late Pontiff.Charles, however, treated these proceedings withdisdain, and it was from Giovanni da Procida that hisauthority received the first shock which endangered itsstability.This celebrated nobleman had been the firm andunvarying friend of Manfred, and, on the final discomfitureof his party by the defeat of Conrad, he hadsought an asylum in the court of Peter, King of Aragon,whose wife Constantia was now the only survivingbranch of the house of Swabia. By these sovereignshe was treated with the most marked respect, andreceived from them the grant of a valuable barony.Grateful for such favors, his whole mind was occupiedwith plans for restoring his benefactors to the kingdomof Naples and Sicily, and, on finding that thewatchfulness of Charles would prevent his assailingthe former with any chance of success, he confined hisplans to the latter.A variety of circumstances favored Giovanni'sattempt. The French were more hated, if possible, inSicily than in Naples, and all the principal men of thecountry were eager to revenge the oppressions theysuffered from the ministers of their tyrannical sovereign.The Pope also was known to be ready to join in anyattack upon him, while the Greek Emperor Catalogus,who dreaded the immediate appearance of aFrench force at Constantinople, would aid in themeasure as his only hope of safety.188 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Disguising himself in the habit of a monk, the Lordof Procida visited both Constantinople and Rome, anddemonstrated to the Emperor and the Pope theadvantages attending his scheme with so mucheloquence, that they both agreed to furnish the Kingof Aragon with means amply sufficient for carrying onthe enterprise. But, while the affairs of the allies werein this prosperous condition, the hopes of the partywere suddenly dissipated by the death of Nicholas, whowas succeeded by Martin IV., a man as inimical tothe cause of the King of Aragon as the late Pope hadbeen desirous of his success. Procida, however, stillresolved to carry his object, returned to Constantinopleto confirm the Emperor in his views, and directed thatambassadors should be immediately sent to Rome, bothfrom Aragon and Sicily. The representative of theAragonese King appeared at Rome for the professedpurpose of congratulating Martin on his accession,and desiring that he would grant the honors of canonizationto a monk of his nation, who had earned a rightto that honor, according to his account, by havingraised no fewer than forty persons from the dead, andtraversed the ocean on his mantle, which had servedhim for a ship. Having dispatched this business, whichwas intended to appear the more important part of hismission, he proceeded to ask the aid of the Pontiff forhis mistress, who was about to claim the restoration ofher rights as sovereign of Naples and Sicily. Theonly reply he obtained was an angry demand of thearrears of tribute which it was alleged were due fromAragon to the Church.\ M'l.lS I KO.M THE Sea. 189The Bishop of Paito and a Dominican monk, whoIkkI undertaken the perilous task of representing theSicilians, received a still ruder repulse. It was intimatedto them that his Holiness would hear what theyhad to communicate only in full consistory, and, onbeing admitted to the august assembly, they beheldto their surprise that Charles himself formed one ofthe numerous auditors. Fortunately, however, theBishop possessed as much boldness and presence ofmind, as patriotism and, without evincing any sign ofdiscomposure, he began his address with this significanttext of Scripture, " Son of David, have pity onme, for my daughter is cruelly vexed by a devil ! "The discourse was in perfect conformity with the text,but the Pope, not deigning to reply, dismissed theambassadors without a word. They had scarcelyleft the assembly when the guards of the King ofNaples seized them ; by considerable bribes theBishop effected his escape, but his companion sufferedfor many years close imprisonment in a dungeon.Notwithstanding these adverse circumstances, andthe threats of Charles that he would devastate Sicilywith fire and sword, Giovanni da Procida continuedhis proceedings with the same persevering confidenceas at first. In the year 1281 he made another journeyto Constantinople, and on his return presentedthe King of Aragon with a sufficient sum of gold toinduce him to fit out his armament, and prepare it atonce for action. As these preparations could not beconcealed from the enemy, he replied, in answer to thedemand which Charles made for an explanation of his190 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.conduct, that the force he had raised was intendedto attack the Saracens of Africa. This answer, thoughlittle satisfactory, served to prevent any immediateinterference on the part of the French, and, as soon asthe fleet was ready to sail, Giovanni da Procidahastened to Sicily, where he laboured incessantly toprepare the people for a general rising upon theiroppressors.The manner in which he followed up his plansevinced the most profound skill. It was not to a factionthat he wished to trust his hopes, but to the indignantfeelings of the whole people, and he well knewwith what infinitely greater force a popular passionacts when left to gather nourishment from incidentalcircumstances, and let loose at the exact momentwhen it arrives at its height, than when it has to beexcited by artificial oratory. Instead, therefore, offixing any day for the rising, he patiently awaited theoccurrence of some event which might answer thepurpose of a signal better than his own word of command,and on Monday, the 30th of March, 1282, thethird day of Easter, circumstances took place whichfully verified his expectations.On the evening of that memorable day, the inhabitantsof Palermo, according to a custom which had longprevailed among them, proceeded to hear vespers inthe church of Montreal, a village situated about threemiles distant from the city. It was there they wereaccustomed, it is said, to spend all their festivals, andon the present occasion the natural beauty of thesurrounding country was heightened by the genial\ \ pii s l "ROM Tin: sr,.\. I!»linfluence of the season. A temporary gleam ofhappiness thus seemed to light up the faces of thenumerous groups which thronged the road and thefields that lay between Palermo and Montreal ; thecares of ordinary days, and even the miseries theyendured under the yoke of the French, appearedforgotten in the sudden ebullition of pleasure whichfilled their hearts, and even their oppressors themselveslost something of their pride and insolenceas they mingled in the happy throng. The distrustwith which the festivities were observed at theircommencement by the viceroy was thus considerablydiminished, and there was little or no reason to believethat any of the gay Palermitans had broken his orders,that no one should be seen with arms, which itappears the young men had been accustomed to bearand exercise in the fields at such times.But in the midst of the liveliest expressions ofpleasure, and while the bells of the church of Montrealwere chiming to prayers, a cry was heard amid alittle family group which speedily attracted theattention of the surrounding throngs. The exclamationof terror had proceeded from a young andbeautiful girl, who, leaning on the arm of her affiancedlover, and with her father at her side, was hastening tooffer up her devotions. Struck by her lovely appearance,a French officer, named Drouet, went up to her,and with brutal insolence, pretending that he suspectedshe had arms concealed in her vest, he thrust his handthrough the folds which covered her bosom. Theinsult, together with the terror of his bride, roused the192 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.young Valerian to madness, and with a desperateplunge he seized the Frenchman's sword, and buriedit in his heart. A few short, fiery, words, explained allto the crowd, and in an instant the air resounded withshouts of "death to the French! death to the French!"The signal was obeyed with awful promptitude.Unarmed as they were, the Palermitans fell upon theirenemies, and, with the bells still chiming to vespers,they slew upon the field, and almost instantaneously,more than 200 of their oppressorsHaving thus dispatched every Frenchman theycould find in the fields, they returned with rapid stepsto the city. The flame which had burst out with suchfury seemed to burn the more furiously, the morecopiously streamed the blood of the French. With acourage that petrified their enemies, the Palermitansattacked them in all their quarters, and put themindiscriminately to the sword. Neither age nor sexwas regarded. " Death to the French" was the cry dayand night, and whether a child or a band of soldiersrepresented the odious nation. It is recorded eventhat a woman being found who was pregnant by aFrenchman, the crowd seized her, and ripped open herwomb, that they might deprive the unborn infantof existence.Charles was at Monte Fiasco, when the intelligencereached him of the revolt. He listened to theaccount in perfect silence, biting in the meanwhilein an agony of rage the end of the cane he wasaccustomed to carry in his hand. At length, withfury in his looks, he broke silence, and swore that heNAPLES PROM I'M! 9] v 193would leave to posterity a terrible example ofvengeance, to make all future rebels tremble. In hisendeavours he was as good as his word, but his ragewas impotent against the valour and resolution of theSicilians. Finding his attacks fruitless, he was atlast obliged to contemplate an arrangement, but hedemanded as a preliminary that the revolted peopleshould send him 800 of their children as hostages, towhich they replied that they would rather eat themthan do so. In consequence of this answer, thestruggle was resumed with all its original fury, andCharles had the mortification to see the crown ofSicily wrested from him, and placed on the head ofhis rival of Aragon.The conflict, however, which had thus commencedwith the Sicilian vespers, did not terminate with thestruggle for the crown of Sicily. For nearly twocenturies, the princes of Aragon and Anjou kept up abloody and scarcely intermitted contest for theNeapolitan inheritance.In the fifteenth century, the struggle seemedbrought to a close by the settlement of the crown onan illegitimate branch of the Angevin family ; but thehope of tranquillity was not long unshaken. TheCount of Maine, the representative of the house ofAragon, having transferred his claims to the FrenchKing and his descendants, Charles VIII. invaded andconquered the territory, but, failing in wisdom orcaution to secure his advantage, was almost immediatelycompelled to retire. Louis XII. and Ferdinandof Aragon next entered into a league against theo194 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.reigning prince, the one on account of his right tothe Angevin succession, the other because of hisrival's illegitimacy. The united monarchs succeededin compelling the Prince to abdicate, but were aboutto desolate the country by their own contentions,when the celebrated Gonsalvo de Cordova, surnamedthe great Captain, put an end to the contest in favorof his master Ferdinand. From this monarch theterritory descended to his grandson, the EmperorCharles V., under whose sceptre a prospect seemedopened for its enjoying some years of peace andprosperity. This however it was far from doing, andmany a volume might be filled with the narrative ofthe troubles it had still to endure from the conflicts ofrival princes and factions.NAPLES, SANTA LUCIA.Diceris extract a duke Serene ; PalerDeceits, et t'elix iinpt britannia hi r.Diceris et Veneris gratissimns aortas ft arrisAlriilis campus deceits esse nous.Diceris et slave Ceteris dittesima tellus ;Diceris intend vine polchra dei.Amicus.Illo Virgiliiim me tempore dulcis alebatParthenope stiuiiis florcntcin nobilis oti.Gkorg. iv.From the Santa Lucia, opening into the grandStrata di Toledo on one side, and the StrataNuova which skirts the bay on the other, a nobleprospect of the sea and the surrounding shoresbursts on the eye, enriched with all the interest andattractions which monumental and classical associations,connected with those of modern history,can confer. In itself, however, Santa Lucia, withsingular incompatibility of name, is the Billingsgateand Thames Street of Naples, with the addition ofall that the genius of confusion and misrule canbe imagined, among so lively and enthusiastic apopulace, and in such a scene, to produce. Its effecton the eye and the senses of a stranger is almostinconceivable, and quite astounding ; for when theconfusion of tongues has reached its climax, and individualvociferation can no longer make itself heard,recourse is had to bells, and a peal of them is rungloud enough to rouse the ancient Roman salesmen,o 2196 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.sleeping in the vast catacomb of cities beneath, fromtheir long and no more usurious repose.To this market of the south did Campania send herchoicest products, and the neighbouring coasts theirwealth of trade in corn, oil, and fish; insomuchthat, but for the grinding taxes which oppressed her,Naples would have been the most prosperous city in theworld. But, the prey alike of foreign and domesticoppression, it has been truly observed of her successionof continental tyrants, that if they suck in Milan,and fleece in Sicily, they flea in Naples; a systemwhich, it is well known, drove the people to desperationunder Masaniello, and left an example, of which it ishoped that people will know how, with more wisdom,to avail themselves in times to come. In the quaintwords of an old English traveller, " Tomaso AngelusMaia, his true name, was the son of a poor fisherman,without stockings or shoes, who for ten days togetherswaggered here so powerfully, at the head of 200,000mutinous people, that when he commanded them toburn a house they did it; when he commanded themto cast into the fire all the goods, papers, plate, beds,hangings, &c, of the gazelles (tax-gatherers), theydid it without reserving the least precious piece tothemselves ; when he commanded them to cry out1 Down with the gabelle they did it; when he puthis finger to his mouth, they were all silent again ; asif this poor fisherman had been the soul that animatedthat great body of people. It was prodigious, indeed,that such a poor young man, not past twenty-three,in waistcoat and drawers and his fisher's cap on, shouldN v 1- 1 I 8, SANTA i.i i 1 v. 197find such obedience from such rich and witty citizens.But as tumultuous people make arms of every thingtlicv meet with, so they make captains of every manthat will but head them ; and as the proverb goes, inseditkme vel Androclides belli decem unit. Theyshowed me the house of this fisherman : but the otherhouses showed me his fury. Thousands have not yetrecovered those ten days' tumults ; for, when God hatha mind to punish, fleas and gnats are powerful thingseven against princes."The state of society at Naples is far from being suchas to do credit to Italy ; but there is scarcely a townin the world so famed for charitable institutions ofevery kind and description. There are thirty establishments,known by the name of conservatories,which are open for the reception of orphans and otherhelpless and unprotected children ; there are fivebanks for lending small sums of money to poor honestpeople, who may require such assistance, the mentionof which will probably remind the reader of DeanSwift's custom of exercising charity in a similar manner; there are also numerous societies, composed ofthe principal persons of the place, for searching outand attending to peculiar cases of distress, each fraternity,as they are called, devoting itself to one classof objects. Altogether, the charitable institutions aresaid to amount to sixty, among which there are sevenregular hospitals, conducted on a very extensive scale,and with as much care and judgment as benevolence.The noblest Neapolitans delight in performing theoffices requisite to the proper management of these198 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.establishments, and are described as exercising a patienceand attention to frugality in this duty whichthey seldom manifest in their private concerns.Of the two principal hospitals, one is for the receptionof the sick and wounded, of which it generally containsabove 1800 ; the other is of a nature similar to ourMagdalen and Penitentiaries, and is said to be amongthe richest establishments for a charitable purpose inEurope. To each of these institutions is joined avilla, or rural retreat, where the patients who are recovering,or who are likely to receive benefit from thepurer air of the country, are placed as soon as it isjudged necessary. Another useful appendage to thehospitals of Naples is an extensive cemetery outsidethe town, to form which the sum of 48,500 ducats wasraised by voluntary subscription. This burial-groundis about half a mile from the city, and occupies anelevated spot, shaded with rows of cypresses." Thewhole space is divided into 366 spacious vaults, whichare opened successively once a year, and, beingclosely covered in with blocks of lava which fit veryexactly, the public are thus effectually preserved fromevery thing offensive either to the mind or senses.As we are beginning to turn our attention in thiscountry to the state of the public cemeteries, it maynot be amiss to give the opinion of so experienced atraveller as Mr. Eustace on this subject, coming as itdoes with the additional recommendation of his havingbeen an ecclesiastic, and a member of a church nevercharacterized by indifference to the sanctity of thedead. " It is to be regretted," says he, "that this\ Isles, BANT I li'i'i V.L99method of burying has not been adopted in every hospitaland parish in Naples, and indeed in every townand city, not in Italy only, but all over Europe. Itis really lamentable that a practice so disgusting, notto say so pernicious, as that of heaping up putrid carcasesin churches where the air is necessarily confined,and in church-yards in cities, where it cannot have avery free circulation, should be so long and so obstinatelyretained. It would be difficult to discover onesingle argument drawn either from the principles of religionor from the dictates of reason in its favor, whileits inconveniences and mischiefs are visible and almosttangible. " After tracing the progress of the abuse,Mr? Eustace continues, " the first attempt, I believe,to check, or rather to remove it entirely, was made bythe Emperor Joseph, who prohibited, by edict, the intermentof bodies, not in churches only, but even, intowns and their suburbs. This edict still prevails inthe Low Countries, and, if I mistake not, in the Austrianterritories in general, though certain clauses gaveconsiderable offence, and suspended for some time itsfull effect. " France, it is then observed, adopted similarregulations, and the writer concludes with thisobservation—" It is astonishing that in a country governedby public reason, and guided by public interest,as England is, no attempts have been made to put anend to a practice so absurd and prejudicial ; especiallyas this practice is more evidently dangerous in Protestantthan in Catholic countries ; as, in the former,churches in general are only opened for a few hours onone day in the week ; while in the latter they are never200 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.shut, and have the additional advantage of being fumigatedwith incense and sprinkled with holy water,which latter has always a considerable quantity of saltmixed with it." To complete the admirable characterwhich so justly belongs to the Neapolitan hospitals,and the institutions connected with them, we must alsomention that every patient who leaves them in a distressedsituation has a certain sum given him, equivalentto the loss he has sustained by being obliged tocease from his usual labour.Of the fraternities already alluded to, the most remarkableis that devoted to the visitation of condemnedcriminals, whom the members strive with pious attentionto prepare for death, and afford them not only thecomforts of religion and the decencies of burial, butthe consolations of an assurance, never broken, thatthey will provide for their widows or orphans. The mottoof this society is, Sttccurrere miseries, and it is said tohave been at first chiefly composed of nobility, but isnow confined to the clergy. The fraternity of noblesfor the relief of the "bashful poor," the title of whichexplains its purpose, deserves also the highest praise;as does that for the succour of distressed strangers,whom they receive and attend with the kindest andmost careful assiduity, and another for the relief of thepoor and imprisoned ; while the congregation of lawyers,who plead the causes of the destitute without charge,and provide for all the expenses which their suits mayrequire, illustrates better, perhaps, than any other circumstance,how deeply and universally the spirit ofcharity has imbued the Neapolitan character. As an\ \ri I 9, 8 w T \ LUCIA.'Jillinstance of the benevolent feeling which also actuatesthe lower orders, we may quote the following anecdote,as told by a recent traveller: — " I cannot dismiss thissubject without mentioning a peculiar trait of charitywe met with among the common people. Our cook, byWith a Neapolitan, was married to a young womanwhom we hired, one summer, as our housemaid; and,after being with us a few weeks, she requested permissionto go and see her adopted child, who was (she said)very ill. The word ' adopted' surprised us so muchthat we enquired why a man and woman who workedhard for their bread, and both young enough to expecta family of their own, had been induced to adopt achild ? They replied, that the child was a foundling,and therefore belonged to the Madonna; consequently,by such an adoption, they ensured her blessing on themselvesand their own offspring : and afterwards, whenwe mentioned this circumstance to our Neapolitanfriends, they informed us that such instances of charitywere by no means rare among the common people."But, having alluded to the inferior classes of Neapolitans,we must not omit to mention one of the mostsingular of them, both in character and appearance.The Lazzaroni are described as the porters of Naples,and are of course sprung from the lowest class of thepeople. Their dress is of the slightest and meanestkind, as is also their food ; but their frames bespeakalmost herculean strength. They have in general nosettled homes, but find shelter under the porches ofchurches or great houses, where they stand ready toanswer the call of any one who may require their202 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.services. The most extraordinary part, however, oftheir character, is that passing as they do this unsettledkind of life, depending on the chances of the day forthe day's support, and being constantly exposed totemptation, they enjoy a reputation for singularhonesty and fidelity in performing the errands onwhich they are sent. They are even distinguished by aspirit of patriotism, which has given birth to more thanone remarkable exhibition of courageous self-devotionthat put the indifference of the higher and wealthiercitizens to the blush. When the inquisition was preparingits terrors for Naples, they are reported to haveunited against it in fearless opposition— when theFrench invaded the territory, they offered to unite andmarch against them — and when the earthquake, whichproduced such ruin and misery in 1783, called forththe humane feelings of the Neapolitans in general,the Lazzaroni, to be equal with the most charitable oftheir fellow-countrymen, offered, with that ready willwhich best proves the warmth and earnestness of benevolence,to employ themselves in the free conveyanceof whatever provisions or necessaries could be collectedfor the suffering Calabria.There is however, we are told, a considerable differencebetween the Lazzaroni who are natives of thecountry, and can alone rightly claim the name, andthe crowd of turbulent and thievish mendicants, who,under that appellation, haunt the churches and differentquarters of the city, but are distinguished moreby their raggedness and filth than by the coarseness oftheir dress, and are much readier to cheat than labour.n \ri i B, s \\ i \ LUCIA.Naples, being almost, proverbially a city of pleasure,is well provided with places of public amusement. Itsprincipal theatre, the Teatro Realee di San Carlo, isone of the most extensive and elegant edifices of thekind in Europe. It was nearly destroyed in 1816 byfire, but in less than a year was restored to its originalmagnificence. The interior of this spacious buildingpresents six tiers of boxes, and the parterre, or pit, issufficiently large to hold nearly 700 persons seated, andabove 150 standing: the stage, corridors, and otherparts of the edifice, are of the same proportions; whilethe Ridotto, an adjoining building, is fitted up withsimilar splendour for balls and other fashionable amusements.Besides the Teatro di San Carlo, there are alsothe Teatro Realee del Tondo, devoted, like the former,to operas; the Teatro Nuovo, and others, of which thelittle theatres of Fenice and San Carling are the bestfrequented; the former being appropriated to slightmusical dramas, and the latter to the famous Dulcisand both sufficiently attractive to find audiencefor two parts of the day.Of the public walks, the best and most frequentedowe their present excellence to the French. The BotanicalGarden, a road to Capo di Monte, and another,begun by Murat, to Pozzuoli, were formed by the invaders,and are excellent additions to the Villa Realeeand the Chiaja, the chief promenades which formerlybelonged to the city.Besides the Carnival, several other seasons of theyear are distinguished by religious festivals, and thestreets and public avenues at such periods present a204 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.motley scene of devotion and rejoicing. One of theseoccurs on the eve of Corpus Christ, when the magistratestreat the people with a concert of music, vocaland instrumental. A long and spacious street is fittedup with galleries and other accommodations ; a fountain,set playing in the midst, is planted round with avariety of evergreens, and adorned with statues, and atoneend of the street rises a gay temple for the musicians,who fill the illuminated streets with their harmoniousairs.But we must now leave the populous streets andsquares of Naples for the far more celebrated hills andvalleys of its neighbourhood ; and the first object whichhere strikes us is the mountain of Pausilipo, renderedsacred as the burial place of Virgil.Every whereFable and Truth have shed, in rivalry,Each her peculiar influence. Fable came,And laughed and sung, arraying Truth in flowersLike a young child her grandam. Fable came,Earth, sea, and sky reflecting, as she flew,A thousand, thousand colours not their own :And at her bidding, lo ! a dark descentTo Tartarus, and those thrice happy fields,Those fields with ether pure and purple lightEver invested ; scenes by him described,Who here was wont to wander,* here invokeThe sacred muses, here receive, record,What they revealed, and on the western shoreSleeps in a silent grove, overlooking thee,Beloved Parthenope."♦ Virgil.s vi'i.i 9, BAN I' a LUCIA-'"■'The tombs of poets are consecrated by the mostpleasing associations. The awe and painful melancholywith which we approach the spots where the commonrace of men mix with the earth are changed, at thegrave of the poet, into recollections of his power overoui hearts. The visions he created, and the life andglory which he every where diffused, swell before oureyes, and at last, resigning ourselves to the spell, weimagine he has only passed behind the curtain of lifeto contemplate from a better sphere the lovely aspectof the universe. The tomb of Virgil is beautifully situated,and the mild, lonely character of the surroundingscenery greatly aids the impression which the sepulchremakes on the mind. The steep hill of Pausilipo iscovered, both on the top and sides, with gardens andvineyards; and on one of the most precipitous edgesof this mountain stands the tomb, partially protected bya rock which overhangs it, and shaded by the thickfoliage of an aged ilex which grows from the precipice.The broad leaves of ivy and numberless flowering shrubsare intermixed with the spreading branches of this tree,and seem to vie with it in protecting the tomb from publicexposure. The building itself is square and flat-roofedexternally, but in the inside it is vaulted, and lightedby windows of modern make. The urn which, it issaid, once contained the ashes of the bard, has beenlong removed, and the name, with an epitaph of comparativelylate inscription, are the sole marks by whichthe stranger learns to whom the spot was dedicated.But it has suffered from more than simple neglect, orthe effects of time. The wild and forsaken character206 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.of the mountain has made it the frequent resort ofbanditti ; and Mr. Eustace relates that, on his visitingit, he was surprised at the sudden appearance of someferocious-looking men, who, it seems, were Sbirri lyingin wait for a murderer who made it his nightly retreat.The church built by the poet Sannazarius is interestingon account of its celebrated founder, who raisedit on the site of his favorite villa, one of the most beautifuleven in this lovely land of gardens. The littlechurch is dedicated to Virgin Parturienti, and, in hispoem Del Part, he thus describes his motive for buildingit, and its situation : —Tuque aces spes fide hominem, spes fide decorum,Alma parens, quam mille aches, quaeque Athens ili.Militia est, totidem currus, tot signa tubreque,Tot litui comitatus, antique agmina gyio,Adgloinerant : Niveis tibi si solennia templesSera camus : si manures tibi ponies arasExcise in scapula, fructus unde aurea canoesSuspicions, celso se culmine MergvllinaAdtollit nautisque procul sententious, offert :Si laudes de more tuas, si sacra diemque,Ac cretus late insignes, ritusque dictus,Anna felicia columns dum garcia partsTu vates, ignarumque via?, insuetumque labor,Diva, none, et david's jam Lata adlabere curtis."The church itself, however, has not much to attractattention, it being very small, and little ornamented.The tomb of Sannazarius, who lies buried in it, is theonly object of curiosity, and this is usually regardedas presenting too many ill-assorted figures to be admiredby the lover of pure monumental statuary.NAPLES, FROM THE STRADA Nova.There would I linger — then go forth again,Ami hover round that region unexplored,While to Salvator (when, as some relate,By chance or choice he led a bandit's life ;Yet Oft withdrew, alone and unobserved,To wander through those awful solitudesNature revealed herself.Rogkhs.There is an indescribable beauty in rich and thicklyfolded clouds, lit up by the strong rays of a brilliantevening sun. The same beauty is to be seen on awide expanse of turbulent waters, tossing about as ifunwilling to wear the magnificent mantle which theheavens fling over them; but, brilliant as are theeffects of a bright sunset on the clouds, and on thesea, they are surpassed by the grandeur diffused, in aglowing cloudless evening, over a vast city. If anyonebe sceptical as to this point, let him contemplateNaples by sunset, from the Strata Nuova, and hewill never doubt the assertion again. Every travelleris alike enthusiastic when speaking of this magnificentspectacle; nor can any thing be conceived more sublime,even according to the briefest of their descriptions.A whole vast city, involved in one mighty globeof the richest light, and surrounded by hills and waters,all partaking in various degrees of its brilliancy, is afigure which can give only a faint idea of the reality;208 Tllh LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.but such is Naples at sunset, when seen from theStrata Nuova. After contemplating such a scene, thetourist will turn with satisfaction to ponder on the fatewhich has attended some of the most gifted childrenof this queenly city ; and where in the records of artshall we meet with a man in closer association withwhat is great and splendid than Salvator Rosa ?Salvator was indeed one of those men of geniuswhose individual history is as attractive to the affectionsas that of the triumphs of their art is to themind. His ardent temperament led him to attempt apath to eminence, steep and rugged, and open only toa few such enterprising spirits; while the real strengthof his intellect enabled him to derive solid advantagesfrom pursuits which, to men of less genuine ability,would have been fruitful only in the gossamer fantasiesof romance.This remarkable man was born at Naples in theyear 1615. His father, who was an architect or land-surveyor,numbered among his ancestors several painterswhose celebrity, though probably of little extent,was sufficiently great to inspire Salvator in his earliestyouth with a strong admiration of their art. Theirsuccess, however, it seems, had not been of a kind toconvince his father that their profession was one ofeither profit or dignity; for, as soon as he was of sufficientage for the purpose, he was sent to learn Latinwith the view of his being devoted in due time to thePriesthood. Whatever were the feelings of repugnancewith which the embryo painter saw himself destined toanother and far less fascinating pursuit, they were notNAPLES, PROM Nil M'lniii Nova. 209of a kind to prevent his distinguishing himself as aquick and talented student. Unfortunately, however,for the completion of his father's wishes, he was sent tofulfil his novitiate in a Carthusian convent, the rulesof which were so severe that his lively dispositionsuffered continual martyrdom, while he laboured tosubject himself to their sway. Nature and youth atlength got the better of all prudential restraint, andSalvator took the desperate resolution of forsaking theconvent and returning home, to face poverty and allits attendant evils.The mind, however, of this extraordinary man hadwithin it too powerful a spring of activity ever to remainidle, and, even in the cloisters of the Carthusianmonastery, he had found means to furnish it with aknowledge of the most elegant arts. Poetry had fascinatedhim with its visions ; music had inspired him withits passion, — and, in the leisure he enjoyed after hereturned to his father's house, he composed severalsongs, which he set to airs of his own, and in bothevinced an exquisiteness of taste and sensibility, anda power over the elements of the arts he practised,which, under favorable circumstances, would have atonce secured him the admiration of the world.But it was for himself only that Salvator was a poetand a musician, or, if he employed his talents forthe delight of others, it . was for that of his ownfamily, who could reward him with nothing but smiles.The fondness, how 7 ever, which he had manifested inearly youth for painting was revived at this periodwith increased force, by the circumstance of his sister'sp210 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.marrying a young artist of considerable ability, namedFrancanzoni, and who had sufficient taste to admirethe genius which was evidently at work in the soul ofSalvator. Encouraged by the praises of his newrelative, the refugee of the Carthusian convent beganto make experiments with the pencil, and his earliestsketches were such as confirmed Francanzoni in hisoriginal opinion of his powers.The disposition, however, of the young artist wasnot changed with the change of his profession. Hecould no more brook the idea of tamely following therules of a painter's school, than he could yield obedienceto the formal regulations of an order of friars.Instead, therefore, of confining himself to the studioof his brother-in-law, he took a portfolio in his hand,and every day, with the first dawn of the light, setout on an expedition to the magnificent hills or wildand picturesque valleys which surrounded the city ofNaples. To a mind constituted like his, every thinghe beheld was redolent not merely of beauty but ofthought. Nature herself would have been sufficientto him, as to every one else of such a disposition ; butan interpretation, as it were, had been given to hermajesty and beauty about Naples, which he at onceseized upon, and mingled up with his own rich fancies.Some touch of classical antiquity, therefore, it is observed,may be traced in almost all his productions,and the learning he had acquired thus tended materiallyto influence his character as a painter.In his daily rambles in the country, he sketchedwith a free and happy hand, and, as his sister's houseNAPLES, FROM THE sti;\i>\ \rov.\. 211was made his home more frequently than his father'swas, Francanzoni, on his return in the evening, wasaccustomed, it is said, to look over his portfolio, praisehim for the spirited drawings he had made, and notunfrequently to select some of them as subjects forhis own study.The encouragement he thus received from his confirmed him in his determination tobecome a painter, and the pleasure he had derivedfrom his shorter rambles made him resolve upon undertakinga tour of some extent. La Puglia, Calabria,and the mountainous solitudes of the Abruzzi, nowattracted his adventurous steps ; and tradition reportsthat, while wandering among the wild and terrificpasses of the last-named district, he was discoveredand made prisoner by a horde of banditti. The delighthe appears to have taken in introducing thefigures of outlaws into his pictures gives a strongprobability to the truth of this report; and one of hismost celebrated paintings is supposed to recount insome degree the history of his adventure.Lady Morgan has described this tour of Salvatorin a strain of romantic eloquence, and it would bedifficult to doubt the truth of her half theoreticalstatements; least of all, however, is it to be disputedthat the young painter, on returning from his wanderings,and with his mind filled with thoughts andimages of things sublime, found only care and sorrowto welcome him home. His father, who had beenlong struggling with adverse circumstances, wassinking under the twofold burden of distress and sick2dl'2 I'll) LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.ness, and, a few days after his son's return, expired inhis arms.Salvator was now free to pursue his inclinationswithout fear of opposition, but the necessities of hisfriends rendered it necessary for him to convert theproductions of his pencil into a means of support; andthis, unknown as he was, required a kind of exertionwhich must have been in the highest degreeoffensive to a young man of his disposition. Havingventured to employ a style of his own, instead ofcultivating, like the other Neapolitan artists, theprevailing taste of the day, he had no chance of obtainingnotice from the persons who were regardedbv the multitude as the legitimate arbiters of publicopinion. Obliged, therefore, to dispose of his picturesas he best might, he took them to the brokersin different parts of the city, and generally sold themfor a sum only barely sufficient to provide him withthe necessaries of the day.It was for a considerable time that he continuedthus to labour in penury and obscurity, till at length,happily for him, a painting he had executed of Hagarand Ishmael attracted the attention of the distinguishedartist Lanfranc, who was then employed at Naples indecorating the cupola of the Church of Jesus. Themerit of Salvator's work was instantly recognized bythe experienced eye of this painter, who bought it, andsoon after several others, to the great joy and advantageof the young artist. Till now his countrymen hadleft him unnoticed, but the praises bestowed by Lanfrancwere more easily comprehended by such judgesNAPLES, PROM THE STRADA Nova. 213than the merit which excited them ; numerous purchasersaccordingly appeared for his productions ; heraised his prices ; became noticed by the great ; andwas at length engaged by the bishop of Viterbo toaccompany him to that city, and decorate the altarof his cathedral.On concluding his labours at Viterbo, Salvator returnedto Naples, where his reputation became everydaygreater, and a more fruitful source of emolument.Rome, however, was the field in which he was ambitiousto exercise his strength, and the admirationexcited by his picture of Titus torn by a vulture madehim resolve to establish himself in that city Thitherhe accordingly proceeded, and the striking originalityof his genius, his engaging personal address andnumerous accomplishments, speedily gained him thepatronage and friendship of all the most distinguishedpersonages in the place. But, as fond of satire ashewas of poetry, he so freely descanted, in someplays he composed for the carnival, on the charactersof certain persons of rank and influence, that hesoon found himself involved in a very disagreeablecontroversy, and saw the expediency of yielding to thesuggestions of his friends and retiring to Florence.The Tuscan capital was still celebrated as theresort of taste, elegance, and genius; and Salvator,immediately on his arrival there, became the intimateassociate of the celebrated Berne, Pietro Salvetti,Lorenzo Lippi, the author of the mock-heroic poem IIMercantile Racquistato, and other persons similarlydistinguished for their talents. In the meetings of the•214 THE LANDSCAPE Annual.academy into which, according to the fashion of theage, they formed themselves, they were accustomed todisplay their talents in theatrical compositions andperformances, and in these amusements the vivacityand genius of our painter shone conspicuously amongthe most successful. A somewhat laughable anecdoteis told of the manner in which he and his friend Lippiemployed themselves, when, relaxing from professionalcares, they retired to the country-house of the latter,which was pleasantly situated on the side of the riverafew miles from Florence. It so happened that thehigh road wound along a walled and lofty bank,which overhung the stream, and that, when passengersarrived at the point which lay contiguous to Lippi'splantation, their reverted shadows could be seen in theriver, though they themselves were not observable bypersons in the grounds. Salvator and his friend, regardingthis as a grand discovery, whispered it about, withan air of great solemnity and mystery, that in one partof the river it was .possible to look through it and seetheantipodes. Whenever they met with any one whosuited their purpose, he was, as a great favor, invitedto witness the wonderful spectacle, and great wastheir delight when they beheld their visitor bendinghis head over the water, and watching with intensecuriosity the people of the nether world, walking withtheir feet upwards.Salvator continued at Florence for nine years, andduring that time enjoyed a degree of patronage whichenabled him not only to defray the expenses of a veryhandsome establishment, and to enter into all theNAPLES, 1 hum THE BTttADA WUOVA. 215pleasure of the city, but to lay by the sum of threethousand crowns. It was at the instance of Lego and(iinlio Mallet that he was induced to leave this agreeableand profitable place of residence, and proceed toV r terra.At Volterra, he was employed not only by his immediatepatrons, but by a variety of wealthy personsin the neighbourhood, and his time passed in agreeablealternations of labour and pleasure. Hawking,and the other sports of the field, together with all thegratifications of a hospitable hall, well filled withguests famed for wit and politeness, formed the recreationsof his leisure, and three years passed rapidlyaway. During that period, however, he executedseveral of his most admired works, and composed, itis said, the greater number of his satires.But Rome appears to have still retained the firstplace in his affections, as, on leaving Volterra, he immediatelyhastened to that capital, and once moretook up his residence among the princes of the church.His industry seems to have been redoubled at thisperiod, the pictures he painted about this time beingtoo numerous, it is reported, to admit of a chronologicalarrangement. His principal patron, forsome time after his return to the capital, was CarloRossi, who engaged him to execute a sufficientnumber of works to fill a whole gallery, and to whomhe dedicated, as a mark of his esteem and gratitude,his etchings of banditti.The life of Salvator had been darkly shaded withtrouble at its commencement, but, since the happy216 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.discovery of his genius by Plan franc, it had runsmoothly on, scarcely interrupted for the briefestperiod by any circumstance calculated materially toaffect the serenity of his mind. But in the year 1672he began to be made sensible that the most prosperouscareer, and the happiest conjunction of good spiritsand good fortune, are far less durable than pleasant.His health was now on the decline, and a cloud thussuddenly spread itself over the gay prospects which hisfancy, still in its vigour, every where presented. Noexertion was spared by his friends and physicians torestore his strength; but it daily gave way to theredoubled attacks of his disease, which at length settledinto a confirmed and incurable dropsy. This, after abrief period of painful resistance, proved fatal, and onthe fifteenth of March, 1673, Salvator Rosa ceased tobe an inhabitant of earth.The career and character of this celebrated artistreceived a strong colouring of romance, both fromthe circumstances attending the early part of his lifeand from the warmth of his temperament, which kepthim constantly awake to every suggestion of fancy,and tempted him to make continual efforts to realizethe dreams with which she filled his mind. Thepopularity he almost universally enjoyed, the splendidremuneration he received for the exercise of hisgenius, the gay courtly mode in which he passedhis time, and the many amusing adventures in whichhe was engaged, all contributed for a while to keepup the illusion with which he entered the world, andwhich would have been still greater but for the keen,NAPLES, FROM THE STRADA NKIV.l. 217penetrating, understanding with which, in addition toits other gifts, heaven had endowed him.Salvator's character exhibited the effect of all thesecircumstances on his mind, and he is said to havebeen strongly inclined to vanity, and sometimes to adegree of satirical arrogance in his conversation,which concealed for the moment the excellent qualitieswhich were otherwise manifest in his disposition.Not unfrequently, however, his satirical propensitiesseem to have had a tolerable plea for the ebullitionsto which they gave rise, and to have been aptlyemployed in the correction of presumption andconceit. Thus it happened one day, when one ofhis princely patrons, who was ill in bed, hadrequested him to come and work in his chamber,that the physician, who was in attendance on hishighness, expressed his earnest desire that Salvatorcould be persuaded upon to paint him a picture.The painter, on having the request put to him bythe prince, cheerfully assented, and was aboutto prepare for the task, when the physician steppedforward and said that he had better wait till he gavehim the subject and a design. Salvator heard theobservation with some surprise, and proceeded withhis work ; but, when the physician took a pen in hishand to write the prescription for the prince, he wentup to him and said, " Pause doctor, and I will giveyou a proper form for the recipe." No ! signor Salvator,"was the immediate reply, " it is my office to dothat." " And to find subjects and make designs ismine," retorted the painter, returning to his seat with218 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.a look which plainly convinced the doctor he mightnow hope in vain for the intended picture.Salvator's noblest exhibitions of genius are byuniversal consent to be found in his landscapes. Inthem the luxuriousness of his fancy, his love of thewild and the terrible, the fondness for adventure andsolitude which led him in his youth through theAbruzzi, are strongly exemplified ; and the least vividimagination can scarcely fail of taking wing withdelight at receiving the suggestions, so wild andexciting, which this class of his works inspires.PUZZUOLI.But here the mighty monarch underneath,He in his palace of fire, diffuses roundA dazzling splendour. Here, unseen, unheard,Opening another Eden in the wild,He works his wonders.Rogers.Hie (quod vix cretan) pelvis lapidescit et ardentMarmot-is in more mixto candor rubens.Strabo.The ancient city of Puzzuoli, like Baiae, Cuinae,and Ischia, lies within a pleasant ride of Naples,on the western shore of its beautiful bay. Of theprecise antiquity of the town, it would be ratherdangerous to speak, inasmuch as those authors towhom we are indebted for our knowledge in theseparticulars are themselves lost in conjecture. Straboaffirms it to have been built by Dictus, the son ofNeptune ; while Suits declares that it was foundedby Hercules. The better informed antiquarians, however,believe it to be indebted for its origin to theIonian, in the reign of Tarquin the Proud, and that itreceived its name from the sulphureous springs inits neighbourhood.220 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.In former ages Puzzuoli is supposed to have extendedto the distance of four or five miles, and to have beenthe principal seaport of the inhabitants of Cumse,affording a certain mart to the merchants of Sicily andGreece for the disposal of their merchandize.The ruins which skirt the shore from the promontoryare called by antiquaries Piscina Veteris, and originallyformed a range of warehouses and shops, chiefly, it isconjectured, inhabited by dealers in precious ware,from the circumstance of basins, and other vessels ofsilver, having been discovered there, and numberlessstones, carved and otherwise adapted, which were wornby the ancients in rings and ornaments.Tully seems to hint at these precious commoditieswhen speaking to his friend Attics : " What have Inot beheld, when journeying through the precious martof Puteoli ? " " Quid non potui videre, cum per emporiumPuteolanumiter facere?" A Roman colony wassent hither during the time that Hannibal was makingwar in Italy, by whom the town was adorned withtemples, theatres, and statues, and to such splendour didit arrive, that Tully called it the Little Rome. The deplorablecondition in which it is now seen by the travellerwould argue ill for its former prosperity, were itnot that the ruins of magnificent edifices, by which itwas formerly ennobled, attest but too well its originalsplendour. But wars, and, above all, earthquakes of themost terrific description, have contributed to desolatethis once favored city.Hannibal was the first who brought thither thescourge of war. The civil contests between MariusPUZZUOLI.22]and Scylla were likewise severely felt, though the latter,when he resigned the dictatorship, fixed his abodethere, and endeavoured to repair the damage caused byhis devastating ambition. It was at Puzzuoli that thetyrant breathed his last, and by a frightful death waspunished for a life of treachery and crime ! The citywas sacked at different times by the Goths underAlaric, Genseric with his Vandals, and Totila king of theGoths. It likewise suffered from the Lombards, theSaracens, and the Normans, but the blow which completedthe ruin of this ill-fated town was dealt by AlphonsoI. of the house of Arragon. During the contestfor the kingdom of Naples, between that prince andRene of Anjou, Puzzuoli was defended gallantly bythe inhabitants, in favor of the latter. Alphonso,having exerted every means to induce them to surrenderwithout avail, blockaded them so closely that theywere reduced by utter famine to submission. The defenceswere entirely destroyed ; and Puzzuoli has neversince that time ranked amongst the cities of Italy.Earthquakes have, however, been still more fatal toPuzzuoli than war. There have been several on record ;but that which has left the most distressing ravages,and marked it, as it were, with the finger of desolation,occurred in the year 1538. For seven days previouslythe inhabitants had a fearful presage of this terrible catastrophe,by a continual trembling of the earth, and arecurrence of noises ; when suddenly, on St. Michael'sday, the 29th of September, the earth yawned horribly,and the greater part of the city, with its thousands ofliving beings, was swept from the face of nature into a222 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.nameless grave ! The sea withdrew 200 paces fromthe shore, and the town of Tripergola, within a shortdistance of Puzzuoli, was entirely swallowed up withallits inhabitants.The town of Tripergola was celebrated for severalnoble convents, and was considered a little Eden, fromits enchanting situation and the beauties with which itwas adorned by nature ; but it is likewise related thatthe profligacy of its inhabitants was proverbial, in memoryof which, and as a mark of divine vengeance,from the same gulf which enclosed the guilty city theresprung a mountain of ashes, which is now known bythe name of Monte Nuovo. The mountain at firstvomited fire, and terrible noises were echoed fromwithin ; but since that time neither flame has beenseen nor has any noise been heard. At the summit ofthe mountain is an opening about fifty feet in diameter,through which the flame was seen to issue ; there nowonly remains at the bottom of this pit a dark sulphureouswater. Carpaccio, speaking of the misfortunesof Puzzuoli, alludes to this dreadful monument of theircalamity, and observes that the remembrance can neverbe effaced, being continually reminded of it by thisgloomy object before them : " The people of Puteoli,"says he, " felt the severest scourge of the barbarians ;but that which nature herself inflicted upon them, andwhich they are compelled to bear, is such as they cannever forget ; for they have an eternal witness of it inthat mount of sorrow which daily appears before theireyes. " Every thing within the neighbourhood of thisdreadful visitation felt its effects. For miles round,puzzuoli. 223houses, trees, men, women, and children weredestroyed. Such is the scourge that, in the loveliestof regions,Exalts the valley, lays the mountain low,Pours many a torrent from his burning lake,And in an hour of universal mirth,What time the trump proclaims the festival,Buries some capital city, there to sleepThe sleep of ages — till a plough, a spade,Disclose the secret, and the eye of dayGlares coldly on the streets, the skeletons,Each in his place, each in his gay attire,And eager to enjoy."Those of the inhabitants that escaped fled to Naples,half dead with fear. The Lucrine lake was nearlyfilled up, as was that of A vermis, and the magnificentruins which were then standing of the Villa Cicerone,where that great Roman composed his " QuestionsAcademics," were destroyed. A copy of some beautifulLatin verses, descriptive of the event, written byGirolamo Borgia, who was a witness to part of thedreadful scene, and addressed to Pope Paul III., maynot be unacceptable to the classical reader.Qui fumes turpnt niger ora licentia solis 1Sulphuret tenebrosa palus effusa cavernsFluctuate, ^Etneis eructans altius igne 1Numquam Averages Phaeton prorupit in unda,Terrible fructus et sana sonata torquens "!Balance reliant undue, simul amen aquariumDulce fruit, celery furies contraria cursu.Exhibit e tremble Miseni buena dextraRauca sonans ; metuit rursus Prochyta alta ruinamEruta visceribus mantis murmura terra?Horrified compleat piceas mugitibus auras."'224 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.What murky clouds obscure the noonday sun !Have the dark caverns of the lake begunTo roll their sulphurous waters, or aspireWith bellowing flame to rival Etna's fire ?Or has Phlegethon with A vermis joined,And fearful waves with sounding rocks combined ?The struggling deep resounds from Baiae's shore,While, with swift course, once gentle streamlets pourTheir increased tide, o'erwhelming nature's store ;The horn, harsh sounding, from Missus' hand,Now trembling, falls ; and Prochvtus' high landAnother ruin fears. Deep murmurs breakForth from the smoking earth, and loudly shakeThe pitchy air, wild with the monstrous mirthConceiv'd in Earth's dark womb, a fearful birth ! "With such a visitation as the foregoing, it is almostsurprising that the least vestiges of antiquity shouldremain. Several, however, yet survive, which neitherwar, nor earthquake, nor even time, has yet been ableentirely to destroy. The most considerable is a templesupposed to have been dedicated to Jupiter, but whichwas afterwards conveniently converted into the episcopalchurch. This temple was built with immenseblocks of marble, of a thickness which would renderit indestructible, and was dedicated to Augustus, underthe name of Jupiter, by Calumnies Pisa, a Romanknight, as appears by the inscription.Calumnies was son to that Pisa whose name hasbeen preserved to posterity, by an exceedingly severeoration spoken against him by Cicero. The temple isnow dedicated to St. Proclus, one of the companionsof St. Januarius, the patron saint of Naples.There existed here formerly a most magnificenttemple, dedicated to Diana, which is affirmed by historiansto have been supported by a hundred marblepuzzuoli. 225columns. It is thought to have stood on the spot nowcalled Pisatura, where several marble columns werefound some years since belonging to the Corinthianorder, and of most exquisite workmanship. MatterPlanting of Salerno affirms that there existed in histime a statue of Diana, which was worshipped in thistemple. It was fifteen cubits high, had two largewings, and a lion and a panther on its sides.About a mile from Puzzuoli are to be seen the remainsof the ancient amphitheatre. But little now isvisible to the eye, though the arena can be traced tohave been about 170 feet long. It was here that Neroentertained Mithridates, king of Armenia, with the mostsplendid spectacles, according to the notion of thetimes, of gladiatorial combats and fights with wildbeasts. But that which obtained for this spot thegreatest celebrity was the miracle performed there infavor of St. Januarius.Timotheus, being in those times governor of the provincefor the emperors Diocletian and Maximin, resolvedto execute to the utmost the bloody edicts issued againstthe Christians. As peculiar objects of his cruel vengeance,he seized St. Januarius, then Bishop of Benevento,along with several of his companions, and, ontheir refusal to subscribe to the terms of the edict, heordered them to be exposed in the arena of the amphitheatreto be devoured by wild animals. Vast numberswere assembled in the amphitheatre to witness thebarbarous immolation of these Christian martyrs. Tothe astonishment of all, however, as the legend asserts,when the lions and tigers, inflamed by rage and226 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.hunger, rushed from their dens, and beheld their opponents,they instantly became tame as lambs, and,crouching towards the holy men, humbly licked theirfeet. At this manifest interposition of divine providence,thousands rent the air with their plaudits, while many fellon their faces and worshipped. But Timotheus, blind toevery thing in his fury, cried out, " Vile sorcerers ! thearts you employ on senseless beasts shall not avail youwith men. Lead forth, therefore, to instant execution."More sanguinary and ferocious than the wild beastswhich were to have executed his cruel sentence, Timonthen directed the guards to conduct their victimsfrom the amphitheatre, and their heads were struckfrom their bodies in his presence. The spot on whichthe saint and his companions suffered martyrdom wascommemorated by a small church, and over the altarwas placed a bas relief, representing the event, withthese words ; —Locus Decorations S. January et sociorum ejus ! "A curious story is related concerning a marble bustwhich was taken of the face of the Bishop after decapitation,and which served as a model for all the picturesby which the saint has since been delineated.When Puzzuoli was sacked by the Saracens, some ofthe soldiery, out of wantonness and contempt for theperson of the saint, struck off his nose, and carried it asatrophy on board one of their ships. Immediately therearose so violent a storm that the robbers were preventedfrom weighing anchor, when some one, more shrewdthan his fellows, suggested the possibility of the tempestbeing occasioned by the nose, which was accordinglycast overboard to propitiate the angry elements. .227villous to relate, at the moment the nose reachedthe waters, they instantly became calm, and the piratesproceeded on their voyage. A few days after thisevent, some fishermen, dragging their nets, observedthis nose amongst the rubbish they had brought up ;but, thinking it merely a common bit of marble, theythrew it with other rubbish into the sea. Every time,however, they drew their nets, what should they see,again and again, but this identical nose ; until, persuadedthat there was something miraculous in its continuedrecurrence, they carried it to the Bishop ofPuzzuoli. The good Bishop, in a moment recognizingit to be the long-lost nose of St. Januarius, was overjoyedat the discovery, and ordered a solemn procession,for the purpose of reinstating the disjointed memberin its original position on the face of the reverend martyr! The most wonderful part is not yet related : Whenthe Bishop was yet some distance from the mutilatedbust, strange to say, the nose escaped from his hand,and, without human assistance, fixed itself as closely inits original situation as though it had never been dissevered: a small scar only remained to attest themiracle ! What renders the story still more curious isthat the clergy, desirous that their saint should not remainwithout that important member to his physiognomy,had some time before caused another to bemanufactured ; but such was the extreme delicacy ofSt. Januarius that he resisted every effort to fix it on,and the attempt was given up, under the convictionthat their zeal for the respectable appearance of theirpatron was evidently disagreeable to him !Q 2PUZZUOLI, WITH THE BRIDGE OFCALIGULA.Quoque Decarchaei portus, Baianaque mittensLitter, qua medicis alter penn issus anhaltIgnis aquas, et aperta domes incendia servant.St ati os.Contracta pisces sequoia 9entinutFactus in alium julius.Thor.That portion of the shore of the Bay of Napleswhich is included between Pausilipo and the Cape ofMisenum, though small in extent, is exceedingly richin classical associations. Within this short space haveemperors, philosophers, statesmen, and heroes, eitherreposed awhile from the cares of their several stations,or, in their later years, have sought, amidst the charmsof a luxuriant solitude, that tranquillity for which theyvainly sighed throughout a troubled existence. Historymakes us acquainted with the events of their lives,while tradition points out the spot where once stoodtheir local habitations, — now their tombs. Although weareindebted to tradition for much that history does notfurnish, it should, nevertheless, be received with caution,as embellishment and a love of the marvellousdo not decrease with time. Many remains of antiquityhave been invested with undue importance fromPI z/roi.l, with rill. BRIDGE OF CALIGULA. 229ignorance and want of research, and errors have beenperpetuated and confirmed by the popular voice. Perhapsthere is no greater instance of the readiness withwhich people imbibe such popular errors than the subjectof the present plate, which was universally acknowledgedas the ruins of the Bridge of Caligula. Someauthors have been misled by the confidence of pretendedantiquarians, and even learned men have beendeceived by similar prejudices. Bishop Burnet, whotravelled in the earlier part of the last century, says,Neither the sybil's grotto nor any thing seen in theBay of Pozzuoli can compare with the ruins of Caligula'sBridge, which raise our admiration. We theresee an illustrious monument of the extravagant prodigalityof a brutal tyrant, who, merely out of vanity,would build in the sea a bridge three or four mileslong, — a work never attempted before."A modern Italian poet, speaking of these ruins, saysHie Pile his sex antiquo ex ponte supersuntQuo Caius Cssar Caliban cognomen adeptsVerities Samian junxisse Dicarchida BasisFertur, et sequoreas siccis transits per undaPassions, instrato sublimis traite moles."Here six piles remain of the ancient bridge by whichCaius Caesar, surnamed Caligula, is reported to havejoined the Samian Dicarchia to the Meridian Baise, andto have passed with dry feet through the waters of thesea, a path being made upon the high mole."Some attribute this undertaking to the presumptionand prodigality of the Emperor, while others say itwas formed to invalidate the prediction of a soothesTHE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.sayer, who declared that Caligula would not besecure on his throne, unless he could drive his chariotacross the Bay of Naples. Suetonius, in his lifeof Caligula, thus describes the bridge built bythat Emperor : — " Bajarum medium intervalsPuteolanas ad moles trim milium et sexcentorumfere passim ponte conjunct, contracts undiqueonerariis navies, et ordines duplicity ad anchors collocation,superjectoque agere terrene, ac directo in Appianvise formam." " He made a bridge about three milesand a half in length, from Baiae to the mole of Puteoli,by collecting together ships of burthen from all parts,anchoring them in two rows, and overlaying themwith earth, after the manner of the Appian way."All this sufficiently explains the manner in which thebridge was built, and indeed antiquarians are now perfectlywilling to admit that the ruins in question arenothing more than the remains of the ancient mole ofPuzzuoli, formed for the security of the harbour by theIonian who founded the city. This wonderful workwas at one time paved with marble, and decorated onthe entrance next the town with a triumphal arch, as isshown in a small antique fresco taken out of Pompeiiand preserved in the museum at Portico. The extraordinarystability of these brick piers, which have stoodunmoved for ages against the violence of the waves,while those which have been displaced were overturnedonly by the force of earthquakes, has been attributedto the adhesive nature of the materials. Strabodescribes this mole as being built of brick and stone,joined by cement, composed of lime and a certain sandPUZZl'OLl, WITH T1IF. 11I11D0E OF CALIGULA. 231found in the neighbourhood, which has the singular propertyof hardening under water, and becoming likemarble. A marble was in fact found in the port aboutthe year 1557, and placed by the people of Puzzuoliover their city gate, the inscription whereon signifiedthat the mole, having been broken in many places bythe violence of the waves in the reign of the emperorHadrian, was repaired by Antoninus Pius his successor.There is another mentioned by JuliusCapitoline, in the Life of Antoninus, which readsas follows : —Imp. Caesar, Divi, Hadrian, Folio, Divi, Trajan,Parthian, Nepoti, Divi, Nerve, Pronepoti, T. Actio,Hadrian, Antonio, Aug., Pio, &c. Quod supercaetera beneficia ad cujus etiam tutelar portus, pilgrimviginti mole cum sumpta noricum reliques, ex seragliosuo largitus est.Opposite to the promontory or cape of Puzzuoli isseen the small island of Nisita, or, as it was ancientlycalled, Nesis. It is about a mile and a half round, andis now used as a harbour for quarantine. Antiquarianssay that it originally joined the shore at Pausilipo, butwas separated by an earthquake. The air of this placewas anciently considered extremely unhealthy, on accountof the trees by which it was covered. Statiusspeaks of it thus,Inde malignAera respire pelago circumflua Nesis. "The sea-girt Nesis breathes malignant air. "Lucan, however, supposes that the unhealthy vapourwas produced by the convulsed leavings of the giant232 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Typhon, who was oppressed by the weight which he wascondemned by the gods to endure. : —Trait inert caelum fluid contagia pestisObscura in nubem : tali spiramine NesisEmitted Stygian nebulous aera saisAntique letiferi rabies Typhoid anhelant."The pestilential waters charge the airWith murky clouds. Thus Stygian vapours crownThe heights of Nesis' rocks ; and the fell cavesOf deadly Typhon breathe forth rage. "The air is now considered perfectly pure ; whetherowing to the trees with which the island was coveredhaving been long since cut down, or the exertionsof the giant Typhon having been quieted by the lapseof ages, Nisita is in a perfectly tranquil state atpresent, and the vines and olive trees which it producesgrow to great perfection. It forms the subject of aclassical fiction, in which Nisita is supposed to be anymph, with whom .Pausilypo was enamoured, and toescape whom she threw herself into the sea, and iselegantly apostrophised by the poet Sannazarius inhis fourth eclogue entitled Proteus.Te quoque formosa?, captum Viridis morePausilype."And thou Pausilvpo, in whom the charmsOf Nesis woke Love's warm and wild alarms. "The Lucrine lake so often mentioned by the ancientauthors is close to the bay of Puzzuoli. It was formerlycelebrated for its fish, particularly oysters, whichPUZZl'OLI, WITH THE BRIDGE 9F CALIGULA.were esteemed as the most delicate in all Italy. Beforethe great earthquake which occasioned such devastationin this region, the Lucrine lake extended almostas far as Baise, and, as Strabo relates, to the lake ofAvernus, and was separated from the sea by an immensemound, broad enough for two waggons to passabreast. A communication was opened between thetwo lakes by means of a canal, by the orders of Augustus,and was called Pontus Julius.An memoria portus, Utrinque addita claustraAtque indignation magnus stridoribus aequo,Julio qua Ponto longe sont unda refusaTyrrhenusque frets immittitur scotus Avernus ? "Or shall I praise thy ports, or mention makeOf the vast mound that bounds the Lucrine lake,Or the disdainful sea that, shut from hence,Roars round the structure and invades the fence,There where secure the Julian waters glide,Or where Avernus' jaws admit the Tyrrhene tide ? "Dryden.The Lucrine lake, so often the theme of poets, is nowlittle better than a muddy pond, and is indebted to ourimagination alone for interest. Pliny gravely relates astory connected with this lake, which, on the authorityof so respectable a writer, will doubtless be regarded asacurious fact in natural history ; other ancient authorslikewise allude to it as having really occurred.A learned English divine also, commenting on thesame story, says : " How incomprehensible soeverthings or relations appear, yet ought we not to be overhastyin pronouncing them false, except they imply a234 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.manifest contradiction." Whether such be the caseinthis instance the reader had better judge forhimself.In ancient times," says the learned historian,amongst the numerous finny inhabitants of this extensivelake, there dwelt a certain dolphin. Thisrespectable fish, when disporting near the banks of thelake, had oftentimes observed a little boy bathing in itswaters. Now, as similarity of habits often produces reciprocalesteem, an intimacy soon sprung up betweenthe dolphin and the boy, which in process of timeripened into the most tender friendship. By whatmeans their sentiments were mutually communicatedour historian does not say ; but, if deeds rather thanwords prove the test of affection, certain it is that thedolphin exhibited a regard of no common order. Thechild had only to intimate a wish to visit Baise, Puz-zuoli, or any of the villas with which the banks of thelake were studded, when straightway the dolphin wouldreceive him on his back, and glide with him over thesurface of the water, in the same manner as doubtlesshe had been accustomed of old, when in the service ofTritons, and other native princes of his element. Ofcourse, the spectacle of the boy thus skimming overthe lake without any apparent means, or exertion of hisown, astounded the good gossips of Puzzuoli and Baiae;and their wonder was in no ways diminished whenthey discovered the secret of his navigation. Immediatelythe most extraordinary reports were circulatedregarding the dolphin and the boy ; and many, notcontented with adhering to the facts, which were inPITZZUOLI, WITH THE BRIDGE Of CALIGULA. 23fithemselves sufficiently wonderful, declared that theboy brought home to his family the choicest fish in thelake, with which the dolphin continually supplied him ;and that this survivorship was carried to such an extentthat the table of the consul, or even that of theEmperor himself, was not so well furnished, whichindeed was not to be wondered at, considering who wasthe fisherman ! People, however, flocked from far andnear to witness this prodigy ; for, even in those timeswhen marvels were not so scarce as now, this wasconsidered wonderful. Chariots and horses were inrequisition ; while the more humble made their way onfoot. Multitudes thronged the road from Naples, andthe dark passage through the cave of Pausilypo wasalmost choked with the curious crowd, all eager towitness the singular effects of this most singularintimacy. But alas ! it appears that disappointmentwas equally rife in those days as in our own degeneratetimes ; for, before the curiosity of the thousands couldbe gratified, the child died! Some said that thismisfortune was to be attributed to a violent coldcaught during one of his aquatic morning rambles ;while others affirmed it was in consequence of themortification of a slight wound he sustained from thefin of the dolphin, when in the act of dismounting.However, the child's death destroyed the hopes of thepublic, as well as of the poor dolphin ; for it seemsthat the too sensitive fish, on learning the fate of hisbeloved companion, refused to take nourishment, andat last died of a broken heart."THE CASTLE AND BAY OF Balm.Nullus in orbe sinus Baise prwlucet amends.Horace, 1st Ens. M^jcen.Tu modo qiiamprimnm corrupts desire Rajas.Multi ista daunt litter dissidium :Litter qua? furent castes inimical pullsAh, servant Base crimen amoris aquas.PKOPERTlt's.To the classic and the antiquary, the spot whereanciently stood the celebrated and splendid city ofBaise presents a field for research and conjecturewhich no other place, if we except the " Eternal City"and her environs, can offer. The whole of this line ofcoast was once studded with Roman villas, on whichwas lavished all that wealth and splendour, from thearts of peace or the spoils of war, could furnish. Thephilosopher, the poet, and the statesman, have each bequeathedto posterity the result of their meditations,while here indulging in delicious retirement; though,if fame be true, they were not always, when enjoyingits enviable pleasures, employed for the benefitof their country or of mankind.The Romans, in gradually departing from the rudebut simple character of their ancestors, ceased likewiseto imitate their virtues ; the lofty spirit, patriotic devotion,— that true nobility of the old Romans, — yieldedto the increase of refinement, and were succeeded byTh Castile AND NAY OP BAIJB. '237the vices of luxurious ease aud sensuality. Nowonder, therefore, that Bailee, the nursling of pleasure,cradled in the lap of nature in all her sweetest andfreshest charms, should, as it advanced in wealth andconsequence, become celebrated as the scene of frivolouspursuits and unlicensed indulgences. We areeven told that Claudius, himself a notorious debauchee,once took the liberty of seriously admonishing Ciceroon the impropriety of his possessing a country house atBaise, a fact which he affirmed was of itself injuriousto his reputation. Seneca calls it the harbour of vices" Diversorium variorum" — and Martial declares that,if any Roman maiden was tempted to visit Baise,Penelope venit, obiit Helena, " though chaste asPenelope when she came, she went back a Helen.To the less enquiring tourist Baise is not an unattractivespot. It possesses the same luxurious climate,the same fertility of soil and beauty of situation, whichonce so captivated the masters of the world; and, asthe gift of nature, still continues to resist that influencewhich has long since levelled their stately templesand gorgeous palaces with the dust.History and Poetry have alike lavished their treasureson the neighbourhood of this once renowned spot.The pen of the historian, indeed, affords us instruction ;but it is with the fancy of the poet we delight to wander,and explore the scenes consecrated by genius, andits immortal works. With Virgil for our companion,we may pursue, with little aid from the imagination,our way untired through grotto and cave, over hillaud lake ; we descend with Aeneas to the abode of the238 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Sibyl, we pluck the golden branch; we breathe thepurer air of the Elysian fields, and approach with awethe gloomy waters of the dead ! But alas! the illusionis doomed to vanish before the more sober aspectof reason and of truth. These spots, once so resplendentin rank and wealth, are now only a tenantlesswaste. Huge disjointed masses of ruin mark theplaces once swayed by the noble and distinguished ofthe earth ; mutilated columns, and time-worn temples,still seem to celebrate the imposing but idolatrousworship to which the Genius of Rome taught itssubject world to bow the knee.But fallen as Baise is, in common with other citiesonce as flourishing, the very ruins speak more audiblyto the senses than the tongue of history can do.Through them we are taught to respect that daring andenergetic people, to whom nothing seemed an impossibility,— who achieved what they dared by the. mightypower of faith in their own strength. Even had wenot ample and authentic historical documents to guideour inquiries, the remains of their stately temples,their stupendous monuments of public utility, theirarchitectural taste, and the marbles into which theybreathed the spirit of their gigantic age, would alonebe imperishable memorials of their greatness. Thoughtheir power and splendour now lie scattered, like somemighty wreck, upon these syren coasts, enough is leftfor the passing wanderer of future days, by which tojudge of the intellectual grasp, the moral dimensions,and the unmatched prowess, of men who raised theirshepherd-huts into the capital of a conquered world.TIIF. Cartier AND HAY OF HAItf.,The principal objects to which the attention of thetourist is directed are the Sybil's Cave, the Lake ofAvernus, the Elysian Fields, the Mare Mortuum orDead Sea, the ruins of the ancient city of Cumee, andthe different architectural remains to which names havebeen assigned by antiquarians, or by a much moredaring class— the country people and guides of theneighbourhood. There is not a stone nor a brick ofwhich they will not confidently tell you its ancientpossessor; and it must be a matter of surprise tostrangers why the learned of all ages should havepuzzled themselves to so little purpose, with such anintelligent race of people close at hand to solve theirdifficulties. The cavern, close to the lake Avernus,into which the guides are pleased to introduce you asthe Sibyl's Grotto, has not the slightest pretensions tothe name. Ancient authors, who have written concerningthe Sibyl's Cave, describe it as being under thetemple of Apollo, which stood on the summit of thehill of Cumee. Virgil says :—At pius eneas arcus, quibus alius ApolloPresident, horrendaeque procul secreta Sibylline,Antrum immane petit : magnum cui mentes, animumqueDelius inspirit vates aperitque future."The pious prince ascends the sacred hillWhere Phoebus is adored ; and seeks the shadeWhich hides from sight his venerable maid,Deep in a cave the Sibyl makes abode ;Thence full of fate returns, and of the god."Dryden.240 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Many other classical authors might be quoted, evenmore directly to the purpose, to prove the real site ofthe Sibyl's Cave. The cavern which bears its name isfull three miles from Cumae and the Temple of Apollo,and must, in all probability, have been the work of theCimmerian, a people who lived in caves, and delightedin habitations of darkness. Cicero says that they inhabiteda valley so exceedingly deep that the sun nevershone on it, whence arose the proverb of Cimmeriandarkness.The lake Avernus better answers to Virgil'sdescription, being surrounded by a thick and gloomyforest, which was levelled in after-times by the RomanEmperor ; but the unpleasant smell and poisonousquality which the poet, in common with other authors,ascribes to the waters of the lake, is no longertheir characteristic.Spelunca alta fuit vastaque immanis hiatus," &c".Deep was tie cave ; and downward as it went.From the wide mouth a rocky rough descent ;And there the access a gloomy grove defends ;And there the unnavigable lake extends,O'er whose unhappy waters, void of light,No bird presumes to wing his airy flight ;Such deadly stenches from the deep ariseAnd steaming sulphur that infects the skies ;From hence the Grecian bards their stories make,And give the name Avernus to the lake."Dryden.The Elysian Fields consist of a small cultivatedplain, which, as the old traveller Lascells observes,would make a good bowling-green. It was there theiill CASTLE w D B \ v OF Ba E. 2 1 Ipoeta feigned that the souls of the good enjoyedeternal happiness; and the Mare Mortuum is within ashort distance of its happier neighbour. This plainwas anciently the burial-place for the people ofMisenum, and their being obliged to carry the bodiesover the Dead Sea gave rise to the poetical fictionof Charon and all his appalling attributes. TheLake Acheron, thought by the ancients to have beenone of the mouths of Hell, is a little higher up,near Cumae : —Unum oro, Quando hie inferno janus Regis, " &c.Ibis let me crave, since near that grove the roadTo hell lies open, and the dark abodeWhich Acheron surrounds, th' unnavigable flood,Conduct me through the regions void of light,And lead me longing to my father's sight."Dryden.The site of the ancient city of Cumae is on thesummit of a hill, and is marked only by a few inconsiderableruins. Cumee was the first colony of theGreeks in Italy, and is interesting on that account.On the highest part stood the temple of Apollo —The lofty Fane to bright Apollo vow'd,"under which stood the Sibyl's Grotto, according tothe description of Justin Martyr and many otherwriters. The city of Cumae was, however, in anythingbut a flourishing condition in the time of theRomans. Juvenal says, speaking of Umbricius, whowith his family retired to Cumae, —Quamvis digress veteris confuses Amici," &c.Juv. Sat. in.242 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Grieved, though 1 am, an ancient friend to lose,I like the solitary seat he chose,In quiet Cumae fixing his repose ;Where far from noisy Rome secure lie lives,And one more citizen to Sibyl gives."DnYDF/N.The ruins of the villa Vatia, in the neighbourhood,are interesting from the account we have of that distinguishedindividual. P. Servility Vatia, or Vaccia,was of consular dignity, and a Roman of great considerationin the commonwealth. He was the conquerorof the Isauri and other neighbouring nations, and wasin consequence surnamed Isauricus. When the tyrantTiberius reigned in Rome, Vatia, soon perceiving thatpersons of honor and independence were liable to jealousyand mistrust, quitted that city, the place of hisbirth, and, retiring to this villa, there passed the remainderof his days. He would sometimes pleasantlysay of himself, "Vatia lies buried here," alludingto the manner of his life. But his friends at Romethought otherwise,, who used to say, — " O Vatia! thoualone knowest how to live !" From what we can traceof its ruins, the house must have been very spacious.Seneca says that amongst other curiosities it had twowonderful grottos, and describes the place so well thatthe site cannot be mistaken.The celebrated villa of Lucullus is likewise clearlypointed out by Tacitus, at the foot of Mount Missus:Mutatis saepius lochs," he says, " tandem apud promontoriumMiseni consent in villa cui L. Lucullusquondam de-minus This was the most splendid residenceamongst those of the Romans in this country.THE Castle \M> hay or r,.\i.v 243Pliny, who delights occasionally in the marvellous,gives an extraordinary account of the fish ponds, andof the discipline to which the finny inhabitants weresubjected. They would answer to their names, heaffirms, and some wore necklaces by way of distinction.Lucullus himself would observe, alluding to hisfinny treasures, that he had no reason to envy Neptune.Tiberius died at this villa on his return toCapri, according to Suetonius, who says: — " RepeaterCares quoque modo destination, sed et temptationset ingravescente vi morbi resents paulo postobiit in villa Luculliana." This house belonged afterwardsto Alterius Asiatics, who was put to deaththere by order of Claudius, when Messalina andNarcissus conspired, by practising on the weakness ofthe Emperor, to confiscate the effects of the chiefpersons of the empire.Between the Castle of Baiae and the Dead Sea arethe ruins of what is supposed to have been the villa ofJulius Caesar. The supposition is grounded on thecircumstance of a beautiful statue of that distinguishedRoman, about ten feet high, having been dugup on the spot. It was in this villa, according toService and others, that young Marcellus, nephew toAugustus, was poisoned by order of Olivia. The ruins ofseveral temples besides that dedicated to Minerva areseen within the gulf — one was evidently dedicated to thegoddess Diana, from the symbols of her worship havingbeen clearly traced. Antiquarians are pleased toascribe another to Venus, and a third to Mercury;the latter opinion, however, seems to have producedit 2244 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.a schism in that learned body, many of whom are ofopinion that it was dedicated to the Sun.The Castle of Baise stands on an eminence commandingthe harbour, and was built by Don Pedro ofToledo, Viceroy of Naples, for the better security ofthe coast against pirates. Not far from Baise standsan old tower, which is all that remains of the ancientcity of Linternum, formerly a Roman colony. Thetown was partly destroyed by Genseric, King of theVandals, who sacked Rome in 455 ; its ruin was afterwardscompleted by earthquakes. The tower is nowknown by the name of Torre di P atria, from the followingstrange misconception. We are told by historiansthat the first Scipio was not exempted from thecalamities usually attendant on exalted stations ; for,having excited the envy and jealousy of certain individuals,a charge was preferred against him, by thetribunes of the people, of embezzling the public money.Disgusted at the baseness of the charge, and despairingof making head against the powerful conspiracyentered into against him, he quitted Rome for ever,and, retiring to Linternum, ended his glorious careerin obscurity. He was buried in the place of hisretirement; and over his sepulchre, in the bitternessof his heart for the injustice he had received, he hadordered to be engraved the following inscription : —Ingrate P atria, ne quidem ossa mea babes." — " Ungratefulcountry ! thou dost not even possess mybones." Now some erudite and gifted individual ofpast times, having heard this account and seen acopy of the inscription, mistook the word PatriaTin cam i.i \\ i) B 11 OF D m i . 245for a proper nunc, and christened the poor remainsof Linternum by the more appropriate designation,as he considered, of Torre di Patria; another littleinstance of what we may term the popular errors ofantiquarians. This appellation, it appears, was immediatelyadopted by his less learned contemporaries ;and ever since that time the tower in question hasborne this name.THE BAY OF Bailie.Not a dirt hut flint;*On the clear wave some image of delight,Some cabin-roof glowing with crimson flowers,Some ruined temple, or fallen monument,To muse on as the bark is gliding by.Litn- beatve Veneris aureiim Bias,Baias superb bland dona nature ;Ut mille laden, Flacce, versions Baias,Laudable digne non satis tamen Baias.Boilers.Martin *l.The Bay or Gulf of Baise, embracing not the leastromantic portion of the Bay of Naples, has long beencelebrated for the purity and softness of its air, arisingfrom a salubrious and admirably sheltered situation.It commands a full view of the sea, and the whole ofits shore is covered with the ruins of temples, baths,and villas, — the magnificent, though decaying, memorialsof its former opulent and licentious masters.The promontory of Misenum forms its boundary on theside towards the sea ; the islands of Ischia and Procida,from proximity of situation, become its natural andbeautiful barriers; while the whole line of coast toNaples, with the opposite shore of Sorrento, crownedby Vesuvius, forms a coup deceit hardly to be surpassed,in picturesque magnificence, by any in theworld. The thousand objects of classic interest, di-theHAY 01 HALE.'247directly on the coast, are usually visited by water, beinghv hx the most agreeable and easiest mode of conveyance.Let us go round,And let the sail be slack, the course be slow,That at our leisure, as we coast along,We may contemplate, and from every sceneReceive its influence. The Cumaean towers,There did they rise sun gilt, and here thy groves,Delicious Baiae?. Here (what would they wish ?)The masters of the earth, unsatisfied,liuilt on the sea, and now the boatman steersO'er many a crypt and vault, yet glimmering,O'er many a broad and indestructible arch,The deep foundations of their palaces ;Nothing now heard ashore, so great the change,Save when the seamen clamours, or the owlHoots in the temple."The Stuff e di Tritons are close to the shore, and. aregenerally supposed to be part of the ancient baths ofNero. They were reputed to have cured diseases ofevery kind, and are highly celebrated by many authors.Martial says : —Quid Nerone ejus > Quid Themis melius Neronianis?"What worse than Nero » What better than his baths VThere is a curious story left on record of a conspiracyanciently formed by certain learned physiciansof Salerno to destroy their reputation, and it waseffected in the manner following. These celebratedbaths, being distinguished for different properties, had,during the course of ages, been accurately analyzed,248 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.and the qualities of each so well ascertained thatthey were severally prescribed, according to the natureof the complaint and the peculiar disposition of thepatient. In order that no mistake might arise frominjudicious practice, or ignorance of the qualitiesof the water, the directions were distinctly engravedon stone, and placed full in view in each separate department,of which there were a great many. Now,the physicians, aware that the reputation of thesebaths was so great as materially to injure theirpractice, and being moreover decidedly averse to soirregular and charlatanical a source of cure, determinedto put an end at once to the growing evil.They therefore assembled, we are told, in the dead ofthe night, armed with chisels and hammers, and, havingprocured a boat, stole secretly and silently to thesources of their philanthropical disquietude on the seashore,and there vented their indignation and spleenby utterly defacing all the inscriptions, and carryingaway all the statues. A sudden and violent storm,however, arose on their return ; and, as at that silenthour no help was near, their overladen boat could notresist the waves, and sunk with all its freight of iniquity.Mankind was thus avenged ; for, although theloss of the baths was greatly to be deplored, theyhaving been long so fruitful a source of cure, yet themischievous effects were at the same time considerablylightened by the loss, it is said, of the physicians.In commemoration of this event, Don Pedro de Toledo,Viceroy of Naples, caused an account of it to be engravedon marble, with the names of the physicians,THE B w or BAIJB.and had it placed at the entrance to the grotto ofPausilipo. This document was, in oftentimes, secretlyremoved by the manoeuvres, as it is supposed, of thefraternity, who felt annoyed at the sight of so publicarecord, conveying such an imputation upon theirhonorable calling.Along the whole coast, from Baise to Misenum, aredifferent remains of antiquity, to each of which traditionhas assigned a name. The tomb of Agrippina isshown to strangers. It was here that the ashes of thatunfortunate princess were deposited before they wereremoved to Rome. There are some considerable ruinsnear it of a circus, which the peasants call Mercator diSabbath. Under the pretence of amusing his motherWith the games, the monster Nero induced that ill-fatedprincess to come thither, when, after trying avariety of detestable expedients, he caused her to bestabbed by Anicetus the tribune. Cape Misenum iscelebrated by Virgil for the pleasing fiction to which itowes its name : —At pius .aeneas ingenii mole sepulchrelmponit suaque arma vero, remumque, tubamque," &c.Thus was his friend interred ; and deathless fameStill to the lofty cape consigns his name."Dryden.Misenum was anciently the station of a Roman fort,for the security of the western provinces, as that ofRavenna was for the eastern. The side of the hilltowards the sea is sterile ; but it is cultivated to thevery summit on the land side, and presents a beautifulview of the islands of Ischia and Procida. The latter'250 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.of these islands is about four miles from Misenum, andis a very beautiful spot. It was peopled by the Greciancolonies which settled at Cumse and the neighbourhood; and so little are the customs changed, duringthe lapse of ages, that the women of Procida at thepresent day still adhere, on their festivals, to the Greekcostume, and traces of the language are yet to befound in their Patois. Procida is famous for itsfisheries. Juvenal mentions the place, and says,Ego vel Prochytam prsepono Suburree." — " I preferProcida to the Suburbs." Suburbs was, at the time,the Regent Street of Rome, and celebrated for wealthand gaiety. Ischia, anciently Inarime, is two milesdistant from Procida. It was known likewise asPithecusse, and is described under that name by Ovid,who pays, by the way, no great compliment to theancient inhabitants: —Quippe Deem Genitor fraudern et perjury quondam, " &c.Ovid.The father of the' gods, detesting lies,Oft with abhorrence heard their perjuries.The abandoned race, transformed to beasts, beganTo mimic the impertinence of man.Flat-nosed and furrowed, with grimace they grin,And look to what they are too near a kin."Formerly this island burned like the Solfaterra atPuzzuoli, when some of the poets feigned that Jupiterhad cast it on one of the giants named Typhus.Conditur larmes astern mole Typhus,"says Lucan. But Filius Italics disputes this theory,and declares that the individual thus condemned to soinhay OT baiae:. 251um;isv a getting place was Laetus, likewise a giant,lout of interior rank.Apparent procul Inarime, qua; turbine nigroFumantem predict Japetum."Two centuries have elapsed, however, and the gianthas shown no farther signs of discontent.Returning to the shore of Baiae, the Piscina Mirabilisclaims attention. It derives its name from theexquisite style of its architecture, and was originally areservoir of fresh water, made by order of Agrippa forthe use of the fleet that wintered at Misenum. Theruins of Pauli are remarkable only for the remains ofthe villa of Hortensius, the celebrated Roman orator.He made himself remarkable for an extraordinarypassion he conceived for lampreys, and devoted thewhole of his leisure time to feeding and attendingthese creatures. It was reported, in Rome, that inconsequenceof the death of one of these objects of hisregard he became for several days inconsolable, andbewailed its loss with tears and lamentations. Thiscircumstance gave rise to several epigrams from thewits of Rome ; and, amongst others, he was tauntedby L. Domitius, who expressed his surprise how a personof such learning and wisdom could weep for thedeath of a fish. Now Domitius had been marriedthree times, and had buried his wives under such circumstancesas to induce the supposition that they hadbeen unfairly dealt with. Hortensius, therefore, notwithstandinghis grief, promptly replied to the attack.It is true," said he, " that I have wept for the death252 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.of a favorite fish ; yet it is a matter of greater surprise,Domitius, how you could have buried three wiveswithout a single tear." This coast is celebrated forthe production of a small fish, in great repute amongmothers who nurse their offspring ; and, amongst itsother virtues, it is said to cure the bite of a mad dog.It is about four inches in length, and has a head resemblingthat of a horse, terminating in a dragon'stail. The Neapolitans call them cavalli-marini, whichwas once ingeniously translated by a learned Englishtraveller as " horse-marines."The shores of Baise, we may also mention, havebeen somewhat singularly apostrophized by the celebratedauthor of the Cameron, whose well-knownattachment to the princess Maria of Naples, a naturaldaughter of King Robert, made him sigh to wanderin its charming environs. On her retiring to itsdelicious scenery, to spend the sultry summer months,Boccaccio appeared to feel all the jealousy of an absentand forsaken lover ; and, in a sonnet addressed toher on the occasion, we are not a little amused andsurprised to perceive that he expresses serious apprehensionlest the degeneracy of manners generally prevailinghere should taint the purity of her delicatemind.Peril posse il tuo nome, Baiae, e il loco,In te riverain fume, solo, e f'uoco ;Che hai corrotto la piu casta menteChe fosse in donna colla tua vicenza. "Perish thy name, oh Baiae, and the spot,Let smoke, flame, sulphur, seize thy charms ajrain ;Thou, thou hast soiled that soul without a hot,By thy seductive spells and pleasures Tain."THE BAY 01 I'M I ■ 253As if not satisfied with thus venting his idle andsum. what ironical spleen on the occasion, the lover-novelist,inspired by the muse, followed up his invectiveby a long and tedious poem in octave rime, entitled" Filtrate." This he transmitted to her witha prolix letter of advice, in which he raises the objectof his illicit passion to a height of excellence such ascould only fairly be ascribed to the most virtuous anddelicate minded person.CASTELL-A-MARE.Est in recess loiigo locus; insula portionEffect object latenini ; quibus oinnis ah altoFrungitur, cinque sinus scinde sese unda reduction.Hinc atqiie hinc vastse rapes, dominique niinanturIn ccelnm scapula ; quorum sub service latej^Eqnora tota silent : turn sylvia scena crucisDeeper, h"rrentique antrum nemus imminent umbra."VlKGlL.It would be difficult, perhaps, to find a town inItaly in the neighbourhood of which is not to be seensome object of remarkable beauty or grandeur. Whereit happens that nature is less profuse in her rich giftsthan she is in other parts of this wonderful country,there some noble remains of antiquity will meet theeye, to conjure up a crowd of stirring thoughts, sufficientto occupy every issue of the heart, and make itforgetful of every thing but the destinies of man. Onthe other hand, where there is little to excite emotionsof this kind, there nature will be found the ever-presentand assiduous handmaid of thought ; and withher lovely and incessantly renewed productions, herdurable forms, her material shadowing and types ofthings unseen, and her mysterious phenomena, willset the imagination free to form out of these elementsa world wild, strange, and beautiful. Such is the casewith Castell-a-mare, a town which, if situated anywherebut in Italy, would be regarded as too insignial.l,- 1-MARE.rant to detain the traveller for an instant: but noplace can be considered unworthy of notice whichVesuvius not unfrequently lights up with terrific splendour,and from which have been observed, almostfrom time immemorial, the grandest phenomena of thevolcano. If tradition speak true, it was in the immediatevicinity of this town that Pliny the elder perishedin the suffocating fumes of the eruption ; and Pompeiiitself is but three or four miles distant. In the ruinthat involved that city fell the ancient town of Stadia,which formerly occupied the site of Castell-a-mare ;and several papyri, it is said, have been at varioustimes discovered among its ashes.The only thing which the town itself has to recommendit is its agreeable situation in the bend of thebay of Naples, of which it commands a delightfulview, while the hills behind it rise in all the pompand beauty of sylvan solitude. By the good taste ofthe public authorities, an elegant and spacious terracehas been formed towards the sea, and adorned with arow of handsomely built mansions, its appearancealtogether strongly reminding the stranger of the deliciouspromenade of the Chiaja at Naples.Since the invasion of the French, Castell-a-mare hasreceived additional importance from the erection of itsnew fortifications ; and the formation of a small line ofbattle-ships begun there by Murat. The only objectto which the attention of travellers is directed, in thetown itself, is a mineral spring, which flows in an opencanal through the city, and resembles in many respectsthe Solfaterra in the neighbourhood of Rome.256 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Immediately, however, on stepping beyond thewalls, the tourist finds himself environed with lovelyscenes, which are only exceeded in attractiveness bythose which extend before him in long and almostinterminable vistas of ever-varied beauty. ,therefore, by the grandeur with which itis occasionally invested by Vesuvius, and by thesurpassing loveliness of the neighbouring country,may fairly claim a portion of the honor which thestranger in Italy is so ready to bestow on the generalityof its cities.Person.Est Amos Silari circa, Uicibosqne virentemPlnrimns Alburnum volitaiiB, cni nomen asyloRomani est, (Estron Grain venture vocanteeIn the close vicinity of so populous a city asNaples, it is, at once, a great advantage and gratificationto meet with such deeply sequestered anddelightful retreats as we find on the southern shore ofthe Bay of Naples. From the foot of Mount Vesuviusto the extremity of the bay, there is a continuedvariety of hill and dale, copse-wood and plain, intermingledwith towers, churches, and villas, groupedtogether in the most picturesque confusion, and which,viewed from the water, exhibits one grand amphitheatre,or rather bay, of vale and mountain scenery.At every turning in this romantic region, an intelligentguide will relate some historical or legendary anecdotesconnected with the spot; and, in this manner, a touristwho does not consider it an imperative duty to maketime the great regulator of his wanderings mightbeguile his leisure most agreeably. Amidst the emboweringwood, which thrives so luxuriantly aroundPerson, the King of Naples has established a huntingseat. A spacious domain of thirty miles in extent, andthickly wooded, affords an abundant cover to the wildanimals of the chase. The palace has, in itself, nothings258 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUALremarkable. The trophies of King Ferdinand and hiscompanions are every where visible, in the shape ofstags' heads and boars' tusks, each inscribed with thename of the hero by whose prowess it became numberedamong the sylvan spoils. Grooms, gamekeepers,and others, necessary in the chase, and governedby a major-domo, form the establishment.The woods of the chase afford, also, scope for verypleasant excursions. They are intersected by a broadpath-way, several miles in length, and are bounded bysmall streams of water, which, however, are insufficientto prevent the escape of game. There are severalinteresting breaks in the wood, which are not unworthythe pencil of the artist, particularly one, ofwhich the interest is heightened by a story connectedwith it. Crossing, by means of a small wooden bridge,a rivulet which divides the road, says a traveller, ourguide, a clever intelligent man, was observed to crosshimself most devoutly ; and, supposing that somethingof local tradition , was attached to the spot, we demandedof him his reason for so significant a gesture.This little bridge, sir, " said he, " which we arenow crossing, is called by the country people ' Mal-semina,'and with good reason ; for it was oncecovered with the blood of as fair a girl as the sunever shone on." At this intimation, our whole partyexpressed a wish to hear the history of an event apparentlyof so tragic a nature, and, as our guide wasnot unwilling to gratify our curiosity, we disposedourselves on and about the bridge, to listen to hisrecital.pesaro '2.59It was a pleasant evening in August: the sunhad lost the intensity of its heat, the breeze wasruffling the foliage of the surrounding wood, and therivulet was murmuring gently along beneath us.Leaning against an acacia tree, at the foot of thebridge, stood our guide, a tall sun-burnt Calabria ;he was clad in the dress of a royal forester ; and themelancholy expression of his bronzed features, arisingfrom the recollection of the events he was about torelate, lent an interest to the scene which we shall notsoon forget. We were disposed, as I said, in variousattitudes around him.Yes gentlemen, " said he, " I ought to knowit well. You see yonder spot," — pointing to a littledell at a short distance ; "it was there, eleven yearsago last feast of St. Barnabas, that I foundthem, and a startling and terrible sight it wasto come upon so suddenly ! and from thence to thisvery bridge on which you now stand was all coveredwith their blood," — the eye instinctively followed thedirection of his hand, — " but, however, I will begin atthe beginning, and then you will understand mebetter. At the little town of Altavilla, whichperhaps you may know — it is built on the side of amountain not far off here, towards the east — therelived at the time of which I am speaking the familyof a Neapolitan gentleman, of very good estate, anddescended from the counts of Monte falconer. Theold gentleman had a son about three-and-twentyyears of age, and a daughter only sixteen. He was avery good old man, uncommonly fond of his laughs260 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.ter and his estate, only as proud as Lucifer of hisdescent. The young man was just as proud as hisfather, without half his good qualities; but the younglady was beloved by every body for her kindness andcharity, and she was as beautiful as she was good.Many a time have I taken her a wounded bird, or ayoung fawn that had lost its dam, and she would tenditlike a child. But those were happy days, and fewenough she had of them."It so happened that one of the inmates of themansion was a young man, an orphan, who had beenbrought up from childhood by the old gentleman,and educated for some profession or appointmentworthy of his early and promising talents ; but no oneknew who he was. He was as handsome and clever ayouth as any in the country ; and none knew betterthan he how to pull a trigger, or tackle a wild boarsingle-handed. Well, these young people were unfortunatelythrown a great deal together; for the son wasa wild extravagant young man, and passed most of histime at Naples, and the old gentleman was absorbed inbooks and politics ; it was therefore no wonder that aromantic passion should spring up between them, forthe beauty and amiableness of the maiden, and thegenerous and manly character of the youth, madethem in every respect worthy of each other : in fact, Inever saw a finer pair, nor any in whom I took agreater interest. A secret understanding had existedfor some time between them, when an explanationwas brought about by an order from the oldgentleman to his protege to join the Austrian army —PERS Vino.the career to which he had been early destined.Such a rude and abrupt dissevering of the ties ofyears was not to be contemplated without passionateemotion.Perhaps they might never again behold each other,and, in the meanwhile, she was at the absolute disposalof her father. No means were left them but to fly,and trust to the forgiveness of her parent for the future.They ought to have known on how frail a reed theydepended for support ; but youth and passion blindthe senses. The youth, in his ramblings amidst theneighbouring forests, had formed an acquaintance witha monk, who had left his convent, preferring the lifeof a recluse in the woods. He used frequently tobring the old man game, and to do him a variety oflittle kindnesses, which had insensibly stolen on hislove. To the monk did the youth confess their passion,and their fixed determination, soliciting him by allthe good offices he had ever rendered him, and by thelove he bore him, to join their hands. This at lastthe old man consented to do ; and likewise to intercedefor them with the father. In the dead of the night,the young lovers stole forth, accompanied by a devotedfemale attendant, and before daylight they reachedthe hermitage, where the monk bestowed on them thenuptial benediction. So far all was calm; but, inthe delirium of love, little did they contemplate thefrightful storm, engendered by pride and contemnedauthority, which was shortly to burst on them in allits horrors.262 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.In the morning, the house of the Neapolitan presenteda dreadful scene of commotion. Immediatelythe flight of his daughter was made known to him, theold noble became roused to fury. A messenger wasdispatched to Naples for his son, and the police of thecity were placed in active search after the fugitives,who, it was supposed, had taken refuge within itswalls. The son lost no time in attending the summonsof his father, and, although less furious than thelatter, it could be easily seen, by his pale cheek andsternly compressed features, that deadly revenge hadtaken possession of his heart. The strictest searchwas made at Naples, but in vain, and the brother,fancying their hiding-place might be nearer than wassupposed, placed spies in every direction, with thepromise of a large reward for their discovery.Meanwhile the monk, who was not suspected,concealed the lovers in his hermitage, which was commodious,and, without suffering them to stir abroad,brought them news of the proceedings from without.In this manner many days elapsed ; the monk intending,after the first paroxysm of rage had subsided, toconfess to the old nobleman the part he had taken inthe affair, and solicit pardon for the young people.An incident, however, unhappily counteracted hisgood intentions. One evening, about eight days afterthe lovers had become inmates of the hermitage, theywere seated together, conversing with the monk ontheir future prospects, when they beheld the casement,which had been slightly opened to admit the air,drawn back by an unknown hand, and a broadPerson.swarthy face present itself to their view. An exclamationof joy burst from the lips of the intruder,who at the same moment disappeared. The loversinstantly became alive to the critical position in whichthey were placed. The young man sallied forth, butcould obtain no trace of the individual, who they immediatelyconcluded was some spy employed for theirdetection. Not a moment was to be lost. The monkgave them a note to the superior of his convent atSorrento, and bade them hasten thither, where theywould at all events be free from violence. His goodoffices he engaged to employ in the mean time withtheir father, and visit them as occasion would permit.Affectionately they took their leave of their kind benefactor,and with aching hearts, and a foreboding ofperil, bent their way to Sorrento.Giacomo was acquainted with every path, and, byfollowing the intricacies of the forest, hoped to reachtheir asylum before the alarm could be given. Helittle considered how swift were the movements of hateand revenge ; and little thought that his path waseven then tracked by blood-hounds, who were guidingthe fell pursuers to their prey. The man who openedthe casement of the hermitage was indeed an agent ofthe young count, who had been attracted thither bythe sound of voices, and, finding who were within,flew to communicate his intelligence and obtain hisreward. To prevent escape, he placed others aroundto give intelligence on his return.Arming himself in haste, and mounting his swiftesthorse the brother flew to the hermitage, accompanied2G4 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.by a desperate companion, who, if report spoke truth,had more than once been engaged in scenes of blood.The scouts at the hermitage placed them on the track,and, riding at their utmost speed, they were not longin overtaking the unhappy fugitives.The lovers had by this time traversed the greaterpart of the forest, and had gained that very bridge,when they heard the appalling sounds of pursuit.What was the horror of the already fainting Laureate,on turning, to behold her brother, his horse wreathedin foam, and his pallid countenance but too faithful anindex of the emotions of his heart! By the superiorswiftness of his steed, he had far outstripped his companion,and was there alone to confront them. For amoment the blood rushed quickly to the heart ofGiacomo, as he beheld his pursuer; but unconsciousof crime, and not fearing mortal man, he placed himselfon the bridge before his wife and her companion,and boldly awaited the event. This was the work ofan instant. Riding up to the very foot of the bridge,and leaping from his steed, he cried, rushing towardshis opponent, ' Dog of a pauper ! we are well met ; isit for such as you to dishonor a noble house ? defendyourself, lest I stab you where you now stand.'' Listen but for a moment to what I have to urge,'cried Giacomo; but he was answered with a deadlythrust from the weapon of his antagonist. For a fewseconds they were engaged in desperate strife, but thesuperior address of Giacomo prickly displayed itself.He bore his adversary backward, disarmed him, andforced him on his knee; when the flash of a pistolPerson.was s,rn. qukUj followed by the report. The sword,,,- the youth fell from his grasp, and he reeled gaspinga<,,mst the. side of the bridge. His wife, who in thefirst impulse of terror was as one almost bereft of life,at this dreadful moment seemed to regain all herenergies. Rushing to support the dying youth, shecovered him with her body, and received the blowof a poniard dealt by a brother's hand deep in herbosom ! ' My dear murdered husband ! ' were the onlywords she uttered, as she fell dead on his alreadylifeless form. The ball which pierced the heart ofGiacomo was directed by the companion of the youngcount, who arrived at the moment his patron appearedin danger, and risked the shot with too fatal aprecision. The assassins, seeing what was done, andthinking to secure their own safety by the silence oftheir victims, plunged a sword into the heart of theunfortunate Laureate's faithful attendant, who, overcomewith terror, was lying senseless near her murderedmistress. She passed from insensibility intodeath. They then dragged the bodies from the spoton which they had fallen into the dell, and, mountingtheir horses, flew to escape the justice due to their crime."It was some days before the monk learned, at hisconvent at Sorrento, that his young friends had not arrived.Fearing some mischance, he instantly soughtthe old nobleman, and, confessing his share in theelopement of his daughter, begged to know if they hadbeen intercepted by his orders, and what had becomeof them. The old Neapolitan was in a state of anxietybordering on madness, and now bitterly repented his266' THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.pride, and fatal precipitation in summoning hisson. He had heard nothing of him since he left onthe fearful night of the pursuit. The alarm wasquickly spread around ; violence was suspected ; andthe country people dispersed themselves amidst thewoods and villages in every direction for miles aroundto obtain tidings. It was my fortune first to crossthis very bridge, and I observed traces of blood, whichmight, however, have been spilled in the chase ; but mydog instantly set up an unusual cry, and, followingthe track, I had the horror of finding the poor unhappyvictims lying together, all stained with eachother's blood, and already beginning to decay ! Theywere both buried in one grave, with their faithfulattendant at their feet. The poor monk, with afaltering voice, rendered them the last offices of hisfriendship ; and there are few, amongst the crowd whoon that day saw the grave close over these victims torevenge and pride, that can erase the scene from theirmemory. " And no one who heard the Calabriarepeat that melancholy history, on the very spot whereit took place — who witnessed his impressive manner,and the mournful emphasis with which he concludedhis tale — can ever forget the evening he spent in thewoods of Person.THE BRIDGE OF VICO.His towel Batnia lochs, hie victor coventfecit, ct Lgnatoa docile manraevit in ususStatu s.The bold eminence on which stands the town ofVico forms part of the beautiful line of coast we areendeavouring to describe between Castell-a-mare andSorrento. It is surnamed Expense, to distinguish itfrom other towns of Italy of a like denomination.From a marble tablet we learn that Vico was foundedby Charles II. King of Naples, in the year 1300, andcertainly the style of its structure reflects no greatcredit on its founder. The pavement is moreover sorugged that it is with difficulty a horse can keep hisfooting, notwithstanding the improvements which aresaid to have been made by the different lords to whosesovereignty the town has been ceded at various timesby the Kings of Naples. In the cathedral, enclosedwithin a handsome marble tomb, repose the remainsof Giovanni, the first Bishop of Vico, who waspresented to the See in 1300, by Charles II., thefounder of the town. The neighbourhood of Vico iscelebrated for its wholesome wines, which are recommendedto all who visit the place. A singular naturalcuriosity, to which usually the attention of strangers isdirected, is a grotto, formed by nature under the height268 TIIF. LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.on which the town is situated. It is known by thename of the bridge of Vico. The waves of the sea passunimpeded through the channel ; and, in tempestuousweather, the reverberation of sound produced within itshollow recesses by the dashing waters is said almostto rival that of the far-famed Scylla, so poetically,though terrifically, described by the poets of antiquity.Along the whole line of coast from Castell-a-mareto the Cape of Misenum, and extending thence to Salernoand the coast of Calabria, were originally erectedMartello towers, to give notice of the approach of theSaracens and other piratical plunderers who formerlyinfested this coast; and, in after times, smallforts were constructed by the French, when they hadpossession of this the most beautiful part of Europe, toprevent any communication between the discontentedportion of the inhabitants and the English fleets, which,having the command of the sea, were ever hoveringaround, like the corsairs of old, though with a betterintent, and on the alert to offer assistance to theirpartizans, or annoyance to their enemies. Sentinelswere placed at these forts, owing to whose caution itwas a very difficult matter to effect a communicationwith the shore.An unfortunate accident occurred close to the bridgeof Vico, during the latter period of the reign of Murat,arising out of the extreme vigilance of one of theirfunctionaries, which at the time created an unpleasantsensation in Naples ; but, as no blame could be attachedto any one connected with the occurrence, itwas allowed to pass without inquiry.nil' BRIDGE OF vii'ii, 269It was a clear beautiful night in the month of August,such as can be seen only in an Italian climate.The moon was not visible ; but myriads of stars werereflected from the sparkling bosom of the bay, and theboats of the fishermen were glancing across its surfaceafter their finny prey, with bright lights in theirbows, looking like shooting meteors. The dark outlineof Vesuvius, then slumbering like some hugegiant after his toils, was thrown out in bold relieffrom the clear blue sky, and the neighbouringmountains, with their thousands of inhabitants,were hushed in quiet and deep repose. The onlysound heard on the bay, besides the low murmur ofthe distant city which the night breeze carried over itswaters, proceeded from a large boat pulling slowlyalong the southern shore, and filled with the studentsof the Royal Conservatory della Pieta di Tarquin.They were singing a beautiful chorus, accompaniedby a band of musicians belonging to their ownschool, and were on their way to Sorrento, to performon the morrow at the cathedral, in celebration of somegrand Fiesta. Delighted with their little excursion,forming, as it did, so pleasing an interruption to thedull routine of their exercises, the glee of the youngstudents knew no bounds.Stay," cried a young man named Malfatani,rising from the midst of his companions, " I shallleave you, and bestride the bows of the boat, like oneof the Tritons of old, only, instead of the concha, 1shall call the monsters of the deep around me by thenotes of my violin." He took the instrument of which270 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.he spoke, on which he was a first-rate artist, and, seating,- himself in the situation he had chosen, againresumed the chorus. Each was intent on his part, andthe voices of the whole, harmonizing together with thesounds of the instruments, rendered the challenge ofa French sentinel on the coast inaudible. The boatwas slowly passing the bluff point of a rock, when theQui vive' of the sentinel was again called. A thirdtime the ominous words were repeated, and were almostimmediately followed by the discharge of a musket.Poor Malfatani uttered a cry of terror, and fell backwardsinto the boat. Instantly all was confusion. Theguard from the fort, hearing the report, turned out andformed ; and the boat pulled to the shore. The. sentinelhad fired across the bows of the boat when hischallenge was unanswered, and the shot, entering thebreast of the unfortunate student, had mortallywounded him.A surgeon was speedily procured, who declared thathe had but a few short hours to live. The officerof the guard, whom the unhappy occurrence hadsensibly affected, bore the dying youth to his ownquarters, and, placing him on his camp-bed, dispatcheda messenger to Naples with the sad intelligenceto his friends. His companions, thus so suddenlyand fatally checked in their happy and joyouscareer, were struck with inexpressible sorrow. Mal-satanwas a young man of exceedingly promisingtalents, greatly beloved by all his fellows, and,having finished his studies, was about to enter intoTHE BRIDGE OF VICO. '27 Ithe world. They stood around his dying couch weepingbitterly.The night wore away in this melancholy and heartbreakingmanner. The dying youth had not spokensince he had been brought on shore ; and, by his difficultrespiration, it became evident that the distressingscene was drawing near to its close. The messengerdispatched to Naples at this moment returned, andwas accompanied, amongst others, by a young andbeautiful female. As the door of the apartment openedwhere Malfatani lay, she rushed in, and, regardless ofthose around, threw herself beside the object of heranxiety, and as she raised his head upon her bosom,and gazed on his pallid features, now fixing in death,burst into a frantic agony of grief. The expiring studenthalf opened his languid eyes, and, fixing them onher agonised countenance, faintly exclaimed, " Mywife!" and breathed his last in her arms.SORRENTO.Where once, onions;The children gathering shells along the shore,One laughed and played, unconscious of his fate,His to drink deep of sorrow.Rogers.Amongst the many delightful situations withwhich Italy abounds, Sorrento is perhaps one ofthe most lovely and delicious. The soil is volcanic,presenting a succession of unbroken rocks along thecoast of the beautiful bay which it skirts, whilebetween those rocks and the mountains extendsa fertile tract of alluvial soil known by the nameof the Piano di Sorrento. Upon this swellingplain, and amidst the neighbouring hills and rocksand woods, numerous villas are distributed, whichcombine in their situation all the advantages thatsea and land can afford. The approach to Sorrento,and the country around it, as the accompanying platesufficiently testifies, are highly picturesque, presenting,on a limited scale, all the most striking beautiesof mountain scenery. To these attractions may beadded the fame of salubrity, which it has long andjustly possessed. Deservedly celebrated, as Sorrentois, for the delicious beauty of its scenery and for itsclimate, it possesses a still more engrossing claim uponthe interest of the traveller, as the residence of BernardoTasso, and the birth-place of his immortal son. Whenafter a youth of dependence, anxiety, and ill-requitedBOERENTO. 27.1passion, the elder Tasso, in company with his beautifuland accomplished wife, was enabled to retreat from thevain labours of a courtier, he selected Sorrento as hishome, carrying; thither his wife and an infant daughter.In a letter to one of his friends he describes in glowingbut just language the beauties of his new abode.I have retired to Sorrento, by the favor of my Prince,who has liberated me from the trouble and fatigues ofactive life. It is separated by the bay of a mostplacid sea from Naples, which, situated on a high hill,shows itself to the beholders as if desirous that everyoneshould see its beauty. Nature here, more bounteousand liberal than to the rest of the world, seems to havebusied herself and laboured to render it delightful.The deliciousness and peculiarity of the fruits, thevariety and excellence of the wines, the goodness andquantity of its fish, the tenderness and perfectionof its animal food, render it, above all human desire,worthy of commendation and of wonder. The airis so serene, so temperate, so healthy, so vital, thatthose who continue here without changing the climateseem almost to be immortal. Add to this that thewall which nature, as if jealous of so dear a treasure,has formed round it, consists of the most lofty mountains.These are so green, so flowery, so aboundingin fruits, that we need not envy Venus her Paphosand her Cnidus. The Naiads, who in general are sounwilling to inhabit the summits of the hills, enamouredof the beauty of these, pour on every sidefrom their silver urns the freshest and the pureststreams, which, descending with a sweet murmur, defendT274 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.the herbs and trees from the fury of the dog-star, whichevery where else scorches the earth. The poets havefabled that here was the habitation of the Syrens, tosignify that such are the delights of the country thatthe man who enters finds it impossible to leave it. Here,refreshed from all its cares and labours, my mind isrestored to its dearest studies, and I shall endeavour,without offending God, to defend myself from theassaults of time and death. "To a mind attached like that of Tasso to intellectualpursuits, nothing could be more captivating than theprospect of learned leisure which his retreat at Sorrentoafforded. To exchange the gaudy and heatedsaloons of the palace for the freshness and simplicityof the woods and fountains — to forget the impertinencesof the court in the tranquil scenes of nature — to becomemaster of himself, and of his own mind — was a changewhich the poet hailed with exquisite and unmingled delight." Here," he says, in one of his letters from Sorrento," here I have recalled my mind, which waswont to be hurried from one business to another, as abird from bough to bough ; I have recalled it to studiesin such a manner that I hope a birth will be produced,which will soon behold, and ornament, and embellishitself in the mirror of your judgment." The work towhich he thus alludes was his celebrated poem of theAmadis, which he composed while resident at Sorrento.It was on the eleventh day of March, 1544, that thewife of Bernardo Tasso presented to her husband a son,who received the name of Torquatus. The house inSORRENTO.which he was born has probably long since yielded tothe encroachments of the sea, though one of themany beautiful villas bordering upon the bay is stillexhibited to the stranger as the residence of the poet.The modern style of the architecture, however, excludesthe idea that it is the house in which Tasso was born,though it is not improbable that it is erected on the samesite. It was situated so near to the water that, accordingto one writer, the chamber in which this greatpoet was born yielded soon after his birth to the attacksof the waves, jealous, as he asserts, of affording ashelter to any meaner head. " Ea con came ratio nonlongus tempus substetit, sed fluctuum concussionssubsedit, pertness foretaste, e trivio incomes accipere,postquam clarissimum Torquatus amisit."It is singular that, while the fact of Tasso's birth atSorrento is admitted on all hands, a vehement disputeshould have arisen as to his country. The argument ofTiraboschi on the subject, if not convincing, is ingeniousand amusing. No one denies that the poet was born atSorrento, and it is equally clear that his father and hisfather's family were of Bergamo. Now if Petrarch wasof Arezzo, if Reggio can claim Ariosto, and if Seravalleis entitled to Marcantonio Flamingo, we must acknowledgethat Tasso was of Sorrento. But if, on the contrary,the first, though born at Arezzo, is universallycalled a Florentine, if the country of the second, thoughborn at Reggio, is always accounted to be Ferrara,and if the last is given to Isola, though his birth-placeis Seravalle, it is difficult to say why Bergamo shouldnot claim the honor of being the country of Tasso,t2276 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.though he was born at Sorrento. Such is the argumentof the learned Tiraboschi, upon which other writershave refined, in a manner still more amusing. Goldoni,in one of his comedies, has ridiculed the disputes towhich the birth-place of the poet has given rise.Signor Tomio, a Venetian, stoutly maintains that theplace of birth has nothing to do with the question ofcountry.Se nato fuss in Mar,Concittadin dei pesci, vi faces cbiamar? "If born at sea,Would you a fellow-cit of fishes be ? "From the delightful scenery of Sorrento, TorquatusTasso was removed in his early infancy, though he appearsto have retained a fond recollection of its beauties.In latter life he revisited its scenes under circumstancesof singular and romantic interest. Suffering under oneof those afflicting delusions to which his state of mindgave rise, Tasso fled from Ferrara, resolving to seeksafety under the roof of his sister Cornelia, who, havinglost her husband, resided with her family in the paternalmansion at Sorrento. Disguising himself in thedress of a shepherd, he succeeded, after many difficultiesand privations, in reaching his native place, wherehe introduced himself to his sister as a messenger fromher brother, who, being in imminent risk of his life, hadsent to demand her assistance and protection. Corneliaanxiously enquired into the perils that surroundedher brother ; and so lively was the picture which thepoet drew of his own imaginary dangers that CorneliaB0RR1 WTO. 277fainted al the recital. Affected by this touching proofof her love, Tasso gradually disclosed himself, and wasreceived by her with every demonstration of affection.He remained at Sorrento for some time under the assumedcharacter of a distant relative, and passed muchof his time in wandering through its woods, in companywith his nephews and nieces, upon the latter of whom,from the tallness of their stature, he bestows, in one ofhis letters to his sister, the epithet of " gigantesse,"Prelate dio per me, e bacciate le gigantesse. " Theunsettled mind of Tasso, and the love of excitement towhich his residence in cities and courts had given birth,did not permit him long to remain a wanderer amidstthe beauties of Sorrento. He resided with his sisterduring the remainder of the summer, at the close ofwhich he departed for Rome. Yet, though a voluntaryexile from his native home, its delightful recollectionsstill hovered round him ; and in a letter addressed tohis sister, many years after this period, he expresses awish that he might once more in her society breathehis native air, and once again refresh his wearythoughts amidst the sublime and delicious scenerywhich nature had lavished round his home with sounsparing a hand. The aspiration was vain — theillustrious poet was fated never more to visit thescene of his birth.Sorrento can boast of not a few remains of antiquity.Some inscriptions near the principal gate, and the remnantsof various columns, collected in a sort of openmuseum, are only, as would appear, among a part ofits riches. The Roman poets have celebrated it for the278 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.excellence of its wines, which, according to Pliny,were, from their lightness and salubrity, admirablyadapted to invalids. Martial has recorded them inone of his epigrams,Serpentine bibis 1 nee myrrbina picta, nee aurumSome, daunt calices haec tibi vina sums. "and Ovid mentions theSerpentine generous palmer colles. "In modern times the wines of Sorrento have lost theirhigh character; "but," says Sir R. C. Hare withconsiderable gusto, " the Florentines may justly boastof another article unknown to their predecessors ofantiquity, and unrivalled perhaps in the whole world,namely their fatted calves, which exceed, in delicacyand flavour, any I ever tasted, and are transported toNaples as the greatest treat which Epicurean luxurycan procure."To enhance the value of this information it may beadded that the bacon is so peculiarly fine that itshogs have been denominated, par excellence, "thecitizens of Sorrento," though not permitted as in oursister Isle to divide the household accommodations withthe tenants. The ancient Greek custom of a numberof generations residing under the same roof is stillretained by the Serpentine, whose social virtues areworthy all commendation.PLAIN AND BAY OF SORRENTO.Tall thriving tree confessed the fruitful mould ;Tim verdant apple ripens here to gold;Here the blue fig with luscious juice o'erflows,\\ iii deepest red the toll pomegranate glows,The branches bend beneath the weighty pear,And silver olives Boorish all the year.Home's Odyssey.The approach to Sorrento, the bold picturesquefeatures of the scenery, with some of the poetical associationsto which it gives birth, have been dwelt uponin the preceding pages. If thus celebrated on one sidefor its rich and variegated views of wood and water,its castellated and romantic town, seated on the steepacclivities, we are presented on another with landscapesof a wholly different character. The union hereafforded, as seen in the adjoining plate, of the noblestand most characteristic traits of the Italian clime, thebright, extensive, views of plain, and vale, and mountain,rich in architectural and classic beauty — ofbeauty in decay amidst the still renewed and glowingaspect of external nature — might well call forth theenthusiastic genius of the Salvator, the Claudes, thePoussins, or the Wilson, of every age.No place in the world can supply more absorbingsubjects for the eye and the soul of the tourist, whethercontemplating the clear expanse of sky, and earth,and waters spread around him, or wandering in spiritto those far-off ages which present us with other forms,280 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.and more gigantic shadows of human greatness andchivalrous exploit. It is round this classic region appearthe ruined monuments of cities, like Amalfi, oncequeens of the sea, and which long lay slumbering undiscoveredin the depths of silence and of time. Besidesthe famed Salvator, numbers of distinguishedartists, before him and since, have offered up theirgenius and hearts' devotion to nature about the shoresand the picturesque vicinity of Sorrento. It wasequally the resort of those dark spirits — Caravaggio,Lanfranc, and Spagnoletto, as of the milder genius ofDomenichino and Guido, who, with other painters,were frequently driven from their occupations at Naplesby the terror of assassination from the hand oftheir fiercer rivals. On the same coasts, overpoweredwith fatigue and fever, and flying for his life, MichaelAngelo da Caravaggio sank exhausted, and terminatedhis dark career ; while, at the same time, by asingular coincidence, his countryman, Polidoro daCaravaggio, fell a victim to the knife of the assassin,in the person of his own servant, on the very nightprevious to his setting sail from Messina to Naples.Nor, in the sister art, have the enchanting environsof Sorrento been consecrated only by the poetic geniusof the Tasso. From occasional allusions in theirworks, as well as from historic mention of their visitsto the city of Naples, both Petrarch and Boccaccioappear to have been no less familiar with the naturalbeauties than with the classic recollections attachedto these shores. The celebrated writer who, beforethe days of Sannazaro, renounced at the tomb ofIM.AIN ANN II VY 01 BORBOTT0. 281Virgil the Sordid pursuits to which his father had destinedhim, would hardly be a stranger to the neighbouringscenery of Baiae and Sorrento ; and his parentcould no where have chosen a more unfit residence forBoccaccio's study of the law than the gay and dissipatedNaples. If before addicted to literature andthe muses, he here breathed the very air of poetry andromance. As little was the temper or pursuits of itssociety, as is observed by an elegant writer, adapted tofoster a taste for dry, legal, studies; at a court, too,whose monarch was himself a man of letters, and thefriend of Petrarch. The favorite resort of scholars,poets, and artists, it was here he met some of his mostdistinguished fellow-countrymen ; and love and fame,preferring their most seductive claims, soon confirmedhim in his bias of becoming a man of letters.While engaged in opening for himself a new path todistinction, Petrarch, accepting the King's invitation,arrived in Naples; and the splendour with whichhe was received, the applause which followed hispublic examination by King Robert, the nobleoration he delivered in praise of poetry, and the gloryof his subsequent coronation, had full force on Boccaccio'simagination, already fired with the desireof distinction. Petrarch, from this period, becamethe model of his admiring contemporary ; but the sameyear was to behold Boccaccio occupied with a stillmore absorbing, but less reputable, pursuit.Happening, on the evening preceding Lent, to be atchurch, he was attracted by the extreme beauty of theyoung princess Maria, a natural daughter of King282 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Robert. It was the first time he had seen her ; but theexquisite perfection of her form and countenance madean indelible impression on his mind, and he willinglyresigned himself to the fascination. Unfortunately,like the mistress of Petrarch, the object of Boccaccio'spassion had been for some time married, and was thewife of a Neapolitan gentleman of rank. But neitherthis circumstance, nor her station, placed her at aninsuperable distance from the vows of the poet ; andfew stronger proofs could be given of the almost totaldisorganization which had taken place in society, thanour knowledge of the fact that the princess receivedand yielded to his addresses. Their interviews werecelebrated by Boccaccio in various parts of his works;but, as it has been excellently observed by Ginguenet,we read the accounts which the author has given ofhis passion with little interest. His connexion withthe princess was prompted by vanity, and was not oneof those passions which affects the whole course of life,and interests us in the recital of its effects in the sameproportion as it influenced those whom it possessed.Dante and Petrarch loved not the daughters of kings ;but the history of their lives, as well as their works, isfull of Beatrice and Laura. These are the true queens;and Maria, disguised under the name of Fiametta, hasthe common look and air of a loose woman.It was in obedience to her wishes that Boccacciocomposed the romance of " Fiametta," that of " Filo-copy," and his celebrated poem the " These." Buthe was suddenly interrupted in his pleasures by a letterfrom his father, then in the decline of life ; and Gio-PLais \si> BAT OF BORER5TO. 283anni obeyed the summons, and returned to Florence,but with a mind wholly occupied with the object hehad left behind. While all around him were strugglingeither for power or liberty, with energies onlyfelt at such times, he was impatient at being interruptedin his compositions, or was languidly sighingafter the princess.The passion with which he had inspired that ladywas not inferior in warmth to his own. She is representedas suffering, during his absence, the most violentsorrow, and as having been narrowly saved fromdestroying herself by the caution of one of her attendants.Boccaccio was not ignorant of her attachmentand ardent wishes for his return ; and it was onlyby the composition of the romance of " Ameto" that hecould console himself for the privations he suffered inthe house of his father. At length, on his return toNaples, he found the princess as devotedly attached tohim as formerly, and more supreme than ever in thecourtly circles of the city.It will be right to add that in maturer years hedeeply repented of this connection, and of the mannerin which he passed much of his time at this period."We need not wait," says the biographer alreadyalluded to, "to point the moral of Boccaccio's life,so admirably adapted to illustrate the universal lessonsof experience. There were few things wanting to hisold age to make it happy ; he was venerated by hiscountrymen, enjoyed the blessings of freedom andleisure, and was crowned with fame and literary honors ;but he was a prey to regret ; the fruits even of his wisestTHE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.dom, long treasured up with successful care, werestolen from him by a superstitious feeling consequenton former irregularities, and the repose he sought forand obtained was broken by a vain and anxious wishto recal the works which he had sent into the worldand which were doing mischief before his eyes to theobjects he now most venerated"*Awakening associations of a sterner and darker character,in the immediate vicinity of the shore of Sorrentorises the little isle of Capri, of infamous celebrity, inthe days of imperial Rome, as the favorite retreat ofher most licentious and sanguinary masters. At oncethe scene of dishonored virtue and beauty, and of thetorments inflicted upon the best and noblest spiritsthat survived the fall of the republic, the subterraneanpassages and terrific chambers of the dead,penetrating its rocky skies, still bear ample testimonyto Capri's having been the imperial lair of the mostwily and dreaded of Rome's prolific race of despots,whose very name conjures up the idea of all we canpicture in the hyena" of his species.Stabbing's Lives of the Italian Poets, vol. i. pp. 258.VIETUI.Ne qui giaccion pauliChe del impnro lettMankind ai cape ignndiNuvol di inorbi infest :E il meriggio a* bei collAsciuga i doni molli.HakimThe balmy spirit of the western galeEternal breathes on fruits untaught to fail :The same mild season gives the blooms to blow,The buds to harden, and the fruits to grow.Odyssey, B. VII.On the borders of the Bay of Salerno, midway betweenthat place and La Cava, appears the picturesquesite of Vietri, on an eminence overlooking one of themost beautiful valleys, for its size, in Italy. Skirtedby the road on one side, the approach at every stepbecomes more and more interesting; but the silenceand solitude of its mountain scenery is broken, as youdraw nigh, by the incessant bustle and activity arisingfrom the business of a paper manufactory, of which themills are put in motion by a stream that flows alongthe margin of the hills below. The vicinity, however,is diversified and enlivened by a number of variegatedand picturesque dwellings, in the Italian style, anddistributed in little groups at intervals over the hillsand grassy glades, — some on apparently inaccessibleand rocky eminences, projecting from the mountain286 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.heights above; and others on gentle slopes, whichbreathe fragrance and amenity from their green, sunny,banks. The hills around are also beautifully clothedwith verdure, fruits, or flowers, almost to their summits,which are nearly perpendicular, and afford a delightfulrelief to the somewhat monotonous character of theadjacent scenery.Salerno is seen rising over a fine sweep of the bay,along the base of majestic hills, with hermitages andlittle cottages, placed, as at Vietri, on inaccessibleprojections. It is, however, by no means considered sosalubrious as the latter place; and all the more wealthyinhabitants, during the summer months, are eager toexchange their residences for the fine bracing air ofthis little village. In proof of the bad air of Salerno,it is observed by Mr. Forth, " I remarked here anumber of apothecaries, who are said to adhere verygenerally to their old Saracenic pharmacy."Cetera.Mineral rive Salvage,Chuse bosch, perth prate,Specie ambrosia auricle piagge.Chiabhera.Situated on the same coast, but possessed of attractionsof a different character, the secluded and unfrequentedvillage of Cetera is more distinguished forits site, and the wildly picturesque and magnificentviews it affords from the sea, than for its historical orantiquarian character. It lies between Salerno . andAmalfi, and is almost inaccessible, except by water.A narrow, broken, and seldom-frequented path, followingthe irregular projections and recesses of themountains, the base of which is washed by the sea,runs from Vietri, and winds up among the cliffs, onthe brink of which is seen the little hamlet, butenclosed as it were in a natural bay, with the majesticmountains towering above. These, if less stupendousthan the Alps, are more agreeable to the eye and theimagination, from the circumstance of being richlycultivated by the little peasant colony which they shelterand almost shut out from the world ; not a footof ground but is made to contribute to the support orthe comfort of its cultivators.J. IladdoD, Printer,Castle Street, I'insbury.