THE TOURISTINITALYc vjsyTHOMAS ROSCOE.MJILLUSTRATED FROM DRAWINGSBYS. PROUT, ESQ. F.S.A.TestyPAINTER IN WATER COLOURS TO HIS MAJESTY.5*Voi cui fortuna ha post in mano il frenoDelle belle con trade.Di cic nulla pieta par cic vi strings,Che fan qui tante peOcgl'llM spade 'l'erche '1 verde tCRCBODel barbarian langue d dining?Petrarch.LONDONPull I8H1 D JOB 1 IN Props IETORS,BY ROBERT JENNINGS IND WILLIAM CHAPLIN,I H i kP81 i»i ■1 83 1LONDON:PRINTED UY THOMAS I) WISOX. WHITEFKIARS.TOTHE HONOURABLE LADY Graham,THIS VOLUMEOFTHE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL,isRESPECTFULLY DEDICATED.TO THE READER.If Italy has been beautifully and appropriatelytermed the garden of Europe, Rome and Venicemay lay no less fair a claim to be regarded as thetwo noblest conservatories of its choicest productions.They teem with exhaustless treasures — the fruits ofits intellectual clime ; unrivalled specimens of thatsupremacy of genius whose vigorous germ and rapidgrowth half realize our dreams of the glory andfascination of the old Grecian and Roman worlds.The revival and perfection, indeed, of art and learningin Rome and Venice vied with their influenceover the spiritual and temporal fortunes of mankind.It is for this — the early and exalted fame of Italy inthe intellectual race of nations — the cherished hopesof that Italy we love to picture as great in freedomis she has shone in arms and arts — that the authorpresumes to offer no apology to English tourists forrecurring to the same consecrated scenes — to thesame high names, — nor impugns the sincerity of theirrd lor what i- most lofty and ennobling in classicind heroic recollection, bj hurrying too rapidly over[talis ikI. W Fiat eye bul-till Lords to liiupon that land of the south it sky, Its waters, itsVIolive groves, its sunny hills, covered with vines andflowers ; and still more, its monuments of past andmightier ages — wonders of art no longer to beequalled — fragments of an older and greater world !Or where may we beguile pleasant hours, or indulgeloftier aspirations, than amidst the sceneswhere genius and valour carried their patrioticdaring and achievements to the highest summits ofhuman greatness and devotion ?On the Forum, or on the Bridge of Sighs —among the deserted fane or ruined palaces of thecrownless queens of the earth and of the ocean, thethoughts of the tourist still dwell with melancholypleasure; and "Time, war, flood, and fire" havevainly dealt their fury upon cities whose recollectionspresent us with all that is most splendidand daring in thought and action — in the arts ofpeace or the exploits of war.Rome and Venice are not places to be passedover in a season. Mirrors of wisdom to futureages — as full of moral doctrine as of monuments ofmightier days — the utter extremes of human powerand weakness are typified in their history and theirdoom :Their doors sealed up, and silent as the nightThe dwellings of the illustrious dead !"I ON TENTS.Venice .The Albi PalaceTitian's HouseThe Dogana .The Rialto .Lord Byron's PalaceThe Piazza di San MarcoThe Church of St. MarkThe CampanileThe Library of St. MarkRomeThe Bridge and Castle of St. Angelo, the Vatican, andSt Peter'sMount AventineThe Fountains of St. Peter's, and part of the ColonnadesTemple of PeaceThe Forum .The Temple of Vesta, and House of RienziTemple of MarsThe Temple of PallasThe Borghese PalaceRimini .Tivoli .ivWi CasteHaoaTerniNarni .Lake and Town of LogoPage6?ISO1 1;17"1 982] lLIST OF PLATES,ENGRAVED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF MR. CHARLES HEATH.1. VENICE.2. THE Albi PALACE.3. TITIAN'S HOUSE, THE Pisans AND BARBERIGO PALACES.4. THE DOGANA DA MARE.5. THE RIALTO.C LORD Baron's PALACE.7. ST. MARK'S PLACE.8. INTERIOR OF ST. MARK'S CHURCH.9. THE CAMPANILE.10. THE Literary.11. ROME.12. THE BRIDGE AND CASTLE OF ST. ANGELO.13. MOUNT AVENTINE, from the PONTE Motto.14. FOUNTAINS OF ST. PETERS, AND PART OF THE Colonnades.15. TEMPLE OF PEACE.16. THE FORUM.17. TEMPLE OF VESTA AND HOUSE OF RIENZI.18. TEMPLE OF MARS.19. TEMPLE OF Pallas.20. THE BORGHESE PALACE.21. RIMINI.22. SIBYL'S TEMPLE, Tivoli.23. Civitas Castella.24. FALLS OF TERNI.25. BRIDGE OF AUGUSTUS, NARNI.36. TOWN AND LAKE OF LUGO.VENICE.See Venice rise with endless beauties crown'd,And as a world within herself is found :Hail, Queen of Italy; for years to comeThe mighty rival of immortal Rome !Sannazaro.To the eye of the stranger the aspect of Venice first presentsitself like some vision of the deep, while her historyfills the mind with awe and wonder at the stern and fearfulrealities and heroic recollections with which it abounds.She stands alone and unparalleled in the annals of Italy'stempestuous republics, — those hypocrites of liberty, whichrecoiled from foreign despotism only the more effectually-to exalt themselves, by harassing and oppressing each.>tlier. While torn by internal factions and successive,revolutions, the rest of Italy wielded at will their fiercedemocracies, Venice preserved unshaken her " high andpalmy state," based on the deep, invisible foundations of!.< r more than Machiavellian system, — the combinationof petty tyrants, which, unlike that of slaves, seldom failsto accomplish the objects it has in view.The splendour and the power of aristocracy were nevermoreterribly developed than when the noon-tide of Venetianprosperity brought into serpent vigour and activitythe policy of her secret tribunals and carried terror intothe hearts at once of her children and her foes. To theinquiring and philosophic reader no government suppliern2 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.more singular materials for speculation : a government inwhich poets, painters, orators, and historians, vied withits statesmen and its warriors in earning patriotism tothe loftiest mark of ambition and renown.In youth she was all glory, — a new Tyre, —Her very by-word sprung from victory,The " Planter of the Lion," which through fireAnd blood she bore o'er subject earth and sea;Though making many slaves, herself still free,And Europe's bulwark 'gainst the Ottomite;Witness Troy's rival, Candia ! vouch it, yeImmortal waves that saw Lepanto's fight 'For ye are names no time nor tyranny can blight.Thus, distinct alike in its political as in its naturalfeatures from all other cities of the earth, Venice — theRome of the Ocean" — might well awaken the admirationand enthusiasm of England's noble poet. Its devotedlove to Tasso, and its having afforded a sanctuaryto the great Dante, were sufficient in his eyes to makeit hallowed ground. He gazed upon her lofty towers,her spires, her palaces, with those splendid cupolas, seenrising from the bosom of the waves, with a degree ofveneration that seems to have been early inspired :I loved her from my boyhood — she to meWas as a fairy city of the heart,Rising like water columns from the sea,Of joy the sojourn, and of wealth the mart;And Otway, Radcliffe, Schiller, Shakspeare's art,Had stamp'd her image in me, and even so,Although I found her thus we did nrt part,Perchance even dearer in her day of woeThan when she was a boast, a marvel, and a show.Nor was the actual grandeur of her edifices, or the imposingTONICS. 3effect of their pictorial embellishment; less in unison withthe associations which history and romance had conferredupon her in Byron's eyes. All that is most magnificent,heroic, or appalling -, the Rialto, St. Mark's, and itsbrazen steeds, and the Bridge of Sighs, have been commemoratedin his immortal verse. But these are familiarto our readers ; and we now proceed to present themwith a rapid view of some of the most memorable eventsand achievements in Venetian story.The Venetians arrived at their highest national glorywhen the capital of the eastern empire acknowledgedthem its conquerors. The wealth which that eventpoured into their treasuries made them the richest peoplein Europe — the fame which they acquired by it madethem the most respected and renowned. But it isdoubtful whether it was not the forerunner of the worstdisasters which the republic was destined to suffer. Inthan a century after this triumph, which renderedit in the eyes of Europe the great barrier against thejx.wcr of the infidel, it had to support three sharp andbloody contests with the increasing strength of theTurks, and had Suffered a disheartening defeat in all.The celebrated Selim the First, and his son, Solimantie Second, carried on successful wars with both nativeand foreign enemies ; and the Ottoman power, evenacquiring fresh force, began more imminently to threatentin proud republicans. After forcing them to pay tributefor Cyprus, Selim the Second concerned the project ofregaining,' entire po^o^'nm <.f that rich and valuableisland. While Ik was carrying on preparations for thisenterprise, the Venetian! irene still further discomfitedr 24 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.by the explosion of their arsenal, which, in the night ofSeptember 13th, 1569, tore up their walls and towers,part of their streets, and four churches. The nobles,astonished, and not knowing the cause of the frightfultumult, ran to arms, and the whole population of thecity believing that an enemy had forced and throwndown the fortifications hastened to secure themselves byflight.The storm at length broke forth, and the Venetiansfound themselves opposed to the whole strength of theMoslem, whose forces were seen covering the neighbouringshores of the gulf. The siege of Famagouste immediatelyfollowed, and the noblest spirit of the republicwas manifested in the defence. After a desperate conflict,Bragadino, the chief of the garrison, having neitherthe means of subsisting his people, nor of supporting anyfurther attacks, accepted the capitulation offered by ,the Ottoman leader. A few days were spent insettling the preliminaries ; and the Moslem , expressing hishigh admiration of the Venetian captains, invited them tohis tent. Bragadino accordingly, and several of his officers,proceeded one evening to the entrenchment ; the formeron horseback, clad in the scarlet robes of a Venetian magistrate,and shaded by a parasol of the same colour Thepacha received them with great courtesy, but demandedhostages to secure the fulfilment of the capitulation. Thechief haughtily replied, that the honour of Venice mightbe well trusted in ; on which Mustapha, in a burst of fury,instantly ordered several of the officers to be strangled,only sparing Bragadino for greater cruelties. After theunfortunate captain had been forced to see the executionVENICE. 5of his friends, his ears were cut off, and he was ledthrough the town as a malefactor. He was then placedon a scaffold, fastened to a stake, and flayed alive, theinfamous Mustapha enjoying the spectacle from a balcony,and afterwards causing the skin of the brave Venetianto be stuffed and paraded about the streets withallthe insignia of the magistracy.The battle of Lepanto shortly followed this event, andmodern history records few engagements which it doesnot surpass in celebrity. It was in the same situationthat the fate of Rome was decided by the battle of Actium; and though the latter was productive of the mostimportant consequences, and the former was followedby none, it is doubtful to which warlike fame wouldgive the greater glory. Certainly never had greatercourage or skill been displayed in naval warfare than inthis engagement. During the chief part of the day thecombined Venetian and Spanish forces and the wholestrength of the Ottoman fleet were opposed in close andincessant combat, and when the latter fled from the strife,it had lost near two hundred vessels and thirty thousandmen. Venice, whatever glory she had acquired by thisvictory, reaped no advantage from it, and finding thatHi confederacy she had formed would not effectually aidher in the principal object she had in view, the govern -ment made peace with the Ottoman, and ceded the disputedpossessions.In mentioning this peace with the Turks, we are reminded<>f the Strict line of pol'n \ which the Wm tianinvariably pursued, in spite of the opinions which wereat the time prevalent among their neighbours. The woi>THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.ship of their churches was conducted with costly grandeur 5their religious profession Alas devout and orthodox, butthey would never let the church interfere with their publicacts, and it was but once, says M. Daru, that theymade any concession to the Pope, and that once waswhen they could only effect their political views by thesemeans, Their conduct in respect to the Jesuits serveswell to illustrate this feature in the character of the republic.They suffered them to reside in the state, butthe decree which admitted them was to be renewed everythree years or cease, and they were only permitted to inhabitthe convent which they ad purchased with their ownwealth. In every respect, it is said, they were brandedwith the same marks of suspicion as the Jews, and inall public processions were obliged to march betweenthe banners of St. Mark and St. Theodore, emblems, itwas said, of the two columns between which malefactorswere executed. The most careful watch, at the sametime, was kept over their proceedings. The mother ofa young man, who had professed his intention of enteringthe order, found that he had, at the same time, made apromise of all he possessed to the fathers. She accordinglycame before the magistrates and acquainted themwith the circumstance ; an order was immediately despatchedto the rector to appear before them, and onhis not attending to it, he was thrown into prison, andmade to repent his conduct in chains.The elevation of Camillo Borghese to the pontificalchair under the name of Paul V. gave birth to the mostremarkable struggle which the republic had ever sustained.The new pope was determined to exercise hisVENICE. 7power to the utmost, and the Venetians were resolvedto follow their usual customs in all ecclesiastical matters.Paul had been known to say, that if he were pope,and the Venetians gave him any cause of uneasiness, hewould at once launch against them the thunders of thechurch : " and I," said the ambassador Leonardo Donato,if I were doge, would despise your anathemas." It wasremarkable enough that they were now both in thesituations alluded to, and both prepared for putting theirrespective threats into execution. The first cause ofcomplaint with the pope was the two fundamental lawsof the republic which forbad the building of churcheswithout the permission of the government, and thealienation of estates in favour of ecclesiastics. He nexttook offence at the imprisonment of a monk who hadviolated a female under circumstances of great atrocity,and demanded that he should be judged by his ownorder, which the council not only refused, but shortlyafter arrested the abbe of Nerves for similar dissolutenessof manners. To revenge himself for these affronts,the pope protested against the election of Leonardo Do-natoto the ducal throne, and the contest began with aviolence unknown before. At last the pope put thewhole state, 1 7th April, 1 GOO', under the ban of excommunication.Venice was astonished but not terrified atthe announcement. The council ordered the religiousservices to continue as usual, and were obeyed by alltl ■ secular clergy, but do! b] the monks, <>r the Jesuits,vrbo were immediately expelled in consequent i oftheir endeavour to evade the decree. After ■ long pon-wellsupported on both rick i, the < combatants found8 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.it necessary to enter into negotiations for peace. Variousstates offered to act as arbitrators, and, by themediation of the French, the republic was induced to resignthe two priests to the judgments of the church, andthe ill satisfied pontiff to accept of this tribute to hisauthority, and agree to remove the excommunication,though Venice retained all her laws and boasted independenceundiminished. ThusThro' many an age in the mid-sea she dwelt,From her retreat calmly contemplatingThe changes of the Earth, herself unchanged.Before her passed, as in an awful dream,The mightiest of the might; . "What are these,Clothed in their purple? O'er the globe they flingTheir monstrous shadows ; and, while yet we speak,Phantom-like, vanish with a dreadful scream !What — but the last that styled themselves the Caesar?And who in long array (look where they come;Their gestures menacing so far and wide)Wear the green turban and the heron's plume ?Who — but the Caliphs ? followed fast by shapesAs new and strange — Emperor, and King, and Czar,And Soldan, each, with a gigantic stride,Trampling on all the flourishing works of peaceTo make his greatness greater, and inscribeHis name in blood — some, men of steel, steel-clad ;Others, nor long, alas, the interval,In light and gay attire, with brow sereneWielding Jove's thunder, scattering sulphurous fire]mingled with darkness; and, among the rest,Lo, one by one, passing continually,Those who assume, a sway beyond them all ;Men grey with age, each in a triple crown,And in his tremulous hands grasping the keysThat can alone, as he would signify,Uidock Heaven's gate.Rogers.VENICE. 9But the severe and determined policy out of which thisresistance sprung was not a sufficient safeguard againstthe evils which were about to assail the republic. Sosplendid hitherto had been her condition, that even thecities through which a portion of her wealth had to passwere regarded by other states with wonder and envy.The citizens of Bruges, it is said, emulated the pompand luxury of the proudest courts ; and when Joanna,wife of Philip le Bel, visited them, she angrily exclaimed,at seeing the costly dresses and ornaments ofthe merchants' wives, " I thought that I had been theonly queen here, but I find that there are many hundredsmore." The same observation would have applied toother cities as well as to Bruges ; and if it was thuswith places into which only the drops fell from thegolden vessel of Venetian wealth, how are we to estimatethe prosperity of Venice herself r The advantages thus beniwere also supported by the determined feeling of thepeople. They saw the true principles on which alone theirgrandeur could be permanently fixed, and they followedthem too often, it is melancholy to add, to the violation oftruth and freedom ; but at other times with a keen, forewisdom, which has never since been so long anduniformly practised by a whole people. Tims, whenthreatened by the league of Camera. they came forwardand lent the best part of their fortunes to the state 3 andwhile the king, r "f France had to pay forty-two per cent.f«>r Hie money he expended in the war, Venice couldraise millions at five per cent. When attached by theI they practised a-till greater city, andvoluntarily brought sufficient to the public treasury to rais10 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.additional forces ; and when the struggle with Ferrarapressed hard upon the usual revenues of the state, theynot only cheerfully obeyed the first demands of the senate,but offered their jewels, their gold and silver, and otherarticles of luxury, to aid the cause of their country. Andthus supported by a deep, fearless, and unsparing policyon the one side, and by so wise a patriotism on the other,Venice might fairly hope to withstand every enemy,whether spiritual or temporal — whether the bandedprinces of Europe, or the fierce and ambitious Moslem.But Columbus and Vasco de Gama humbled a powerwhich neither popes, prince?, nor sultans could unsettleor overthrow. Their discoveries tore away its pomp andglory, as the diffusion of knowledge in a subsequent agehumbled those of Rome.Thus did Venice rise,Thus flourish, till the unwelcome tidings came,That in the Tagus had arrived a fleetFrom India, from the region of the Sun,Fragrant with spices— that a way was found,A channel opened, and the golden streamTurned to enrich another. Then she feltHer strength departing, yet awhile maintainedHer state, her splendour ; till a tempest shookAll things most held in honour among men,All things the giant with the scythe had spared,To their foundations, and at once she fell;She who had stood yet longer than the lastOf the Four Kingdoms — who, as in an Ark,Had floated down, amid a thousand wrecks,Uninjured, from the Old World to the New,From the last glimpse of civilized life — to whereLight shone again, and with the blaze of noon.ROGERS.VENICE. 11At the period when the state was engaged in a warwith the Archduke Ferdinand, and regarded with a mostjealous eye the inclination which Spain had manifestedto assist the prince in his operations, a singular sceneoccurred at Venice, for which neither contemporary norsubsequent writers were able to account. One day,about the middle of the month of May, in the year 1618,a great number of persons, totally unknown in the city,were publicly executed in the Place of St. Mark ; numbersmore were brought to the scaffold the day after,and no one was able to say either whence they came, orfor what crime they were punished. At length rumourswere afloat that a frightful conspiracy had been formed,in which measures were taken for exterminating the nobility,burning Venice to the ground, and overthrowingthe republic. Hundreds of the traitors, it was said, wereconfined in the dungeons of the Council of Ten. Besidesthose who had suffered in the Place of Saint Mark,several were supposed to have been executed during thenight, while bodies seen floating about on the canals andnear the shores rendered it certain that numbers hadbeen drowned, or otherwise put to death and cast intothe water. All Venice was filled with terror at the ideaof the perils which had been so narrowly escaped j andcitizens of even, - rank were occupied with investigatingthe circumstances which might had t<> the discovery ofthe truth: but the Council of Ten preserved a mysterious[1 i every inquiry which the painfulcuriosity of tir public prompted, and the people wenmffi red to decide m they might <>n tin real origin of thisstrange aflsir.J 2 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Thus left free to conjecture, the populace was notlong in determining on whom to fix their suspicions, andthe Spanish ambassador was obliged to save himself fromtheir fury by a precipitate flight. His escape served toconfirm them in this opinion of his guilt, and whether theidea was false or true, the council still left them withoutany clue to resolve the mystery. To increase, however,both their wonder and their doubt, another Spanish ambassadorwas allowed to settle in Venice — the whole affairremained unexplained, and no public documents appearedto record its occurrence; but when the agitationcaused by the circumstance had nearly subsided, andabout five months after it happened, the senate gave ordersfor a public thanksgiving to Providence for havingsaved the republic from destruction.This extraordinary occurrence, it is strange to relate,was never cleared up, and what is still stranger, many ofthe politicians of the time believed it to be altogether afabrication of the Council of Ten to favour its secretpolicy with regard to Spain, and its other suspectedallies. In a letter from the French ambassador to hisbrother, quoted by the historian of Venice, in his relationof these events, we find him broadly asserting hisbelief, that no conspiracy whatever had existed, an i thatthe council had only suffered the report to gain groundto colour its own barbarous acts.But the deep and. hitherto successful projects of thismysterious government were in a few years to be provedaltogether unequal to meet the new spirit of enterprisethen abroad in the world. The instability of thegovernment, and an universal corruption of manners, con-venice.13tribute still more to the changes on the eve of takingplace, and which were to reduce the once magnificentVenice to the lowest rank among nations. The degradationof the nobles at the commencement of theeighteenth century may be proved by the fact that theRidotto, an immense building devoted to games of hazard,was the privileged resort of the patricians. Seventy <»reighty tables were placed in its vast halls, at which thenobles only had the right of playing. Seated there, cladin their robes of state and with their faces uncovered,the especial privilege of these honourable gamesters, theynot only played for themselves, but were the capitalistsof others, who wished to engage in such enterprises,and were paid either by the year, month, or hour forthe accommodation they thus rendered to inferior speculators.Such was the state of manners in Venice when it hadto meet the shock of the French revolution. For manyyears past, the favourite maxim of its statesmen hadbeen, to preserve peace at any sacrifice, and tiny hadin consequence suffered their fortifications to dttheir arsenal to remain without defence, and their fleetin the same condition as when they had to fear no< ii' my or rival. When the war between France andthe other states of Europe commenced, tiny would faina« ted on the maxim tiny had thus devoutly < m-braced and determined to preserve ■ strict neutrality.Bvf they wore quickly undeceived in their hopes ■. andVerona and Padua had n<» sooner yielded to the Frenchthan they saw then approach within sight <>f their ownshores. < >n the 30th of April, 1797, s memorable Hay14 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.for Venice, the Doge summoned all the different departmentsof the government to deliberate on the situationof tli? state. Various were the opinions advanced on theoccasion : midnight had already past, and they had formedno determination as to what measures they should pursue,when a letter was delivered from the commander of theirflotilla, announcing that the French had already commencedpreparations for a blockade. Consternation wasvisible in even* countenance ; and the doge, agitated andtrembling, walked up and down the apartment, exclaiming," This night even we are not sure of sleeping tranquillyin our beds !" How changed was the Venetianspirit from what it was when the blind old Dandolo facedthe batteries of Constantinople ! It was at first decidedthat the operations of the French should be resisted, butacounter resolution reduced this determination to nothing; and the procurator Pesaro, almost the only memberof'the state who seemed to feel the degradation ofhis country, sighed deeply, and said, with tears in hiseyes, " I see the fate of my country ! — I cannot succourit ; but a brave man finds a home any where : I mustseek mine in Switzerland."Jn a subsequent meeting it was debated whether achange in the constitution might not serve to removesome of the evils which were hanging over the state.The grand council was assembled to deliberate on theproject. The palace on this occasion was surroundedwith troops and cannon ; the workmen of the arsenal,and different companies of citizens, were all under arms ;while patrols hastening along the streets, their faces displayingsigns of fear and amazement, served to spreadVENICE. 15apprehension through even* quarter of the city. Six hundredand nineteen senators met in this hour of terror toresolve on such measures as their situation allowed themto take. The doge, bowed with affliction, read a proposition,the purport of which was, to consider, withBonaparte, what changes might be most profitably madein the government. A mournful silence succeeded ; themeasure was put to the vote, and four hundred and ninety-eightmembers of the council declared themselves in itsfavour. When the report of this determination was presentedto Napoleon, he replied, that unless the death ofhis captain Laughed, and some others who had fallen inalate affair with the Venetian fleet, were revenged bythe immediate punishment of those who had authorizedthe assault, he would in fifteen days enter Venice swordin hand. Neither the doge nor his councillors had anymeans of resistance to propose, and they therefore gave-their commissioners full power to treat with the generalon his own terms. They found Bonaparte at Milan, andthere a treaty was entered into that put an end to thesovereignty of the great council, which was thenceforthto reside in the whole body of the citizens.On the 12th of May, while the council was holdingits final session, and the doge was lamenting the miserablecondition to which he was reduced, the sound ofmusketry was heard near the palace. The most frightfulconfusion immediately prevailed throughout the chamber.Every one believed himself on the point of beingmassacred; and without farther <l< bate, and more likemad m« ii than senator debating for the good of their16 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.falling country, they hastily gave their suffrages anddeparted.The people who surrounded the palace, seeing a signaldisplayed at the windows, which announced to them thetermination of the debate, expressed their feelings onthe occasion in loud and contradictory vociferations.While some uttered exclamations in favour of the French,others were as eager in their lamentations over the fallof their ancient constitution j but all united in contributingto the confusion of the moment, by abandoningthemselves to pillage or licence. The night approached,and still these disorders remained unrepressed, till, abouttwo hours after midnight, a small detachment of soldiersassembled on the Rialto, and some cannon being postedthere, the mob was dispersed. In the morning a proclamationwas issued, prohibiting, under pain of death,any opposition to the decree which had been passed.On the 16th of May, 1797, three thousand Frenchtroops disembarked on the Place Saint Mark, in themidst of the wild shouts of one part of the population,and the mournful tears and lamentations of the other.The demolition of the prisons of the inquisition was thefirst act of the new government ; the burning of thebook of gold, consecrated to the enrolment of • he nobility,was the next ; while the Lion of Saint Mark, insteadof the inscription which designated his sacredcharacter, was now made to bear the motto of " TheRights of Max."Before St. Mark still glow his steeds of brass,Their gilded collars glittering in the sun ;YKXICE. 1/But is not Doria's menace come to pass ?Are they not bridled? — Venice, lost and won,Her thirteen hundred years of freedom done,Sinks, like a sea-weed, into whence she rose !Better be whelm'd beneath the waves, and shun,Even in destruction's depth, her foreign foes,From whom submission wrings an infamous repose.But Venice was not yet reduced to its lowest stage ofdegradation. It had fallen beneath a conqueror, but ithad never yet been made an object of barter betweenone master and another. To this, however, it was nowreduced. By the treaty of Campo Formio, Venice wasceded to Austria, whose forces entered the city onJanuary 18, 1798. The state inquisition was re-established,and Pesaro, who had made such a display of hispatriotism in the scenes which preceded the final humiliationof his country, actually reappeared in the characterof an Austrian commissary. It was before himthat the humbled patricians had to take the oaths ofallegiance to their new master ; and the ex-doge, who,though too weak and undecided for the situation he held,had the love of his country deep at heart, fell, as hepronounced the words of the oath, senseless on theground. Thus sunk the free and queenly Venice, andtrue in every line are these words of her epitaph :The spouseless Adriatic mourns her lord,And, annual marriage now no more renewed,The Bucentaur lie rotting restored —Negle '■ i garment of hex widowhood!St .Mirk yi t Bees hi Lion where he stoodStand, hut in mockery ofhil within power,>\. r tin proud Place where an emperor sued,.Ami monarch gazed ami envied iii the hourWhen \ "< nine wai i queen with an unequall'd down i<18 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.The Arabian sued, and now the Austrian reigns —An emperor tramples where an emperor knelt ;Kingdoms are shrunk to provinces, and chainsClank over sceptred cities ; nations meltFrom power's high pinnacle, when they have feltThe sunshine for a while, and downward go,Like laurina loosen'd from the mountain's belt ;Oh, for one hour of blind old Dandolo !Th' octogenarian chief, Byzantium's conquering foe.VENICE.THE BALBI PALACE.Quest palazzo e quest lodge, or coltNostri, di mari, e di figure omelette,Fur poche e basse case insierne accostedDesert lids, e povere isolate.Giovanni della Casa.Among the hundred noble palaces which confer a peculiarair of splendour and magnificence on the city of thesea, there is scarcely one that has been less frequentlydescribed, and to which fewer associations attach, thanthe Albi. Of comparatively modern character, like theGrimani and a few others, it belongs to the tasteful andelegant style in which Palladio so much excelled. Chastenessand beauty of design, with a picturesque and dignifiedappearance, are its characteristics. It is situatedon the Canal Grande, or, as described by Sansovino,on the left hand a little beyond the Candle Niccolo,leading towards San Pantaloons; ' he also adds, "thatit is an extremely beautiful edifice belonging to the Albifamily, and had been erected very recently (late in thesixteenth century) in a style of architecture at oncetul and inthlr. - ' Still fewer recollections remaine family. Among these, however, the portrait ofAgostino BarberigOj pforeditore of Venice, is preservedin Tinto grand historical painting of the victoryc 2THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.achieved over the Turks in the year 1571. While inthe act of performing prodigies of valour, he was mortallyMounded by an arrow in the eye, from which are seen toflow drops of blood. This production of Tintoretto is oneof the fewgrand compositions free from his usual exaggeration,and confers lasting celebrity on his genius. Thereis also some mention, in the histories of the period, ofseveral of the name connected with public commotions,and conspiracies entered into against other members ofthe government. But these are without interest 5 andin Sansovino's very full description of Venice, there isonly casual reference to a Pietro Albi, who was electedgeneral of an expedition in the year 1509, and who diedwhile preparations were making for a campaign in theMorea.In this dearth of historical materials the reader, it ishoped, will hardly complain if we diverge a little intotraditional recollections, and call the genius of poetry andfiction for a brief interval to fill up the break in ourhistorical and anecdotical narrative.The following story will, perhaps, be thought not lessadapted to the scene of the Albi Palace, inasmuch as itis on record that the splendid festivals and most imposingspectacles to celebrate the naval glory of the Venetians,as exhibited on the Adriatic, commenced theirsolemn ceremonies, headed by the reigning doge, fromthe Albi walls.The annals of Venice record that towards the conclusionof the sixteenth century there arrived at thatcelebrated city a lonely stranger, who speedily purchasedVENICE — THE BALBI PA LAI B, 21one of the most gorgeous palazzo, near the Rialto, on theGrand Canal, and hired a train of domestics, whom heattired in the most splendid manner.At that time a new doge was just elected, and asumptuous feast was prepared on the occasion. In some ofthe old chronicles a very minute account is given of theriches of the masquerade, the delicacies of the banquet,the exquisiteness of the music, and the consequent approbationof the numerous guests. Amongst these wasour mysterious stranger. He wandered about amidstthe crowds of splendid masques with a vacant and carelessair, till he approached the lovely Bianca di Gonzaga,at that time the loadstar of all the eyes of Venice. Atthe sight of her his hitherto listless features were animatedwith a dark and fiery glance, and he bent on heralook in which the most powerful interest was deeplyexpressed.Bianca di Gonzaga was indeed a lady never to bepassed without interest. Even if her figure had beenless faultless, her countenance less heavenly, the mournfulcircumstances of her sad story would have fixed attention.The descendant of a line of the most powerfulnobles in Italy, she had at one time been duchess of Pisa.A " million had arisen in her dominions, and a youngbaron had driven her from her throne to seat himselfupon it. Alone, deserted by all her former friends, shehad led to Venice j where her misfortunes met withSympathy, while her beauty excited admiration. Buttin k i 1 1 r l r i < — . of friendship could not efface the remem-"I love. Whilst in 00664 BSKMl of her ducal THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.city, she had been affianced to a prince whose dominionsbordered on her own, and it weighed on her heart thathe should coldly desert her when surrounded by herenemies : hence arose the air of sadness that cloudedher marble brow when the stranger first surveyed herin the halls of Venice. It was true she had never seenthe prince : that he had never knelt at her feet tobreathe his passion ; but from infancy she had heardhim spoken of as one who was to be her future husband,and in that belief had hung on every tale of his growingvalour which had reached the court of Pisa. Reportspoke him generous, feeling, enthusiastic, noble, andBianca was in love with his image.The stranger approached her, and commenced a discourseto divert her melancholy, in which he displayedpowers of conversation but seldom rivalled. Bianca'seyes were soon lightened with a smile, and she replied,on her part, in a manner at once natural, easy, andgraceful. A young Venetian noble, who had in vainpressed his suit with her since her arrival at the city,was offended at the evident gratification with which shelistened to the words of a stranger, and, approaching,joined in the conversation, in a manner which partook ofthe nature of insult. Bianca blushed with indignation ;the stranger levelled at the young patrician a biting sarcasm,which, unable to answer in any other way, he repliedto with a blow. Swords were drawn, and ere thegay crowd around them could separate the combatants,the Venetian received a wound in his right arm that disqualifiedhim for fighting for a year at least.VENICE Thir BALBI PALACE. 23Such hazard undergone in her cause rendered it impossiblefor Bianca to refuse giving the stranger a generalinvitation to her palazzo, even if she had been previouslyindisposed to the measure. It was given, andthe stranger, for the next month, was always at her side.Her partner in the dance, her companion in the song,he displayed a perfection in these accomplishments whichfew could boast. In a week or two his songs, however,began to turn always on love ; his guitar was nevertouched but to some plaintive tune, in which a despairingknight was the subject, who accused the cruelty of hislady. Bianca began to repent her encouragement ofhim, for, knowing nothing of him save his person andaccomplishments, and being betrothed to another, shewas by no means pleased at such close attention.One evening as she was seated at a window overlookingthe Grand Canal, on which many busy gondolas, intheir black coverings, might be seen gliding past, thestranger approached on his usual visit. A short conversationensued ; and, after a few minutes, bending oneknee on the velvet footstool of Bianca, he made a declarationof love. The suddenness of the address suri1 her: in a hurried manner she stated the manyobjections to the match j her want of knowledge of hisfamily, his fortune, and his character j the espousalswhich at an early ;i<. r »' had magic her the affianced brideof the prince Adornoo. At the end "t" hei speech theger'a eyes flashed with jo j he implored bet toonthe deception thai lore alone had caused, andavowed bima< If the prinThat single word overruled every objection. It at24 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.once silenced every doubt as to his birth — he drew itfrom one of the loftiest lines in Italy ; and though hisfortune consisted but of a paternal estate, and a swordthat had already gleamed in numerous battles, his famefar outweighed every paltry objection on that account.As soon as Bianca knew that she saw before her theyoung hero whom she had loved before she saw him, sheat once resigned herself to joy, and consented to becomehis bride.** And yet," said she, as she surveyed the manly figurebefore her, " they did not picture thee to me as thou art.They spoke of blue eyes — thine are black as the raven'swing j of light fair hair — how jetty is thine !"Doubtless thou that I am the prince r" said thestranger reproachfully: " behold, then, these proofs!"As he spoke, he produced a letter to the prince Adornoo,and another signed with his name. The former was froma friend, and informed him of the rebellions by whichBianca had been driven from the ducal throne, concludingwith an earnest request that he would return instantlyfrom his travels and assert her rights ; the latter statedhis determination of replacing her in her dominions.This," said the stranger, as he presented it, " I haveyet found no means of forwarding."After a few moments spent in the examination of thedocuments by Bianca, who recognized the hand-writing,the stranger, again addressing her, besought her to consentto a plan he had formed for the nuptials. As therewere so many of her lovers at Venice, he wished to sparethem the mortification of seeing her become his bride,and besought her to consent to set out for his castle. AVENICE THE BALBI PALACE. 25lingering consent was wrung from Bianca, and it wasagreed that next day they should sail down the river,and, landing at some point near his domains, proceedthither as fast as possible.The next morning was one of exquisite beauty.Never was there a more cloudless sky or a brighter sun.The blue waves of the Adriatic seemed bluer than ever ;the river, with its banks clothed with trees and verdure,was a perfect paradise. Embarked in a gallant gondola,with a numerous train of domestics, the stranger andBianca sailed down towards Pisa; and when evening wasapproaching, the lady half trembled as she saw, rising onone side of the stream, the domains of which she hadonce been duchess. At length they approached wherefromthe rocks that frowned above, a descent of a hundredsteps, hewn in the solid stone, conducted to a broadlanding-place. At the sight of this spot the str;turned from Bianca, with whom he had been conversing,and wound a bugle-horn that hung by his side. A strangesuspicion crossed the mind of the Lady di Gonzaga, as,in reply to this sound, another of a precisely similar naturewas heard above, and a hundred men came trampingi the rocky pass, fully armed and weaponecL Alas!these suspicions were but too true ! The stranger caughthold of her in one arm, as he drew his sword with theother, quid leaped on shore from the prow of the gondola.Safe on the land, he long Bianca to the newly-arrived« with a command to load h< r with chains. " Farewell!"he exclaimed to the dome-tick in the boat; " andhack to Venice a- fast .1- yom can. There, if the Iask you tin ream Of my Conduct, tell him, th.it for a26 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.month, without his knowledge, his deadliest enemy dweltwithin his walls — tell him, to plunge him in despair, thathe might have seized, but did not, Malvezzi, Duke of Pisa ! ' 'The wretched Bianca had been at first petrified at theconduct of the pretended prince ; his concluding avowalopened her eyes to the misery of her situation. The villanousMalvezzi, so glittering without and so evil within ;the unprincipled usurper of a throne to which he had notthe slightest claim; had in reality, as she conjectured,intercepted some real letters of Prince Adornoo's, declaringhis intention of exciting a struggle in her favour. Inthe fear of being intercept -d, Malvezzi had determinedto attempt to gain her affections in disguise, and thus atonce destroy even future idea of resistance to his power.A month had he spent in this task, and he imagined thatBianca's heart must have been melted by his numerousattractions. In this belief he declared his love. Whatwas his surprise to hear her confess her affection forAdornoo ! The strongest dissimulation, a vice whichItalian statesmen at that period almost considered avirtue, could alone prevent the hatred he instantly conceivedfor the duchess from glaring in his deceitful countenance.His presence of mind suggested the thoughtof counterfeiting the prince. The intercepted letterswhich he still bore about him readily furnished him withthe means of strengthening the imposture, in which hewas unhappily but too successful. Information had instantlybeen dispatched to Pisa, to cause a band of spearmento await him that day at the hundred steps. Theresult was such as has already been detailed.The outlines of flues dark and iniquitous scheme flashedVENICE THE BALBI PALACE. 2/across the mind of Bianca, as chains were placed uponher delicate hands, and, guarded by the band of Pisansoldiers, she mounted the hundred steps. As the villanousMalvezzi followed, she darted at him a glancethat almost, like that of the fabled basilisk, possessedthe power to kill, but not a word of complaint burst fromher lips, though her heart was full of torture. To whatdark dungeon was she now to be borne by her rebellioussubjects? Her eye asked the rpiestion, though her lipsmoved not. Malvezzi, as they attained the summit ofthe lofty rock, pointed to a gigantic castle gloomingover the distant woodland landscape, elsewhere splendidlyilluminated by the rays of the setting sun, and said, in anaccent of scorn, ec There is your prison."Bianca recognised the time-worn fortress. In her youth,her father had once shown her the castle, from battlementto donjon keep. It contained the most loathsomedungeons m Pi sa — dwellings, where the wretched state-prisoners,who were confined there, clasping the duke'sknees, implored, as a mercy, to be led to execution.Melting with pity, she had implored and obtained thatthey should be removed to more lightsome prisons, andDO <>ii< should henceforth be confined there. Howlist!, at tint time had she thought that it would ever beher own lot to be immured in these dreary dungeons ! Herheart Bank within her aa they approached, and she burstinto tears* FnMI the mountain which they were de-ding,the palace of Prince Adornoo tvaa visible andthe reflection thai perhaps he might at that very mos!><• within her km, unknowing In i fan . made hei\> lis flow Mill faster .28 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Malvezzi, meanwhile, was conversing with a soldier,who gave him some important information. The PrinceAdornoo was in reality returned — report said that he wasassembling his vassals to invade Pisa — that he had senta messenger to Venice to inform Bianca of his arrival andintentions. " The lagging fool !" said Malvezzi, withscorn ; " had he but been a day sooner, my plans hadfallen to nought— perhaps I might at this moment havebeen crossing the Bridge of Sighs. By this time theCouncil of Ten must know Bianca's disappearance, andbe conjecturing the cause — they shall soon be informed."Night was now sinking, and the heavy walls of thecastle were almost towering above them. As they rodeup the rocky path, at whose summit frowned its blackbattlements, the warder's voice echoed through the passWho comes there r"A friend from Venice," cried Malvezzi, exultingly.Welcome !" said the warder ; " you have been impatientlyexpected. By 'r Lady, your expedition is miraculous."The heavy drawbridge dropped sullenly over the moat,the portcullis was raised with a grating sound, and entered, leading Bianca, trembling, with him. Ashis band were following he heard a struggle behind. —The portcullis was dropped — the drawbridge raised. —Some idle quarrel," fiercely muttered Mali ezzi. " Thisgarrison is the worst disciplined in Pisa." And so saying,he strode haughtily onward through the dark passagethat led to the great hall of the frontier garrison.In the hall a large table was spread, and torches wereplaced in the immense iron candlesticks, that shed a broadVENICE THE BALBI PALACE. 29flashing light through the apartment. But no one wasas yet assembled at the banquet. " Fellow!" cried to an attendant, striding into a neighbouring room,send your commander hither."The miserable Bianca, whom Malvezzi had never, fromthe moment of the warder's challenge, suffered to escapefrom his grasp, sunk, overpowered, into a chair, whilstthe villain, scarcely concealing his pleasure, surveyedfrom the great window the rising moon, that, havingemerged from the black clouds which had for someminutes obscured it, now cast a bright radiance intothe room. Exulting in the success of his treacherousplans, he scarcely heard the door open behind him ;but the step of an armed foot in the room aroused himfrom his reverie. Hastily turning round, what was hisastonishment to behold a warrior, in complete steel,stand between him and the entrance, indignation andsurprise painted in his noble countenance. At t lie Banemoment that the exclamation of " Malvezzi" burst fromthe lips of the stranger, Malvezzi himself, starting back a(vw paces, uttered \\ ili astonishment the word " Adornoo.""Yes! Adornoos' cried the prince, "Adornoo, who- to wrest the throne of Pisa from the usurper.""By heavens! this exceeds my hopes," shouted thetreacherous bravo: "yield thyself, for it is impossibleto i scape. My guards are all around. - 'They wert this morning' said the prince," but theBtroi g detachment s« at off t<» the hundred steps enabledme t-> attack the castle with tm It is bow in thepossession of Bianca diGonzaga. Yield thee, or £<The astonished Malvezzij filed like a statue, heard30 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.the fatal intelligence. At length, suddenly rushing forward;he endeavoured to stab Adornoo ; but the prince,wrenching the dagger from his grasp, laid him prostrateat his feet. With a groan of agony the wretch expired,whilst Adornoo supported the fainting Bianca.The news of Malvezzi's death opened the gates ofPisa to the duchess. She long and happily swayed thesceptre of her paternal dominions, and was not the worseprincess that she had once known adversity. There arefew persons who cannot picture to themselves, withoutassistance, the festivities attending her entrance into thecity, and the magnificence of her nuptials with the PrinceAdornoo, still more worthy in reality than fame proclaimedhim.Wie have the pleasure of here subjoining, as most appropriateto the site of a palace, from whose banks spedover the blue waves many a pleasure-party and many alover's gondola to explore the beauties of Adrian's tributaryisles, some lines to the able illustrator of thiswork from a well known and admired pen.TO SAMUEL PROUT, ESQ.AFTER RECEIVING HIS " BRIDGE OF SIGHS."The Bridge of Sighs ! the Bridge of Sighs !Lie down, and, by its waters dreaming,Lament no more thy colder skies,Thy mountain peaks, thy torrents streaming !Look — where the hues, sunniest seaNow bares its breast for thee and me !VENICE THE BALBI PALACE. 31Come on, fair girl, and let us skimThe ocean's bright blue hearing bosom,Forgetting old November dim,The winter pale, the snow-drop's blossom ;Wild myrtles and the palms are near us,So thither let our boatman steer us.What, ho ! row on, our gondolier !Row on across the shining waters !Behold where Mestre's lands are near,And near are Padua's dark-eyed daughters.Row on ! — yet stay; we will not leaveA place where love has learned to grieve.Look ! through that carved arch, that bindsThe palace to the dungeon's heart,(Like ties which link unfitted minds),Hath pass'd how many a trembling heart !Brave picture 'tis ! Fine marriage madeBetween the sunshine and the shade !I& t then a picture? Ay; but suchAs men strike out in glittering hours;This side dashed in with stormy touch,That flooded with the sunset hours :.A picture ? — ay, 't is one divine ;Prout wrought it, and he made it — mine !B. C.TITIAN'S HOUSE.The beings of the mind are not of clay ;Essentially immortal, they create,And multiply in us a brighter ray,And more beloved existence.Child Harold.Genius alone has the power of conferring splendourupon the humblest abode, the most obscure spot of earth,and wheresoever its footstep? have been impressed becomeshallowed ground. Too seldom indeed is intellectual exaltationcombined with the heritage of palaces, though itexercise the holiest and most invincible of all despotismsthe only one to which we willingly bow — the sway ofcreative and immortal mind. It would seem as if Providence,in return for the worldly scorn and oppressionof many of its most gifted children, had endued theirmemories with perpetuity of fame : an empire over theintellect and passions of ages — over the fortunes of futuregenerations, interwoven with the best principles and theloftiest hopes of humanity. Like martyrs to their religion,their glory is rarely of this life ; they I ok to ahigher guerdon, and, like the martyrs, their faith isanchored on the foundations of imperishable truth.It thus becomes the peculiar privilege of lofty geniusand worth to bid us pause, after passing by the gorgeousmausoleum, the palace walls, or the battle-fields of kingsand conquerors — as we approach the shrines containingall that was earthly of the inheritors of a purer anatitian's house. 33nobler renown : we tremble and we burn as we contemplatethe high example their history holds up, andtraverse the abode once familiar with their voice, wheretheir eye kindled and their hand wrought, with a feelingof devotion akin to that of the pious pilgrim pouring outthe worship of the heart and spirit in the sanctuarywhere rest his dearest hopes.Among the few splendid examples of the felicitouscareer of genius is recorded that of the master-painterof his country — the first colourist in the world — thegreat Titian. He was the architect of his own fortunes,— invested with noble titles, the resident of apalace, attended by an almost princely retinue from courtto court, the honoured companion of monarchs, and theenvy of their courtiers. What is still rarer, he maintainedthe high reputation and dignity he had acquired,during a long and laborious life, up to its close.The noble edifice in which this celebrated man passedthe latter yean of his life is situated on the Canal Grande,next to that of the more splendid Pisan, as seen in theplate. The latter, besides being admired for the beautyof its external appearance, is recommended to notice byra in which it was constructed. It is adorned withlome of the finest paintings of Paul Veronese, amongwhich is that of the family of Darius at the feet ofwAlexander the Great. The general effect of the richlandfrequency of the cornices the form of thebalustrades, and, above all. the magnificent entablatureby which it is decorated; urged by the moat skilful- so many evidences <»f the improvementwhich had taken place in the arts a! the period of itsu34 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL-erection.Some decorations in the morisco style are stillto be seen about the arches of the windows, and elegantminutely wrought pilasters, corresponding to the basement,support the angles of the edifice. The size andmassy strength of the capitals are also conspicuous, andcarry the reader back to the era immediately precedingthat in which the great masters of the modern schoolwere preparing to exercise their genius — the celebratedprecursors of the yet more celebrated Palladio. Titian'shouse, adjoining the Pisan, formerly belonged to theBarberigo family, several of whose members rose to thedignity of doge. One of the most distinguished of thesewas Marco Barberigo, who succeeded the still more celebratedMocenigo in 1483. He was a man of high talentsand great popularity, and is stated by Sansovino to havebeen the first doge on whom was conferred the honourof a public coronation on the grand staircase of the ducalpalace, where he was harangued by a Turkish orator,sent on that special mission by the grind signor, to congratulatethe head of the republic. Venice enjoyed perfecttranquillity under his government. He built thefacade of the ducal palace, which surmounts the grandstaircase, covered with marble ; — was a politic lover ofpeace, revered religion, was just and liberal, and blestwith a family of noble sons. Over his tomb was inscribedthe following rare and honourable testimony tohis worth :Servant moro patria, bellevue namque,Justitia celui, plus dare non potui.From the Rialto," observes a celebrated living poetin his private book, obligingly shown to the writer, " ITITIAN 's Bough. 35took a gondola and went to the Palazzo Barberigo, whereI saw the room in which Titian is said to have paintedsome of his best pictures. Many of thin are in theiroriginal state — nothing at least but time has touched them.The other chambers are filled with the portraits of dogesand cardinals, ancestors of the Barberigo family. Theceiling is deeply channelled, as are most in Venice, andrichly painted with smalljapan-like ornaments in bronzeand gold. The walls are of a light green. I went nextto the church of Santa Maria do' Frari, where I saw thevault of the Pesaro family, and over it a magnificentpicture of Titian's — the Virgin and Child. Near thewall, on the other side, is a small slab of white marblein the floor, which is of the rhomb or lozenge-shape,and is thus inscribed :Qui grace il grand Titian dV Gemelli,Emulator dV Zeus e degti ApellL"The windows of the apartment in which Titian died,as may be seen in the plate annexed, are still closed ;and his painting-room is said to be preserved, with properrig, exactly in the state in which he left it. It isdecorated with his own productions, consisting chiefly <>ftffl latest works, among which are the Magdalen and theSal \ at <»r Mundi (so often t<> be Been in prints sand dataunfinished-k< tch <>;' St S bastian, the mbjecl on which1m u get at tin period of his death. He lived tothe advanced I ninety-nine, and i^ known t<> havetaken his own portrait in the \. of his da cop] <>f which, oik'- in the collection "t ( harl - I- ind36 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.correctly, we believe, pronounced to be an original, thewriter of the present account had the gratification ofhaving submitted to his inspection, while thus engagedin recalling some of the leading features of his life andworks. It represents him in extreme old age, dressedin his furred gown, with a white sleeve appearing fromunder it, and with the light velvet cap he is known tohave worn. But a still finer portrait is that introducedinto the splendid picture of the Marriage of Cana, byPaul Veronese, now in the select and admirable collectionof Mr. Rogers. It has been thought not unworthy ofmention that the apartment in the palace of Titian, statedto have been his painting-room, opens upon a southernaspect. Whether or not this be deserving the attentionof artists, the merit of the pictures it contains by himand by others before the acra in which he flourished,can admit of no question ; and cold indeed must be thespirit that in Titian's palace — in the very room in whichhe embodied his magnificent conceptions and power ofcolours — can fail to mark it as a proud event, a white day,in the artist's or the tourist's life.Titian Vecellio, sprung from the family of the Gemellia name of some repute and antiquity — was born in theyear 1477, at the little town of Cadore, on the confinesof the Friuli. His father, whose name was Gregory,procured for him, before the age of ten, his earliest instructionsin that art by which he was to shed lustre onhis country. He first studied under a native artist ofCadore, whose name, on the best authority*, is said toThe Abate Gei of Cadore. Lanzi, vol. in. pp. 101.titian's house. 37have been Antonio Rossi. Of this old master a few specimensyet remain, pronounced by critics to be inferioronly to those of Giovanni Bellini and his more illustriousscholars, among whom Giorgione and Titian ranked atthe head, before the latter, as is reported, became thepupil of his great contemporary.Having imbibed, under the learned Giovanni Egnazio,a taste for letters as well as the arts, during his educationat Cadore, he was subsequently placed underthe direction of Sebastian Zuccatr a mosaic painter ofTreviso, settled at Venice, whither he was permitted byhis father to resort, about 1 4Qo ; and where he is statedto have studied, first under Gentile Bellini*, and nextunder his brother Giovanni, the latter of whom stood highin the estimation of his fellow-citizens. For some periodTitian executed works in the yet cold and hard style oflii master, from whose example, however, he acquiredthat diligence, close observation, and minute study ofnature so perceptible even in his most splendid andmature productions, and which enable the critic to distinguishthem from those of his illustrious contemporaries.Such at first was Titian's proficiency in this; minute andstudied style, M to induce him to try his skill in competitionwith Albert Durer; and he painted at Ferrarathe Christ, to whom the Pharisee is seen in the act ofoffering the piece of coins. He succeeded in surpassingthe mode] lie had in \i< u , the whole being boexquisitely and highly wro ug h t, that, in tli< nrordfl of Lanzi,Rudolf and Felebien, Vies dei Peintres, TrevoiUj I-I painting now in the Dresden collection. ( copies onl]met with in Italy.38 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.the very hairs of the head, the pores of the flesh, andthe reflection of objects in the pupils of the eyes, maybeseen and almost numbered ; — all, too, without detractingfrom the general effect, which is not the casewith the productions of Albert Durer, when placed at adistance. Titian, however, never repeated the experiment; but with the confidence of exalted genius soonburst through the shackles of early custom and thoseconventional rules imbibed under his first masters, tostudy nature in her real forms and highest attributes, tocommune with her in the recesses of his own subtle andcapacious mind. He had already commenced severalaltar-pieces for himself, in which he introduced a numberof portraits of living persons, agreeably to the prevailingcustom. Though younger than his fellow-pupil and rivalGiorgione, he had now adopted a free and bold style ofhis own, before he so much devoted himself to the broadermanner of that great master, and in 1507 he completed hispicture of Tobias and the Angel, for the church of S. marriage.To compete, as he now eagerly prepared, with themaster-pieces of one whose fame had already gone widelyabroad — extolled as the prince of Venetian painters — isan honourable proof of the rapid development of Titian'spowers. A keen and well maintained competition ensued,and so closely did the young painter of Cadoretread upon his elder rival's steps, that his portraits in ashort time were not to be distinguished bv the bestcritics from those of Giorgione himself. What servedto render this noble emulation more warm and declared,was the fact oi" Giorgione being one day highly applaudedfor a painting in fresco on the facade of thetitian's house. 39Merchants Hall of the Germans, but really from thehand of Titian, while the other side nearest the Canalwas the work of the former, who from this momentbecame so extremely jealous of Titian's growing reputationthat he would no longer meet or receive him asusuaL at his house ; although these two great men hadstudied together, and always evinced for each other themost cordial regard. Endowed, perhaps, with a loftierand more exuberant genius, Giorgione had taken thelead, and he now felt mortified, after having chalked outa new and splendid path in Venetian art, to be rivalled,if not surpassed, by the skilful and well-directed effortsof so young yet formidable a competitor, who seemed topossess an intuitive knowledge of the power and effectof colours. But this was not Titian's object . he wouldonly have been an imitator, if not a mere plagiarist of hisgrt.it contemporary 3 and he aspired to a yet higher famethan his. To have successfully rivalled an Albert Durerand a Giorgione could have brought him no lasting reputation• it formed part only of his own matured andenlarged education, previous to striking out for himselfa purer and more perfect style, combining the truth ofnature with the dignity of ideal grandeur and beauty,exhibited with a force and brilliancy of colouring inwhelp he Btandfl alone and unrivalled. L< 38 broad andflowing than that of hi great rival, but more pleasingand natural, it enchanted the beholder by its novel andMrik Dg representation "I beautiful reality.Tin tion of Titian daily increasing a> his newted, he shortly obtainedcommissions from thi republic upon a considerable scale.40 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Among these was the grand altar-piece for the church ofthe Frari, in which he introduced the figure of the EternalFather, remarkable for its fine and majestic expression,while that of the Redeemer is seen in mature youth,seated upon a splendid throne, in the act of receiving hisvirgin mother. This was speedily followed by othernoble specimens, both for public and private exhibition, inwhich equal dignity, elegance, and study of nature are conspicuouslymanifest, and which soon placed him at the headof the most splendid school in the world. The fame ofAlbert Durer's engravings now inspired Titian with theambition of vindicating for his country that excellence inan art for which she had been early remarkable ; and in1508 he designed and executed on wood his Triumph ofFaith, a work which astonished the public by its infinitevariety of composition, and its bold clear style, surpassingeven that of the Flemish artists.Titian next repaired to Vicenza, on an invitation todecorate the Palace of Reason, in which he produced hisJudgment of Solomon, a work which considerably addedto his reputation by its superior grandeur and power ofcomposition. Proceeding to Padua, he there painted forthe school of San Antonio three histories relating to thelife of that saint, with the figures as large as life. Theysurpassed ail that had before appeared, although Campa-solaand Contain, men of considerable celebrity, w< eengaged with him in decorating the edifice. In a largespace over the door of the sacristy he painted, in fresco,the miracle of the youth, who having had one of his feetsevered from his body for some grievous offence, was againmade whole by the patron saint. It is asserted by Ri-titian'shouse. 41dolfi that he here also painted his Triumph of Faith, engraved,as we have seen, some time before.On his return to Venice, Titian decorated the facadeof the Grimani palace, and completed a number of worksleft unfinished by Giorgione, who died, it is said, of abroken heart, on hearing of the seduction of his wife bvMorton de Feltre, but bv Vasari and other writers hisdeath has been attributed to the plague. Amongst thechief of these was an historical painting of the EmperorFrederick I. at the feet of Pope Alexander III., in whichTitian introduced a vast number of portraits of personsbelonging to the court of the emperor, of the pope, andof the seignory of Venice, painted in the costume of variousages. About this period (loll) he is reported tohave contracted a marriage with a Venetian lady namedLucia, by whom he is known to have had two sons and adaughter \ but by most writers the marriage ceremony isnot mentioned. When Francis I. returned from his expeditioninto Italy he passed through Venice, where hedesired to be introduced to Titian, and sat for his portrait,though extremely anxious to hasten his arrival at Paris.After completing the grand historical compositionabove mentioned, it is stated that an annual sum of 100crowns was conferred on Titian by the senate. He thenpainted the portrait of the reigning doge, Leonardo Idanoj and from that period continued the custom withrs until the election of the doge LorenzoIVnih. who, in consideration of Titian's then advancedage, freed him from ■ state duty attended with the \\ eight crowns. He next repaired to the(nut of Ferrara, when completed by desire ofAl-42 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.phonso I., the works left imperfect by Giovanni Bellini,who died in 1514. The most beautiful among thesewas the famous group of the Bacchanals ; the same, webelieve, which is now seen in the Villa Aldobrandina, atRome. The landscape introduced into it is so extremelybeautiful that Frenzy, when at Rome, became anxiousto obtain a copy, which he at length carried home withhim to Paris, as the richest trophy of his tour. Healso took the portraits of the duke and of bis duchessLeonora, besides that of the celebrated Ariosto, his acquaintancewith whom ripened into a lasting friendship.The great poet is represented as large as life, dressed inablack velvet cloak splendidly ornamented, and in returnthe painter's name is celebrated in Ariosto's immortalpoem, asTitian che noraNon men Cador, che que Vciiezia e Urbino.Being in habits of familiar intercourse, Titian learntthat the poet was preparing to give his great work to theworld, and he then painted a smaller portrait of him,which was engraved and placed in the frontispiece of hisOrlando Furioso. In the time of Rudolf, the first ofthese portraits was to be seen in the house of NicolRender, himself a celebrated painter.In the year 1515 Titian returned to Venice, havingobtained the esteem of some of his most distinguishedcontemporaries ; and so much endeared himself to theduke, that in his visits to the republic he was in thehabit of inviting Titian to return with him in his Bucentaurto Ferrara. During these visits we are informedtitian's house. 43that he was often invited by Messer Ludovico Ariosto,who would read to him various passages of his divinepoem before it was given to the world. It is assertedthat the poet thus derived some valuable hints, whichadded to the beauty of his enchanting descriptions, andthe charms of his Alcina and Angelica.Besides the magnificent picture for the Pesaro family,painted in the grand church of the Frari, Titian undertook,by public commission, in 1523, the decoration of thegrand hall of council. Among the subjects he there executedwas that splendid and highly laboured representationof the great battle fought between the Venetiansand the Imperialists; but it now exists only in the printsof Fontana. He had before been engaged to paint twelveportraits of the first Caesarss, eleven only of which are byhis hand, although the whole have been erroneously attributedto him. A number of other works were executedfor the same prince, and for his brother the cardinal,during his visit to the court of Mantua.But Titian's great work, produced in the maturity ofhis powers, was the St. Peter Martyr, which formerlyadorned the church of S. Giovanni and Paolo; a work,observe Algarotti, in which the greatest masters declaredthat they were unable to detect a shadow of defect.I r Buoy, however, is of opinion that his designs of menare not always correct, and that the drapery la tooscanty; but that hill women and boys, both in colour andreperfect Mensa and Lana confirm tin pinionof i and it i^ of* red by Sir Joshua Reynolds,that though hill style ia not m chaste n thai ofboom other Italian schools, it exhibits a sort of senatorial44 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.dignity, and that in portrait he was a consummatemaster.In the year 1530, when the Emperor Charles V. wascrowned by Clement VII. at Bologna, Titian was invitedby Cardinal Impolite de' Medici to be present at the ceremony.He was received with marked attention, and theemperor sat to him for his portrait, with which he wasso highly gratified, that from that moment fortune as wellas fame crowned the noble and unrivalled efforts of thisindefatigable artist. All the chief personages assembledat the court vied with each other, at whatever price, inobtaining their portraits from the hand of Titian. WhenCharles, in 1532, arrived a second time in Bologna, hehad again the honour of taking his portrait, and it wason this occasion that the emperor conferred on him thedignity of a count palatine. During his absence fromVenice Pordenone had risen into high reputation, andventured to compete with Titian in the church of S.Giovanni ; but his genius, by popular consent, soonquailed before that of his mighty rival. Besides a numberof works executed for different churches, and otherportraits of the doges, Titian, in 1441, painted that ofDon Diego di Mendoza, the celebrated Span ih writerand statesman, at that period ambassador from Charles V.at Venice. He is drawn standing, at full-length, with anair of peculiar dignity ; and it is asserted by Vasari th tthis was the first occasion of introducing the whole personon the canvas. Xor was it only in portrait thatTitian opened a nobler path and more extended field tohis successors ; safe was equally a model to Armenianand others in the painting of his heads of infant angels,titian's house. 45women, and children, and especially in the beautiful andmagnificent landscapes which embellished his historicalcompositions, deserving the best study of every artist.About this period, being in more affluent circumstances,Titian began to enjoy more of the society of hisnumerous connexions and friends. Among the latter,the poet Aretino and Sansovino held a high place, and,by one of the artist's biographers, we are informed thattheir social meetings were not unfrequent, and that hewas accustomed to give suppers to a select few. It isalso stated that he made occasional excursions into theadjacent islands, where, attracted by the mingled charmsof poetry, painting, and music, added to those of friendlyintercourse, he would unbend his mind, and linger therefordays.Titian is said, indeed, to have owed to Aretino hisfirst introduction to the Emperor Charles, to the Dukesof Mantua aud of Urbino, and to the Cardinal de 1 Medici; and on one of these occasions it was, that, in passingthrough Parma, he is supposed to have seen thefamous cupola of 8. Giovanni, painted by Correggio, and,by his commendation, to have induced the canons of thecathedral farther to avail themselves of their great artist'stalents, not till then duly appreciated.In the autumn of 1545 Titian was invited bv the CardinalFai i Rome. To the wishes of the pope andthe cardinal WCK added those of his friend Aretino andQuinine, and the desire he bad long entertained of seeingthat splendid and ancient capital. He aras then in hissixtieth year* and aran accompanied by his son Orationalready an artist of high repute. ll firs! trent to UricTHE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.bind, where he painted the Venus, since placed in theTribune of the Royal Florentine Gallery, taken from theportrait of the duke's mistress. He was thence accompaniedto Pesaro by the duke, whose retinue attendedhim to Rome, where he was received with the highesthonour. Magnificent apartments were assigned him bythe Cardinal Farnese in the Palazzo Belvidere, and hewas surrounded by persons of the first eminence, eagerto gratify his curiosity by displaying the wonders of theeternal city. Vasari was in the train of those who accompaniedhim, and he relates, that one morning MichelAngelo and he visited him at the Belvidere, where theysaw a beautiful figure, intended to represent Daniie withJove transformed into a shower of gold ; and, that beingin the presence of Titian, they commended it. On theirdeparture, however, speaking of Titian's composition, Bo-narcoticbestowed much praise on-his style and colouring,but added, that it was a pity the artists of Venice didnot begin by studying design, and observe a better methodin their studies ; — that he had the noblest spirit, anda beautiful, animated manner ; and had the art of designonly a little more assisted one to whom Nature had beenso lavish, Titian would indeed have attained perfection.At Rome he again painted the portrait of tit reigningpontiff, Paul III., a full-length figure, in which he seemedto surpass all he had before done. In a letter from Vasari,dated 1547, to his friend Varchi, there is the followingpassage : — " We have seen many instances ofocular deception in our own days, as in the portrait ofPaul III., which being placed to dry on a terrace in thesun, those who suddenly came by and saw it, mistakingTITIAN S HOUSE. 4"it for the pontiff himself, made their obeisance to itsthis assertion, however, is not repeated in Vasari'sLives, it may be doubted, as well as his criticism upon theDan'ae and the EcceHomo, painted and presented by Titianto the pope. But the decoration of the Farnese Palace washis chief object, where lie is said to have produced thatmaster-piece of Venus and Adonis, which called forth theplaudits of the great professors of the Roman school.An anecdote is related of Titian's being conducted,while at Rome, to see the paintings in the apostolic-palace,where some heads by Raphael had been partiallydefaced, and which Sebastian del Piombo was commissionedto restore. This artist was himself pointingthem out to Titian, who, on examining them, exclaimedas he turned to him, " Whose ignorant and presuminghand has thus dared to injure heads like these ?" notaware at the moment that the culprit was so near him.The extraordinary reputation maintained by Titian inthe very field which abounded with the great masterpiecesof Michel Angelo and Raphael alarmed the prideof the first artists, in particular of Merino del Vega, thenthe ablest colourist at Rome. He imagined that theifs, by his munificence to the painter of the imperialnuit, must have intended him to decorate the Sala deiii . for which he was himself preparing the stuccoed,and expecting the entire commission ; and such an effectdid this impression produce upon his sensitive mind, thathe no only refused to visit Titian, bat w seated bythe disappointment, that shortly afterwards fell sickand died.• I.* there Pittoricbe, vol. i. p. I H.48 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Having completed his labours at Rome, Titian, in theMaw following, set out on bis return to Venice by wayof Florence, in which city be remained a few days.He visited Poggio a Cajano, where Cosmo de' Mediciwas then residing, whose portrait he would have painted,had not the Florentine, either from indifference or awish to encourage native artists, declined to press thesubject. Titian hastened on to Venice, where the warmwelcome of his family and his friends, and numerous engagementswith the Imperial court and the Venetiansenate awaited him. In vain had the pope sought toprolong bis residence at Rome, by offering him thebishoprick of Seneca for his son, and other advantages ;he had already amassed a sufficient fortune, and enjoyeda handsome income from the emperor and the seignoryof Venice. Though in his seventieth year, he was invigorous health, and still enthusiastically devoted to hisart. When he was eighty years old he lost his oldfriend Aretino, and, thirteen years afterwards, GiacomoSansovino, to whom he had been so long attached."While his parents survived, Titian had been in thehabit of paying regular visits to Cadore, and he alwaysmaintained the same mild and affectionate demeanourtowards his sons, his brother, and other relatives. Fromthe year 1530, when he visited the different courts ofItaly, he was induced to live on a more liberal and extendedscale, though without relinquishing his simplehabits and his extreme attachment to his beloved art.Besides the pleasant residence he possessed at SanCanciano, he took another, with delightful orchards andgardens, situated in that part of Venice that overlooksTitian HOUSE-1«.»the isle of Murano, the most frequented of any duringthe summer months. There, and sometimes at thehouses of Aretino and Sansovino, he was accustomed tosup with his friends, chiefly belonging to the academy ;and these evenings passed agreeably away in pleasantdiscourse, or in learned and philosophical discussions.In the letters of Aretino and others, we are presentedwith abundant details respecting these social and learnedconferences ; of the individuals who composed them ;the exquisite wines and viands they afforded, with theaid of distant friends, whose frequent presents were thebest proof of the estimation in which they held theillustrious artist, and the terrible pen of Aretino and hiscompanions. Of this a curious proof may be cited fromAretino's letters, showing the able manner in which hecatered to the tastes of the select icw.to FRiK\n rn.XA niccolo — greeting.As I am well assured you are not a prince,and therefore not bound to forget your promises in thevery hour they are made — to sav nothing of days andweeks afterwards, I believe you will find in some cornerof your memory that, when you sent me the great jarfull of Ferrara finocchi, you observed — Pray eat themquickly with your friends, because I have more at home.This being so, it happens that Titian, Sansovino, andIf, after having relished the first, begin to feel oarappetites return, and we long tor the arrival of a second,with a bt tnd I can toll you our anxietyis little less than that of tho good cardinals about thef>0 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Purple ; I mean about the pope's life — as to when, likeour beloved jar, it is likely to arrive at its journey's end.From Venice, 11th November, 1541."To Titian himself, whom he styles compare, or gossip,he writes —"We are all eagerly expecting you to-night at supper.Sansovino will certainly be there, and also that gentlemanwho talks so much.December, Venice, 1540."THE SAME TO THE SAME.A brace of pheasants, and I know not what else, areexpecting you to supper this evening. There will alsobe the Signora Angola Zaffetta and myself. So come,in order that by continually keeping ourselves alive, wemay keep old age, that spy of old death, at a respectabledistance. Come quickly therefore, and if Anichino liketo lend you his company bring him ; he will be mostwelcome.December, Venice, 1547."TO MESSER ALESSAXBRO, THE SCULPTOR.The pears you sent me from Vicenza are very fineand savoury ; indeed, I think you show no less tast inmaking presents than you do in marble itself. You maybelieve that our grand Titian has eaten no less of minethan of his own; because it is well known that wealmost continually sup together, as Sansovino well kno \ ■$,titian's house. 51who is often with us, as you have seen, and praises yourpears.December, 1552."TO MESSER PIGXA."Most gracious, pleasant, and excellent MesserNiccold,it is the opinion of our Titian, the soul of colours — andof Sansovino, the breath of marbles — that it would be ungratefulin me alone to thank you for the present of thefinocchi preserved in vinegar, and the mostacciate inspices. Both add the testimony of their keen appetitefor such delicious food to that of my own, confessing thatthey owe you an obligation — rather over much than little.Venice, Jan. 1552."From the date, however, of this letter it would appearthat the jar of fennel had been something morethan ten years on its journey. We shall extract onemore specimen from the letters of Titian's singular friend,and' content ourselves with referring the more curiouslover of anecdote to the work itself.TO MESSER GIOVAN JACOPO DA ROMA.For the beautiful and excellent eating guinea-fowl,which the humane impulse of your real courtesy despatchedt.» roe hither from Padua, I thank you as manytiiiK as the noble bird had feathers in his tail andwings. I thank yen more particularly, since it hasled me the pleasure of treating with it the mostbeautiful, pleasing, and cxcellcnt-uiaiiiicirl lady «»f uImmiiCupid ever made boast in his court. Yes ! the bin!,B J52 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.that if it do not surpass the peacock is little inferior,was served up to La Samara Angela ; while the ambassadorof Mantua, my Lord Torquatus Bembo, Sansovinoand Titian, entertained the divine creature at table, andwent away rejoicing in the fulness of the honour and ofthe feast. At every mouthful, both the lady and myguests bestowed blessings upon the giver and ifonly you, the model of gallant personages, had been present,as every one desired, the ornaments of the tablewould have been complete.March, Venice, 1552."We shall not attempt to follow Titian in his reputedtour into Germany, for the purpose of attending the courtof Charles V. at Augsburg. It was on this occasion, whileagain painting the emperor's portrait, that the anecdoteis related of his dropping his pencil, when the emperorstooped and picked it up, observing, " Titian is worthyto be served by Caesar." Nor can we stop to notice thetraits of generosity and liberality attributed to him, whenhe had surmounted the difficulties of his profession —omitting no opportunity of obliging his former companionsand friends. During the latter years of CharlesV. Titian enjoyed much of his confidence, and is statednot to have returned from Augsburg till the summer of1548. In the two succeeding years he produced a gre tvariety of works, both at Venice and other places : hksubsequently took portraits of the Doges Trevisani andTeniers, and executed numerous commissions for PhilipII., though he never, as erroneously stated, went intoSpain.TITIAN 's Hole. 53When Henry III. of France passed through Venice,on his return from Poland, he went to visit Titian at hisown house. Titian returned this high honour by entertainingseveral of the king's suite at his mansion, witha liberality becoming a noble of the empire, hitherto arare occurrence in the lives of artists. While conversingwith the king, and displaying his collection, with thosepictures on which he was then engaged, he alluded withgrateful emotion to the munificence of Charles V. andthis successor. He then presented the king with severalfine pictures, to mark, he said, his sense of the honourconferred upon him. There were, indeed, few distinguishedpersonages of his times, in a succession of pontiffs,emperors, and princes, from whom Titian had notvet marks of favour and regard. He was no less■1 by his friends, among whom he counted someof the most distinguished literary characters of the period.Next to those already mentioned were Marching, SereneSeront, Signa, Torquatus Bembo, Lodovico Dolce ; bc-bidesa number of learned and accomplished ladies ; asPaolo Sansovina, La Carolina, Angola Zafletti, LaFranceschini, La Violante. In the earlier portion ofhis protracted career lie was intimate also not only withAriosto, but with Casa, Xavagcro, Bernardo Tasso, celebrated novelist, and a crowdof other \\ rifLO lii life, crowned with honour and fulnessof days, Titian died, aged 99 years, in 1576. Thoughcarried off by an epidemic resemble tgae, publicany was rendered to the brilliant genius and meriticfa a man by the reaped shown to bis remains.54 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.While lie lived the senate had exempted him from a taximposed upon all other citizens, and at his death he wasexcepted from the rule which denied the honours of burialto those who died of the plague. He was interred in thechurch of the Fran, for which more than one of his masterpieceshad been produced.In Ridoln is contained an account of the proposed honoursthat were to have been bestowed on his obsequiesbv the entire body of Venetian artists, had not the calamitousstate of the city prevented them. The insigniaof his order were laid in his tomb, but no stone markedthe spot where reposed the ashes of him who had conferredimmortality on his name and country. At the distanceof nearly half a century, the younger Palma erecteda monument to the common fame of Titian, of his predecessorGiacomo Palma, and of himself. It is in thechurch of S. Giovanni and Paolo, and is inscribed thus :Titian. VICELLIO.JACOPO. PALMA. Senior. JUNIOKIQUE.Were. Palmer.Communi. GLORIA.MDCXXI.Few painters have lived who produced such a varietyof works, and so admirably finished as Titian. Hi e -tended career, combined with extreme assiduity and despatch,enabled him to effect so much and so perfectly.Spain boasts many of his productions ; Rome, Venice,and other Italian cities more; while France, Germany,and, in particular, England, are enriched with them.titian's house. 55Perhaps some of the most beautiful specimens are tobe seen in the royal cabinet at Paris. Besides hisnumerous paintings, Titian is said to have left behindhim many designs, particularly in landscape, beautifullysketched in ink. Xor was his genius less excellent infrescoes, and in those cartoons he produced for theworkers in mosaic. He also made designs of manyworks for engraving upon wood ; and when CorneliusCourt went to Venice in 15 TO, he was received by Titianinto his house, by whom he was engaged some time tomake engravings from his pictures and designs, andmany of these plates are still met with.THE DOGAXA.Your mind is tossing on the ocean ;There, where your argosies with portly sail, —Like signors and rich burghers of the flood,Or as it were, the pageants of the sea, —Do overseer the petty traffickers,That curtsy to them, do them reverence,As they fly by them with their woven wings.Merchant of Venice.This noble edifice was erected in the year 1682,, afterthe designs of Giuseppe Benoni. Its front is adornedwith a magnificent colonnade of marble pillars, and overthese rises a small but beautiful tower, the summit ofwhich supports a statue bearing a large golden globe, torepresent the world. Above the sphere stands a figureof fortune, so placed as to turn with every change of thewind, and thus teach the moral most necessary to thefrequenters of the Dogana. It is in this building thatthe customs are paid by foreign ships and on merchandizefrom abroad. A sort of council was early appointedto assemble here, and take cognizance of even* thing pertainingto the commerce of the state ; but the structurehas lost much both of its importance and elegance ; andthough it is still a beautiful and sti king object whenobserved from the sea, it owes its present interest principallyto the connexion of its design with the earlierglory of the city.The commerce of Venice is invested with a traditionalTick DOGANA. ~>~lustre, which renders its history as interesting to the imaginationof the poet as to the mind of the philosophicalpolitician. Trade, which in other states ministers onlyto the comfort or support of the people, poured a floodof wealth through every avenue of the Venetian republic.It was the magician which converted her humble cabinsinto palaces of marble — which awoke the minstrels ofher light-hearted, festive population, and which fixed herstandards on the towers of many a noble city and island,till they at last floated on the walls of Constantinopleit-elf. Even the melancholy splendour which still surroundsthe fallen Venice calls up visions of her commercialgrandeur. The richest ornaments of her hallsand temples were brought from lands which her merchantshad rendered tributary. The genius of Titianwas nursed into immortality by their luxurious taste ; andbis painting, and those of Tintoret, Paul Veronese, andGiorgione, are as precious monuments to the memory ofthese tradersis not so much for a spirit of romantic enterprise asfor the comprehensive ability of their designs, that theetiam merchants deserve renown. Thcv became acquaintedwith the sea and its storms from hard necessity.They passed an apprenticeship of centuries before theyCould anchor without fear in the ports of foreign laand when tiny had gained Strength by an in'i and the conquest of new territories, tiny r< gainedprudence of their parsimonyby \l,< sent of their transplantwhich resulted fromordinary profil ■ u bicfa attended58 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.their expeditions, begun in a spirit of the most dispassionatepolicy, they became a community which realized,in the magnificence of its habits, the pomp of its ceremonies,and the far-stretching influence of its sceptre,some of the most brilliant dreams of romance. In thefine lines of one of Italy's most classic tourists, familiarwith each ancient spot as household words, and a poetwhose genius seems to glow only the brighter with theflight of time, —Like the water-fowl,They built their nests among the ocean waves ;And where the sands were shifting, as the windBlew from the north or south — where they that came,Had to make sure the ground they stood upon,Rose, like an exhalation from the deep,A vast metropolis, with glittering spires,With theatres, basilicas adorn'd;•A scene of light and glory, a dominion,That has endured the longest among men.And whence the talisman whereby she rose,Towering? 'twas found there in the barren sea.Want led to enterprise ; and, far or near,Who met not the Venetian ? — now amongThe aegean isles, steering from port to port,Landing and bartering ; now, no stranger there,In Cairo, or without the eastern gate,Ere yet the cafila came, listening to hearIts bells, approaching from the Red Sea coast ;Then on the Euxine, and that smaller seaOf Soph, in close converse with the RussAnd Tartar ; on his lowly deck receivingPearls from the Persian Gulf, gems from Golconda;Eyes brighter yet, that shed the light of love,From Georgia, from Circassia. Wandering round,When in the arch bazaar he saw, display'd,Treasures from climes unknown, he asked and learnt,And, travelling slowly upward, drew, ere long,THE DOGANA. 59From the well-head, supplying all below,Making the imperial city of the east,Herself, his tributary.Rogers.'Hie traveller will find in these considerations a sufficientreason for regarding every quarter of Venicewhich reminds him of its former commerce with morethan ordinary interest. It is hence that the Doganacomes in for its full share of respect in this city of merchants; and though it possess not so original a claimto notice as either the Rialto or the religious structuresof Venice, it may give rise to recollections littlecaptivating. The means by which a number of merefishermen, enjoying few or none of those advantages bywhich other communities have risen into notice, effectedthese objects, are well worthy of attention, and the history,consequently, of Venetian commerce has exercisedthe curiosity of many a talented antiquary. It is not thesurprising circumstance in the narrative, that theirprogress was made in the midst of domestic broils,, andwhile they were exposed to the ferocious attacks of theirpiratical neighbours. In the middle of the tenth century,when they had acquired some degree of wealth and consideration,their situation may be learnt from the recitalof an incident which still makes a figure in thechronicle <>f the republic*It wm the custom of the principal citizens at that periodbo to arrange their into od d marriages that severalmight take place at once. The time usually chosenfor these public nuptials was boom grand festival of thechurch, when the popular gaiety of the city and the00 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.prayers of the faithful might combine with their own tohallow the happy ceremony. On the present occasion,the feast of the purification was appointed for thesolemnization of the marriages, and on the eve of thatclay the intended brides repaired, according to custom,to the cathedral. A numerous band of the noblest andmost beautiful of Venetian damsels accompanied themto the church, and before each was borne the casket ofjewels, the rich vests, and other bridal presents, whichthey had received from their friends. But the city wasscarcely hushed in repose, when a bark anchored closeto the shore, and a body of corsairs from Trieste landed,and concealed themselves in the neighbourhood of thecathedral. With the first break of day, the city presentedsigns of the gay festival about to take place, andthe sun had no sooner arisen than citizens of every rankand degree rushed to behold the highest born of theiryouth interchange their nuptial vows.It was St. Mary's eve, and all pour'd forthFor some great festival. The fisher cameFrom his green islet, bringing o'er the wavesHis wife and little one; the husbandmanFrom the firm land; with many a friar and nun,And village-maiden, her first flight from home,Crowding the common ferry. All arrived ;And in his straw the prisoner turned and listen'd,So great the stir in Venice. Old and youngThrong'd her three hundred bridges; the grave Turk,Turban'd, long vested, and the cozening Jew,In yellow hat and thread-hare gaherdine,Hurrying along.The lovers v. ere speedily ranged round the altar \patents and friends were preparing to give them theirTHE DOGANA. (IIfinal blessing, and the words of the priests were alreadymingling with those of the brides and bridegrooms, whensuddenly a cry was heard at the door of the church • thegazing multitude fled in terror, and the pirates, withthreatening aspects and naked swords, rushed up to thealtar. The fathers and new-made husbands of the terrifiedgirls, unprepared for such an interruption, were instantlydispersed ; and the corsairs, seizing the damsels,with all their bridal treasures, bore them unopposed totheir vessel. After the first stupor, which surprise andterror had occasioned, was over, the city resounded withclamour and lamentations :Now hadst thou seen along that crowded shoreThe matrons running wild, their festal dressA strange and moving contrast to their grief;And through the city, wander where thou wouldst.The men half arm'd and arming — every whereA - rou-ed from slumber by the stirring trump ;One with a shield, one with a casque and spear;One with an axe severing in two the chainOf some old pinnace. Not a raft, a plank,But on that day was drifting: in an hourHalf Venice was afloat. But long before,Frantic with crick and scorning all control,The youths were gone in a liu'ht brigantine,I .• anchor near • rial ;Each having sworn, and by the holy rood,shun.»The tumult at l«'UL r th reached the palace <>t" the difor hia comand the I" ole. N :•. therefore,had ! f I In dial than hitered sony gall I, and potting himself at02 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.the head of a band of the boldest sailors, he instantly setsail in pursuit of the pirates. The most fearful anxietyreigned through Venice when they saw him depart — butterror was speedily exchanged for the most vivid delight.After a rapid pursuit, the doge had come up with thecorsairs on the coast of Friuli, and there giving thembattle had cut them nearly all in pieces, and deliveredthe brides in perfect safety from their hands. An annualfestival was instituted in commemoration of thisevent.Thus were the bridesLost and recover'd ; and what now remain'dBut to give thanks ? Twelve breast-plates and twelve crowns,By the young victors to their patron saintVow'd in the field, inestimable giftsFlaming with gems and gold, were in due timeLaid at his feet ; and ever to preserveThe memory of a day so full of change,From joy to grief, from grief to joy again,Through many an age, as of: as it came round'Twas held religiously. The doge resign'dHis crimson for pure ermine, visitingAt earliest dawn St. Mary's silver shrine ;And through the city, in a stately bargeOf gold, were borne with songs and symphoniesTwelve ladies, young and noble. Clad they wereIn-bridal white with bridal ornaments,Each in her glittering veil ; and on the deck.As on a burnish 'd throne, they glided by;No window or balcony but adorn'dWith hangings of rich texture, not a roofBut cover'd with beholders, and the airVocal with joy.Nothing can better prove the condition in v. ili Venicemust have long continued, when such a hardyTHE DOG AX A. G3attempt could be made by a handful of men, and nearlycarried to a successful termination.Xor are there wanting numerous incidents to prove,how fierce and turbulent a spirit ruled at Venice, whilein all that regarded the increase of its wealth and commerce,the people were distinguished above even otherin the world for prudence, regularity, and forbearance.Canadian the Fourth was the son of the third doge ofthat name, and his youth was disgraced by the mostatrocious profligacy and violence. To the admonitionsof his father he opposed the menaces and the swords ofa desperate band of freebooting companions ; and so intolerableat length became his conduct, that the peoplerose, and having seized him were about to inflict thesummary punishment of death. From this danger, however,he was delivered by the entreaties of his father,and was sent into banishment ; but even in his exile hecontinued to threaten his friends and countrymen withdestruction. Providing himself with a vessel, he attackedeven,* Venetian ship which came in his way, and hiscareer as a pirate only ceased when his father died of abroken heart, occasioned by shame at the deeds of hisson. " But how strange is the uncertainty of humanpassions," exclaims M. Daru " this pirate, this madman,this exile, who they had sworn should never return,was the candidate who, in the election for doge,was called by their suffrages to the throne. Three hundredbarks were sent to Ravenna to bring him home, andii to Venice was a triumph.".\ very Whorl period, however, had passed before theprince manifested all his former dispositions - and()4 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.while lie made advantageous treaties, and increased thecommercial relations and importance of Venice, his conductwas marked by a rude, barbaric fierceness. He repudiatedhis wife, and forced both her and his son toembrace a monastic life. He then married the granddaughterof the King of Lombardy, introduced a guardinto his palace, which no previous doge had done, andprepared to wage war with states which the citizens regardedas their friends and allies. No remedy appearsto have been thought of by the Venetians but that ofopposing violence to tyranny. Rising in a mass, theyproceeded towards the palace, but finding it too stronglydefended for their force, they set fire to the buildingswhich surrounded it. Three hundred houses, it is said,together with the church of St. Mark, and other publicbuildings, were soon in flames. Thus enveloped in themidst of a burning city, the palace could not long escape,and the populace waited at every little avenue which theconflagration offered, to seize their prey. At length thepalace was in flames, and the doge was seen hurryingfrom one side to the other with an infant son in hisarms, vainly seeking an unguarded opening. No otherchance was left him but that of moving the people topity. As the flames, therefore, pressed fast upon him,he threw himself, with his child, at the feet of the foremost,and both were instantly torn limb from limb by heunrelenting multitude.This is but a single specimen of the scenes amid whichVenetian commerce effected its early triumphs; nor doesits later history present a less tumultuous aspect. Throughevery age we sec the some strange contrast in the chasDOOANA. 65i r of the people, as they were merchants and citizens; the one exhibiting, as we have before observed,all the marks of the coldest and most calculating disposition; the other, a fury and turbulence which havenot been surpassed by the most licentious republics.The trade of Venice flourished in its greatest vigourduring the twelfth, thirteenth, and fourteenth centuries.Navigation had, to the end of that period, made none ofthose vast discoveries by which human courage itself becameendowed with new and mightier attributes. Theadvantageous situation of the city, and the experiencewhich its inhabitants had acquired on the neighbouringseas, thus secured them a natural pre-eminence in thecommercial transactions of Europe. The most necessary,as well as the most useful, productions of Asia necessarilypassed through their hands. By the admirable politicalskill which they employed through the whole course of thecrusades, they not only rendered their alliance necessaryto the proudest monarchs of Europe, but filled their treasurywith riches, and their ports with vessels and seamenunequalled in the world. When the empire of the Eastfell under its numerous enemies, Venice was the first inthe field to secure and demand the richest portion of thespoil; and on that occasion the actions of her people,under the blind old Dandolo, were not surpassed insplendour of heroism by the proudest knights of Englandor II the discovery of the p to India by the (of Good Hope, and the successive improvements in naw!■ privet Ik i of the superiority ^lw enjoyed novi r66 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.other maritime states. Her commerce from that periodgradually declined, and with the loss of wealth and thespring of popular activity and enterprise, she lost theonly power which had enabled her to grow into grandeur,and continue great amid domestic broils, and undera government essentially tyrannical.Connected with views of the Dogano da Mare : " Ilove," says an old traveller, i( to contemplate, as I floatalong, that multitude of palaces and churches, whichare congregated and pressed as on a vast raft." " Butwho can forget his walk through the Mercers, where thenightingales give you their melody from shop to shop,so that, shutting your eyes, you would think yourself insome forest glade, when, indeed, you are all the whilein the middle of the sea. Who can forget his prospectfrom the grand tower, which once, when gilt, and whenthe sun struck upon it, was to be descried by shipsafar off? or his visit to St. Mark's church, where yensee nothing, tread on nothing, but what is precious ?Yet all this will presently pass away ; the waters willclose over it ; and they that come row about in vain toascertain exactly where it stood."THE Rialto.There is a glorious city in the sea ;The sea is in the broad, the narrow streets,Ebbing and flowing; and the salt sea weedClings to the marble of her palaces.Rogers.A thousand grand remembrances and splendid visionsof the past await ns on the old Rialto. It was from theisland of the Rialto that queenly Venice first raised heryet nndiademed head ; and it is on the bridge of theRialto that she seems to have laid aside her glory, and>it> deserted amid her palaces. Like the daughter ofSidon in ancient days, the harvest of the river was herrevenue. She was the <( crowning city," and her traffickerswere the honourable of the earth. Like her, too,she has lost the girdle of her strength, and become forgottenamong the nations of which she was the heart andeasnry.There is no spot, on which the European traveller canreft hi !" t, more fruitful in the most interesting of hi —topical associations than the noble bridge \\<' are contemplating: ami both the simple beauty <»f its broad ^jirin.the magnificent line of marble palaces which adorn thecanal ever which it i^ tin-own, and its antiquity, renderit in picturesque nd moral and romantic inter 9t,one of the grandest monuments of pThe oldest chronicles <»f the country ascribe the origin268 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.of the Venetian states to the exiled inhabitants of theneighbouring lands, whom the ravages of the Gothic barbariansdrove in terror from their homes. In those daysof darkness and lawless violence, the rocky fastness, themarshy plain, or the low uncultivated island, was theonly safe retreat of the few and the weak ; and the smallspots of land, which were seen just rising above the saltlagunes of the Adriatic coast, offered, in the third andfourth centuries, the securest asylum that could be foundin Italy, In one of the green and oozy islands, therefore,of that little nest of cyclades, a few exiles from theRoman states raised some rude cabins, and supportedthemselves by fishing and by occasional barter with theneighbouring people. By degrees, the other islands becamecovered with huts, and the little community enjoyeda considerable degree of comfort and tranquillity. Butthe inhabitants were as yet unprovided with any placefor religious worship ; and it seemed as if they had almostforgotten the faith of their fathers, and the holyrites they had practised in the land whence they hadfled. Year after year passed away in this manner, whenthey were suddenly roused from their indifference by anawful calamity. " By the will of God," s:iys an oldchronicler, " a fire broke out in the Rialto," or the Rialto,as.it was then called. It began in the house of amaster of a ship, and having speedily reduced this buildingto ashes, it seized on the adjacent ones, when thewind rushing from every quarter with great violence, thewhole cluster of islands was covered with a dense massof fiery vapour. In vain did the terrified Venetiansexert their strength against the fury of the storm andTHE R I ALTO. ()'9the flames. The fire rose triumphantly above the rains oftheir houses, and seemed to take the form of a destroyingangel, riding in scornful magnificence over the waste.It was then that, as if by sudden inspiration, one ofthe multitude who stood trembling at the spectacleraised his hands to heaven, and exclaimed, with a loudvoice, " Father of heaven and of the revolving stars !thou great Creator, to whose empire all things are subject! restrain the madness of this fire ; command theseflames that they may no longer rage ! We have sinnedin not having had respect to thy holy church : pardonthy humble suppliants ! — Neither water nor the strengthof man any longer avails us, for the wind and the fire stillincrease, conspiring to our destruction. Save us, then,ere we be driven wanderers again from the place of our• '. — Deliver us, and we-wear to build a temple forthy holy worship !"This prayer and ?ow were repeated by the rest of thelily; — sobs and expressions of wild despair accompanyingtheir words. But scarcely had devotion thusted the hearts of the Venetians, when the wind allce ceased, the flames rose with less fierceness, thegloomy volumes of smoke, which seemed twisted likemonstrous fetters about the clouds, dispersed, and thethick, sulphur air melted into copious showers of rain.The conflagration was thus Subdued, and the gratefulpeople fulfilled their vow by building the church of St,i, the first religious structure of h which Venice couldboAfter this event, the Rialto and the other islandsrapidly increased in populos and the inhabitants70 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.are described by cotemporary witnesses as the mostsecure and contented of mankind. The famous Cassiodorus,who lived in the early part of the sixth century,and was the minister of the emperor Theodoric, wrotean epistle to the little republic, in which he enumeratesthe advantages of their situation, and gives them directionsfor their future conduct. " Consisting partly ofislands and partly of the main land, their territory," sayshe, " is formed more by human art and industry than bythe hand of nature. They have a soil which is alwaysabundant — the waters, namely, which are full of fish.The poor and the rich there live on equal terms ; thesame food and the same humble habitations serving forall. Xo one, therefore, can envy another 5 and by avoidingthis vice they escape all those sources of discordwhich disturb the rest of the world. Their whole careconsists in working the salt-pits which provide themwith the means of obtaining some commodities of lifefrom their neighbours. Every one is thus kept industrious; for though there may be persons in other countrieswho care not to labour for gold, there is no one inthese islands that neglects to seek for salt." " Be careful,therefore," continues the prefect, " to pi serve yourpresent enviable condition • protect yourselves withinthe fortifications with which nature has provided you, ascertainanimals within their shells, and be always readywith your vessels for whatever service the emperor mayrequire assistance."Other testimonies of a similar kind remain to illustratethe ancient frugality and simple manners of the Venetians.No people were more laborious, and none moreTHE RIALTO. Jlcareful and parsimonious in treasuring up the small revenuesthey possessed. They bore heat and cold withequal indifference, fed on the coarsest fare, and, despisingevery kind of ornament, clothed themselves in the meanestkind of raiment. But, frugal and careful as they were,neither avarice nor usury had yet appeared among them,and the golden age, it is said, would have again visitedand been the lot of the humble islanders, had it not beenfor the anarchy and envy of other states. The coast ofItaly was every where infested with numerous corsairs,some of whom were private adventurers, and others belongingto the petty marine towns, which were principallysupported by their marauding expeditions. Fromlawless wanderers the Venetians suffered severely,being sometimes attacked by them in their houses, andat others losing their vessels, freighted with their humblemerchandise, in which the wealth of their republic conducted.But notwithstanding this drawback to their felicity,t lie* infant state continued to increase in strength, andthe virtue and devotion of the people kept pace with thetli of the republic. Religion, it is reported, had become,since the fire in the Rialto, a distinguishing traitin tin Venetian character, and the reason alleged to accountfor this circumstance, is the danger to which theprincipal men of die state were exposed by the attacksof tl: in. \<>t a hark could tia\ci-e the lagunewithout the i being in peril of ■ bloody engaged' t with the pirates. The service of the sea, therefore,audit wa that to which most of thifl merchant-peoplewere devoted, was one of extreme hazard. It was THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.dom, consequently, that a vessel set sail, before the wholeof the crew had put up solemn prayers in the church forasafe voyage, and when they were departed, the parents,wives, and other relatives of the sailors would be seenpressing round the altars, and offering vows for the safereturn of their friends.The affairs of the republic continued in this state tillthe time of Pepin, when that ambitious monarch turnedhis attention to the Venetian islands, and a desperate conflicttook place, in which great numbers of the inhabitantswere destroyed, and the islands desolated. But thecourage and resolution of the people prevailed. Theking, in endeavouring to gain the Rialto, after losing hisfleet and several hundreds of his bravest soldiers, was atlength obliged to retreat. The country, however, afterthis event presented a miserable prospect to the afflictedVenetians ; they were surrounded by a melancholy wasteinstead of the numerous houses which rose as monumentsof their industry, and the sea threatened soon to regainits ancient domain, and cover the islands and everymark of human labour with its waves. The only spotwhich had escaped the effects of the invasion was theRialto ; thither, therefore, the remnant of the peoplerepaired, and as soon as they were recovered fromtheir panic they began to examine what resources theystill possessed. It was soon finally determined that theRialto should be the seat of government, and that for thepresent the whole strength of the people should be employedin constructing edifices for their residence there,and in rendering it fit to be the centre and citadel of theVenetian republic.THE RIALTO. ~'AThe industry and frugal habits of the people enabledthem rapidly to overcome their late disasters — the Rialtoshortly crowded with houses and a flourishing population.A bridge was then built over the lagune whichdivided it from the opposite island, and though at first onlyof wood, was destined to be one of the most celebratedin the world. The inhabitants in a short time becametoo numerous for the Rialto, and the city, for Venicethen began to assume that form, gradually spread intothe rest of the islands. In this early period of its historythe government was strictly popular; twelve magistrates,chosen from the same number of the principaltribes, constituting the executive part of the republic.About the year 607 the Commonwealth was greatly disturbedby the divisions of its rulers, and to add stabilityto the constitution, a chief magistrate was chosenunder the title of doge, whose office possessed all thecharacteristics of sovereignty, and was to continue forlife Subsequent revolutions diminished the authorityof these princes, but towards the end of the tenth century,the doge, Peter Urseolo th <1, an extraordi-iiian for his age, gave a new turn to the affairs of\'< trice, and has been honoured as the founder of itsglory and riches. Extending the views of his countrytaught them to look for wealth from wider enterprisesthan they had hitherto ventured to undertake)aright the advanl f their situation, andlist their government by alterations adapted t«» thent wants of the republic <>n a more solid foundationthan thai "ii which it nun stood.Tli- oho was followed, and man] a THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.sequent age remembered and acted upon the sage counselhe had offered. Venice from that early period presentedsigns of her future greatness, and commercemight be seen rising from her lagunes crowned withwealth and victory.The present bridge of the Rialto was commenced inthe year 1588, and completed in 1591 3 — Pasquale Ci-cognac,whose arms appear in the centre of the arch,being then doge of Venice. The design has been attributedby Vasari to Michel Angelo and his assertion issupported by other authorities, although Michel Angelodied upwards of twenty years before the completion ofthe bridge. According to Vasari the design was madeat the request of Andrea Gritty, at that time doge ofVenice. Many, indeed almost all the great architects ofItaly, appear to have furnished designs for this celebratedbridge. The genius of Palladio and Scamozzi wasexerted upon it, and Sausovino is said to have presenteda design to the Venetians, which was prevented frombeing carried into execution by a war between the republicand the Turk. Sansovino, however, was the architectof the building or exchange adjoining the bridge of theRialto, known by the name of the Fabbriche N»6ve.Besides the historical recollections attaching to theold Rialto, it is known to have been the scene of many astrange and tragic event — many an act of appalling vet. •glance for private injury or hate. Hence has it offeredso fertile a field of incidents for the genius of the dramatist,the novelist, and the poet ; and not only to its own butto almost every European people. The most remarkable ofthese, like the plots of Othello, the Merchant of Venice,THE RIALTO. 75Venice Preserved, and many of those in our old dramatists,are already familiar to us ; but the following incident, ofa wholly domestic character, has, we believe, never yetbeen appropriated to scenic representation, though presentingabundant sources of interest.The beautiful and accomplished wife of Antonio de"Ricci had long resisted the dishonourable proposals of arich and powerful noble, allied to the family of the reigningdoge. Accidentally discovering the seducer's designs,and his ceaseless importunities, the lady's husbandbeing known to many of their common friends, publiclycharged the tempter of her honour with his base andunmanly perseverance in such a pursuit. Relying on hisrank and influence, the patrician, in place of offering theleast apology, declared before the assembled merchants,on the Rialto, that whether agreeable or not, he was determinedto persevere until he had carried his point : itwas an affair between the lady and himself. This replyStung Antonio to the quick, and drawing his sword swiftas lightning, he flew on his enemy and laid him dead athis feet. He then effected his escape 3 but a rewardu. offered for his head 3 and such were the misfortunesthat befel his wife and family as to reduce them to thelast stage of destitution. Learning their extreme misery,and determined to afford them relief, the father and thehusband secretly returned to Venice, and accompaniedby hill Wife, two daughters, and this young son, deliveredhimself up bound to the officers of justice, claiming attie same time from the Council of Ten the sum dm tothose who brought him there, alive or dead. "That.' heexclaimed, " 1- aou due to this woman and her taughtTHE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.tors." Their tears and cries, however, too truly evincedthe kind of interest they took in the prisoner ; and sostruck were the members of the council with the boldnessand magnanimity of the action, that turning toAntonio, after hearing his tale of wrongs and sufferingsendured from his powerful rival, they recalled the edictagainst his life, and restored him to his family and hisfriends.Tn the year 1587, a stranger suddenly appeared inVenice, and addressing a noble on the Rialto, inquiredif he wished to view an admirable collection of paintings.He went ; and after admiring them for some time, happenedto cast his eyes over the chamber door, wherehung a portrait of the stranger : he gazed on it. " Thisis your portrait, sir," said the noble. The other signifiedhis assent. " Yet," exclaimed the noble with surprise," you look only about fifty ! this picture is knownto be Titian's hand, who died a hundred and fifty yearsago. Good God ! how strange ! — who are you ? — is itpossible ?" " It is not easy to know what is possible, orwho [ am," replied the mysterious being gravely : " it isno crime to resemble Titian's picture."The noble retired ; but was haunted with tl e idea ofthe stranger. He went next day, and was told he hadtaken his departure.LORD BYRON'S PALACE.In Venice Tasso's echoes are no more,And silent rows the songless gondolier ;Her palaces are crumbling to the shore,And music meets not always now the ear :Those days are gone — but beauty still is here.States fall — arts fade — but nature doth not die.Nor yet forget how Venice once was dear,The pleasant place of all festivity,The revel of the earth ; the masque of Italy.Chxlde Harold.The opposite page presents a view of the palace occupiedby Lord Byron during his residence in Venice.When, after his unfortunate marriage, and the de-thonof those hopes which he at one period entertainedof becoming, under the mild influence of a virtuousand sensible woman, a better and a happier man,Lord Byron once more left England in search of that• of mind, which was destined never to be his,naturally occurred to him as a place where, for atime at least, he should find a suitable residence. Hehad. in his own language, "loved it from his boyhood;"and there was try connected with its situation, itshabits, and its history, which excited both his imaginationand this curiosity. At the same time the melancholywith which his heart was fill I wbm toothed andcherished by the which every object inVenice inspired. The prose < t of disunion subdued, ofa high spirit humbled, <«f splendour tarnished of pal78 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.sinking into ruins, was but too faithfully in accordancewith the dark and mournful mind which the poet borewithin him. Nor were other motives, of a nature whollydifferent, wanting to draw him to Venice. He still imaginedthat he could find gratification in that which hecalled pleasure; and that the false lights of dissipation,and the broad glare of passion, could waken life andlight in the cold solitude of his wasted and desolate heart.But he was mistaken. His residence at Venice was farfrom contributing to his happiness. It brought out theworst parts of his character. The society of the placestimulated his vanity and egotism, while its pleasuresroused and kept awake this spirit of dissipation. Heexpressed to Captain Medwin, in strong language, thepainful remembrances to which his Venetian residencegave rise. " I asked him about Venice. ' Venice !' saidhe, * I detest even' recollection of the place, the people,and my pursuits. I there mixed again in society, trodagain the old round of conversazione, balls, and concerts5 was every night at the opera, a constant frequenterof the Ridotto during the carnival, and, in short,entered into all the dissipation of that luxurious place.Every thing in a Venetian life, its gondolas, its effeminateindolence, its siroccos, tend to enervate the mindand body. My rides were a resource and stimulus, butthe deep sands of Lido broke my horses down, and I g rtired of that monotonous sea-shore. To be sure I passedthe Villegiatura on the Brent. I wrote little at Venice,and was forced into the search of pleasure — an employmentI was soon jaded with the pursuit of.' 'Of the dissipations of Lord Byron's Venetian life someLORD BVKON's PALACE. 79anecdotes are preserved by Captain Medwin. It was herehis lordship's misfortune to form an acquaintance withthe most troublesome shrew and termagant he ever metwith." The lady insisted on taking up her residenceat his lordship's palace, a proposal to which he gave littleencouragement. Upon one occasion, while his lordshipwas at dinner, she forced her way into the room, andsnatching a knife from the table, threatened to stab herself,if he did not consent to her remaining. Finding hermenace disregarded, she ran into the balcony and threwherself into the canal, whence she was rescued by a gondolauninjured. The Venetians, of course, imagined thatLord Byron had thrown her into the canal. During hisresidence at Venice his lordship had the imprudence toserenade an unmarried lady. " I had been one nightunder her window serenading, and the next morning,wli<» should be announced, at the same time, but a priestand a police officer, come, as I thought, either to shootor marry me again, I did not care which. I was discand tired with the life I led at Venice, and wasglad to turn my back on it."The pursuits of Lord Byron in Venice were very differentfrom those so eloquently described by Mr. Shelley,as forming his own pleasures, while resident in thatcity.It I had I*. en aii unconnected man.I from this moment should have formed tin planre lair \It irai d< liL'lit r<> ride I>\ the lone -•And then the town is silent; one may writ.< >r read in gondola* by day <» night,I laving the little bra* n lamp slight,80 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Unseen, uninterrupted : books are there,Pictures, and casts from all those statues fairWhich were twin-born with poetry ; and allWe seek in towns, with little to recalRegrets for the green country ; I might sitIn Aladdalo's great palace.During his visit to Venice, Lord Byron performed oneof those aquatic feats in which he appears to have sogreatly prided himself. " When I was at Venice' liesaid to Mr. Medwin, " there was an Italian who knewno more of swimming than a camel, but he had heard ofmy prowess in the Dardanelles, and challenged me. Notwishing that any foreigner, at least, should beat me atmy own arms, I consented to engage in the contest.Alexander Scott proposed to be of the party, and westarted from Lido. Our land-lubber was very soon inthe rear, and Scott saw him make for a gondola. Herested himself, first against one and then against another,and gave in before we got half way to St. Mark'sPlace. We saw no more of him, but continued ourcourse through the grand canal, landing at my palacestairs. The water of the lagunes is dull, and not veryclear or agreeable to bathe in."The Countess Albrizzi, in her character of Lord Byron,has mentioned another incident of the same kind. " Hewas seen, on leaving a palace situated on the grand canal,instead of entering into his gondola, to throw hint if,with his clothes on, into the water, and swim to hishouse. On the following day, in order to avoid the riskhe had on the former evening run, of being hurt by thenumerous oars &f the gondoliers, who, in their swiftbarks, were conveying home their masters, as one impaledBYRON S PALACE. 81tient of every obstacle, he was seen swimming across thesame canal with his right arm, and holding, raised in hisleft hand, a small lamp, with which to illumine his way.At the view of so strange a wanderer, it is not possibleto describe what was the astonishment of the peaceablegondoliers, who, stretched along the decks of their barks,waited, singing the beautiful verses ofErminia andBion-tina, until the watchful cock should salute the morn, thehour at which the night-wandering Venetian ladies arewont to betake themselves to their homes in summer."Ravenna appears to have afforded Lord Byron his happiestand most tranquil residence in Italy. " I found,"he says, " at Ravenna much education and liberality ofthinking among the higher classes. The climate is delightful.I was unbroken in upon by society. It lies outof the way of travellers. I was never tired of my ridesin the pine forest 3 it breathes of the Cameron j it ispoetical ground. Francesca lived and Dante was exiledand died at Ravenna. There is something inspiring insuch an air." He has also recorded in his verse hisattachment to these scenes.- feet hour of twilight! in the solitudeOf the pine fi d the silent shoreWhich bounds Ravenna*! immemorial wood,i noted when once the Adrian wave flow'dTo where the la~- I in fortress-food,i I ' which I >'> loreits haunted ground to metHow have I h>vcd the twilight hour and tinill rir;ila*. |n ojilr (if the pine,*!imnicr-li\>Were tl <i'- and mine,■ the boao2 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.The Countess Albrizzi, who became acquainted withLord Byron during his residence at Venice, has given,in her character of his lordship, a few details of themode in which he passed his time while he remained inthat city. Amongst his peculiar habits was that of nevershowing himself on foot. " He was never seen to walkthrough the streets of Venice, nor along the pleasantbanks of the Brent, where he spent some weeks of thesummer ; and there are some who assert, that he hasnever seen, excepting from a window, the wonders ofthe Piazza di San Marco, so powerful in him was thedesire of not showing himself to be deformed in any partof his person. I, however," continues the countess, " believethat he often gazed on those wonders, but in thelate and solitary hour, when the stupendous edificeswhich surrounded him, illuminated by the soft and place drawn tucker of the same round thebosom, adorned with rows of the finest pearl, each aslarge as a moderate gooseberry, till the rows descendedbelow the top of the stomacher ; then two ropes of pearl,which came from the back of the neck, were caught upat the left side e? the stomacher, and finished in two finetassels. Their heads were dressed prodigiously high, inTHE Piazza DI SAN MARCO. 93a vast number of buckles, and two long drop-curls on theneck. A great number of diamond-pins and strings ofpearl adorned their heads, with large sultanes or featherson one side, and magnificent diamond ear-rings.The bride was dressed in cloth of silver, made in thesame fashion and decorated in the same manner as theother ladies 3 but her bosom was quite bare, and she hada line diamond necklace, and an enormous bouquet ofnatural flowers. Her hair was dressed as which as theothers, with this difference, that it was in curls behindas well as before, and had three curls which fell downher back from her poll, the two side ones reaching halfwaydown her back, and the middle curl not quite so far.These three curls had a singular appearance, but not nearso good an effect as the heads of the other ladies, whosehair was plaited in large folds, and appeared much moreful. Her diamonds were very fine and in great profusion.She la bnt seventeen years old, is of a comely sortof beauty* and very full grown of her age. All the ladiesthat walked, about sixty in number, were relations or intimatefriends to the young couple ; many of them extremelyhandsome. The men appeared to me to be allalike ; they were dressed in black gowns like Lawyers,with immense periwigs. The bridegroom, a slender, fair,little man. seemed to b< much charmed with his newwife; he very politer] sent as the epithalamium andother made on the occasion, elegantly coveand adorned w with engra ing'I In trav< 1!> r who, for the djtsI time, * insno doubt < i i find them Idledwith i94 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.the with the ridicule, and the indignation of the Ramonhave been lavishly poured out. Many of our owntravellers have presented highly ludicrous pictures of theduties incident to the office of cicisbeo. One writerseparates the class into various species : the first, thecicisbeo of dignity ; the second, the cicisbeo who picksup the glove, gives the fan, pulls off or puts on the cloak,&c. ; and the third, the substantial cicisbeo or real lover.Lord Coke appears to have been much scandalized at theinstitution. " How shall I spell, how shall I paint, howshall I describe the animal known by the name of a chichisbee(cicisbeo). He is an appendix to matrimony.Within a week after her nuptials a young lady makeschoice of her chichisbee. From that moment she neverappears in public with her husband, nor is ever imprudentenough to be seen without her chichisbee. He isher guardian, her friend, and her gentleman usher. Heattends her in a morning as soon as she is awake ; hepresents to her chocolate before she rises ; he sets herslippers ; and as soon as his morning visit is over withdrawswhere he pleases. The lady admits him not todinner ; the husband only has that honour. In the afternoonhe returns to attend her in her visits. When shesees company at home, he is to hand her from one endof the room to the other, from chair to chair, and fromside to side. If she enters into a particular discoursewith another person, the chichisbee retires into a cornerwith the lap-dog, or sits in the window teaching themacaw to speak Italian. If the lady sits down to play,it is the duty of the chichisbee to sort her cards, 'l hehusband (believe me, I entreat you, if you can) beholdsTHE PIAZZA DI BAN Marco. 1>5these familiarities not only contentedly but with pleasure.He himself has the honourable employment ofbisbee in another house ; and in both situations, ashusband and chichisbee, neither gives nor receives theleast tinct of jealousy." Occasionally, these attachmentssubsist to the verge of life, which would indicate a morerefined sentiment than is usually attributed to the connexion.Lady Miller has given a striking picture of anancient cicisbeo and the lady of his love. " I felt ashock at first sight of a tottering old pair I saw entercoffee-house the other evening. They were bothshaking with the palsy, leant upon each other, and supportedthemselves by a crutch-stick. They were bentalmost double by the weight of years and infirmities, yetthe lady' a head was dressed with great care : a littlerose-coloured hat, nicely trimmed with blond, was stuckabove her right ear, and over her left was a smallmat of artificial flowers. Her few gray hairs behindtied with ribbon, but so thinly scattered over herforehead, that large patches of her shrivelled skin ap-redbetween the parting curls. Her cavaliers was-cd in the same style : all his elegance consistedin an abundance of wig, which flowed upon his shoulders.I inquired who this venerable couple were, and learnedthat the gentleman had been the faithful cavaliers of theiy abort that they regularly frequentedthe Place St. Mark, and the eotTei-houses, and,with the mo \ttiey, had loved each Oftill age and conducting them, hand in hand.An which the close of the !96 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.fury produced in European manners, and especially inthose of the Italian, was the decline of cicisbeism. Thepractice received a very heavy and destructive blow fromthe poet Paring who flourished towards the end of thelast century, and whose fame is founded more particularlyon his poem entitled 77 Giorno. This short composition,divided into four parts — II Matting, II ,II Vesper o, and La Note — of which only thefirst two are finished, is an elegant, satirical descriptionof the life of an Italian, or more properly, of a Milanesenobleman in the last century, The poet takes up hishero, from the moment he awakes about twelve in themorning, and leads him through the occupations of thedav, till he retires to rest. The various and mighty engagementsof this nobleman, in nihil agent occupatissimus,are recorded with a solemn gravity which renders theirabsurdity doubly striking, and with an elegance of ironythat makes the hero an object of compassion as well asof contempt. All the occupations, the engagements, andviews of the hero of the poem are subordinate, and directedto one end — that of showing him off as the nonpareilof all cicisbei. Whatever the poet represents himas doing or thinking (when he ventures to suppose himcapable of thinking), is only part and parcel of hisduty as a pattern of a cicisbeo. This is the main actionof the poem of which a cicisbeo is the hero. The workproduced a prodigious effect, and although it could notextirpate the evil altogether, it tended very much to itsabatement. It certainly destroyed altogether the open,effeminate,; 1 . listing eastern slavery that a ciiunblushingly professed to the wife of another man.THE PIAZZA 1)1 SAN MARCO. !>7To feci the beauties of Paring's poetry, and to judge,consequently, of its extensive influence, it is requisitenot only to be alive to the most recondite elegancies ofthe Italian language, but to the charming harmony of itsblank verse, which, it is admitted on all hands, Masbrought by him to a pitch of perfection unknown beforehis time, and unequalled since. No poet is more popularin the north of Italy than Paiini; and the exquisitepolish and Horatian elegance of his lines so much charmthe reader, that it is not uncommon to hear persons ofa moderate education repeat long passages of his Giornoby heart. The subject has also been enlivened by thepoet with stories, comparisons, and episodes, well suitedto the whole, the Grecian proportions of which are perhapsits most striking feature. One of the most celebratedembellishments of this kind is the origin t which, with the entire poem, we venture to recommendto the taste and curiosity of the reader.During the carnival, as at our own fairs and races, thegaming tables are opened in the Piazza di S. Marco,and the Venetians, like most of the other people of theintent, attach themselves with eagerness to thesedestructive pursuits. In former times the noble Venetianswere accustomed themselves to keep the btables. "Here none is to enter," says Mr. Wright,"that Blows a human face, except their excellencies,who keep tin bank at tl I table. In other placespeoph iii : i ina-k, but line tlicy must. What i-> a pi i -e in other places is here turned to an obligation,perhaps for the better maintaining thai appearanceequality which is requisite to the paoli Used liberty of theu98 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.place ,• and thus a tinker, by virtue of his mask, maycome to a basset table, and set a ducat with one of theprinces of the people. Nothing, sure, can affect thestoic more than a nobleman behind one of these bassettables ; they would seem unmoved either by good or badfortune ; but I have sometimes seen their apathy fail alittle, and the contrary discover itself in some voluntarycontraction of the muscles. All is transacted with agreat deal of silence ; and I have seen large sums wonand lost without a word speaking." According to Evelyn,we are indebted to the Venetians for that most perniciousand absurd species of public gambling, the state lottery,which he tells us was introduced into England, fromVenice, during the reign of Charles II. The generalscheme of the Italian lotteries is this : — Out of ninetytickets which are put into the wheel only five are drawn ;the purchaser of one of these receives fifteen times hisstake, be it more or less. If he stakes upon two numbersas a combination, and both happen to be drawn, he receivestwo hundred and seventy times his stake 5 butnothing if one of them only turns up. If upon threenumbers as a combination, he gets five thousand timeshis stake, supposing him fortunate. Mr. Blunt, in hisVestiges of ancient Manners and Customs discoverablein modern Italy," has endeavoured to trace the practiceof lotteries to classical times. A lottery, it appears, wasan agreeable afternoon pastime with the Romans. Augustuswas accustomed to sell tickets varying greatly intheir value, and would in the same manner dispose ofpictures with their faces turned to the wall, in orderthat he might amuse himself with the pleasure or dis-thePIAZZA DI SAX MARCO. 99appointment of the purchasers. Heliogabalus used alsoto distribute tickets amongst his guests, with such prizesas ten camels, ten flies, ten pounds of gold, ten poundsof lead, and ten eggs.It is not with recollections of splendour and festivityalone that the Piazza di S. Marco is associated. Spectaclesof terror and scenes of blood have been exhibitedwithin its boundaries. "Whenever an open and awfulexample of severity was judged to be necessary, this wasthe place in which it was displayed to the people. Sometimesthe executions took place between the columns ofthe Piazzetta, at other times in the Piazza. It was inthe latter place that the body of the unfortunate AntonioFoscarini was exposed, after he had been strangled bythe order of the inquisitors. The history of this infamoustransaction, which drew down a just odium uponthe government of the republic, has been related withsome particularity by Sir Henry Wotton, at that timeambassador from the English court at Venice.Two men of mean condition, by name Domenico and(inflame Vanii, inhabitants, but not natives, of Venice,t. uttered themselves to the inquisitors of state as evidencesagainst certain noble Venetians, who, as theyalleged, were accustomed secretly and in disguise to frequentthe palaces of the foreign ministers, and particularlyof the Spanish ambassador, at that time highly obnoxiousto the \ venetian government. The informers, having obtainedthe stipulated reward, delivered to the inquisitors ali-t <»f tl i d, at the bead of which Stood the Dameof Antonio Foacarini, ■ senator of the republic, and assu li strictly inhibited from nil intercourse with foreignH 2100 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.ministers. In support of their testimony the Vanii referredto Giovanni Baptista, a servant of the Spanish ambassador3 but suggested the propriety of proceeding againstFoscarini on their own evidence, as the examination ofthe servant might be the means of warning the otheroffenders of their danger. This course the inquisitorsresolved to pursue, and Foscarini, passing at night fromthe senate through the ducal palace, was seized, muffled,and committed to close prison. Being examined, he deniedthe charge ; but as that denial could not be receivedagainst the positive testimony of two witnesses, he was,by sentence of the Council of Ten, strangled in prison,and hung by one leg on a gallows in the Piazza, fromsunrise to sunset, with every imaginable circumstance ofinfamy. His very face was so bruised by his beingdragged on the ground, that his features were with difficultyrecognised ; an act by some considered as a brutalfavour, intended to prevent his being known.The infamous Vanii, having been thus successful, proceededwith more confidence in their denunciations,and named another noble Venetian, Marco Miami. Fortunately,however, one of the inquisitors, doubtful perhapsas to the truth of their story, urged tin necessityof examining Giovanni Baptista, who had left the serviceof the Spanish ambassador, and was residing in Venice.Being secretly interrogated, he contradicted in everyparticular the testimony of the Vanii, who being confrontedwith him confessed, without the application oftorture, the falsehood of their accusation with regard toMiami, and were sentenced to be hanged. Before theirexecution the nephews of Foscarini petitioned the CountPIAZZA DI SAN MARCO. 101veil of Ten that the informers might be again examinedwith regard to the guilt of their uncle ; a request withwhich the Council, probably with the view of concealingthe infamy and injustice of their proceedings, refusedto comply. The criminals having, however, declared totheir confessor the innocence of Foscarini, the Councilcould not avoid issuing a declaration to that effect, andthe body of the sufferer was piously removed by hisnephews from the infamous receptacle into which it hadbeen cast to the tomb where his ancestors reposed.Surely," says Sir H. Wotton, "in the 312 years thatthe decemvirs tribunal hath stood, there was never castupon it a greater blemish."J 02THE CHURCH OF ST. MARK.In that temple porch(The brass is gone, the porphyry remains)Did Barbarossa fling his mantle off,And, kneeling, on his neck receive the footOf the proud pontiff.Rogers.The church of St. Mark, one of the most celebratedtemples in the christian world, was originally built inthe ninth century, when Giovanni Participation was Dogeof Venice. The breve, or inscription, in the hall of theGreat Council, recording the deeds of the doges, alludesto this fact in the following words : — " Sub me EcclesiaSancti March conditur, ubique corpus deponitur."The church thus erected, having been consumed byfire in the year 976, was replaced by the present edifice,which was completed in the time of Domenico Silvio,Mho was elected Doge in 10/1. It exhibits a singularmixture of classical and oriental architecture, whichhas been severely but justly criticised by Mr. Forth.Though most of its materials came from Greece, theircombination is neither Greek, nor Gothic, nor Basilica,nor Saracenic, hut a fortuitous jumble of all. A front,divided by a gallery, and a roof, hooded with mosquescupolas., give it a strange unchristian look. Nowherehave I seen so many columns crowded into so small aspace. Near three hundred are stuck on the pillars ofthe front, and three hundred more on the balustradeTHE CHURCH OF ST. MARK. 103above. A like profusion prevails in the interior, whichis dark, heavy, barbarous, nay, poor, in spite of all theporphyry, and oriental marbles, and glaring mosaics thatwould enrich the walls, the vaults, and pavements. Infact, such a variety of colours would impair the effect ofthe purest architecture."Being come into the church," says Evelyn, " yousee nothing and tread on nothing but what is precious.The floor is all inlaid with agates, lazuli, cancerous,jaspers, porphyries, and other rich marbles, admirablealso for the work 3 the walls sumptuously incrusted, andpresenting to the imagination the shapes of men, birds,houses, flowers, and a thousand varieties. The roof isof most excellent mosaic. But what most persons admire,is the new work of the emblematic tree at theother passage out of the church. In the midst of thisrich volta rise five cupolas, the middle very large, and sustainedby thirty-six marble columns, eight of which areof precious marbles j under these cupolas is the highaltar, on which is a reliquary of several sorts of jewels,engraved with figures after the Greek manner, and setI her with plates of pure gold. The altar is coveredwith a canopy of ophir, on which is sculptured the storyof the Bible, and so on the pillars, which are of Pariannimble, that rapport it. Behind these are four othercolumns of transparent and true oriental alabaster, broughthither out of the ruins of Solomon's temple, as theysit."The mosaic work in the church of St. Mark was introducedby the Doge Domenico Silvio, who restored theedifice, after its destruction l>\ fire in the preceding centoTHE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.turn 5 but the more splendid mosaics which adorn itswalls were executed, in the year 1545, by two brothersof the name of Zuccati, who worked under the directionand from the designs of Titian.Speaking of the mosaics which decorate this church,Lanzi says, " The art of mosaic work in stone and colouredglass at that time attained such a degree of perfectionin Venice that Vasari observed, with surprise,that it would not be possible to effect more with colours.The church and portico of St. Mark remain an invaluablemuseum of the kind, where, commencing with theeleventh century, we may trace the gradual progress ofdesign belonging to each age up to the present, as exhibitedin many works in mosaic, beginning from theGreeks and continued by the Italians. They chieflyconsist of histories from the Old and New Testament,and at the same time furnish very interesting noticesrelating to civil and ecclesiastical antiquity."The singular operation of painting in mosaic is thusperformed. The picture which is to be imitated inmosaic is placed at some distance behind the artist,parallel to the wall on which it is to be copied. Theartist sits upon a bench with quantities of niarbV*, stone,or glass, of various colours, on his right hand. The piecesare mostly square in shape, and larger or smaller accordingto the distance at which the work is to be viewed;The stones and glass are of every variety and of evendifferent shade, and are assorted in several boxes, like theletters in a printing office. On the left hand of the artistlie the various toads necessary in the execution of hislabours, and upon the bench on which he sits is fixed aTHE CHURCH OF ST. MARK. 105piece of iron,, with the edge upwards, on which, with ahammer, he shapes the pieces of stone, 8cc. to a propersize, as the work requires. In the morning he spreadsupon the wall a layer of cement sufficient to afford himoccupation for the day ; and being seated on the bench,and turning back from time to time to observe the picture,he selects pieces of suitable colours to imitate thoseof the picture, and fixes them in the cement. It is obviousthat an art like this must require very great skilland practice.The church of St. Mark was long celebrated as beingthe depository of the Evangelist's body, of the translationof which to Venice a singular account is given in cue ofthe ancient Italian historians. The king of Alexandriahaving resolved to build a palace, collected the most preciousmaterials from every side for that purpose, and didnot even spare the church of St. Mark, where the bodyof the Evangelist reposed. It happened that at this periodtwo Venetians, Bono de Malaraocco and Rustic de ,visiting the church, were struck with the grief exhibitedby the attendant priests, and inquired into itsLearning their apprehensions of the church beingdespoiled, the strangers entreated from them permissionto remove the relies of the saint, not only promisingthem a I ward, hut also the lasting gratitudetheir fellow-citizens, the Venetians. The priests at firstmeat with a decided e, but when theyrants of the king busily employed infishing the-acred edifice, they yielded to the instancesof the Italians. The difficult) now was to con\. \ tin body on board on ofth< Venetian ships, of which106 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.there were several in the port of Alexandria, and at thesame time to conceal the circumstance from the knowledgeof the inhabitants, who held the remains of theEvangelist in high veneration on account of the miracleswhich were performed through their agency. The bodyof St. Luke being removed, was replaced by that of St.Claudia ; but a miraculous perfume which spread itselfthrough the church when the holy relics were broughtto light nearly betrayed the removal. In transportingthe body through the city to the port, it became necessaryto adopt some expedient which should prevent thecuriosity both of the infidels and of the Christians frombeing awakened. The body was accordingly depositedin a large hamper, surrounded with vegetables, and coveredwith pieces of pork, an article which every goodMussulman holds in abhorrence. Those who accompaniedthe hamper were ordered to cry Khanzir asthey went, which, in the oriental tongue, signified pork.Having succeeded in reaching the vessels, the preciousburden w r as suspended in the shrouds, to prevent discovery,till the ship put to sea. Scarcely had the Venetiansleft the port when an awful storm arose, and hadnot the Evangelist himself appeared to Bone de ,and advised him to furl his sails, the vessel musthave been lost. On their arrival at Venice the wholecity was transported with joy. The presence of thesaint promised perpetual splendour to the republic. r l hebody was received bv the senate with the same wordswith which his Master had saluted the saint in prison :Peace be unto thee, Mark, my Evangelist !" Venicenas filled with festival?, music, and prayers, and theTHE CHURCH OF ST. MARK. 10/liolv relics were conducted, amidst hymns and incense,to the ducal chapel. The Doge, Justinian Participate,dying a short time after this event, bequeathed asum of money to build a church to the saint, which, aswe have seen, was accomplished under his brother andsuccessor, Giovanni Participation. In allusion to thesetranslations of the saint's body, the breve attached tothe name of Justinian Participation in the hall of theGreat Council, exhibits the following inscription :Corporis alta datum mihi Sancti gratia March.The funzioni, or great religious offices of the church,have always been performed with splendour and magnificencein the church of St. Mark. Upon one occasion,it is said, that, during the elevation of the host, thesenate, who assisted at the ceremony, and the whole assemblykneeling, a scrupulous English gentleman remainedstanding. A senator sent a message to him, desiring himto kneel, but our countryman disregarded the intimation.The senator then going to him in person, repeated his request." Sir," said the Englishman, " I don't hold withsubstantiation." " Ne anche io," said the senator,warmly, " pero ginocchione, o for di chest." " Xor Icither; but down on your knees, or get out of the church."During the performance of the same ceremony at Rome,and in the presence of the sovereign pontiff, Lady Millerr« d upon this proof of stout protestantism, whichwas laster ed to pa * unnoticed. " Whilst standing, Ilooked about me, and a- far ;i> 1 could see all were ontheir knees. I turned myself towards the pontiff, andcaught his eyOj but he did not look SOOT at me, and108 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.seemed only to notice the singularity of my standing up ;nor was I reprimanded afterwards, either by his Holinessor by any of the Romans."In visiting the church of St. Mark, the treasury 7 of thesaint was always an object of great curiosity to travellers,more especially as the obtaining access to it was a matterof some difficulty. The keys of the treasury werecommitted to the custody of three procurators of St.Mark, the presence of one of whom was necessary wheneverthe doors were opened. The relics were containedin one room, and the jewels and other rich curiosities inanother. The temporal treasury was formerly very rich,and the strangers who visited it were carefully watched.At the showing of it," says Mr. Wright, " the procuratorwas closely present himself." It contained the corno orstate-cap of the Doge, twelve golden breastplates, adornedwith precious stones, and twelve crowns, said to havebeen worn by the maids of honour of the empress Helena,together with several large and valuable gems. Howell,in his " Familiar Letters," tells us, that he saw there " ahuge iron chest, as tall as himself, that had no lock,but a crevice through which they cast in the gold thatwas bequeathed to St. Mark in legacies, whereon therewas engraved this proud motto :Quando quest scipio s' aprilTutti '1 monde tremor."One of the most remarkable curiosities in the treasure)of St. Mark is a very ancient copy of the Gospels, thehandwriting of .which the piety of the Venetians has attributedto their patron saint. This volume was care-theCHURCH OF ST. MARK. 109fully examined bv the learned Montauban, who was ofopinion that it was written upon papyrus, and that thelanguage was the Latin, and not the Greek. The greatantiquity of the manuscript, and its very imperfect preservation,rendered it extremely difficult to decipher anyof the characters. Montauban, intimately acquainted ashewas with MSS., tells us that he had never seen anyMS. that seemed to be of greater antiquity than this.It was obtained by the Venetians from Friuli, and wasconducted to the church of St. Mark amid the applauseof the people and the ringing of bells.Among the other relics which composed the celebratedtreasure of this church, and which were regarded asof inestimable value by the Venetians, were a small quantityof the supposed blood of our Saviour ; a cross of gold,adorned with precious stones, in the midst of which wasa piece of wood, said to have been part of the treeon which he suffered j one of the nails with which hepierced; four of the thorns which composed hiscrown; a part of the column to which he was bound; a• slit of the skull of St. John the Baptist; besides avariety of no less veritable remains. There werealso deposited here a sapphire, weighing ten ounces, togetherwith other pre* i- • of similar value, and agreat Dumber of candelabra and golden i od lurepreserve d the ducal crown. u^c<\ only on the mostsolemn public festivals, and which astonished the speckI»\ the pearls and diamonds of inconceivable beautywhich it was coi red.While on this Subjects u< ought not to omit mentionof the celebrated painting of s miracle of St. Mark by110 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Tintoret, the noblest and most masterly he ever produced.He received the commission from the governorsof the fraternity. It was on an immense scale, andthe subject represented Saint Mark rescuing one of hisdevotees from a violent and unjust death. The piousservant of a knight of Provence went, against the will ofhis master, to see the holy relics of St. Mark, and, onhis return, the knight ordered him to be seized, to havehis eyes put out, and his legs broken. Tintoret haschosen the moment when the servant is seen in bonds,surrounded by his executioners and instruments of torture.The saint is seen as having just appeared in theair 5 while the prisoner remains uninjured by the blowsattempted to be inflicted on him. The astonishment,the terror, and confusion, amidst a host of spectators,variously and richly habited, are powerfully expressfear, awe, or admiration, are depicted on their features ;and one of the attendants is seen in the act of exhibitingto his master, who is seated above him, the hammer andthe fragments of wood. Amongst other figures, a womanis supporting herself on a pedestal while leaning back tosee the sudden miracle which seems to rivet every one tothe spot. It is one of the few great triumph? of the art,and in it Tintoret surpassed himself. If we mistake not,the study for this noble production is now in the valuablecollection of Mr. Rogers.THE CAMPANILE.Underneath,Where the archangel, as alighted there,Bless the city from the topmost tower,His arms extended — there in monstrous leagueTwo phantom shapes were sitting, side by side,Or up, and, as in sport, chasing each other,Horror and Mirth.Rogers.It was mentioned in the former volume of this workthat the Campanile of St. Mark was the scene of Galileo'sobservations while resident in Venice. It ought to beadded, that when the philosopher, in the year 1 609, exhibitedto the Doge and to the senate his discovery ofthe telescope, he was munificently rewarded by a decreeconfirming him in his professorship for life, and by thedoubling of his annual salary. A curious anecdote respectingthe prosecution of philosophical studies in theCampanile is related by the author of the lately publishedand excellent "Life of Galileo." Sirturi describesa ludicrous violence which was done to himself, when,with the first telescope which he had succeeded inmaking, lie went up into the tower of St. Mark at\ 11 the v;iin hope of being there entirely nnmo-d. (Jnrockiry be was teen by some idlers in theacrowd so<»n collected round him, who insistedon taking posses-inn of his instrument, and, handing itone to the other, detained him then' for several boors,112 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.till their curiosity was satisfied, when lie was allowedto return home. Hearing them also inquire eagerly atwhat inn he lodged, he thought it better to quit Veniceearly the next morning, and prosecute his observationsin a less inquisitive neighbourhood.The loggia, at the foot of the Campanile, was builtfrom the designs of the celebrated Sansovino, whosegenius has added so much beauty to the Piazza di S.Marco. The edifice is of the Corinthian order, ornamentedwith vers* rich columns, and with four niches, ineach of which stands a bronze statue of the size of life,and executed with the greatest skill. It was the originalintention of the architect that the loggia should extendall round the tower, so as to form a perfect base to it,and not be confined, as at present, to one of the frontsonly. The marble of which the loggia is built is allowedto be of great beauty and rarity.About the beginning of the last century, the Campanileis said to have been the scene of a singular andfatal catastrophe, the narrative of which has never, webelieve, hitherto appeared in print. In the autumn ofthe year 1713 two strangers arrived at Ravenna — anelderly lady with a young and beautiful girl, who appearedto be her daughter, and whose health had evidentlysuffered from recent illness. They only stayedat Ravenna till they could obtain possession of one ofthe small retired villas situated on the borders of thePineta, or Pine Forest, which stretches over the hillsalmost as far as Rimini. In this retreat, attended onlyby a single servant, they passed their time in the mustsecluded manner, seldom even appearing in the open airTHE CAMPANILE. I 1.)until the shadows of evening had begun to descend.They neither sought nor permitted any intercourse withthe few persons who resided in their neighbourhood, norwere they ever known to receive any communications byletter. The whole occupation of the elder stranger appearedto be devoted to her young and suffering companion,whose health seemed to be slowly consuming under somemental disease.In the early part of the spring which followed theirarrival at Ravenna they were, as usual, taking theiralmost twilight walk in the Pineta, when they were suddenlyconfronted by one of a numerous pack of wolves,which had been driven even thus far from the mountainsby the severity of the past winter. In general these animalsfled at the appearance of the human figure, but thewolf which now crossed the path of the strangers waswished with hunger. As they stopped, it eyed themintently, and then crept towards them with that stealthypace which too surely marked its design. The elderlady turned in terror and fled ; but the younger, withmore presence of mind and apparently with little fearI'" h< t nun safety, kept her place. The wolf naturallymade her who retreated his prey, and springing uponher, threw her to the ground. It needed not the Shrieksof the victim to bring to her assistance her young companion,who with ;i -■ which the nerves <>f fewmen could have furnished, threw her delicate and weaponlessarms round the body of the various animal, andattempted t<> drag him from his prey. As she Struggledwith him for victory, her beautiful countenance, whichusually wore a look of deep melancholy, assumed .01 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.pression of the most impassioned fierceness — her glitteringeye, her perfectly pale cheek, and her arched andquivering lip, all bespoke the intensity and violence ofthe passionate terror with which her soul was stirred.The animal had just quitted his prey in order to springupon his helpless assailant, when he suddenly received ablow from a couteau de chasse which cast him, writhing,to the ground. The aid thus opportunely afforded wasfrom the arm of a young hunter, who, passing homewardfrom the chase, had been attracted to the spot by thecries of the elder lady.Camillo Ranuzzi was the heir of a noble Bolognese family,and as such had been educated with that indulgencewhich is generally so destructive to the character. Inhim, however, its injurious effects were counterbalancedby a singular sweetness of temper and generosity of heart.Ifwas only in the pursuit of objects upon which his inclinationswere deeply fixed that he displayed the recklessand self-willed pertinacity of purpose which his injudiciouseducation had fostered.The accidental service he had rendered to the strangersled him, in despite of their retiring habits, to somethinglike a friendly communication with them, and it was notlong before the feelings of interest with which he hadregarded them on their rescue were changed, towardsone of them, into the deeper sentiment of admirationand love. It was impossible that a heart so ardent asthat of Ranuzzi could remain insensible to the beauty ofthe younger stranger, heightened as that beauty was bythe mystery of aer situation, and the soft and tendermelancholy of her manners. For some time after theirTHE CAMPANILE. ] 15first acquaintance lie was received by the strangers withthe gratitude and respect due to the preserver of theirlives ; but no sooner had his attentions to the youngerassumed a more decided character, than the conduct ofboth of them towards him suffered a change. The elderlady became cold and distant, while the manners of hercompanion exhibited a severity, and sometimes even afierceness, strangely at variance with the usual tenor ofher mind. The heart of Camillo Ranuzzi, however, wasnot one to be depressed by the frowns of beauty, andthe position in which he stood with his friends renderedit impossible for them to dismiss him from their presence.Perhaps the ardour and sincerity which he displayedin the prosecution of his suit were not whollywithout their effect, and Camillo congratulated himselfin the reflection, that he had not, at all events, lostgr pond in the esteem of her whose heart he sought.In the meanwhile the health of the elder lady rapidlygave way, and she who had with such assiduous tendernesswatched over her young and delicate charge,doomed to receive from her hands in return a requital ofeditions. But cither her young companion was lesssuccessful in her cares, or the disease under which thesufferer languished was of a more fatal character r, foir an illness of only a few weeks the lady expired.;uill<>, daring tin a of distress, had acted thepart-if ;i judicious and constant friend, seldom encroachingupon the mflFerers by his presence, but providingthing that lichen and art could command f<>r theirrelief. At last, when she whom In so passionately lovedwas V ft in Botitodej h< again presented himself bt110* THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.her, and it was in that hour of her bereavement and anguishthat he first heard her allude to her past history.Do not' she said, " imagine that I need consolationunder this blow. My heart has no room for fresh suffering."Time passed on, and the attentions of Ranuzzi werereceived as before, coldly and austerely. At length thevehemence of his temper would have way, and he pouredforth his passion at her feet in language which seemed towarm even the coldness of her heart. Yet, at first, itwas to anger only that her bosom was kindled, and sheanswered him with the flashing eye and the quiveringlip that he had marked when he rescued her from theenraged animal with which she was struggling. But abetter sentiment soon assumed the place of this passionatedisplay of feeling, and, once more, with the melancholykindness which generally characterized her manner, shebesought him to forget her. " You know. not what youask," she said, " when you ask for my love ; you cannottread the pathway that leads to my heart." Camillostill repeated his vows and his entreaties, and the strangerat length said, " It is due to your constancy and yourtenderness, that I should keep you no longer in suspense :meet me in the Pine Forest tomorrow at the twilight."Camillo, with a heart full of anxious hope, was faithfulto the appointment. The stranger was already waitingfor him, with a countenance from which some strongmaster passion had banished all its usual bland and beautifulexpression. A resolute sternness reigned over everyfeature. It was evidently no maidenly confession of attachmentthat was about to proceed from her lips, andTHE CAMPANILE. 1 17the heart of Camillo sank as he beheld her. She atonce entered upon her story, — a story of bitter wrongsand of inhuman deceits practised upon her young andspotless heart. When she reached the catastrophe of herhistory,, her voice sank into a scarcely audible whisper,which, approaching Camillo closely, she breathed into hisear. Her tones, though low, faltered not, and her eyewas perfectly tearless. u And now," she said, " yoursuit is answered. In that day of extremity, when thetraitor abandoned me for another, on my knees I vowedthat upon him who should bring to me the sweet tidingsthat he lived not, I would bestow soul and body, heartand hand ; but such task is not for you. Farewell forever! "To Bay that Camillo was thunderstruck would ill describehis situation. The blast of the lightning wouldhave deadened the feelings which in him were excitedto a state of tumultuous frenzy. Love, disappointment,and revenge, filled his heart with an agony whichalmost threatened his dissolution. In the spot wherehad left him, he long strove with the passionswhich agitated him, but which, ere he left the shade offorest, had subsided into one dark and deadly puref< u day after these transactions, a> the young• ' DnrazsOj in company with hi beautifulB the poetic garden al Vir nea. underarchway <>f Palladio, he was suddenly confronted bya al '. h" Btadkmsly placed himself In his way*The count end ca y our d to avoid him, hut tin<1 in roderj thrusting him from his path. Placing118 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.his countess in the care of one of his friends, Durazzofollowed the offender, to demand the cause of this insolence."My name," said the aggressor, "is CamilloRanuzzi; and I will repeat the insult wherever I meet you,though it were before the footstool of the pontiffs throne."Every explanation was denied, and a promise of satisfactionon the following morning was all that Durazzo couldobtain. They met at daybreak in the deserted area ofthe ancient amphitheatre ; and so eager was Ranuzzi forthe encounter that he had passed the night amongst theruins. The contest was begun in silence, till, in makinga pass which he imagined would be successful, Ranuzziexclaimed, " Traitor ! remember Beatrice Monti !" Thevoice of Camillo produced a more deadly effect than hissword, which merely grazed the breast of his adversary.The weapon of Durazzo fell from his hand ; he stood foramoment, as though irresolute, and then, opening hisbreast, cried, " Strike ! your sword shall be welcome !"Camillo had not expected this termination of the rencontre,and the generosity of his temper was roused.He vainly entreated Durazzo to resume the combat ; butfinding himself defeated in his object, he passionatelybroke his own sword, and retreated from the theatre.From this period Count Durazzo endured, with a patienceand insensibility, which they who knew his spiritand courage could scarcely credit, a series of the m stextraordinary persecutions from the hands of CamillaRanuzzi. Taunts, threats, and provocations of the mostgalling description were vainly showered upon him j andeven when, wrought up to a frenzy of passion, Ranuzzistruck him as he was walking, surrounded by a numberTJ9E CAMPANILE. ] ]<>of noblemen, on the Broglie at Venice, the only answerwhich he gave to the blow was, " it is just !"Foiled in his attempt to provoke his adversary to anequal combat, it seemed that the mind of Camillo began to contemplate darker designs. He avoidedall personal collision with Durazzo, but still continuedpertinaciously to dog his footsteps. During a tour whichthe count was prevailed upon to take through the southof Italy, he was sedulously followed by Ranuzzi, whonever suffered a day to elapse without his having a viewof his victim. Early one brilliant morning Durazzo havingascended the Campanile to view the magnificent prospectwhich its summit affords, did not return to his palace,where his countess awaited him. Anxious inquiries intothe cause of his absence were instituted, and in the eveninghis body was discovered on the winding ascent of thei, pierced with seven wounds, each of which wouldhaw proved mortal.On the following night, as Beatrice Monti stood at thedoor of her cottage, she heard the sound of horses' feetrapidly approaching through the Pine Forest. In a nomena horseman emerged from the shade, waving in hishand a white handkerchief stained with blood as he roderapidly towards her. In another instant he was at herFlinging her arm round him, she kis>< <l his < Ihis !i|><, his • Not a word had D Spoken byeither, when they were Surrounded and mad* prisonersmm ii , who had ridden rapidly upon the stepsof the fugitive.After the interval of a few weeks from this time thetrial of ( amillo Ranuzzi and Beatrice Monti for the nuncioTHE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.der of the young Count Durazzo was expected to takeplace in the criminal court at Ravenna. The gaolerswere despatched for their prisoners., and the populacewithin and without the court were anxiously expectingtheir arrival. But the expectation was disappointed. —The messengers returned pale and terrified. — Both theoffenders were found dead in their cells.THE LIBRARY OF ST. MARK.M\ library, a dukedom large enough !Shakspeare.The beautiful building in which was formerly depositedthe Library of St. Mark is situated on one side of thePiazza di S. Marco. The architect was Sansovino, towhose genius Venice was indebted for many of her mostmagnificent structures. Jacopo Tutti, who afterwardsassumed the name of Sansovino, was born at Florenceabout the year 1479, and became the pupil of a sculptor,Andrea Contucci da Monte a Sansovino. His labours atFlorence having rendered him much celebrated, he transferredhis studio to Rome, where he became known, notonly as a sculptor, but also as an architect of the highesttalent. On the sack of Rome in 1527 Sansovino wascompelled to fly, and retreated to Venice, intending fromthence to proceed to the court of France, whither he hadbeen invited. Having been called upon to superintendthe repairs of the Church of St. Mark, he executed thisduty so much to the satisfaction of the senate, that heappointed t<> the office of " Protnmaestro de' signorienratori di 8. Marco' <>r chief architect <»f tinpublic. A boose and a salary of 180 ICUdl wire shed to thifl office. The first building erected in Venicefrom , '" design of Sansovino voss the Mecca, <>rMint, which was followed hy that <>( tin Library, dt -scribed l>\ Vasari aa la bellissima e ri-theLANDSCAPE ANNUAL.chissima fabrics della Liberia di S. Marco, con tantoordines d'entagli, di cornice, di colonne, capitally e mezzofigure per tutti opera, che e una maraviglia." In theexecution of this work, however, the reputation of was greatly endangered. Owing to some unforeseencause, the roof of the Library fell in, an accidentwhich was attributed by the senate to the negligence ofthe architect, who was thrown into prison, heavily fined,and deprived of his office of protomaestro. From thisconfinement, however, he was soon liberated, and beingrestored to his official situation, he continued to ornamentthe city with his splendid and classical designs.The nobility of Venice, who had hitherto preserved thatsameness in the architecture of their palaces which isstill observable, availed themselves of the genius of ,who, in addition to his public buildings, ornamentedthe city with many magnificent private edifices.The first palace erected from his designs was that ofGeorgia Corner. The remainder of his life was spentby Sansovino at Venice, where he died in 1570, at theadvanced age of ninety-one, having embellished thatcity not only with its most magnificent buildings, butalso with many beautiful specimens of sculpture. Te-manna,who has written his life, has summed up hischaracter in a few striking words: — " Jacopo era natoper primeggiare ma non ove fosse Michelangelo."The Library of St. Mark is said to be indebtedfor its origin to the generosity of Petrarch. The poethad visited Venice in the character of ambassador fromthe Visconti, to negotiate peace between the republic andGenoa; and the consideration and respect with which heTHE LIBRARY OF SAINT MARK. 1*23was received appear to Lave produced an impressionupon his mind highly favourable to the Venetians. Visitingthe city on another occasion, he announced his intentionof bequeathing to the republic his library, in thefollowing letter addressed to the council: — "FrancescoPetrarch desires to bequeath to St. Mark the Evangelist,the books winch he now possesses, or which he shall infuture possess. He would impose this condition only,that they shall be neither sold, alienated, nor dispersed,and that some place, secure from water and fire, may beassigned for the preservation of the library, in memoryof the donor, to the glory of the patron saint, and forthe consolation of studious men, who may frequent itwith pleasure and advantage. In forming this wish hedoes not forget that the books are neither very preciousnor very numerous, but he indulges a hope that the collectionmay increase under the auspices of this gloriousrepublic. The illustrious nobles, the patriotic citizens,and even strangers may in future enrich it by bestowingupon it portions of their own collections, so that atlength it may rival the most famous libraries of antiquity.The least enlightened persons will perceive that thismonument will not be useless in forwarding the glory oftheir country; that he has laid the first foundations ofthe ( dihee will ever be a source of happiness t<> theor." The Venetians gratefully accepted this inestimablepint, which became the foundation of thery nf >t. Mark. Amongst the manuscripts coll.'petrarch irene one of Homer, presented to him byNicholas lor from the Emperor of theSophocles, which he bad received born Lentils124 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Pilate, his instructor in the Greek language 3 a Latintranslation of the Iliad and the Odyssey by the sameperson, copied by the hand of his pupil Boccaccio, togetherwith the greater part of the works of Cicero,which the poet had himself transcribed. It seems doubtfulwhether the whole of these manuscripts came intothe possession of the Venetian state, since, according tosome writers, the library of Petrarch was dispersed athis death. Guinguene supposes that after his donation tothe senate he had formed another collection. VariousMSS. exist in public libraries, which were formerly inthe possession of Petrarch h 3 a fact which proves eitherthat the whole of his books were not presented to theVenetians, or that by their most culpable negligencethey were subsequently dispersed.Indeed the history of the volumes thus munificentlypresented to the Venetians by Petrarch is involved inmuch obscurity. It is certain that a mansion was assignedto the poet, the Palazzo delle due Torn, of which he hashimself left a description ; and it is supposed by DeSade, that in this house the books were deposited.Other writers, again, have stated, that the collection wasplaced in a small room above the church of St. Mark ;a supposition which was strengthened by the discoveryof some ancient MSS. in that place in the year 1635.The small number of the volumes thus found would showthat the library of Petrarch was by no means extent \Unless these books formed part of the poet's library, notrace remains of the donation. Certainly, the volumespresented by the poet were not deposited by the senatein a public library, according to the intentions of theTHE LIBRARY OF ST. MARK. ] °.~>donor, since, in the time of Cardinal Bessarion, no institutionof that kind existed in Venice. It is just, however,to add, in the words of Tiraboschi : " Al Petrarchsi dee solo la lode di averse conceit il penser, e factocio che in lui era per eseguirlo."The passionate attachment of Petrarch to literature isnowhere more forcibly evinced than in those passages ofhis works in which he speaks of his library. In a letter tohis friend Francesco Belli, he calls it " the only solaceof his soul, the only stay of his life." Similar expressionsare profusely scattered throughout his letters. During tithepoet's residence at Yaucluse his librarian was an oldand faithful domestic, whom he has admirably describedin one of his familiar epistles. " He knew not how toread, yet he was the guardian of my library. Withanxious eye he watched over my most rare and ancientcopies, which, by long use, he could distinguish fromthose which were more modern, or of which I myselfwas the author. Whenever I consigned a volume to hiscustody, he was transported with joy : he pressed it tohis bosom with sighs : with great reverence he repeatedthe author's name, and seemed as if he had received anaccession of learning and happiness from the sight andtouch of a book."Stimulated, probably, by the example of Petrarch,Cardinal Bessarion, in the year 1 168, presented to therepublic of Venice his rare collection of Greek and Latinscript. In the letter which he addressed on this• ion to the Doge ;mel senate* he stated that, ifrom bia boyhood, he had exerted all hia labour., care,and study, in the collection of books in ever branch of126 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.literature. That, in his early youth, he had not only copiedseveral volumes in his own hand, but had expended allthe little money he could save in the purchase of manuscripts.That although he had ever been earnestly bent onsuch acquisitions, yet that, after the destruction of Constantinople,he had consumed his entire strength, care,power, and industry, in increasing his collection of theGreek writers ; and that he had now selected the city ofVenice as the depository of his library, on account of itsadmirable government, the number of Greeks who frequentedit, and the benefits which he had himself derivedfrom that city. Has splendid gift was gratefullyreceived bv the Venetians, and bv a decree of the senatewas lodged in the ducal palace. The learned Rebelliouswas the first librarian to whom the care of this collectionwas confided.At the period of the extinction of the republic, thebooks which formed the library of St. Mark were removedfrom the beautiful edifice of Sansovino, and depositedin the ducal palace. The hall of the GreatCouncil, a large and noble room, was prepared for theirreception, and poets, and philosophers, and scholars, nowfill the magnificent apartment where the sovereigns ofVenice were accustomed to hold their councils. Thehall likewise contains a collection of antique statuespresented to the republic by Grimani, the patriarch ofAquileia, besides the splendid collection of pictures, ofwhich some notice was taken in the former volume ofthis work.The chief benefactors to the library of St. Mark, a.its illustrious founders, Petrarch and Bessarion, wereThir LIBRARY OF ST. MARK, 127Geronimo Justinian, Jacopo Nan, several members ofthe illustrious family of Contain, Venturi Leonine,Piero Morosiui, and Nicol Manuzzi. The librarians towhom the literary treasures of St. Mark were committedwere of two classes, the superior or honorary librarian,and the acting librarian. In the list of the former, manyof the most celebrated Venetian names are to be found —the scholars, the warriors, and the doges of Venice. Ofthe acting librarians many have been distinguished bytheir attachment to literature, and by their successfulefforts in its cause.Venice has always occupied an illustrious station inthe republic of letters. She claims, though the claimhas been disputed, the glory of having been the first tointroduce the art of printing into Italy. The manuscripttreasures of St. Mark's library, and the learning andmunificence of the Venetian nobility, soon drew to thatcity the most distinguished printers of the fifteenth century.The editions principes of many of the classicalwriters were ushered from the Venetian press, which alsogave to the world the first edition of the Bible printedin Hebrew characters. To Venice also is referred theinvention of newspapers, a very remarkable fact, whenthe nature of the government is considered. The nameGazette is derived from gazette, the small piece of moneypaid for the Venetian news-letters. In literature, theannals of V« ni e present a long roll of splendid names —scholars, poi ts, and philosophers.It would be unjust, in noticing the literature of Venice,to omit the name of a man, who* extraordinary powersas a linguist were not inferior to those of the celebrated128 thi: landscape annual.Mezzofanti, of whom some account was given in theformer volume of " The Landscape Annual." BonifaceFinetti was born towards the end of the seventeenthcentury at Venice. Having become a friar of the orderof St. Dominic, he availed himself of his religious characterand connexions to procure from the missionariesdespatched to preach in partibus infidelity, specimensof the literature of almost every country in the world.With that intense zeal which such studies seem to inspire,he devoted himself to the acquisition and criticalexamination of languages, and for sixty years employedhimself exclusively in these painful and laborious pursuits.His library presented a strange assemblage ofgrammars, dictionaries, bibles, and documents in almostevery known language 5 and he meditated, and in partexecuted, a stupendous work upon all the languages ofthe world. In his seventieth year he published a specimenof this vast undertaking, comprising a dissertationon the Hebrew, and its derivative tongues. In his prefaceto this volume he has traced out the course whichhe intended to pursue in his larger work. The verycatalogue of the languages which were to form the subjectof Finetti's dissertations is appalling. Amongst theEast Indian tongues we have the Malacca, the malabar,the Malegamic, the Tumuli, the Telugic, theSiamese, and some others ; amongst the Tartar languages,the Maurice, the Mongulese, the Tanguttan, tfceCalmucic, and the Crimean. Of the African tongues, werethe Tamagzet, the Concoyan, Angola, Melinda, hottentots,Madagascar, &c. " From Africa," continuesthe linguist, <c we shall sail to America, travel it all over,THE LIBRARY OF ST. MARK. \'2[)listen to the various speeches of those wild nations, andinterpret them as far as we shall be assisted by our books.Of the American languages we shall make two chapters :the first, which will be the eleventh in our work, shalltreat of the languages of North America ; and the second,which will be the twelfth in order, shall comprehendthose of South America. In the first of these two chapterswe will speak of the Mexican, the Pocomanic, theVirginian, the Algonkine, the Heroic, the Caribbean,and others ; and in the second, of the Brazilian, theChinese, the Peruvian, and others. With this chapterball terminate our long and laborious peregrination."Unfortunately Finetti did not meet with the encouragementso noble a design merited, and the only portion ofit driven to the world was the Discourse on the HebrewLanguage.HOME.GENERAL VIEW.L'antiche mura, ch' anchor time, ed ama,E trema '1 monde, quando si membraDel tempo andato, en pietro si revolve;F. i sassi dove fur chuse le membraDi ta', che non savanna senza fama,Se 1' universe pria non si dissolve.Petrarch.Rome, seen at a distance, appears impressed with all thecharacteristics of its ancient and religious glory dimmedby centuries and revolutions. The country around it issingularly desolate. Nature seems to have left it toman,and man to have left his glory there and departed.The first object which meets the eye is the Vaticanmount, with the magnificent and gorgeous pile whichrises from its summit. Xor could the stranger beholdany thing on his approach to the Eternal City more calculatedto awaken the emotions he is prepared to feel.Among the seven hills, that of the Vatican was the mostcelebrated in the earliest annals of the church. It wason its brow that the first martyrs poured out theirblood in testimony of the truth, and the sumptuousedifice, raised over the spots where they suffered, wasfor ages esteemed the sanctuary of their faith. Noteven the temple of Jerusalem, nor the church of St.Sophia at Constantinople, rich in all the wonders ofeastern art, surpassed, it is believed, the splendour of theROME. 131Vatican ; and what edifice ever exceeded it in the importanceof the events which had their origin within itswalls r The castle of St. Angelo, built above the mausoleumof the Emperor Adrian, next bursts upon the sight,and recalls to mind the eventful times when the churchwaged war with nations and their sovereigns, and theFathers of Christendom found themselves surrounded, andtheir lives put in peril by banded legions. With thisrecollection arises another as the eye rests on the imageof the angel which crowns the turrets of the castle, andwonder is mixed up with the remembrance that both thename and ensign of the fortress arose from the pretendedvisit of an angel to Gregory the Great. Immediatelyafter these prominent objects, the thousand turrets,palaces, obelisks, and temples of Rome rise into view \and the spectator pauses, awe-struck with the crowdedgrandeur of the scene.Directly before him is the Campagna, a wide and almostunvaried plain, covered with a kind of rank grass andherbage, which gives it the appearance of a vast burial-placewithout tombs. Far away in this waste lies thevast city we are contemplating, and beyond it swell thebright and picturesque hills, amid which the Latin museher favourite retreat. To the south rises theAlba; mount, now Mount Cave, green and woody aswhen ita Blades surrounded the temple of Jupiter Latialis.To the left of this mountain is Frescati, orTusculam;ai. I to the east swell the Sabine hills and the Apennines,the Conner adorned with the lovely villas tivoli andPales trinaj while between these and the bills of Viterbo,K 2132 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.which form the northern boundary of the scene, the far-famedSoracte stands in wild and lonely beauty, as ifproud of its poetical celebrity.The general appearance of this wide and impressivelandscape has been strikingly described by more thanone modern traveller. On all, the strange desolationwhich occupies so large a portion of it left a deep feelingof melancholy, and seems to have given to their detailsa tone of sadness, which forcibly conveys to the imaginationthe idea of what Rome must be, seen either in thedistance of time or space.Over this wild waste," says the author of Rome inthe Nineteenth Century, " no rural dwelling, nor scatteredhamlets, nor fields, nor gardens, such as usuallymark the approach to a populous city ? were to be seen.All was ruin. Fallen monuments of Roman days, graytowers of Gothic times, abandoned habitations of modernyears, alone meet the eye. Xo trace of man appeared,except in the lonely tomb which toll us he had been.Rome herself was all that we beheld. She stood alonein the wilderness as in the world, surrounded by a desertof her own creation — a desert which accords but toowell with her former greatness and her present decay.It may perhaps be soothing to the contemplation of thetraveller, or the fancy of the poet, to see the once beautifulCampagna di Roma abandoned to the wild luxury. neeof nature, and covered only with the defaced tomb ofher tyrants, and the scarce visible remains of the villas ofher senators ; but it is melancholy to reason and humanityto behold an immense tract of fertile land, in the immediateROME. 133vicinity of one of the greatest cities of the world, pestilentwith disease and death; and to know that, like adevouring grave, it annually engulfs all of human kindthat toil upon its surface. The unfortunate labourersemployed in the scanty cultivation occasionally given tothe soil to enable it to produce pasturage for cattlegenerally fall victims to the baneful climate. Amidstthe fearful loneliness and stillness of this scene of desolation,as we advanced through the long dreary tractthat divided us from Rome, a few wretched peasants,whose looks bespoke them victims of slow consumingdisease, occasionally reminded us of the tremendousravage of human life which this invisible and mysteriousp«»wer is annually making."Once more we look, and all is still as night,All desolate! groves, temples, palaces,pt from the sight; and nothing visible,.Amid the sulphurous vapours that exhaleAs from a land accurst, save here and thereAn empty tomb, a fragment like the hmbOf some dismembered giant.The author of the Classical Tour expresses himself inasimilar manner respecting the solemn grandeur, blendedwith an air of desolation, which overhangs this remarkablebat he adds to his reflections those whichSpring from the recollection of what a mighty share Romei in tin affairs of Christendom \ — at first, and atn ny tin, good — but, in the pr of her career,for how much c\ il !The bistor) of no country in the world is so fraught134 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.with interest as that of Rome, even after her decline andfall. True, she lay prostrate for some time, and seemedto be the mere crouching slave of her rude but valiantconquerors. Her ancient dignity was no more ; thespirit of her people appeared to have fled for ever ; amidthe fallen she was the most fallen ! and in the dark agesof European states, the stormiest of the clouds whichveiled the horizon was that which overhung imperialRome.In the midstA city stands, her domes and turrets crown'dWith many a cross ; but they that issue forthWander like strangers, who had built amongThe mighty nuns, silent, spiritless ;And on the road where once we might have metCaesar and Cato, and men more than kings,We meet, none else, the pilgrim and the beggar.But while thus divested of all the grandeur whichconquest or the pride of her citizens had won, whileshe thus lay outstretched but the lifeless corpse ofCaesar's capital, a new principle of life was fomenting inher veins, and she was destined again to awe the worldby her name, and with a power more irresistible than shehad exercised in the very zenith of her former glory.The struggle between Paganism and Christianity hadtried the hearts of more than one people ; and everyconquest which the latter made, imbued the nationwhere it established itself with strength and fortitude,as well as the love of truth. The moral influenceof this religion was thus of incalculable weight in theprogress of returning civilization, not merely by theBOMB. 135positive value and rationality of its doctrines, but theeffect which the necessary exertion employed in its establishmenthad on many successive generations. Rome, itis probable, would, but for this, have lain for ever prostrate,and the rank grass of her campagna covered thespots now adorned with temples and palaces.The triumphs of the truth in this destined seat ofspiritual tyranny were productive of a pure and nobleheroism, which eclipsed the brightness of human virtueson their own soil. The first scions of the churchplanted here were men whose minds and hearts weredevoted to the welfare of their species, and who as cheerfullyshed their blood on the block or the cross for themcause of truth, as the proudest Roman had ever drawnhis sword in view of the capitol and a crown. But thecontest was scarcely decided when a feeling entirelyforeign to the new faith sprung up in the bosoms of itssupporters. The shrines in which honour and ambitionhad been worshipped by suppliant thousands were nowopen to Christian priests and bishops. It was speedilyforgotten that, though the devotees of Jupiter and Marsno longer wielded the sword, the same piety which hadwrung it from their hands had still an ample field forit. Luxury, and the love of pomp — the wagons of everyreligion — were now the idols; and thinking that Truthmost certainly be enshrined in every temple which agulden cross surmounted, and that Bhe was sufficiently Balei that ensign, the self-denying, patient, humble, andlaborious men who had planted it at the foot of tinv re succeed) d by luxurious and haughty prelates.Gregory fl 9 ad i usually and right!) regarded a-136 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.the founder of papal power on subjected monarchy ; andthe letter commonly quoted to illustrate his temper whenaddressing the greatest sovereign in Europe is sufficientto establish the position. " During ten pure and fortunateyears," says he, Cl we have tasted the annual comfortof your royal letters, subscribed in purple ink withyour own hand, the sacred pledges of your attachment tothe orthodox creed of our fathers How deplorable isthe change ! how tremendous the scandal ! You nowaccuse the Catholics of idolatry ; and, by the accusation,you betray your own impiety and ignorance. To thisignorance we are compelled to adapt the grossness of ourstyle and arguments. The first elements of holy lettersare sufficient for your confusion ; and were you to entera grammar-school, and avow yourself the enemy of ourworship, the simple and pious children would be provokedto cast their hornbook at your head." Such wasthe style in which the bishops of Rome, in the eighthcentury, dared to address the most powerful monarchs ;and such were their sentiments when they were accustomedto say, " The eyes of the nations are fixed on ourhumility!"It was to this same Gregory that a conquering king ofthe fierce Lombards bowed himself, with all-he powerhe had won in his hands, and, standing at the gate of theVatican, offered to the church the richest spoils of conquest,and even his victorious sword. And the sameGregory it was who inspired the noble Pepin to armhimself in defence of a power which was shortly to overthrowthrones at its will. But the most wonderful circumstancein tnc history of papal domination is theBoys. 137violence and depravity which marked the characters ofso many of its founders. The history of ecclesiasticalRome is thus sometimes tinged with the deepest hues oftragedy, at others with the strange, uncertain coloursof popular legends ; and amid the confusion whichprevails over its earlier portions, we are only ableto discern with certainty, that ambition had too oftenthe upper hand of piety, and passion the mastery overallits fairest graces. Among the doubtful records ofthe middle, and, in this respect, dark ages, traditionaryhistory has not a more curious passage than that inwhich is recorded the singular achievement of PopeJoan. This celebrated woman, according to commonreport, was as remarkable for her various and powerfultalents, as for her enterprising courage. She was anative ofMentz in Germany ; but having become attachedto an English monk, she resolved to devote herself tohim through life, and partake in his fate whithersoeverhis labours might lead him. In order to do this, withoutscandal to her lover, she assumed the dress of a man, andthus disguised they travelled to Athens. Here she sharedin all the pursuits of the monk, profited by every meansof instruction which the city afforded, and shortly becameaccomplished in all the learning and science of the age.It happened, however, that Boon after this, Joan lostlover, who was taken Back and died. Tims left aloneand unprotected in the world, she determined on progto Home, where Bhe had no doubt her learningand eloquence would readily obtain her and support.Still retaining, therefore, her male attire, liehastened to t h« pontifical capital, and. u she had138 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.expected, was soon rendered an object of respect, by theskill with which she disputed on the most difficult questionsof the schools, and the eloquent harangues whichflowed from her tongue. Every day brought some additionto her fame ; all Rome was astonished at her universalaccomplishments ; and the increase of her reputationwas accompanied by rapid promotion in the favourof the ruling ecclesiastics.At length, while in the zenith of her glory, Pope Leobreathed his last ; and, to render her life the most remarkablea woman ever passed, Joan, it is said, was elected tofill the vacant throne. Th e confidence which had hithertosupported her did not fail her in this elevated and importantstation. As she had before manifested all thequalifications necessary to an accomplished scholar, shenow seemed to possess the virtues and dignity requiredin the supreme ruler of Christendom. By the authorityvested in the office she possessed, she made bishops andpriests, consecrated churches, administered the sacraments,and, to complete the climax with an old writeron the subject, gave men her feet to kiss. This, however,was not all. During her popedom Lothario abdicatedthe throne of the empire, and Lewis the Second,being elected in his stead, came to Rome 10 receivethe imperial crown at the hand of the pope, and wasformally invested with the insignia of his rank by Joan.So perfectly according to the tradition, was thisextraordinary woman qualified for the part she had toact, that it seems probable the imposture would neverhave been discovered had she controlled her licentiouspassions. But having found a new lover in one of theROME. ].39cardinals of her court, her intrigues proved fatal bothto her life and fame. While she was proceeding oneday, accompanied by all the pomp and splendour ofher state, to the church of the Lateran, she was suddenlytaken ill, and, being obliged to stop, was in thesight of all present delivered of a child. Her almostinstant death relieved her from the ignominious fate towhich she would most probably have been doomed ; butshe was immediately stripped of all the badges of herformer dignity, and was buried with no indication of theconspicuous part she had so lately played.The character of John the Thirteenth has also renderedhim conspicuous in the annals of the pontificate.Besides being accused of every crime which could disgracehim as a churchman, he is likewise charged withhaving committed those dark and deadly sins, which gavea sort of terrific gloom to the vices of the age. In asynod held before the Emperor Otho, he was publiclyaccused with having ordained deacons in his stables andamong his horses, with having made a mockery of thesacraments, and drunk a cup of wine to the devil. Thecharacter, however, of this pontiff is exceeded in deformityby that of the celebrated Hildebrand, or Gregory thenth. who is reported, by the old chroniclers, to have!. both before and after his elevation, the magicalarts, which he ifl said to have learnt from a prodsorcerer in Etruria. By the assistance of thisit i> also supposed that h< succeeded in removingoral of the popes ivho preceded him. Having silength succeeded in bis purpose, the Unbounded ambition<>f hi nature tai speedily manifested; and hia love140 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.of power being accompanied with considerable talents,and with an utter fearlessness of laws, human or divine,he raised the authority of the popes to an almost absolutepower over the world. His first great endeavour was toprevent the marriage of the clergy ; by doing which heconverted the Roman church into a garrison of ecclesiasticalwarriors, not prepared by their separation fromthe world to war against its vices, but to descend, wheneverthey chose, into the retreats of domestic virtue, andspoil them of their most hallowed treasures. He nextresolved to make the power of the emperors and allsecular princes bow to that of the church j and Henryof Germany was speedily made the victim of his machinations.But while the contest was yet undecided, he isreported to have suffered the greatest anxiety respectingthe issue, and one day determined to try if the sacramentalelements would not serve the same purpose as theidols of the heathen. Inquiring, therefore, at the altar,whether he should succeed in his war pith the temporalpower, but receiving no answer, he took the emblems,in the presence of his astonished and terrified cardinals,and flung them into the fire, exclaiming, at the sametime, " Could the idol gods of the heathen give themanswer of their success, and cannot thou tell mc r" Nordid he content himself with exercising his authority onlyon the great, whom it might gratify his pride to : eehumbled at his feet : his cruelty extended to the lowestof his subjects, and he seemed to rejoice in multiplyingthe victims of his rage. Among the anecdotes relatedin illustration of this fiend-like quality of his characteris the following: — A poor widow, distinguished for herROME. 141piety, had a son, who, for some offence or other, hadbeen condemned to a year's banishment. On his returnhome, the poor woman, anxious that his fault might bewholly expiated, led him with a halter round his neck toHildebrand, whom she besought to give him absolution,and restore him to her freed from the stain and penaltyof his former guiltiness. But her petition was receivedby the haughty pontiff with contempt, and, freeing himselfto a sudden burst of fury, he ordered the penitentto be instantly hung, which would have been done, butfor the strong interference of some of his courtiers present.The cruel sentence was, however, only partlyrevoked, and the young man was not restored to hismother till one of his feet was cut off ; and from thesufferings he endured lie soon after died.The ambition and cruelty of Hildebrand were equalledby the pride of Hadrian the Fourth. When the emperorFrederic was approaching Rome to aid this pontiff in aquarrel lie had at that time with the citizens, Hadrianwent out to receive him. Frederic, on their meeting,d<-tended from his horse, and, walking by the side of thepop fully held the left stirrup-leather to assisthim in dismounting. Hadrian, however, turned scornfullyround to the emperor, and with an angry voice exclaimed," Thou shouldst have held the right stirrup!"on which Frederic mildly replied, " I have not learned tohold a stirrup, and yon, holy father, are tin Inst to whomr did this service ;" and-<•< ing the countenanceHadrian grow dark under this gentle reproof. ** I wouldknow of \<»ii whether this be my duty to do it of foor of mj own courtesy, [fa man offer it of courtesy,142 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.how will you rebuke him of negligence ? if it be not ofduty, what need you care on which side he come unto youwho comes to do you worship ?" But such was eitherthe humility or the fear of Frederic, that the next timehe met the pontiff he took care to profit by the lessonhe had been so rudely taught.An anecdote very similar to this is related of Alexanderthe Third, who, having subdued the emperor's sonOtho, and held him prisoner in Venice, compelled theformer to appear before him in the cathedral of that city,and there to fall prostrate before him, and in that posturesupplicate his forgive less. The humbled monarchdid as he was commanded, and the pontiff placed his footon his neck, repeating, at the same time, the passagefrom scripture, <c Thou shalt tread upon," &c.The emperor at this raised his head and said, " It wasnot said to thee, but to Saint Peter." The pontiff thenagain stamping on his neck, exclaimed, " Both to meand to Peter !"In Urban the Sixth we again meet with those traitsof barbarous and revengeful cruelty which stained thecharacters of so many pontiffs. His conduct to theclergy was so severe that he is said, by a contemporaryhistorian (Theodosius, lib. i. eh. ii), to have been leftalmost entirely alone at the commencement of a changein his fortunes. Six cardinals, whom he had thrown intoa dungeon for some supposed offence, were, says tl. $same author, tortured in so deplorable a manner, thatevery spectator was melted with pity at their sufferings.But the more he was besought to have mercy, the morewrathful he was, so that his eyes would sparkle, his faceROME. 143burn and glow, his throat turn dry for anger. " Aftersundry examinations' continues he, " the Cardinal ofSanger was first brought unto us, with a pair of ironshackles on his feet, and a short mantle about him, becauseit was a cold and windy prison j who, when he canoto the end of the cellar, and saw above him ropes hanging,where he should be racked, and was by waitersstripped out of his apparel, leaving him scarcely his shirton, and bound very hard to the rack, Francis, the pope'snephew, stood by and laughed at this miserable spectaclewithout all measure j but I, that loved this cardinal ofold, was sore grieved thereat, but I could not depart theplace. But, to be short, the said cardinal was an agedman, of a corpulent body, comely and tall of stature, andbeing bound, he was thence lifted up from the groundby the strong pulling of those that racked him ; so thathe waxed very feeble, which, when I beheld, when he.was let go to the ground again, I said to him softly, ' Odear father, do you not see how your blood is soughtfor ? I beseech you, for God's sake, confess somethingto deliver yourself from these tormentors." He answered,' I cannot tell what I shall say;' and when theywould have racked him again I bad them cease, c for liehath satisfied me,' said I, ' as I will certify the pope inwriting;' and so they loosed him, and carried him out totake air." The persecution of these churchmen by thefather <>f Christendom did not end till they fell martyrsto hk nee : and the anecdote is valuable, as showingin how fearless a manner the heads of the Romishchurch indulged their private feelings, even oo those whoformed the prime rapport of their stab .144 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.We might multiply stories of this kind till they wouldfill a volume ; but the above are amply sufficient toillustrate the too general character of pontifical history,and of Rome in the zenith of her latter glory. ThereMere, it is true, bright exceptions to the constant recurrenceof evil men and evil deeds in the course of her riseand fall, for so her state may now almost be termed j andthe memory rests with delight on the names of such menasGanganelli and others of the same class, who strove,in a corrupt court and nation, to preserve the ancientsimplicity of christian virtue. But it was not by theactions of these men thai Rome became a second timethe dictator of the world : the founders of her empirewere the dark but powerful spirits whose vices astonishand dismay the imagination, and, could we forget howthey corrupted truth and violated the sanctity of theirname, whose splendid policy and daring would inspire uswith admiration.The spirits of the Brutes, the Caesarss, the Alexanders,and Leos are still, to the imagination, hovering overthe seven hills : — from the spot where we fancy ourselvesstanding, the mingled monuments of their fame and ambitionrise upon the view — the Colosseum and St. Peter's— the crumbling temples of Mars and A ends — themagnificent shrine of our Saviour — the tombs of emperorsby the wayside — the mausoleums of popes, surmountedby splendid churches, are before us ! And onwhat other spot on the globe can we stand and contemplatesuch a scene?THE BRIDGE AND CASTLE OF ST. ANGELO,THE VATICAN, AND ST. PETER'S.Turn to the Mole which Hadrian rear'd on high,Imperial mimic of old Egypt's piles.Bvrox.But thou, of temples old, or altars new,Stances alone — with nothing like to thee —Worthiest of God, the holy and the true.Byron.The view represented in the plate comprises theBridge and Castle of St. Angelo, the Palace of the Vatican, and the Church of St. Peter's.The bridge of St. Angelo, which formerly bore thetitle of the Pons melius, or Hadrianii, from the name ofthe emperor by whom it was built, crosses the Tiberopposite to die Moles Hadrianii, to which it was designedas an avenue. The piers and some of the arches are ancient; but having given way in consequence of the crowdassembled on it during the jubilee of 14o0, an accidentby which upwards of 170 persons perished, it was renewedby Nicholas the Fifth, and was again repaired in- by dement the Ninth, who erected the balustrade,and plan. I upon it. with the assistance of Bernini, theill-conceived statues of Angels, which flutter over thewater.Tlr - Angelo, the fortress and the stateprison of RotDC } i> Contracted from the remains of theII4G THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.celebrated Moles Hadrianii, the mausoleum erected bythe Emperor Hadrian as a sepulchre for the imperialdead. It appears to have been converted into a fortressduring the siege of Rome by the Goths, in 537, whenthe besieged cast down from its walls the statues andother ornaments of the place upon the assailants. Thebuilding, which is circular in its form, and about twohundred and nineteen feet in diameter, rests upon asquare base composed of large blocks of peering, theheart of which is traversed by various sepulchral passagesand chambers designed to receive the bodies of the dead.During the middle ages the Moles Hadrianii continued tobe employed as a place of defence, and is mentioned inthe annals of that period, sometimes under the name ofthe Tower of Crescents, and sometimes of the Houseof Theodoric.During the pontificate of Alexander the Sixth, thesuperstructure of brick which crowns the ancient buildingwas added, and the whole was surrounded by a ditchand rampart with bastions by Urban the Eighth.When Clement the Seventh was besieged in this fortressby the Imperial troops, the celebrated sculptorEenvenuto Cellini was employed in directing the artilleryof the castle. Of the marvellous skill faith whichhe performed this duty he has, in his usual characteristicmanner, left an accurate account, which he has embellishedwith various anecdotes more amusing than credible.There passed not a day," he says, " that I did not killsome of the army without the castle. One day, amongstothers, the pope happened to walk upon the round rampart,when he saw in the public walks a Spanish colonel,THE CASTLE OF ST. ANGELO. 147whom lie knew by certain tokens ; and understanding thathe had formerly been in his service, said something con-cunningham,all the while observing him attentively. I, whowas above the battery and knew nothing of the matter,but saw a man who was employed in getting the rampartsrepaired, and who stood with a spear in his hand,dressed in rose colour, began to deliberate how I shouldlay him flat. I took my swivel, which was almost equal toa dcmi-culverine, turned it round, and charging it with agood quantity of fine and coarse powder mixed, aimed itat him exactly: though he was at so great a distancethat it could not be expected any effort of art shouldmake such pieces carry so far, I fired off the gun, andhit the man in red exactly in the middle. He had arrogantlyplaced his sword before him in a sort of Spanishbravado, but the ball of my piece hit against his sword,and the man was seen severed into two pieces. Thepope, who did not dream of any such thing, WBfl highlydelighted and surprised at what he saw, as well becausehe thought it impossible that such a piece could carry sofar,as by reason he could not conceive how the mancould be cut into two pieces. Upon this he sent for me,and made an inquiry into the whole affair. I told himHie rut I had used to fire in that manner; but as for theman's being split into two pieces, neither he nor I wereable to account for it. So falling upon my km ientreated his holiness to absolve me from the guilt ofhomicide, as likewise from other crimes which I hadCommitted in that Castle in the service <>!' the clinch.The |» ,, l'S lifting up phil hands, and making the-i-u ofthe ( rOSfl 0VC1 in' ,-aid that he blessed DM . and gave mei'148 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.his absolution for all the homicides I had ever committed,or ever should commit, in the service of the apostolicalchurch. Upon quitting him I again went up to the battery,and continuing to keep a constant fire, I scarceonce missed all the time ; my drawing, my elegant studies,and my taste for music, all vanished before thisbutchering business; and if I were to give a particularaccount of all the exploits I performed in this infernalemployment, I should astonish all the world j but I passthem by for the sake of brevity."It was the fortune of Benevento Cellini, at a subsequentperiod, to become a prisoner in the fortress wherehe had performed these prodigies of gunnery. He contrivedupon this occasion to employ his skill in effectingan escape, the particulars of which he has detailed withconsiderable minuteness in his Memoirs. He succeededcondescending from the battlements of the castle undetectedand unhurt : but in attempting to scale one of theouter walls, he fell, and became insensible. On recoveringhis senses, he imagined he had been beheaded, andwas in purgatory. Notwithstanding the injury he hadreceived, he contrived to crawl away; and though thepontiff, Paul III., had himself, in his youth, made hisescape from the same confinement, he was again committedto the prison, where he suffered incredible hardships,and witnessed still more incredible visions.The castle of St. Angelo received the appellationwhich it now bears in the pontificate cf Gregory theGreat, who, in crossing the bridge of St. Angelo, as hewent to offer up prayers for the deliverance of the Romansfrom a pestilence with which they wore afflicted,THE Castle OF ST. ANGELO. 149beheld on the summit of the Moles Adrian the figure ofan angel sheathing a sword. In commemoration of thisvision, the brazen statue which still crowns the castlewas erected, and the building, as already stated, receivedthe name by which it has since been distinguished. It hasbeen long used as a public prison, and contains about fourhundred wretched criminals, who have been sentenced tothe galleys. The upper apartments, which present littleworthy of notice, are used as prisons for the confinementof state criminals. In the principal saloon is exhibiteda bust of Hadrian; and this apartment was used as atheatre for the representation of a tragedy during thefifteenth century, under the directions of Cardinal Riario.From the summit of the castle a fine view is presentedof the windings of the Tiber.On Easter Monday a splendid display of fireworks isexhibited from the summit of the Castle of St. Angelo,a spectacle which has been represented by the fierypencil of Wright of Derby. The first discharge of thefireworks consists of upwards of four thousand rockets,producing a fountain of flame, the magnificence of whichit is difficult to imagine. Other devices succeed, andthe exhibition is terminated with a shower of rocketslike the first."Tow Res tenements de histoire de Rome," -Madame de Stan 1. " dennis Adrian jusqu'4 no* jourssoul lies I ce monument Befiaaire sydefendit contraGot ' presque aussi barbare que ceux qui l'atta-quaint, il 1 cont < anemia lea belles statuesqui decorated li' e <!<• Edifice. Presenting, Ar-faultde Brescia, Nicholas Rienzi, ces anus de Is lib I150 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Romaine, qui ont pris si souvent les souvenirs pour desappearances, se sont defends long-temps dans le tombeaud'un empereur. J'aime ces pierres que s'unissent a tantde faits illustres. J'aime ce luxe du maitre du monde,un magnifique tombeau. II y a quelque chose de granddans homme qui, possessed de toutes les jouissances etde toutes les pompes terrestres, ne crainte pas de s'oc-caper long-temps d'avance de sa mort. Des idees morales,des sentiments disinterested remplissent lame, desqu'elle sort de quelque maniere des bornes de la vie."At an inconsiderable distance from the castle of St.Angelo stands the palace of the Vatican, the principalresidence of the supreme pontiff. The vast and irregularmass of buildings which compose this palace wereerected at various periods, as the convenience or the tasteof successive popes suggested. The early history of thepalace is lost in remote antiquity About the year 800,it was the residence of Charlemagne. Nicholas theThird and Innocent the Second added to the building ;and to Nicholas the Fifth it owes the rooms which wereafterwards illustrated by the pencil of Raphael. The tripleportico was the work of Leo the Tenth : and a newpalace was annexed to the edifice by Sixtus the Fifth.Pius the Sixth completed the structure by the additionof the Muse Pio Clementina. The architecture is various,and the effect, consequently, far from pleasing: ; tsbeing situated upon higher ground than St. Peter's, wlrchit immediately adjoins, injures in some degree the viewof that magnificent temple.The extent of the Vatican is almost incredible. Thenumber of apartments in it is said, at a low computation,THE VATICAN. ] 5 1to amount to 4422. De la Lande states them to be1 1,2 16 : while according to Bonanni they are not less innumber than 13,000.Afl a treasury of art the Vatican is unequalled in itslavish magnificence. Not only does it contain within itslimits the walls of the Sistine chapel, stamped with thegenius of Michael Angelo; not only does it comprise theloggie and the stance of Raphael ; but it boasts one ofthe richest collections in the world of ancient sculpture,and a library of manuscripts of unequalled value a idrarity. When to these treasures are added its pavementsof ancient mosaic, its columns of porphyry andalabaster, its gates of brass, its ceilings of gold, its richlywrought tapestries, and its long succession of galleries,stored with all that is curious and beautiful in ancient oimodern art, it must be confessed, that it is a residenceworthy of a potentate who claims to be the head ofChristendom.In close juxtaposition with the palace of the Vaticanstands the church of St. Peter, the most magnificenttemple of the christian world. It rises, according tosome antiquarians, from the site of the Circus of Nero.The apostle, having suffered martyrdom under that emperorswas buried, as tradition reports, in a grotto ornow cam red by the superb edifice which bears ibisnaiiic ; but there is reason to believe that the bodthe apostle m wet reposed in this-p<>t.At ■ \<t\ early period, and, is it i- said, by Constantine. a church was dedicated in this place to St PIn the middle of the fifth nth Century, a new edifice Recommencedbv Nicholas the Fifth, but the ancient church152 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.was not entirely removed until the pontificate of Juliusthe Second, in 1506, when the first stone of the presentbuilding was laid.The history of the building of St. Peter's, and the descriptionof the splendours of its architectural decoration,would literally require volumes to do them justice. Thetreasures of a succession of pontiffs and the genius ofseveral generations of architects were lavished upon theedifice. During the pontificates of Julius the Second,Leo the Tenth, Adrian the Sixth, Clement the Seventh,Paul the Third, Julius the Third, Pius the Fifth, Gregorythe Thirteenth, Sixtus the Fifth, Paul the Fifth, andAlexander the Seventh, the vast work still proceeded $and it was not until three centuries and a half had beenconsumed in the labour that the mighty mass was completed.The whole sum expended upon the church,before its completion, has been reckoned at forty-sevenmillions of scud, upwards of ten millions and a half sterling.It has been said that the building of the churchwas one of the principal causes of the Reformation, sincethe expenses of it were so great that the pontiffs werecompelled to discredit the Catholic faith by issuing anextra number of indulgences. During the pontificate ofSixtus the Fifth, six hundred workmen were employedday and night upon the cupola, which, by this extraordinaryexertion, was completed in the space of then: .-two months. In one story only of the dome eleven hu i-died beams were employed, one hundred of which wereof such magnitude that the arms of two men could notembrace them.The eye of the traveller is generally deceived as tost.peter's. 153the vast extent of this edifice, which, from the admirableproportion of its parts, does not present that idea ofmagnitude which might be expected. So great is thedeception, on first entering the church, that the statuesof the evangelists appear to be little larger than life,when such in fact is their magnitude, that the pen in thehand of St. Mark is six feet long. It is only gradually,and by comparing the objects before him with himself,that the traveller obtains a correct notion of the colossaltemple which he is admiring. The whole length of thechurch, from wall to wall, is six hundred and nine feet,while our own St. Paul's measures only five hundred andtwenty-one. The length of the Duomo at Milan isfour hundred and thirty-nine, and of St. Sophia at Constantinople,three hundred and fifty-seven feet. Thetemples of the ancient world cannot be compared withSt. Peter's in point of magnitude. In Rome, the largestof the temples, that of Jupiter Capitoline, is supposedto have been about two hundred feet in length • and theParthenon measured two hundred and thirty in length,and ninety-eight in width.The cupola of St. Peter's has always been representedas one of the most sublime efforts of architectural science.The cupola," says Mr. Forsyth, " is glorious. Viewedin its design, it altitude, or even its decoration, &fl auliolr. Of Bfl a part, it enchants tin | satisfies thetaste, it i rounds the tool. Tin very air -i ems to cat!l that i- harsh 01 colossal, and leaves as nothing batthe sabfimc I on — a sublime peculiar to the geniusof the immortal archie d . and comprehensible only on the154 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.spot." Lord Byron has celebrated, in some of his mostsplendid verses, the glories of the Dome.But lo ! the dome — the vast and wondrous dome,To which Diana's marvel was a cell —Christ's mighty shrine above his martyr's tomb !I have beheld the Ephesian's miracle —Its columns strew the wilderness, and dwellThe hyaena and the jackall in their shade ;I have beheld Sophia's bright roofs swellTheir glittering mass i' the sun, and have survey'dIts sanctuary the while the usurping Moslem pray'd ;But thou, of temples oil, or altars new,Stances alone — with nothing like to thee —Worthiest of God, the holy and the true.Since Zion's desolation, when that HeForsook his former city, what could be,Of earthly structures, in his honour piled,Of a sublimer aspect? Majesty,^ Power, Glory, Strength, and Beauty? all are aisleIn this eternal ark of worship undefiled.Enter : its grandeur overwhelms thee not ;And why? it is not lessened but thy mind,Expanded by the genius of the spot,Has grown colossal, and can only findA fit abode wherein appear enshrinedThy hopes of immortality; and thouShalt one day, if found worthy, so defined,See thy God face to face, as thou dost, nowHis Holy of Holies, nor be blasted by his brow.Thou modest — but increasing with the advance,Like climbing some great Alp, which still doth rise,Deceived by its gigantic elegance ;Vastness which grows — but grows to harmonize —All musical in its immensities :bt. pbtbb's 155Rich marbles— richer painting — shrines where flameThe lamps of gold — and haughty dome which viesIn air with Earth's chief structures, though their frameSits on the firm-set ground — and this the clouds must claim.Thou seest not all ; but piecemeal thou must break,To separate contemplation, the great whole;And as the ocean many bays will make,That ask the eye — so here condense thy soulTo more immediate objects, and controlThy thoughts until thy mind hath got by heartIts eloquent proportions, and unrollIn mighty graduations, part by part,The glory which at once upon thee did not dart,Not by its fault — but thine : Our outward senseIs but of gradual grasp — and as it isThat what we have of feeling most intenseOutstrips our faint expression; even so thisOutshining and o'erwhelming edificeFools our fond gaze, and greatest of the greatDefies at first our Nature's little. .Till, growing with its growth, we thus dilateOur spirits to the size of that they contemplate.Of the interior decorations of St. Peter's — its lavishtreasures of marbles, its mosaic ceilings, its statues, itspaintings, and its innumerable and splendid tombs andtrophies, no narrative can give an adequate idea. SuchIs the magnificent scale to which the eye grows accustom.-d, that the Bnhlacchino, or great canopy, over thehigh altar, and immediately under the dome, thoughequal in height to the Farnese palace, one of the loftiestRome, does not strike the spectator as remarkable'itudi . Hie gilding alone of this canopy, whichbronze, coat forty thousand Bcndi, upwards of ninethousand pounds sterling.156 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.The spectacle presented by the devout persons whocome to worship in this vast temple has been well paintedby a lively and popular writer. " A group of peasants,in grotesque and highly picturesque costumes, wereflocking round the bronze statue of St. Peter, to give itthe pious salutation they had wandered from their distantmountain homes to bestow. * * * Round theconfessionals female penitents, clothed in black, anddeeply veiled, were kneeling, whispering through thegrate into the ear of their ghostly father that tale ofhuman guilt and misery uo other mortal ear might hear.Their faces were concealed, but their figure and attitudeseemed to express deep humiliation, grief, and compunction.The countenances of the confessors were various.Some fat, lethargic, and indifferent, expressed, and seemedcapable of expressing nothing. Others seemed to wearthe air of attention, surprise, admonition, weariness, orimpatience 5 but in one only could I trace the tendernessof compassion, and of gentle yet impressive rebuke.It was an old Dominican Monk, whose cowl, thrown back,displayed a pallid cheek, deeply marked with the linesof piety and resignation, and in whose mild eve, shadedby a few thin gray hairs, shone the habitual kindness ofchristian charity. He seemed, in the beautiful languageof scripture, ' A man of sorrows, and acquainted withgrief;' humble and patient, yet tolerant of human frailty,as they generally are, in the highest degree, who the leastneed toleration from others. In striking contrast to thisvenerable old monk was a cardinal, whose robe of statewas carried by his train-bearer, and whose steps werefollowed by an immense retinue of servants. He wasst. peter's. 1T>7going round to all the altars in succession, and kneelingbefore them to offer up his pompous prayers. The servants,dressed in sumptuous liveries, were on their kneesbehind, but some of them growing tired of the length ofhis devotions, were in this posture making grimaces ateach other, and cutting jokes, sot to voce ; and one ortwo of them in the rear had got up again, when the cardinal'seye glanced round, and down they plumped, moredeep in apparent prayer than ever. Near this princelypriest, as near as they could get, were some wretcheddiseased cripples, covered with rags and filth, and crawlingon their hands and knees over the marble pavementof this superb edifice, vainly demanding charity in themost abject terms of misery and supplication. One ofthese unfortunate wretches, finding his petitions disregarded,at last, at a distance and in silence, began toworship at the same shrine, as if to implore from Heaventhat mercy which man had denied. * * * Somepilgrims, too, were among the supplicants of the manifoldshrines, and it would be a curious task to analysethe motives that led them hither. They were chieflyyoung, strong men, apparently from the lower classes ofsociety, whose appearance certainly did not denote thatthey had suffered much from the hardships and privationsof the way. * * * Some of them were veryfine-looking men. Their large black eyes and expressiveeountt dances overshadowed by their broad-brimmed faTheir oil-skin tippets, cockle-shells, scrip, rosaries, andstaff, had to us a novelty thai was poetical as well aspietureM|iie. Some of them had come from the inoiin-158 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.pains of Spain, and seemed resolved to lay in a stock ofindulgences to serve them the rest of their lives."An enthusiastic old traveller, Lassels, concludes hisaccount of St. Peter's with the following remarkableeulogy. " You will, perhaps, wonder, when you hearthat this church is the eighth wonder of the world ; thatthe pyramids of Egypt, the walls of Babylon, the Pharos,Colossus, &c. were but heaps of stones, compared to thisfabric ; that it hath put all antiquity to the blush, andall posterity to a nonplus ; that its several parts are allincomparable masterpieces ; its pictures all originals ;its statues perfect models ; that it hath a revenue ofabove twenty thousand pounds a-year only for the fabric; that it hath cost, till the year 1654 (the accountsbeing then summed up), forty millions of crowns ; thatmost of the popes since Julius the Second's time (andthey have been twenty-three in all) have heartened andadvanced this work ; that the prime architects of theworld, San Gallo, Bramante, Baldassere, Buonarota, Giacomodella Porta, Giovanni Fontana, Carlo Modern, andnow Cavaliers Bernini, have brought it on to this perfection,that the whole church itself is nothing but thequintessence of wit and wealth strained into a religiousdesign of making a handsome house to God, and of fulfillingthe divine oracle, which promised that magna erstgloria domus isthmus novissimse plusquam primae."MOUNT AVENTINE.La poesie vient encore erabellir ce sejour. Virgil a place sur le Mont Aven-tinla caverne de Cacus ; et les Romaines, si grands par leur histoire, lesont encore par les fictions heroines, dont les poetes ont orne leur originefabulous.De Steel.If, fatigued with the dry realities of history, the traveller,in his perambulation of Rome, is anxious to refreshhimself by visiting the scenes consecrated by classicalfiction, he will find ample gratification in exploringthe boundaries of the Aventine Mount. The first objectof his curious inquiry will be, of course, the den of Cacus,in the discovery of which it is probable that he willnot be so fortunate as Hercules. Many an eager travellerhas traversed the Aventine in search of the cave,till, like the demigod, he has found his anger excited byhis failure jter totus fervid iraJiUstrat Aventine monte; ter saxe tentatLimina quisquam : ter fessus valle resent.Certainly, the task of pulling up the steep ascent ofthe Aventine by their tailsibtdifl prostate corpore taurus,i feat well worthy of the hero to whom it is ascribed.The care of says a very intelligent traveller,we are gravely informed, is still extant on the16*0 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.side of the Aventine that overhangs the Tiber ; and someof our active friends scrambled about in search of itamong the thorns and brushwood that fringe its perpendicularbank, at the imminent peril of breaking theirnecks, and to the actual demolition of their clothes.But though they found holes in abundance, they nevermet with any that could contain a single ox, or that byany stretch of courtesy could be dignified with the nameof a cave, so that the abode of Cacus, as far as I know,remains undiscovered to this day."It was upon the Aventine Hill, also, that Numa metthe rural gods Faunus and Picus, to whom he insidiouslyadministered an undue quantity of wine and honey, andtaking advantage of their intoxication, compelled themto reveal to him their celestial secrets.The Aventine Hill was added to the city by AngusMartins, and for a long period., during the early historyof Rome, it appears to have been unbuilt upon. It wasthe scene of those popular nocturnal meetings which, inthe infancy of the republic, led to the secession of thepeople, and, indeed, according to some authorities, thesecession of war to Mount Aventine. A little later, thecitizens who rose against the tyranny of the decemvirsestablished their camp upon this hill, and in more moderntimes Rienzi assembled upon its summit the hardyspirits who conspired to regenerate Rome — an attemptwhich has excited the genius of Petrarch and of Moore.At dawn, in arms went forth the patriot band,And as the breeze, fresh from the Tiber, fann'dTheir gilded gonfalons, all eyes could seeThe palm-tree there, the sword, the keys of Heaven—MOUNT Aventine. ] helTypes of the justice, peace, and libertyThat were to bless them when their chains were riven.On to the Capitol the pageant moved,While many a shade of other times that stillAround that grave of grandeur sighing rovedHung o'er their footsteps up the sacred hill,And heard its mournful echoes, as the lastHigh-minded heirs of the republic passed.The Aventine was the site of the temple dedicated toDiana by Service Nullius in imitation of the Ephesiantemple. Of this magnificent fabric no trace whatever isnow to be discovered; nor, indeed, are the ruins of theother temples which formerly crowned this hill — of Juno,of Liberty, and of the Bona Dea — now visible. Monasteriesand churches have succeeded the heathen fanes,amongst the most conspicuous of which are the churchesof Santa Maria del Prioratus, of S. Plessis, and of SantaSabina. It ought not to be forgotten, that when Romewas free, the Aventine was the residence of Ennius,and that in later days it was the site of the Palace ofTrajan.A considerable portion of the base of the Aventine iscovered with the extensive and magnificent ruins of thebaths of Caracalla. With the exception of the Colosseum,there is no remnant of ancient Rome which presents soct an idea of the magnitude and splendour of theedifices with which the imperial city was adorned. Thelength of tin buildings as measured from the ruins, was1840 met, and the breadth I 176. It u said thai it waibegun by I caracalla, that Hehogabahai added the porticos,and that the whole wai completed by Alexanderrna. The number and rise of the apartments, which162 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.were devoted to various amusements, strike the strangerwith admiration. One of the rooms called the Cella So-learns,the length of which was 150 feet, was remarkablefor its ceiling, being covered with a flat roof of stone,supported, it is supposed, by flat cross-bands of metal,a work said to have been executed by Egyptian artists.Amongst the ruins of these thermae many singularly finemonuments of antiquity have been discovered ; and ithas been much regretted that the excavations have notbeen carried on with more vigour within these bounds.The celebrated Hercules Farnese was discovered in thisplace in 1540, bat at first the legs were wanting. Asculptor was immediately ordered, under the direction ofMichael Angelo, to suppl this deficiency; and the resultof his labour is still to be seen in the Farnese Palace atRome. In the mean time the genuine limbs were discoveredand came into the possession of the PrinceBorghese, who was ultimately prevailed upon, with muchdifficulty, to resign them to the possessor of the body.The traveller who ascends the Aventine hill must notneglect the prospect which is open to him from the Belvidereof Santa Maria del Prioratus. On one side theTiber rolls sluggishly along past the ruins of the PonsSubliciusj while on the opposite shore is seen the modemport of Rome, and beyond it Mount Peniculus,with the splendours of St. Peter's at its feet. On theright rise the Capitoline and Palatine hills ; and on theopposite side extend the level meadows of the Pratedel Populo Romano, adorned with the tomb of CaiusCestus.The present view of the Aventine is taken from nearMOUNT AVENTINE. 1G3the Ponte Motto, one of the earliest bridges of ancientRome. The piles of this bridge were laid during theconsulate of Q. Fulvous and L. Manlius (U. C. 573), butit was not finished till the censorship of Scipio Africansand L. Summits (U. C. 611). Having been injured bya great inundation, it was restored by Gregory theThirteenth in 1575. It suffered again from a similarcause in 1598, and has not since been repaired, a circumstancefrom which it has derived its present name. Itwas formerly known by the name of the Pons Palatines orSenators, and has sometimes been called the PonteSanta Maria. At low water the entrance of the CloacaMaxima may be seen from the spot where the PonsPalatines formerly crossed the river. Near this bridge isthe mansion in which Rienzi is said to have lived, and ofwhich we shall say a few words in another place.Between the Aventine and the Ripa Grande are seenthe remains of the Pons Sublicius, so called from thesublimes, or wooden piles, of which it was composed.For a long period this was the only bridge across theTiber. It was built, according to Livy, in the reign ofAngus Martins; and it was upon this bridge that HoratiusCodes " insignia inter conspecta cedentium pugnae terga,obverse comines ad ineundum pretium armis, ipso miraculaobstupefeeit hostes' and it was from this bridge thatthe hero cast himself into the stream with the invocation,Tiberius pater te sancti precor, luce anna et hungmilites propitious flaming acacias!" Livy, in relatingthe story, speala of Codes as "rem lusus plus famaehabitual ad DOStevOfl <juain fidei:" but it must not fromt > j i — observation be concluded that the historian himselfM 2164 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.entertained doubts as to the truth of his narrative ; noris there indeed any thing incredible in the story itself.The bridge having been partially destroyed to prevent thepassing of Porsenna's army, was repaired with wood asbefore, and was so constructed that it might be taken topieces immediately, in case it should be desirable to preventa communication with the opposite shore, In thereign of Augustus it was swept away by a flood, but is saidto have been restored, in stone, the following years, duringthe censorship of P. JEmilius Lepidus, whence it has beensometimes called the Pons ^Emilius. It was again injuredby inundations during the reign of Tiberius andOtho, and was not restored till the time of AntoninusPius, when it was rebuilt of marble, and received thename of the Ponte Marmorato. In 780 it was once morecarried away by a flood, and was never again repaired.The fragments of a broken pier or arch, visible only at lowwater, are all that remain of the first bridge of Rome.Rome, if thou avert a desert, and if noneBut ruins clad thy bills and head thy plain,I could within thy shatter'd walls runain.But there are Romans in thee not thine own.Old Tiber rolls, as in the ages gone,And remnants of those arches chafe his flood,Where one man 'gainst a host unshaken stood.What thousands now can match that arm alone !O Rome, within thy tombs a spirit lurksThat animates afresh their crumbled clay:'Tis in thy palaces destruction works,For living man rots there in foul decay:A ruin that hath made itself, and whereThe past is a reproach, the future is despair.Charles John-stove.THE FOUNTAINS OF ST. PETER'S, ANDPART OF THE COLONNADES.Oswald sentit une emotion tout-a-fait extraordinaire en arrival en facede St. Pierre. D'etat la premiere fois que ouvrage des hommes produisaitsur lui effet d'une merveille de la nature."De Steel.The approach to St. Peters, like that to our owncathedral church of St. Paul's, is very unfavourable tothe architectural effect of the edifice. A long and narrowstreet of mean houses leads to an open space of abouttwo hundred feet square, on passing which the travellerarrives at the colonnades in front of the church. Thisedifice was not contemplated in the original design of thebuilding ; for at the point which is now the entrance ofthe colonnade stood the house of Raphael, designed byBrabant, which, with several other buildings, was removedin the year 16G0 to afford room for the colonnades.That structure was designed by Bernini, during the pontificateof Alexander the Sixth, with a taste which hasbeen often severely criticised. It consists of a semicircularcolonnade of four rows of pillars, enclosing a■ e of seven hundred and twenty-eight feet by sixhundred and six. In Dumber the pillars are two hundredand fifty-six, and they are surmounted by one hundredand ninety-two statues of Bainta, Some idea of themagnificence of the colonnade may !><• formed, when me166 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.find that through the centre rows of the pillars two carriagesmay pass abreast, and that each of the statueswhich surmount them is eleven feet in height. Undeterredby the criticisms of his predecessors, Mr. Forsythhas spoken in high terms of the colonnade. " Howbeautiful the colonnades ! how finely proportioned to thechurch ! how advantageous to its flat, forbidding front,which ought to have come forward like the Pantheonto meet the decoration ! How grand an enclosure forthe piazza ! how fortunate a screen to the ignoble objectsaround it ! But, advance or retire, you will findno point of view that combines these accessories withthe general form of the church. Instead of describingits whole cycloid on the vacant air, the cupola is morethan half hidden by the front — a front at variance withthe body, confounding two orders in one, debased by agaping attic, and encumbered with colossal apostles."In the centre, if it may be so called, of each of thecolonnades, rises a magnificent fountain, from the designsof Modern. The waters, after having been forced intoa number of splendid jets, are received into a noble basincomposed of a single block of granite.In the centre of the space formed by the colonnadesof St. Peter's rises the obelisk of the Vatican, one ofthe most remarkable monuments of antiquity preservedin Rome. It appears to be one of the two obelisks mentionedby Herodotus as having been erected by Piero,the son of Sesostris, on his recovery from blindness. Sogreat was the anxiety of the monarch that the pillarshould be raised uninjured, that he fastened his own sonto the summit in order to render the engineers moreFOUNTAINS AND OBELISK OF ST. PETER'S. 167careful in performing this operation. From Egypt it wastransported by Caligula to Rome, a vessel being builtfor the purpose of conveying it. In the construction ofthis vessel a fir-tree of such enormous bulk was used,that four men could scarcely embrace it in their arms.The pillar was dedicated by Caligula to Julius and AugustusCaesar, and erected in the Circus of Caligula, afterwardscalled the Circus of Nero — a position not far fromthat which it at present occupies. The precise spot fallswithin the church, and is marked by a square stone inthe passage leading from the sacristy to the choir.In the year 1586, Sixtus the Fifth directed the obeliskto be removed to its present situation. Of the difficultyof this task some idea may be formed from a statementof the magnitude and weight of the monument. Thelength, exclusive of the pyramid at the apex, is upwards ofseventy-seven feet — the transverse section at the middlemore than seven and a half feet square 3 the solid contentsare one hundred and sixty-six cubic yards of granite,weighing upwards of three hundred and thirty-two tons ;to which must be added four tons, the weight of the pyramidat the top. It has been calculated to be fourteentimes the weight of the largest block of stone at Stonehenge,and is the largest wrought stone in Europe.The operation of transporting this prodigious masshas been described by Fontana, the architect employedl>\ the pope to superintend its removal. A castellum orIran', composed of eight upright beams of oak and walnut,was erected around the obelisk, which vru coveredwith mat and plank bound together with iron andropes to preserve it from injury. It was then raised, by168 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.means of capstans and blocks, upon a platform restingon wooden rollers, and was thus removed to its presentsite. Six hundred men and a hundred and forty horseswere employed in the transportation, the expense ofwhich amounted to about nine thousand pounds. As areward for his successful labours, the pontiff bestowedupon the architect the materials used in the removal of theobelisk, which were valued at twenty thousand crowns.A singular anecdote with regard to the erection ofthe obelisk is related by some Italian writers. Thepope, whose anxiety for the successful elevation of thepillar appears almost to have equalled that of Piero, issaid to have issued a command that, during the progressof raising the monument, no person should venture tospeak under the penalty of death. A member of theBrescia family (of the ancient republic of S. Nemo), whowas intently watching the progress of the operation, observingthat the ropes were on the point either of breakingjpr of taking fire from the extreme friction, forgettingor disregarding the pontiffs order, called aloud for water.Sixtus, who saw the danger to which the machinery hadbeen exposed, instead of threatening him with the inflictionof the punishment, desired him to name his reward.He did so, and selected the office of supplyingthe papal chapel with palms on Palm Sunday ; a privilegestill claimed by the Brescia family. In the Vaticana painting may be seen representing the removal of theobelisk, and the seizure of this person by the papalguards.Madame de Steel, who is never more eloquent than inher descriptions of the works of art which Rome exhibits,FOUNTAINS AND OBELISK OF ST. PETER'S. 169and who gives such admirable expression to the sentimentswhich such exhibitions inspire, has embodied inher own beautiful language the feelings with which thetraveller surveys the magnificent fountains and the obeliskof St. Peter's : — " Un oblique de quatre-vingtpieds de haut, qui parait a peine eleven en presence decouple de Saint Pierre, est au milieu de la place. Laforme des obelisks elle seule a quelque chose qui plaita imagination : leur sommet se perd dans les airs,et semble porter jusqu'au ciel une grande pense deleonine. Ce monument, qui vint d'Egypte pour osierles bains de Caligula, et qui Sixte Quint a fait transporterensuite au pied du temple de Saint Pierre, cecontemporain de tant des siecles, qui n'ont pu riencontre lui, inspire un sentiment de respect. Homme sesent si passager, qn'il a toujours de emotion en presencede ce qui est immutable. A quelque distance desdeux cotes de 1'obelisque, seulement deux fontaines dontl'eau juillet perpetuellement, et retombe avec abondanceen cascade dans les airs. Ce murmure des ondes qu'ona coutume entendre au milieu de la campagne produitdans cette enceinte une sensation toute nouvelles maiscette sensation est en harmonie avec celle que fait maitreCt dun temple majestueux.La peinture, la sculpture, instant le plus souvent lafigure unable, on quelque objet existant dans la nature,i< vaillant dan Notre aine des id res parfait ment chairset positives ; maia on bran monument architecture neapoint, pom sinai f 1 i r< • , de sens determine; et Ton eat in ti n le contemplate i>ar cette ri \« rie, Bans calcul et Bansbut, qui in. ne -i loin la pen • !.' bruit dea eaux THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.vient & toutes ces impressions vagues et profanes : il estuniforme comme l'edince est regular."L'eternel mouvement et l'eternel repos sont ainsiapproaches l'un de l'autre. C'est dans ce lieu stoutque le temps est sans pouvoir; car il ne tarit pas plusces sources jaillissantes, qu'il n'ebranle ces immobilespierres. Les eaux qui s'elancent en gerbes de ces fontainessont si legends et si nuageuses que, dans un beaujour, les rayons du soleil y produisent de petits formes des plus belles couleurs."TEMPLE OF PEACE.O Thou who bad'st thy turtles bear,Swift from his grasp, thy golden hair,And slightest thy native skies!Oh Peace, thy injured robes unbind !Colliers.Buildings, like books, have sometimes a disputedauthenticity ; and it often happens that the questionas to their true founders is agitated with more vivacitythan in the case of authors and their writings, inasmuchas all their present value and interest depend onour knowledge of their origin. This is particularly thecase with regard to the Temple of Peace. If the dateand purpose of its foundation, as popularly described, becorrect, it is one of the most interesting remains of antiquitybut if tradition can be fairly convicted of errorin this instance, there is scarcely a ruin in Europe whichpossesses less claim to regard.According to the commonly received opinion, thedilapidated and almost rude structure we are con tern -plating was begun by the Emperor Claudius, but t< <1 by Vespasian, and dedicated to the goddess of"ii the successful termination of the Jewish war.Josephus, after describing the pomp of the triumphscelebrated the final overthrow of oil nation,that the conqueror determined on building a tempi* to172 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Peace ; and that he finished it in so short a period, andin a style of such unexampled magnificence, that itastonished every beholder. The prodigious wealth whichhe had accumulated in the late wars assisted him in hisdesign ; and the rarest statues and paintings, with themost curious productions of every quarter of the world,were collected under its roof. Thither also he broughtthe spoils of the temple of Jerusalem 5 and the goldenvessels and sacred instruments of its altars graced, asonce before of old, the festive rites of idolaters.Such was the celebrity which the Temple of Peaceacquired by the splendour of its ornaments, and the vastsums expended on every part of the structure, that itwas regarded as the nc blest edifice in the world. Acurious custom also, which prevailed at a very earlyperiod in Greece, appears to have added considerably toits grandeur. In the temple at Delos, rendered sacredto all the land by the mysteries of religion, both states andindividuals deposited their accumulated wealth. Neitherfraud nor violence dare approach a treasure which hadbeen placed under the immediate guardianship of a deity ;and in times when the weak had little protection againstthe strong, and one republic was always on the watch tosurprise another, it contributed not a little to the generalgood that such an institution existed. It is not easy todiscover so weighty a reason for the same custom beingprevalent at Rome, at least not in the time of Vespasianor Titus ; but, whatever was its origin, the Tempe ofPeace received an immense increase of wealth by itsprevalence, and every citizen of rank and opulencerendered himself a sort of guardian of its sanctity byTEMPLE OF PEACE. 173placing within its walls some valuable portion of Msproperty.From the scanty records which remain respecting theoriginal plan of this famous edifice, it is hardly possibleto give an idea of its former grandeur. Three massywalls are all that now exist of the sumptuous templewhich astonished the haughty Persian ambassador bv itsmagnificence. The last of the eight pillars which adornedits front was removed, by the order of Pope Paul V., tothe church of Santa Maria Maggiore, where it supportsan image of the Virgin. The whole length of the buildingwas about three hundred feet, and its breadth about twohundred. In the interior the walls were lined with gildedbronze and paintings by the most celebrated artists.Among the latter was the famous one of Prologues,who, in endeavouring to finish the figure of a dog andto add the foam which was supposed to have fallenfrom its mouth, was almost driven mad himself by findingall his efforts unsuccessful. At length losing all patience,he flung his brush with great fury at the picture,when, to his delight, he saw that he had, by that means,painted the foam to admiration. There is also said tohave been an extensive library in this temple, which obtainedfor it the respect of the learned, as its other richesdid the admiration of the curious.Tin' goddess of Peace was vrarehipped in very earlytimes by the Greeks ; and she had a temple in Athens,built, it is said, by ( limon, in commemoration of his victoryover tli> h suis. It is a singular circumstancethe Romans should not have had a place for herworship till so late a period as the reign of Vespasian, or174 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.at earliest as that of Claudius ; that is, not till after theyhad conquered the world, and established their empireon a foundation formed of the crushed arms, and ensigns,and slain bodies of myriads of enemies. In neither case,however, was the Temple of Peace erected till the respectivenations had acquired the greatest military glorythey ever possessed ; but the Greeks worshipped thedeity through the best and happiest periods of their history.The most enduring monuments of their fame wereraised under her fostering hand ; and as the twin sisterof their own Athena, the power and beauty of herspirit was felt in the breathing of their zephyrs, in thetranquil loveliness of their vine and olive mantled hills,and in the reposing majesty of their marble temples.With the Romans this was not the case. Peace set upher altars among them when both their vigour and geniuswere on the decline. There was never any thing grandin the tranquillity* of the Roman empire but once, andthat was in the time of Augustus, when the reposeseemed miraculous, and the whole w^-rld lay like a mightyocean hushed into silence by Heaven.Great doubt, however, has existed in the minds ofmodern antiquaries as to the identity of the present ruinswith the real Temple of Peace 5 and the ingenious authorof " Rome in the Nineteenth Century" has collected intoa short compass most of the objections urged againsttheir claims to veneration. " It can neither be madeout," says that agreeable writer, " to be a hypoethros,like the Pantheon 5 nor a circular peripheral, like thelittle Temple of Vesta j nor a prostylos, nor an nor a dypteros, nor a pseud-dypteros • norTEMPLE OF PEACE. 175any of Vitruvius's fourteen orders of temples; nor anydescription of temple whatsoever. Nor can they find outany possibility of its ever having had any of the threenecessary constituent parts of a temple — the cellar, theportico, and the area; not to mention that it had windows,which they will by no means allow to any temple,except those of Vesta. Certainly its form and the dispositionof its parts bear no resemblance to any knowntemple of antiquity. But how few are there of which theruins or the description have come down to the presenttime ! Xor did the ancients bind themselves so slavishlyto these general rules as modern critics pretend. Athousand aberrations from architectural laws might be instanced; and why should not the form of a temple be one ?Winkelman, who seems never to question the identityof this ruin with the Temple of Peace, gives it as one instanceof temples with three names, and mentions JupiterCapitoline as another; adding, that such temples had alwaysvaulted roofs. But even if it were a temple, the antiquarieswill not allow that it could be Vespasian's Templeof Peace, because, they say, the style of architecture andthe clumsiness of the brickwork prove it to have beenan erection of a much later period ; and because — whichis a much more incontrovertible reason — the Temple ofCC was burnt down in the time of Commodus. I amI cannot remember the authority that was givenme for this assertion, nor recover the antiquary that magicI vii if correct, the Temple of Peace Light havebeen rebuilt after that period; and though Procopiussp< oaks of it as a ruin in his time, that docs not proveshal it il not a ruin in ours. To my humble thinking,176 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.however, this ruin bears a decided resemblance to abasilica ; and as the Forum of Peace, like every otherforum, must have had a basilica, I thought this might beit, and plumed myself upon the notion. But when Icommunicated it to some learned antiquaries, they declared,that though the ruin bore every appearance ofbeing the remains of a basilica, it must, from the styleof the architecture, be the basilica, not of Vespasian, butof Constantine, who built one on the Via Sacra, and nearthe Temple of Venus and Rome j and, as its situationexactly corresponds with this, they maintained that, sitcura mente, it was the remains of Constantine's basilica,which was pompously described by one of his panegyrists,and adorned with all the magnificence which thearts at that degraded period were capable of exhibiting."In support of the opinion thus hazarded it is furtherobserved, that both the poverty of the architecture andthe badness of the masonry-work, for excellency in whichthe Romans of an earlier age were famous, tend stronglyto establish the opinion that the building, whatever waitsoriginal character, was erected at a period far posteriorto the reign of Vespasian.If this edifice, however, was in truth the Temple ofPeace, it was not only the most splendid in Rome, butthe most frequented. Besides the crowds who visited itthrough curiosity, and the number of learned men whoemployed themselves in its library, nearly all the sickpeople of the city, or their relations, frequented it, inorder to petition the goddess for a speedy restoration tohealth. It thus happened, says an old author, that fromthe great multitudes who were always crowded togetherTEMPLE OF PEACE. 1 77in the courts, the Temple of Peace was not unfrequentlya scene of most " uproarious discord."The attributes ascribed to this deity were nearly thesame both in Greece and Rome. In the shrines of theformer, she was represented as holding a little image ofPlutus in one hand, and some ears of corn, intermixedwith olive-leaves, in the other, both wealth and plentybeing considered the produce of her smiles. The Romansornamented her image in a similar manner, and put acaduceus in her hand to indicate her power and divineauthority. But in the reign of the Emperor Commodusboth the goddess and her temple were suddenly strippedof their glory by lightning, which set fire to the building,and nearly burned it to the ground. All the treasureswhich had been placed there for security were destroyedwith the edifice ; and the people regarded thevisitation as a prelude to those fearful convulsions whichwere so shortly to overwhelm the empire itself.The excavations which were carried on a few yearssince by the Duchess of Devonshire and some otherzealous antiquarians, whom the excellent example of hergrace prompted to the design, laid more of this buildingopen to inspection than former inquirers had the opportunityof observing. According to the discoveries thusmade, it is supposed to have been erected on the site ofsome more ancient edifice, the brick-work of which, saidto be of much superior workmanship, is traced in an obliquedirection across the line of the walls, as is also aportion of antique basaltic pavement. " This vast hall,"saws the editor of the Classical Torn in hid preface tothat work, w measures about two hundred and seventyN178 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.by eighty-two feet. It was almost precisely similar indimensions and decorations with the great saloon in thebaths of Diocletian j and, like it, the ceiling was supportedby eight gigantic columns, except that the materialwas here of white marble instead of granite. Thishall opened, by three arches on each side, into two aisles.The entrance to the building was by means of a low vestibulumat one end of the saloon, towards the Colosseum,or east . at the other end is a semicircular recess or tribunal.The external wall of the north aisle was piercedby six arches, in two tiers under each of the three greatopenings connecting it with the nave ; but the centreof these three divisions had undergone an alteration, apparentlyin the progress of the work, and its straightwall was thrown out into a semicircular tribune, with ahalf cupola ceiling, like that before alluded to at thewest end, opposite the original entrance : and this changeseems to have been made in consequence of an alterationin the approach 3 for although the south aisle no longerremains, yet the excavations have la : d open a flight ofsteps, and foundations of a portico of entrance, in thecentre of this south side of the building."This is as full a description, perhaps, as could be givenof this ruin ; to which we would fain ascribe the honoursof its ancient fame, and contemplate it as the remains ofthe only edifice in which imagination can picture thesevere genius of Rome assuming a bland and gentleaspect, and laying aside the splendours of her imperialglory for the simple olive wreath and the white robes ofPeace.THE FORUM.The Forum, where the immortal accents glow,And still the eloquent air breathes, burns with Cicero.Bvr.nx,Porta est, ait, ista PalateHie Stator, hoc primum conduite Roma loco est.Ovid.The associations connected with childhood and earlyyouth are infinitely more powerful than any that areformed in maturer years. How various and interestingarc the recollections which the name of Rome excites,connected as they are with the happy studies of ourearlier days ! Montaigne has described, in his own inimitablestyle of simplicity and sincerity, the revival ofhis youthful enthusiasm on visiting the ruins of Rome.w I was acquainted," says he, " with the affairs of Romelong before I knew any thing of those of my own family.I had the Capitol and its whole figure in my mind whenthe Louvre was quite unknown to me, and had heard ofthe Tiber before the Seine. My thoughts have runon the condition and fortunes of Lucullus, Metcllus,and Scipio than of any of my own countrymen. FindingM to this age, I recur t<> that other, and amken with it, that tlii> old Rome, in its iai; 1 flourishing state (for neither am I delighted with itsv 2180 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.infancy or old age), affects and warms me so, that I cannotsee the situation of their streets and houses, andthose ancient ruins, without all the powers of my soulbeing stirred."Gibbon has delineated, with equal fervour, the enthusiasticfeelings which animated him as he gazed uponthe Forum. " At the distance of twenty-five years Ican neither forget nor express the strong emotions whichagitated my mind as I first approached and entered theEternal City. After a sleepless night, I trod, with alofty step, the ruins of the Forum. Each memorablespot — where Romulus stood, or Tully spoke, or Caesarfell, was at once present to my eye 3 and several days ofintoxication were lost o r enjoyed before I could descendto a cool and minute investigation." Even the unimpassionedMiddleton, when " rambling about in the veryrostra of old Rome, and in that Temple of Concord whereTully assembled the senate," confesses that his imaginationwas warmed to a degree almost equal to that of theorator's " old audience."In no part of the city are these classical recollectionsmore feelingly excited than in the Forum Romanum," lochs isis in quibus, coram quos admiramur adsuntvestigia" — where we gaze, as it were, upon the presentfootprints of those who, in our youth, were our admirationand delight. How infinite the variety of never-forgottenincidents that crowd upon the mind in surveyingthis centre seat of Roman greatness ! how magnificentthe multitude of images which the history of the republicpresents ! and how awful the vicissitudes of the cityTHE FORUM. 181from the period when aeneas found the herds grazing inthe Forum,Passim armenia videnturRomanesque foro et laughs mugire crisis,to our own days, when the Forum once more echoedwith the lowing of the herd ! The seat upon which theRoman people sate enthroned in their majesty was convertedby their degenerate descendants into a mart forcattle. The market was constructed amongst the ruinsof the Temple of Peace, and the name of the Forum Romanumwas lost in that of the Campo Vaccine It isonly within a very late period that its ancient name hasbeen restored to the Forum.The principal monuments of antiquity represented inthe plate are the remains of the temple formerly supposedto have been that of Concord, the three pillars ofthe Temple of Jupiter Stator, the Column of Phocis, andthe Arch of Septimius Severus. The round portico onthe left was long believed to have been the entrance tothe Temple of Concord ; and the classical traveller delightedto indulge in the idea that he stood on the thresholdof that edifice which had so often echoed with theeloquence of Cicero. Later discoveries, however, provedthat the Temple of Concord was situated nearer theQnirimd Hill, between the Temple of Jupiter Tonanaand the Arch of Septimius Severus. In the same maii-04 r the three beautiful columns near the Palatine Mountconjectured t<> have formed part <»f the Temple ofJupiter Stater, the " munitissimus habendi senatus lo-chin,'in which Cicero assembled the senate in that time182 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.of extraordinary emergency when he delivered the firstof his orations against Catiline. These ruins, however,have had so many names assigned to them, that theironly unexceptionable title has become that of " TheDisputed Columns." They are generally ascribed to theAugustan age, and have been long regarded as perfectspecimens of the Corinthian order.The three pillars nearly adjoining the portico of theTemple of Fortune, at the very foot of the CapitolineHill, are conjectured to have formed part of the Templeof Jupiter Tonans, erected by Augustus to commemoratehis escape during a thunder-storm on his return fromSpain, when one of his slaves was killed by the side ofhis litter. By some antiquaries these columns are supposedto have belonged to the Temple of Julius Caesar,Dives Jiuius.Nearly in front of these columns stands an isolatedpillar, which for a considerable time was the opprobriumof the antiquaries. By some it was said to be a portionof the Temple of Jupiter Custos ; others maintained thatit had formed a part of the Temple of Vulcan ; while athird party stoutly contended that it had belonged to theBridge of Caligula. The lower part of the column wasburied in the earth ; but it never occurred to the disputantsthat an examination of the pedestal might putan end to their controversies. At length, under thedirections of the Duchess of Devonshire, the groundaround the pillar was excavated, aud an inscription wasdiscovered, from. which it appeared that the column v asdedicated, in the seventh century, by the Greek exarch,Smaragdus, to the Emperor Flocks.THE FORUM. 183The Arch of Septimius Severus is situated at the footof the Capitoline Hill. Like most of the triumphalarches of Rome, it consists of a large arch, with a smallerone on each side. It was erected about the year 200,in honour of Septimius Severus and of his sons, Caracallaand Get, to commemorate the triumphs of the emperorover the Parthian. The bas-reliefs represent the achievementsof Severus in the east in sculpture which tooplainly indicates the decline of art. The ruins withwhich the Form is covered formerly buried this archto almost half its height ; and though attempts weremade under the directions of Leo the Tenth, and at subsequentperiods, to disinter it, the whole of the structurewas not laid open to the eye until the year 1804, when,by the command of the pontiff, the excavations aroundthe arch were completed. It is to be regretted that theexcavations hitherto made in the Forum have been soimperfectly carried on, and that they should have beenabandoned, for the most part, to the caprice or cupidityof strangers. Xor is it a pleasing spectacle to see gangsof criminals, who, under the direction of the Roman government,are employed in those labours. Until lately,the mounds of soil and ruins thrown out in the excavatingof the ground were suffered to encumber the Forum ; but■ unsightly excrescences are now removed.It i Bible, within the limits of these pages, eventhe history <»i* the Forum, or to enumerate thevarious magnificent structures which at different periodscrowded its surface. Indeed, BO much uncertainty ds it history, that the conjectures of antiquariespart, all that we have to guide US in tracing184 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.the site of many of the celebrated buildings with whichit is known to have been filled. Besides the temples,columns, and arches which once rose proudly from itssurface, it contained porticos and shops, thus forming asort of market-place for the people. That, in the timeof the decemvirs, a portion of the Forum was occupiedwith shops, we learn from the graphic pages of Livy.We are told that Virginius " seduce filial ac nutricemprope Cloacinae ad taverns, quibus nunc Nevis est nomen,atque ibi ab lanio, cultro arrest, Hoc te uno. quopossum, ait, modo filia in liberated indico."In traversing the Forum, the stranger looks in vain forsome traces of the gulf of Curtis ; though, as it is saidto have closed upon the hero, it is scarcely to be expectedthat we should find it still yawning. That some particularspot in the Forum retained the name of the Lakeof Curtis appears from the account given by Tacitus ofthe death of Galba, who is said to have perished there.Mr. Forsyth was so fortunate as to have all doubts as tothe locality of the Lake of Curtis cleared away by hisvalet de place. " On my first visit to the Campo vaccine,I asked my valet de place where the Lake ofCurtis was supposed to have been. 'Behold it!' hecried, striking with his cane an immense granite basin,called here a ago. ' Was this, then, the middle of theForum ?' ' Certainly.' ' Does the Cloaca Maxima runbeneath ?' ' Certainly.' c And was this really theago where the ancients threw the money?' ' Certainly.'Thus was the lacus of some ancient fountain(probably one of those which M. Agrippa had distributedthrough the streets) transformed by a cicerone' 'sTHE FOR I'M. 185hand into the Curtain Lake, and thus are thousandscheated by sounds."In viewing the Forum, nothing is more striking thanthe air of desolation that reigns over a scene ancientlyso full of animation.Now all is changed ! and here, as in the wild,The day is silent, dreary as the night ;None stirring, save the herdsman and his herd,Savage alike ; or they that would explore,Discuss, and learnedly; or they that come(And there are many who have cross'd the earth)That they may give the hours to meditation,And wander, often saying to themselves,u This was the Roman Forum !''The boundary of the Foro Romano on one side is theCapitol, so long the stronghold and sanctuary of theRoman powers —The citadelOf great and glorious Rome, queen of the earth !So far renown'd, and with the spoils enrich'dOf nations.Xo portion of the ancient city possesses more illustriousclaims to distinction than the Capitoline Hill.Within its narrow circuit the whole hope of Rome wasenclosed, when, on the approach of the Gauls, the " juslit us military, statuesque robur," the strength of theRoman soldiery, and the wisdom of the Roman senate,sought refuge within it limits. In gazing on its ascent,the traveller would fain track the footsteps of the adventbarbarians, who, " tra<l< uses anna, ubi (quid cuhpie'. alt.rni innixi, sublevantesijue invited et trahentcs186 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.alii alios, prout postulate locus' climbed in silence andsecrecy to the very summit of the hill. On the top of theCapitoline Mount the eye of the curious traveller maystill trace the remains of ancient walls, which are supposedby some to be the ruins of the fortress from whichManlius cast his barbarian enemies. In the pages ofthe Roman historians and poets the Capitoline Mountis always mentioned as something sacred and eternal.Horace, in the height of a poet's ambition, does notventure to propose to himself a longer date of fame thanwhile the Capitol is devoted to its sacred ceremonies :Usque ego postersCream laude recent, dum CapitolineScarlet cum tacit!, virgin pontifex.Nor has Virgil dared to indulge a fonder hope :Fortunate ambo, si quid mea carmina posset,Nulla dies unquam memory vos exist svo ;Turn domus aeneas Capitol immobile sarumAccount, imperiumque pater Romanus habit.To an Englishman it is not amongst the least interestingof the associations with which the Capitol is investedthat it was the scene of Gibbon's meditations when heconceived the vast design of becoming the historian ofthe ruins around him. "It was at Rome, on the 15thOctober, 1764, as I sate musing amidst the ruins of theCapitol, whilst the barefooted friars were singing vespersin the temple of Jupiter, that the idea of writing theDecline and Fall of the city first started to my mine."The Temple of Jupiter, to which the historian alludes, isthe church of Aracaeli, where Marc Anthony Colonia MasTHE FORUM. 187received in triumph on his return from the victory ofLepanto.The precipitous side of the Capitoline Mount, lookingtowards the Tiber, and at the back of the palace of theConservators, is supposed to be the site of the fatal TarpeianRock —The promontory where the traitor's leapCured all ambition —an object by no means answering the formidable ideas ofit, which our classical studies inspire. Bishop Burnet,who expected to find a death-place worthy of a Roman,was much disappointed with the actual appearance ofthe rock. " The Tarpeian Rock is now so small that aman would think it no great matter, for his diversion, toleap over it." According to an admeasurement given byDr. Moore, it is exactly fifty-eight feet perpendicular ;and, from the appearance of the ground at the foot of it,it is probable that the accumulation of ruins has raisedit about twenty feet, which would certainly afford a veryrespectable precipice of nearly eighty feet. According toTacitus, the ascent to the Tarpeian Rock was by a handledSteps. The criminals, cast from its summit, fell atit Wise in the Campus Martins* It is suggested by an:<>us traveller, that probably the criminals were.11 from the summit of the arx or citadel, the Iwalls "f which were founded on the Tarpeian Rock; andthat, consequently, the height must have been muchgreater than that of tin pn choice itself.The summit of the Capitoline, or rather t ! .\\- two Summit (intermontiam) the asylum of188 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Romulus — is now occupied by the Piazza di Campidoglio,surrounded by buildings erected from the designs ofMichael Angelo. In the front is the Palazzo Senators,or the palace of that single Roman senator upon whomthe degraded title is conferred at the will of the pontiff.The other sides of the piazza are formed by the buildingsdevoted to the treasures of the Museum Capitoline.Near the base of the Capitoline Hill, and under thechurch of S. Pietro in Career, are the remains of theSullivan or Lamartine prisons, originally constructedunder the kings. To these dark and awful chambers theaccomplices of Catiline were led when condemned bythe senate to instant death. Here Jugurtha perished,and here Tetanus met his ignominious end. Accordingto tradition St. Peter was confined in one of thesedungeons by the command of Nero, and the chamber hasbeen accordingly consecrated as a chapel.Another boundary of the Forum is the Palatine Hill,on the brow of which formerly stood the splendid palaceof the Caesarss. Until the commencement of the lastcentury, the ruins of the Palatine Mou it, so rich in themost magnificent remains of imperial Rome, had beenvery imperfectly explored. About the year 1/20, anantiquary of the name of Bianchini devoted himself tothe examination of these ruins, and from the discoveriesthen made composed his " History of the Palace of theCaesarss." During his zealous labours in this rich fieldof antiquity, an alarming accident happened to Bianchini.Attended by his . servant, he was exploring with a pickaxeone of the most promising spots on the hill, wherethe hollow sound returned from his blows denoted theTHE FORUM. 189existence of some subterraneous chamber, when suddenlythe ground gave way beneath his feet, and the unfortunateantiquary was plunged up to his shoulders in thecavity. His own efforts and those of his servant wereexerted in vain to extricate him from his perilous situation.Their attempts only widened the aperture ; andthe pious antiquary well knowing that he must be plungedinto the abyss below, whatever might be its depth, calmlyrepeated the prayers appointed for those who are in thearticle of death. The servant's strength being at lengthspent in endeavouring to uphold his master's weight,Bianchini fell the depth of thirty feet upon a heap ofruins. Regardless of the contusions he had received,the joyous antiquary called loudly for a lamp, to viewthe treasures amidst which he had fallen ; and on beingfurnished with lights he found himself in a vast saloonornamented with frescoes. The discovery, however, costhim dear ; for within the space of two years the consequencesof his accident carried him to the grave.The Palatine Hill possesses a better claim to the noticeof the traveller than that which it derives from itshaving been the site of Nero's Golden House. Herestood the mansion of Cicero, situated on the declivityof the hill, overlooking the Forum — that mansion, forthe restoration of which the orator put forth the wholeson] and Strength of hi eloquence in his immortal oration" Pro Domo." Upon the Palatine also the oratorHortensius possessed a house, which subsequently becamethe residence of Augustus, and was afterwardsthe site of Nero's pal ice.The Palatine Hill is now little more than a deserted]i)0 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.tract of ruins. "The most populous part of Rome, "says Mr. Forsyth, " is now but a landscape. Mount Palatine,which originally contained all the Romans, andwas afterwards insufficient to accommodate one tyrant,is inhabited only by a few friars. I have gone over thewhole hill, and not seen six human beings on a surfacewhich was once crowded with the assembled orders ofRome and Italy. Raphael's villa, the Magnesian summerhouse,Michael Angelo's aviaries, are all falling into thesame desolation as the imperial palace, which fringes themount with its broken arches."Mr. Hobhouse, also, has drawn a striking picture of thedesolation which reigns over the Palatine Hill. " Yourwalks in the Palatine ruiiiv, if it be one of the many dayswhen the labourers do not work, will be undisturbed, unlessyou startle a fox in breaking through the bramblesin the corridors, or burst unawares through the hole ofsome shivered fragments into one of the half-buriedchambers which the peasants have blocked up to serveas stalls for their jackass, or as huts for those whowatch the gardens."All that learning reap'dFrom her research hath been that these are walls.Behold the imperial mount ! — 'tis thus the mighty falls !THE TEMPLE OF VESTA, AND HOUSEOF RienziQua? nunc are vides, stipula tunc tecta videreEt paries lento mine texts erat.Hie locus exitus, qui sustained atria Vests,Tunc erat intense regia magna Xuma?.OViD.The friend of Petrarch, hope of Italy !Rienzi, last of Romans !Btbov.Upon the u pulcnim litmus," or "beautiful shore"of the Tiber, as this portion of the city was formerlytermed, stand the remains of a temple which for centurieshas passed under the name of the Temple of Vesta.It i> chiefly upon poetical authority that the building hasreceived this appellation. AVe learn from Ovid thatXuma dedicated a temple to this goddess, and that theedifice was circular in shape: while from Horace weknow that it was injured in the overflow of the Tiber.Vidimus tlavum Liberi, rctnLittle Etruscan violenter undid,Ire dejected monuments iI emplaqne Vestathifl ; if baa i. ( . :i conjectured, and •vainly with much plausibility, that the temple of whichthir i ka ii ii" other than thai repre* need in theTHE LANDSCAPE A^UAL.192 t v P \rcli of Janus andplate , ** is situated W- *• sffeffillgs of theL river, and therefore expose ^ ^ti de. On the other **££, autWlt lies ; that thefrom serous and-*££. ; auld , mo recover, thatTenrpie ^^^^ dedicated to thastere mm not more than o Jf ^ ^ passage ofgoddess in the city It •• ^ hv others,Grace is *+>«£££. ft. the Tiber haveoccasionally reached the Hercuk , B ntVesta have bestowed the te P ^ and proofsam midst the variety of confuse rd ^ ^ ^edition is.P-W S .*e safe g ^ ^ ^may fairly be left >n posses. "J has presided for so ™°> "^ d t0 the nameWhatever disputes may ex t ^ ^ ^of the edifice, one opnnon ely ^ ^ ^^ bnUfing ,of its elegance and bea • ^ ^ „ adcomposed went-rely of £» ^^ colum nsconsisting formerly of t« en entaW nature andone of which is ^ since disappeared ; and ancient roofs have ton, ^ rests apo nstead of the latter, a co eun, ^ Theand defaces the be.ut.fol pffl« ^ cU . caul .columns are thirty-five J* **£„, and se vent fee,terence of the budding » by . backUn til lately the ^rcolu b , the,- a ll ; but this e dl0US /f™tj a circular cella of winterencl, Within the ■*-*? ^ as tomar able, the stones of wj cl R was c0 „give to the whole the appearanceTHE TEMPLE OF VESTA. 193secreted, as a christian church, to St. Stephen, andafterwards to the Madonna, under the title of " La Madonnadel Sole. "Of the age to which this building is to be referred, itis difficult to form a judgment. If those antiquarians areright, who have bestowed upon it the name of the Templeof Vesta, we learn from Tacitus that it was burned inthe fire of Nero. It suffered again from a conflagrationin 191, under Commodus, and was restored by Julia Pia,the wife of Septimus Severus. This it is supposed is thestructure, the remains of which we now see.In the immediate neighbourhood of the Temple ofVesta is that of Fortuna Virilis, now the church of SantaMaria Egeziaca. The scepticism of the antiquaries hasextended to this as to most of the other remains of ancientRome, and the name of the presiding deity hasbeen frequently changed. A temple was certainly dedicatedto Fortuna Virilis by Senilis Nullius, but thatbuilding was destroyed by fire. Whether the presentstructure was erected on the site of the ancient templeis very uncertain. It is said, indeed, that the Temple ofFortuna Virilis was situated in the Foro Boario, whilethese ruins appear to be without the limits of that forum.The remains of the temple consist of seven fluted Ioniccolumns, forming the side of the building; and of thefour columns of the portico, now partly concealed bytin wall of the church. The fact that this temple isconstructed of stone, while the remains of all the othertemplet se marble, has, together with the plainness andsolidity of the structure, induced a belief thai it was awork of the republic Winkelman has pass 'I I S194 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.censure upon the architecture of this building, terming itil piu reggio di tutti."In the immediate neighbourhood of the Temple ofVesta, and opposite to the Ponte Motto, stands a housebuilt of brick, and fantastically ornamented with fragmentsof ancient architecture. This building, from whatcause it is extremely difficult to say, has long been knownbv the name of " the House of Pilate." From an inscriptionstill remaining upon the walls, it appears thatit was formerly the habitation of the celebrated Nicolaor Cola di Rienzi, the Tribune of Rome, whose singularand romantic history forms one of the most interestingepisodes in the annals of modern times. We find him apatriot, inflamed with the love of freedom, inspired bythe ancient history of his country, haranguing his fellow-citizens,and preparing them for the mighty change whichhe afterwards accomplished. — We find him the successfulfader of a popular insurrection, the founder andhead of a system which was to restore to Rome her ancientliberty and greatness — we see him, in his characterof tribune, repressing the violence of the nobles, restoringorder in every department, and wielding the energies ofthe state with dignity and with wisdom. Such was Rienzibefore the possession of power intoxicated his brain ;but the adulation of his adherents, and the folly andsupineness of the people, seem totally to have changed hischaracter.In the next stage of his career we find him arrogatingto himself an imperial pomp, surrounding himself withthe guards and the ensigns of royalty, and summoningto the fantastic ceremony of his knighthood all the splen-THE HOUSE OF RIENZI. 195dour and nobility of Rome. — We see him, at the extremityof his despotic vanity, citing to his presenceemperors and kings, and indulging in the wild imaginationof an universal empire. But a more extravagantceremony still remained to be performed. Rienzi, whoto the fervour of the patriot added the enthusiasm ofthe fanatic, pretended to a communion with the HolyGhost, a gift typified in the ceremony of his coronation,when, to denote the seven gifts of the spirit, he wascrowned successively with seven crowns of various leavesor metals.In the disgrace and deposition of Rienzi, after a reignof seven months, there was little to regret 5 for from thedream of liberty, in which, at the commencement of hiscareer, good men had indulged, they had long awakened.The subsequent history of the tribune has cast upon hismemory a well-grounded suspicion of his sincerity, evenwhen his professions in favour of freedom were at thehighest. After an imprisonment of some months, he condescendedto accept from the hands of the pontiff thename and the office of senator, and to become a part ofthat government which he had so successfully laboured tooverturn. But they whom he had so grossly misled couldnot forgive the apostate. The Roman nobles fomentedagainst him the natural feeling of popular indignation,sad Rienzi fell on the very spot which had been the• • of his vain and wicked pretensions to despoticauthority. The picture of the tribune's death has beenpainted by the hand of Gibbon. " In the death as in thelife of Rienzi, the hero and the COWard "ere strangely196 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.mingled. When the capitol was invested by a furiousmultitude, when he was basely deserted by his civil andmilitary servants, the intrepid senator, waving the bannersof liberty, presented himself on the balcony, addressedhis eloquence to the various passions of the Romans, andlaboured to persuade them that in the same cause himselfand the republic must either stand or fall. His orationwas interrupted by a volley of imprecations andstones ; and, after an arrow had transfixed his hand, hesunk into abject despair, and fled, weeping, to the innerchamber, from whence he was let down by a sheet beforethe windows of the prison. Destitute of aid or hope, hewas besieged till the evening : the doors of the capitolwere destroyed with axes-end fire, and while the senatorattempted to escape in a plebeian habit, he was discoveredand dragged to the platform of the palace, the fatal sceneof his judgments and executions. A whole hour, withoutvoice or motion, he stood amidst the multitude, half nakedand half dead ; then rage was hushed into curiosity andwonder : the last feelings of reverence and compassionyet struggled in his favour ; and they might have prevailed,if a bold assassin had not plunged a dagger in hisbreast. He fell senseless with the first stroke : theimpotent revenge of his enemies inflicted a thousandwounds, and the senator's body was abandoned to thedogs, to the Jews, and to the flames. Posterity willcompare the virtues and failings of this extraordinaryman : but, in a long period of anarchy and servitude, thename of Rienzi has often been celebrated as the delivererof his country, and the last of the Roman patriots."THE HOUSE OF RIENZI. 197Lord Byron has dedicated to Rienzi a beautiful stanzain the fourth canto of his Child Harold.Then turn we to the latest tribune's name,From her ten thousand tyrants turn to thee,Redeemer of dark centuries of shame,The friend of Petrarch, hope of Italy —Rienzi ! — last of Romans ! While the treeOf Freedom's wither'd trunk puts forth a leaf,Even for thy tomb a garland let it be :The forum's champion, and the people's chief,The new-born Numa thou, with reign, alas ! too brief.It may well be questioned whether the tomb of Rienzihas any claim to the garland of freedom. The substitutionof one oppression for another ; the destruction ofthe tyrannical few in order to exalt the despotic one;the abuse of the name and of the weapons of freedom inthe erection of a power independent of the people; theheaping of contempt and derision upon efforts whichought to be consecrated as most honourable and glorious jif, indeed, these be services to the cause of freedom,Rienzi may merit the chaplet ! The eulogistic epithetswhich Petrarch applied to his friend — f ' vir magazine !vir fortissime ! Junior Brute !" — seem to have had greaterweight with Lord Byron than the sober relations of history.Even Mr. Hobhouse has spoken in very, verymeasured terms of EtienzTs apostasy from the cause offreedom. " The fall of this abortion of fortune was thefruit rather of his own intemperance than of the incon-i i the Romans* As the overthrowerof the usurpationof the nobles, as the Assertor of justice, as thepunished of violence, and tin projector oi a splendidin which w i the freedom of Rome and198 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.of Italy, he did indeed ' redeem centuries of shame.'"When the republican aspired to perpetuate his ownpower ; when the tribune imitated the fopperies ofroyalty ; when the reformer declared himself the championof superstition and the church, he lost his distinctivecharacter, and,, like a more celebrated personage of ourown times, left a convincing proof that a revolution canbe maintained only by the maxims and even the veryforms bv which it was first ushered into life."TEMPLE OF MARS.c ircondaro piu volteI mien Gens realDi Roma i grand natal :E 1' aquila superbeSola in pria awezzai di Marte al lure.Glide. La Forgive.I r was natural that the worship of the God of warshould call forth all the wealth and pomp of the Romanempire ; and the temple which is said to have been raisedto that deity by Augustus was one of the most magnificentin the world. It is a curious but well-established fact,that the Greeks had no temple consecrated to the honourof Mars. This is the more remarkable, as the details ofhis actions form as conspicuous a portion of the Iliad asthose of almost any of the deities to whom Homer maybesaid to have given a bodily form and immortalityamong men. It is, however, probable that he neverattained to the honour of a strictly tutelar deity, till thepeople of Rome found it convenient to adopt him astenir sire. The days which their descendants devotedt«» his sen ice were marked by extraordinary festivities.ad combats of every kind were exercised in thishonour, and more wild beasts were slaughtered in thethose periods than at any other. The bull, theram, and the boar, were bis peculiar offerings ; the horseand the irolf alto bled upon hit and the vulture200 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.and the magpie obtained by their attribute of voracitythe same distinction.Few ceremonies were more imposing than the processionsof the Salis, when they issued from their temple inhonour of the god. On their left arms they bore thesacred shields, or cecilia, which were regarded as thepalladium of the country. In their right hands they carrieda javelin, and their habits, striped with purple, werefastened round the waist by broad belts, ornamentedwith brass buckles. Loud and triumphant martial musicaccompanied them as they proceeded, singing at intervalsand in chorus the praises of their deity. Whilst theSalian festival lasted, no business of private concern wasto be undertaken. Even marriages at that time wereunlawful, and the most religious of the people consideredit a species of crime to let their minds be burdened withany thing more serious than that of keeping the seasonwith as much gaiety as possible. So sumptuous werethe feasts with which the priests regaled themselves whenthe ceremonies were ended, that to sup like a Salian wasa common Latin expression to describe the most luxuriousmode of living.The Romans were taught by the pacific Numa to regardthe waging of war unlawful till they had proclaimedtheir intention with the solemnities of religion. A specialorder of priests was therefore instituted, whose businessit was to treat with the nations against which hostilitieswere deemed necessary. When any particular causeof complaint existed, two of these ministers, or ft dales,as they were called, were chosen from the rest to proceedimmediately to the offending state. Of these one wasTEMPLE OF Ears. 2<)1endowed with the chief authority, and was magnificentlyclad, bearing in his hand a caduceus, in testimony ofthe supreme importance of his functions. On arrivingnear the hostile territory, he acquainted the first strangerhe met with the nature of his mission, and the solemnoaths he had taken to act with impartial justice. Herepeated this form on entering the city, and again inthe most public place of resort. A conference with themagistrates was next demanded, and to them he declaredthe resolution of Rome to exact satisfaction for thed injury. Ten, twenty, or thirty days were allowedfor deliberation ; after which time, if the answer returnedwas not satisfactory, he called upon the celestial and infernaldeities to bear witness between the parties, andthen took his departure homewards. Having informedthe senate respecting the issue of his mission, he andhis colleague were sent back with the formal declarationof hostilities, which he published in the presence of threewitnesses, and then began the war by hurling a bloodyjavelin towards the city, exclaiming, that thus the Romanswould revenge the violence they had suffered.The worship of Mars seems not to have been so generalin ancient times as might have been expected; butthe traditions and mythological fables respecting thisgod have been spread far and wide over every region ofthe earth."The identity <»f Mars," says Mr. Faber, " with the'»(! of the Scythian, whom we know to have beenthe Wbd f purely fanciful and imaginary, ainount-!«• than this, that the WBT-god OfODC P*gU•ii may alway be deemed tin same as202 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.the war-god of another. There is sufficient of an arbitrarynature to prove that Mars and Woden are truly andproperly of one primeval character, and that their worshipamong the Romans, the Greeks, and the Goths,must have originated from a common source. We learnfrom Herodotus, that the Scythian or Goths veneratedMars, that is to say Woden, under the symbol of a sword,which they placed on the top of a rude pyramid constructedof faggots, and to which they sacrificed not only sheepand horses, but likewise every hundredth captive. TheThracian, who were of the Scythic race, or who at leastwere under the government of Scythic chieftains, usedthe same hieroglyphic to represent their god of war, whowas doubtless no other than Wot or "Woden : for Ammia-nus Marcellus tells us that they worshipped a nakedsword fixed upright in the ground, considering it andMars as the guardian of the countries through whichthey roved. Now the Romans, whose ancestors, I havelittle doubt, were of Scythic origin, adored their godMars precisely in the same manner ; for, we are informedby Varro, Plutarch, and Amorous, that he wasworshipped under the form of a spear : and Arnobius andClemens very naturally mention this mode of worship inthe very same sentence in which they speak of theScythian veneration of a sword."Rome made ample amends to Mars for the neglectwith which his worship had been treated in Greece andother ancient nations. The splendour which attendedall his rites ; the devotion which inspired the wholepeople at his festivals ; the care with which every traditionwhich regarded his name was handed down fromI I Mile OF MARS. 203generation to generation ; and the honour bestowed onall whom he was supposed to favour, placed hin in thehighest niche of that vast temple which victory built forthe gods of Rome. The greatest glory which can investthe shrine of a deity, whether true or false, is bestowedby worshippers who imitate his attributes; and couldVenus herself, in her own Paphian bowers, or amid thelaurel groves of Eastern Antioch, boast of adorers morefaithful than the Roman devotees of Mars ?Besides the stated seasons for the special service ofthis deity, there were others, in which he was honouredeither for the assistance he had rendered the republic, orthe glory he had bestowed on some of its members. Ofthe latter kind were those magnificent triumphs, to whichno modern spectacle can be compared, either for splendouror solemnity — the pride of conquest having neverdared, since the fall of Rome, to display both the wealthof a ruined nation and its fallen people for the amusementof a rabble. But forgetting the insult which thesespectacles put upon humanity, nothing could have beenbetter calculated to inspire a martial city with enthusiasmthan the triumph of a victorious general.The procession commenced in the Campus Martins,and proceeded through the most public streets to thecapitol, all the avenues through which it passed beingstrewed with flowers. A large band of musicians precededthe cortege, alternately playing martial airs and singingthe p iqneror. The oxen intended for theSacrifice, adorned with fillets and with their horns gilt,a, and these were followed by chariots filled withspoils taken in th war. Splendid armour, Sumptuous204 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.ornaments of gold and silver, statues and pictures, andwhatever could impress the mind with an idea of the grandeurof the victory. Then came the prisoners — generals,princes, and even kings — placards being carried beforethem, describing their rank and the circumstances oftheir capture. The victors followed these unwilling andmelancholy sharers in the show, with their fasces boundwith laurel, and accompanied by numbers of dancers invarious fantastic dresses, some wearing crowns of gold,others the garb of satyrs ; while one, habited like a pantomime,had the office of insulting the fallen by everykind of gesticulation which his wit could prompt. Atrain of persons next followed carrying the richest perfumeswhich the tributary provinces of the empire couldproduce, and lastly came the victor himself, dressed inpurple and gold, crowned with laurel, bearing a branchof the same tree in his right hand, and a sceptre in hisleft, surmounted by an eagle. His face was painted withvermilion, a golden ball hung from his neck, enclosingan amulet, and he rode in an ivory chariot drawn byelephants or four white horses ; his car was surroundedby all his private friends and relations, but immediatelyat his side came a slave, who, while carrying a crown inhis hand, as emblematical of the high honour to whichthe chief had arrived, repeatedly whispered in his earthe solemn admonition, " Remember, thou art but man !"For within the hollow crownThat rounds the mortal temples of a king,Keeps death his court : and there the antic sits,Scoffing his state, and grinning at his pomp ;Allowing him a breath, a little scene,TEMPLE OF MARS.To monarchs, be fear'd, and kill with looks;Infusing him with self and vain conceit, —Afl if this flesh, which walls about our life.Were brass impregnable ; and, humour'd thus,Comes at the last, and with a little pinBores through his castle-wall, and — farewell kingCover your heads, and mock not flesh and bloodWith solemn reverence ; throw away respect,Tradition, form, and ceremonious duty,For you have but mistook me all this while ;I live with bread like you, feel want, taste grief,Need friends ! — Shakspeare.The procession was closed by the legions who badwon the victory — their helmets adorned with laurel, andtheir horses covered with the richest housings. The descriptionwhich Josephus has left of Vespasian's triumphis the most perfect picture which remains of these spectacles,and fills the imagination with wonder at the immensewealth displayed on the occasion. " Almost allthe curiosities," says the Jewish historian, " which themost happy men ever got by piecemeal were here, heapedone upon another, and those both admirable and costlyin their nature ; and all brought together on that day,demonstrated the vastness of the dominions of the Romans; for there was here to be seen a mighty quantityof silver and gold, and ivory, contrived into all sorts ofthings, and did not appear as carried along in pompousshow only, but, as a man may say. running along like ariver. Some parts were composed of the rarest purplehangings, and so carried along; and others accurately rentedtO tin life what was embroidered by the art ofBabylonians. There were also precHHM thattransparent, some set in crowns of gold, and tome205 Tir LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.in other touches, as the workmen pleased ; and of thesesuch a vast number were brought, that we could notbut thence learn how vainly we imagined any of them tobe rarities. The images of the gods were also carried,being wonderful as well for their largeness as made veryartificially, and with great skill of the workmen j norwere any of these images of any other than very costlymaterials : and many species of animals were brought,every one in their own natural ornaments. The menalso who brought every one of these shows were greatmultitudes, and adorned with purple garments, all overinterwoven with gold: those that were chosen for carryingthese pompous shows having also about them suchmagnificent ornaments aa were both extraordinary andsurprising. Besides these, one might see that even thegreat number of the captives was not unadorned, whilethe variety that were in their garments, and their finetexture, concealed from the sight the deformity of theirbodies. But what afforded the greatest surprise of allwas the structure of the pageants that were borne along ;for indeed he that met them could not but be afraid thatthe bearers would not be able firmly enough to supportthem, such was their magnitude; for many of them wereso made that they were on three or even four stories,one above another. The magnificence also of their structureafforded one both pleasure and surprise . for uponmany of them were laid carpets of gold, There was alsowrought gold and ivory fastened about them all; andmany resemblances of the war, and those in several w. y-and variety of contrivances, affording a most lively portraitureof itself; for there was to be seen a happy countOF MARS. 207try laid waste, and entire squadrons of enemies slain,while some of them ran away and some were carried intocaptivity ; with walls of great altitude and magnitudeoverthrown and ruined by machines ; with the strongestfortifications taken, and the walls of most populous citiesupon the tops of hills seized and an army pouring itselfwithin the walls ; as also every place full of slaughter,and supplications of the enemies when they were nolonger able to lift up their hands in way of opposition."Of the temple of the god thus magnificently honouredtoo little remains of the original building for the spectatorto determine precisely its first extent and appearance.A large vault, however, with au immensepillar in the centre is supposed to afford sufficient proofthat the edifice was circular. In its neighbourhoodformerly stood the temples of Bellona and Apollo, butruin has ravaged even quarter of the once crowded AppianWay, and the stranger contemplates with amazementthe solitude that prevails where the ruling divinitiesof Rome were worshipped by their millions of devotees.THE TEMPLE OF PALLAS.Quivi tempo sublimeSacro all' eternity con aurea haveVertu gli april ; quince spiego le penneE luogo in ciel fra gli altri numb ottenne.Fulvio Tsstt.The same doubts have been started by antiquaries respectingthe proper designation of this temple as of mostothers in the eternal city — a title to which, were it notfor the immortality of her people, and the unfading lustrewhich memory casts upon the spot, would be less properlyapplied to Rome than to any other city of the earth j forwhere has ruin so wrought her perfect work r where istime seen the conqueror and man the victim so clearlyand so awfully as there r The death of a strong manfills us with a deeper sense of human frailty than that ofa weaker being ; and Rome in ruins — the mightiest andthe proudest monument of the earth crumbled into dust —makes us feel as if the pillars of the round world itselfwere unloosened. The image of eternity seems to havebeen raised of adamant to be dissipated in air, ard dreamingof Rome as clothed in her bridal garments and thespouse of hundred-throned victory, we wake to treadupon her ashes, her name only remaining immortal.Of the almost infinite number of temples which adornedthis city, not a dozen can be said to exist even in ruins;Tick TEMPLE 07 PAT LAS. L?f >! Iand of those of which vestiges remain, a very few arcknown for certainty to be ascribed to the right deities.So numerous were these edifices during the flourishingtimes of the empire, that some antiquaries have excusedthemselves from naming them all by saying thatsuch a task were endless; and those who have commencedthe undertaking have ended with fixing thenames to two or three ruins as temples, which the nextgeneration of critics has determined to be basilicas, baths,or palaces. " The antiquarian disputes began at an earlyperiod," observes Mr. Hobhouse; "and where nothingbut a name was left, there was still some pleasure foundin the struggles of conjecture. The mica aurea has notbeen seen since the ninth century ; but it afforded an opportunityof quoting Plutarch, Ammian, and Martial, toshow that it might have been a Greek girl, or a bear, or asupper-house. The actual remains were soon found to beno less uncertain. The two vaults of the church of St.Maria Xuova were believed by Poraponius Laetus thefragments of a temple of aesculapius and Health ; byMartiauus, of the Sun and Moon ; by Bonds, of aesculapiusand Apollo ; by Poggio, of Castor and Pollux. Theyare now called the Temple of Venus and Rome." Inthe same manner the Temple of Maria Egizziaca im-^at different times supposed to be a chape) of PatricianModi stye a basilica of Caius sad Lucius j a templeof Good Fortune ; a temple <»f Manly Fortune ; while atthe time Mr. HobhoUM WBS in Rome it was generallybelieved tO be, as at tn>t suppose 1, the Temple <•!Modesty. And thus it bai been far il withalmost all the ruins on which the antiquary gases withp210 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.most pleasure ; each having his own opinion, and delightinghimself sometimes with his favourite theory, atothers, with the splendid visions which belong to thespot, if that theory be true. The temple, however, weareat present contemplating is one of the most beautifulruins in Rome. It consists of two Corinthian columns,eleven feet in circumference, and supposed to be thirty-onefeet high j but the soil has been so long suffered toaccumulate around them that but half their height isto seen. The architrave supported by these columnsis strikingly beautiful, as well as the frieze, which ismagnificently adorned with bas-reliefs, descriptive ofthe mythological character of the goddess to whom thetemple is thought to have been dedicated. Above thewhole rises an attic story, but in a totally dilapidatedstate 3 all that remains, in any degree of preservation, ofthis part of the building being a supposed statue of thedeity.How different are the religious associations now connectedwith the name of Minerva's temples and the seatsof her former grandeur ! How changed is the spectaclewhich throngs the way to the spots where stood her ancientfanes, and the feeling with which the adoring multitudeshallow them as sacred to divinity ! Speaking ofthe customs prevalent in the sacred city during Lent,the author of " Rome in the Nineteenth Cent y " thus describesthe procession to one of these consecrated spots,now the site of a christian church. " Before the HolyWeek," it is said, " our sufferings began. We veredisturbed the very 7 morning of our return from Napleswith the information that it was a grand festa— theTHE TEMPLE OF PALI ,AS 2] 1festa of the Annunciation j and that a grand funzionewas to take place at the church of Santa Maria SupraMinerva, preceded by a still more superb procession ;and that we must get up to see it, which we accordinglydid, and drove through streets lined with expectingcrowds, and windows hung with crimson and yellow silkdraperies, and occupied by females in their most gorgeousattire, till we made a stop near the church, before whichthe pope's horse-guards, in their splendid full-dress uniforms,were stationed to keep the ground ; all of whom,both officers and men, wore in their caps a sprig ofmyrtle as a sign of rejoicing. After waiting a shorttime the procession appeared, headed by another detachmentof the guards, mounted on prancing black chargers,who rode forward to clear the wav, accompanied bv sucha flourish of trumpets and kettle-drums that it looked atfirst like any thing but a peaceable or religious proceeding.This martial array was followed by a bare-headedpriest, on a white mule, bearing the Host in a gold cup ;at the sight of which every body — not excepting ourcoachman, who dropped down on the box — fell apoDtheir knees, and we were left alone, hermetically sittingin the open barouche.The pope, I understand, used formerly to ride openthe white mule himself \ whether in memory of our entrance into Jerusalem <>n an ass, or no, I cannotand all the cardinals used to follow him in theirmagnificent robes of state, mounted either on mulehones ; and as the rm/nrnfiss'nni are, for the most part,ot vi ry eminent hoi Mea, they were gi really fastenedon, lest tin y should tumble Off. Thifl cavalcade mustp2212 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.have been a very entertaining sight. I understand thatPius VI., who was a very handsome man, kept up thiscustom ; but the present pope is far too infirm for suchan enterprise, and so he followed the man on the whitemule in his state coach, at the very sight of which heseemed to have made a jump back of two hundred yearsat least. It was a huge machine, composed almost entirelyof plate-glass, fixed in a ponderous carved andgilded frame, through which was distinctly visible theperson of the venerable old pope, dressed in robes ofwhite and silver, and incessantly giving his benedictionto the people by a twirl of three fingers, which aretypical of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, thelast being represented by the little finger. On thegilded back of this vehicle — the only part, I think, thatwas not made of glass — was a picture of the pope in hischair of state, and the Virgin Mary at his feet. Thisextraordinary machine was drawn by six black horses,with superb harness of crimson velvet and gold. Thecoachman, or rather postilions, were dressed in coats ofsilver stuff, with crimson velvet breeches, and full-bothtoned wigs well powdered, without hats.Three coaches, scarcely less antiquely superb, followed,with the assistant cardinals and the rest of thetrain. In the inside of the church, the usual tiresomeceremonies went on that take place when the pope ispresent. He is seated on a throne, or chair of state ;the cardinals in succession approach and kiss his hand,retire one step and make three bows or nods, one tohim in front, and one on the right hand and another onthe left, which, I am told, are intended for him (as theTHE TEMPLE OF PALLAS. 213personification of the Father), and for the Son, and for theHoly Ghost, on either side of him; and all the cardinalshaving gone through these motions, and the inferior priestshaving kissed his toe — that is, the cross embroidered onhis shoe — high mass begins. The pope kneels during theelevation of the Host, prays in silence before the highaltar, gets up and sits down, reads something out of agreat book which they bring to him with a lighted taperheld beside it (which must be eminently useful in thebroad daylight), and having gone through many moresuch ceremonies, finally ends as he began with giving hisbenediction with three fingers all the way as he goes out.During all the time of this high mass, the pope's militaryband, stationed on the platform in front of thechurch, played so many clamorous martial airs that itwould have effectually put to flight any ideas of religioussolemnity — if any there had been."THE BORGHESE PALACE.Ma quicunque di gloria animi accessFaction slender quaggiii mirabilis come,Ch' margin signing al tempo ivan tu pense.Caution le solid' ore e le samos.E pria dell ore, ahi ! che al coheir suo graveSi consuma la man che le compose !Salomo.ve Florentine.The palace and villa of the Borghese are among themost celebrated in Rome. The former was founded bythe Cardinal Dezza in the year 1590, and after the plansof the distinguished architect, Martini Lunghi the elder.In extent and magnificence it has the air of an imperialresidence, rather than of an edifice belonging to a privatefamily. It is divided into three great apartments, thecommunication between which is formed by a doublegallery, running across the court of the garden. Thisnoble entrance is surrounded by an elegant double portico,supported by a hundred massive granite columns ofthe Doric and Ionic orders, and ornamented by severalstatues, of which the most conspicuous are those ofAustin and of an Amazonian. The principal room in theground floor was formerly filled with one of the largestcollections of sculpture, both ancient and modern, to befound in the world ; but the present possessor of the palace ehaving married Pauline, sister of the late Emperor of theFrench, bartered it away to his brother in-law ; and theTHE Borghese PALACE. 21")residence of his ancestors, so long the boast of the familyand of Rome in general, has been thus deprived of its chiefattraction. Among the paintings were many of the mostadmired productions of Titian, Raphael, Leonardo daVinci, Caravaggio, and others of the great masters. Insmaller rooms belonging to the same apartment weretwo fountains of alabaster, various busts of the ancientCaesarss in porphyry, and a number of minute paintings,regarded by amateurs as the most precious relics ofItalian genius. The friezes of the rooms in the principalapartments are decorated with designs from the hand ofCosmo Piazza ; and the richness of the drapery andgolden ornaments with which the walls are in many partscovered dazzle and astonish the spectator. Among thechief curiosities of the latter kind is a beautiful ivory cabinet,splendidly embossed with golden basso-relievos, andcovered with jewels of the most costly description. Theprivate oratory is another portion of the edifice whichwins admiration by the richness of its decorations ; whilein a different quarter of this magnificent palace the eyeis attracted by a superb gallery, ornamented with gold,crystals, and paintings of the most admirable kind \ thepavement throughout being formed of various preciouswoods, and the attention every where attracted by marblesand the valuable porcelain of Saxony.The Villa Borghese is as celebrated for its extensivegardens as the palace is for its noble apartments, itssculptures, and paintings. This beautiful retreat is situatedjosh beyond the walls, and extends to a considerabledistance over the I v m< inn Hill. The manner inwhich it is laid out is pn>fesscdl\ English, the I216 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.being uncut, and the walks left shaded on each side bythe luxurious foliage of noble evergreens. The drivethrough the grounds, which are usually considered rathera park than a garden, as they are called, is said tobe one of the most pleasant about Rome j and as theyare always open to the public, they form the usual promenadeon Sundays and other holidays. At the extremityof the garden is the casino, the usual ornamentof Roman villas ; and the splendour of its decorations, itsnumerous specimens of sculpture — among others a curtison horseback, and two groups by Bernini — renderthis peculiarly attractive.Some degree of bad taste, however, is evident in theornaments of these gardens, otherwise so excellent acopy of the champaign estates of rural England. Artificialruins and mythological temples destroy the simplebeauty of its thick shades ; and fountains and waterfalls,left neglected, and choked up with weeds and rubbish,give, an air of desertion and decay to some parts of thegrounds which ill agrees with the life and freshness ofnature. But few persons find themselves in a humourto criticise the arrangements of this extensivegarden if once fairly surrounded by its bowers andlabyrinths, almost impenetrable even to southern suns.Nothing can exceed their beauty when the varied foliageof the plantations is seen under the strong light of asummer's day. Every tint to be found in the forest orthe garden meets the eye ; and the graceful dispositionof the trees — of pines, laurels, and cypresses — is as Refreshingto the fancy as the coolness they breathe aroundis to the heated frame.THE BORGHESE PALACE. 2 J ,The Borghese Villa was founded by the Cardinal Borghese,nephew of Pope Paul the Fifth, who expendedupon it a large portion of his princely revenue ; and succeedingmembers of his noble house continued to addnew treasures of art to those he had already collected,till the present possessor left Rome to reside in Florence,and resigned it, consequently, to comparative neglect.The palace was occupied by the favourite sisterof Napoleon till her death ; and it is a curious circumstance,that in one of the chambers of the edifice is astatue of this beautiful woman by Canova ; but the princenever suffers it to be seen, and keeps the key of theapartment with him at Florence.When that amusing old traveller Lassels visited Rome,the Borghese Palace and Villa were in their splendour,and called forth a full share of his wonder and criticism : —From hence I went to see the palace of Borghese,which is hard by. This is one of the noblest palaces inRome. It gives you a fair broadside of windows, threestories one over another ; and its length is prodigious.Mounting up to the chambers, I found a fair open gallerybuilt upon arches and pillars round about the court.This gallery lets you into several apartments ; and onthat side which overlooks the piazza I saw a row of tenortwelve great chambers, through which I looked atonce. In these chambers and the other rooms I observedthese tidings: — 1. Rich hangings, Bud ever themrare painting made by a Capuchin lay-brother. Thehistory <>f the Queen of Sheba coining to wait Solomon*!•-nut, and the rap of the Sabines, which make thisei the hangings are bo rarely well done, that218 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Raphael and Michel Angelo would not have mendedthem for colours. 2. A great cabinet of ebony, set withhistories cast in gold, and set with rich precious stones ;it is valued at threescore thousand crowns. 3. A rarepicture of Hercules and Anteus. 4. Raphael's own picture.5. The Last Supper, by Titian. 6. The terraceand garden, with box-knots and fountains of water ; allat the very top of the house, and overlooking the street,river, meadows, and St. Peter's. 7- The little backgallery of pictures, where, among others, I was shownthe pictures of Martin Luther, Nicholas Machiavel, andCaesar Borgia; the two last great corruptors of policyand manners. 8. The low cool gallery full of statuesand pictures, especially of the Borghese family. Thatof Paulus Quintus, in a small mosaic work, is scarce tobe discovered from painting : as also the Assumption ofour Lady in the same work. There I saw also Titian'sown picture, and the rare Crucifix made by MichelAngelo, so to life, that some men have fabulously givenput "that he drew it after a crucified man."Of the villa he thus speaks :From hence crossing over the fields, I went to Borghese'svilla and garden, which are a little half mile fromthe town. This is the greatest villa that is about Rome.For here you have store of walks, both open and close,fish-ponds, vast cages for birds, thickets of times, storeof fountains, a park of deer, a world of fruit-trees, statuesof all sizes, banquetting-places, grottoes, wetting sports,and a stately palace, adorned with so many rare statuesand pictures, that their names make a book in octavo,which 1 refer you to. As for the palace itself, it is com-theBorghese PALACE. 21Dpassed on both sides by a fair semicircle of statues, whichstand before the two doors, like old Penates and Lares.The wall of the house is overrated with a world of ,or old marble pieces of antiquity ; as that of Curtisspurring into the virago, that of Europa hurried away byJupiter become a bull, with a world of such like fables.Entering into the house, I saw divers rooms full ofcuriosities.In the great hall stands the statue of Diana inoriental alabaster, which was once a deity adored byAugustus Caesar. Here also hang two great pictures :the one representing a cavalcade, when the pope goethabroad in ceremony ; the other a cavalcade, when thegreat Turk goeth abroad in pomp.2. In another room stands the statue of one of thefamous gladiators anciently, who fought alone againsttwenty others, and being wounded to death seems tothreaten with his looks all his beholders. It is terriblywell made.3. In one of the chambers above is the head inprofile of Alexander the Great cut in marble.-4. In another room below I saw the statue ofSeneca bleeding to death. It is of a black stone like jet ;than which nothing can be blacker but the crimes ofNero the magistracies, who put this rare man his mastert- death.5. The statue also of Daphne and Apollo in alar; Apollo running after Daphne, and she Stiffeninginto a tree, being overtaken ; — her fingers shooting intobranches, and her toes into roots, arc admirably welldone. It mush be Bernini's work.220 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.6. The statue also of aeneas carrying his old fatherAnchises upon his back out of burning Troy. The youngman is brawny and strong 3 the old man is made leanand weak : as also the young man shows a great deal oftender affection towards his father, and the father asmuch fear in his looks.7. The statue also of David slinging at Goliath. Hefrowns so terribly as he slings, that you would swear heintends to fright him with his looks, and then kill himwith his sling. These two last statues are also of thehand of Cavalier Bernini.8. In another chamber above I saw the great chairwhich locket fast any man that sitter down in it.It is said to be a chair of revenge, or a trap-chair for anenemy 3 bat methinks it would be a fine chair for a restlessstudent, or a gossiping wife.I saw here also some toys for young men 3 as theclock, which being wound up played a tunable dance,and little men and women of iron, painted handsomely,dance in a ring to the tune by virtue of the wheels. Thefool's paradise — representing, first, a fine green garden offlowers, then a palace, and, lastly, a neat library — is madealso to recreate children."R I M I N I.Veda Genera, Isotta e l'altre argenti,E la copia d' Arising.Petrart.a.Heu, miser, exagitans immiti corde furores,Sancti puer, cures hominem qui garcia misses,Quaeque regis Golgos, quaeque Idealism frondosum,Quibus incense jactastis mente puellaFluctibus, in flava saepe spite suspirantem !Quartos ilia tulip languenti corde minores !Quantum saepe magis fulsome expalluit auri !Catullusor Ariinino, the Ariminum of the Romans, is aplace of great antiquity. Tradition has even assigned itsorigin to the times of Hercules. Here terminated the ViaFlaming, being joined to the Via-ilia. The laboursof Augustus, the great road-maker of Italy, are stillvisible in the magnificent bridge over which the travellerenters the town. This bridge, which consists of threearches, built entirely of solid blocks of white marble, isone of the most perfect monuments extant of the Augustanaire. The proportions of the arches are said tobe the same as those recommended by Palladio. Fromthe inscriptions still legible upon the marble, it appearsthat the work was not completed until the time of Tiberius.Rimini also exhibits other remains of antiquity,inviting the attention of the traveller : a triumphal gaitvrith one arch, raised in honour of Augustus] and theruins of an amphitheatre, in the garden Of the Capuchins222 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.In the square, or market-place, stands an antiquepedestal of marble, which, according to a modern inscriptionupon it, was the suggestion from which Caesarharangued his army after passing the Rubicon. It is tobe regretted that so classical an association is not supportedby better evidence than that of mere tradition.At the distance of about twelve miles from Rimini issituated the little republic of San Marino, whose singularfortune it has been, in the midst of despotic governments,to maintain its independence for upwards of twelve hundredyears. The traveller who passes through Rimini,from which place alone the territories of the republic canbe entered, ought not to omit to visit this little state, celebrated,as it has been, in the prose of Addison and inthe verse of Collins.Bat Rimini is more interesting to the lovers of Italianliterature, on account of its being connected with thetragical deaths of Francesca da Polenta and Paolo Malatesta,which form the subject of one of the finest episodesin Dante's poem. — inferno, c. v.) Here it will be onlynecessary to remind the reader that Gianciotto Malatesta,married to Francesca da Polenta, killed her and his ownbrother Paolo, under suspicion that an unlawful attachmentexisted between them. A few words in illustrationof that passage of Dante will not, perhaps, proveunacceptable to our readers.The house of Malatesta were lords of Verucchio, a smallcastle near Rimini, which was bestowed upon them bythat city, as a reward for services performed by thatfamily on behalf of the people of Rimini. This addedgreat consideration to the Malatestas, whose head, Mala-rimini.223testa il Vecchio, displayed great talents, and was acknowledgedas chief of the Guelph in that part of Italy.He commanded the Guelph League when they weredefeated bv Guido da Montefeltro, the leader of theGhibellines ; and eventually succeeded, after several vainattempts, in making himself lord of Rimini, by treacherouslyseizing and murdering Montagne de' Marcia,the head of the Ghibellines of that city.Malatesta the old was thrice married. By his firstwife he had Malatesta dall' Occhio, so named becausehe had only one eye ; by the second were born Giovanniand Paolo j by the third he had one Lambert, of whom wehave no need farther to speak. Giovanni was lame ;hence he was surnamed Giotto, a word which being unitedwith his christian name, pronounced in dialect Zan orGiant, the name Zanciotto or Gianciotto was formed,sometimes changed into Lanciotto. Paolo, on the contrary,must have been a fine-looking man, he being surnamedPaul the Beautiful, or Paolo Bello. Giovanni wasthe father of three sons, probably by his wife Francesca;and it is to be concluded that Paolo was married, sincefrom him descended the counts of Ghiazzolo.Guido da Polenta, the father of Francesca, was Lord ofRavenna, and a Guelph. He contrived to render himselfBattel "f that city, by driving from it the two powerfulGhibelliue families, Traverse and Atanagi. He succeeded,chiefly by the assistance of the Malatestas, withwhom he was strictly allied. After the murder of Francesca,the two houses continued to support each other,hut the persona more nearly connected with the twovictims seem nev. i t«« haec been aft r\\anl> OB friendly224 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.terms. The history of these two families is an uninterruptednarrative of treachery and murder, particularly in thatof the Malatestas ; of whom Villany says, that " it seemsthe curse of that race, of that province, and of Romagna,that the members of the same family are traitors to eachother." The Count of Ghiazzolo attempted to murderMalatestino dall' Occhio, who had become Lord ofRimini after Malatesta il Vecchio. The Malatestas ofRimini assisted the relations of Guido and Rialto daPolenta in seizing upon Ravenna, and murdering Rialto,who was then its archbishop. Hence Dante, although aLibelling, was well received by Guido da Polenta, whosehatred for the Malatestas found a kindred feeling in thebreast of the poet, who never omits an occasion of brandingthem with infamy. Thus, he first speaks of the twoMalatestas, il Vecchio and dall' Occhio, as " two mastiffseating Rimini" {Inf. xxvii. 46) ; and then he records thetreachery of that felon, " who sees but with one eye," whomurdered the two best persons of Fan (Ins. xxviii. 81).The poet's dislike for the Malatestas, who were Guelph,and particularly for Malatestino dall' Occhio, is easilyaccounted for. Of this tyrant, a contemporary chroniclersays, that he was "bold, wise, and honest as ever manwas. He had only one fault — he would neither see norhear a Libelling ; he persecuted them fiercely." Dante,placed between his political principles and his gratitudefor Guido, does not abuse him, but praises highly theAtanagi and the Traverse, and weeps over their misfortunes; "which was an indirect, but bitter and decisivecondemnation of Guido's conduct towards them.The history of the Potestas and Malatestas, as well ;«-RIMINI. 225that of the love of Francesca and Paolo, has been sadlyconfused, and turned into a mere romance, by Dante'scommentators. There is but one old chronicler whoincidentally mentions the tragical death of the two relationsin the following few words : " It happened thatAnne Sciancato (that is, John the Lame, Zanciotto)found his lady with his brother Paolo and killed themboth." Their guilt is not even hinted at, and seems tobe implicitly denied by Dante himself, who says thatZanciotto is destined to fall into hell's pit as a murdererof his relations. Boccaccio, who was not likely to extenuatetheir guilt, admits that Francesca and Paolo werepartial to each other, but adds : " I never heard themaccused of a criminal act, and I rather think the suppositiona fiction founded on what was likely to have happened,than on what actually took place." Even the partialityof Francesca for Paolo might be excused, were ittrue that she was deceived in her marriage, either bvbeing induced to consent to the match, believing thather hand was to be bestowed on Paolo, or by being infact betrothed to Paolo, from whom Gianciotto tyrannicallyseparated her. Both these versions are to be foundin old, although not contemporary, writers j but neitherstory is founded on good authority, any more than theenmity of the Malatestas against the Potestas, their wars,rank of Zanciotto, and other circumstances, whichoriginated only in the fancy of commentators. Dantesupposes that Paolo and Francesca fell in love on readinghow Sir Lancelot's passion nrafl returned by Generic ; ai instance purely imaginary, ai wt may i aaUy chess,but which has nevertheless been received at a facty226 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.by some good-natured annotators. The Romance of SirLancelot being a very rare book, we shall here transcribepart of the passage to which Dante alludes, in its originaland charming old language. To render it intelligible,a few circumstances from the romance must bepreviously mentioned.Sir Lancelot had been knighted by King Arthur, atthe request of the Lady of the Lake, and then set out inquestof adventures. On a solemn tournament beingheld at the court of King Arthur, Sir Lancelot enteredthe lists incognito, and performed such wondrous featsof arms, that every body wished to learn who he was.Sir Galehault, who knew the secret, as the most intimatefriend of Sir Lancelot, knew, likewise, that tliibbrave knight was in love with Genere, Arthur's queen,and had undertaken to inform her of this fact. Ladiesand knights were speaking of the great valour of theunknown champion, when the question was individuallyproposed to every one of the party : " "What would youdo to have that warrior for your friend r" Each of themanswered according to his or her fancy, when Sir Gale-fault,turning to Messire Gavin, who was in very poorhealth, said, " Et vous, Messire Gauuain, si Dieu vouspoint santa que tant desires, quel mischief en feriez vouspour avoir campaign a si preudhomme. Et quant MessireGavin lot, si pense hung petit, comme celuy qui neclyde jamais avoir santa. Se Dieu me donnoit la santaque ie desire ie vouldroye orendroit estre une des pinsbelles dames du mont, par covenant quit me disastrousles hours de sa vie. Par ma foy, fait Gallehault assezy aucz mis. Et vous, madame, quel mischief feriezRIMINI. 227vous par eonucnant que hung tel chevalier fuit toujoursen vostre service. Par Dieu, fait elle, Messire Gauuainy a mis toutes les oftres que dame y pelt mettre. EtMonseigneur Gauuain ct tous autres se commencementa rire."Having thus broken the ice, Sir Galehault next informedthe queen that he would introduce to her theunknown champion in a garden, where she would meetthem. Sir Galehault went with, his seneschal and SirLancelot, and the queen came with La dame de Malle-faultet Dame Core de Cardueil, " une sienne pucelle."Sir Galehault advised these two ladies and the seneschalto move on, and he remained behind with the queen andSir Lancelot, who was very bashful. " Et Gallchaultqui le voit si honteux, pense quit vault dire a la boyneson pense seul a seul," and he therefore discreetly joinedDame Malleable and " la pucelle," and his seneschal. Along dialogue (which must have seemed very short tothe interlocutors) then follows, when Sir Lancelot, byreminding the queen of several particulars which wereknown to both, at length discovers himself. Then theyproceed in the following manner.Et aunt hier pourquoi feistes tant d' armes commovous feistes. Et il commence a souspirer. Dicte amoySeulement ; car ie Bay bien <jue pour aucune dame ondemoiselle le festa vous, et me dicte qui elle est parlafov quo tous dm deuez. Haa, dame, is voy bien qn'il!<■ me consent dire, creates vous. Moy, fait elleEl combien a il que vous ni<- aymez tant ? De le lour quei • baa tcnii pour chevalier et ie ne 1'eatoye mie. Par latoy que vous me deuez, done vincent oea amours queq2228 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUALvous auez en moy mises. Dame, fait il, vous le mefeistes faire, qui de moy feistes vostre amy, se vostrebouche ne me a mente. Mon amy, fait elle ; comment.Dame, fait il, ie vins devant vous quant ie eu pris conniea monseigneur le roy. Si vous command a Dieu, etdis ie estoye votre cheualier en tous lieux. Et vous medictes que vostre amy et vostre chevalier vouliez vousque ie feusse. Et ie dys : adieu, dame. Et vous dishes :Adieu, mon beau doulz amy. Ce fut le mot que preud-homme me fera (perhaps /£) si ie le suis; ne oncquespuis ne fus a si grand mischief qu'il ne men remembrance.Ce mot m'a consort en tous mes ennuys ; ce mot m'ade tous maul guard ; ce mot m'a fait riche en mes .Par ma foy, fait la royne, ce mot fat en bonneheure chit 5 et Dieu en soit azure, ne ie ne le prendre pasa certes comme vous feistes ; et a maint preudhommesay ie ce dist, ou ie ne pensay oncques rien que le dire.Mais la costume est telle des chevaliers, qui font amainte dames semblant de telles choses dont a gueres neleur est au cur. Et ce disoit elle pour voir de combienelle le pourroit mettre en malaise, C a elle venit bienqu'il ne pretended a autre amour que en la sienne : maiselle se delectoit a sa malaisete veoir ; et il eut si grantangoisse que par un pou qu'il ne se passa ; et le royneeut pour qu'il ne client, si appelle Gallehault ; il y hintaccount. Quant il voit que son compagnon e c t si si en a si grant angoisse que plus ne pent. Haa,dame, fait Gallehault : vous ne le pourrez bien toller. etce seront trop grant dommaige. Certes, sire, seront mon.Et ne scales vous pour qui il a tant fait d'armes, factGallehault. Certes jenny, faict elle ; mais s'il est vraiin mini. 2:29ce qui m'a etc dit c est pour moy. Dame, se m'aistDieu, bien Ten pouez croire j car aussi connie il est lcplus prcudhomme de tous les homines, aussi est soncueur plus pray que tous autres. Vehement, fait elle,diriez vous qu il seront preudhoinine, se vous scauiczqu il a fait d'armes puisque il fut cheualier. Lois luycorpse tout ainsi comment vous auez ouyj et sanchezqu' il a ce fait seulement pour moy, fait elle. Lois layprie Gallehault et dit: Pour Dieu, dame, ayez de luymercy, ct faites pour moy ainsi comme ie fis pour vousquant vous ln'en priests. Quelle mercy voulez vous queie en aye. Dame, vous scales qu' il vous aime surtoutes, et il a fait pour vous plus que oncque cheualierne fist pour dame Certes fait elle il a plusfaict pour moy (pie ie ne pourroye desseruir, ne il mepourroit chose require tout ie le puisse escouduire :mais il ne me require de riens : ains est taut niclcn-coliseum que marseilles. Dame, faict Gallehault, ayez enmercy : il est celluy qui vous aye plus que soy meshes.Si in' list Dieu, ie ne scauoye rien de sa roulette quantil hint fors Jc en away, fait elle, telle mercycomme vous voulez. Dame vous auez fait ce que ievous aye requis ; aussi toy ie bien faire ce que vous merequerrez. Se, dit la roync, il ne me require de riens.Certes, dauic, fait Gallehault, il ne ose, car Ten nctymera ia riens poor amours que Ten nc craigne: maisus en |)ii<- pour luy; ct sc ie ne vous en praise, siossiez vous purchasers car plus ritchie tremor neponrriei vous connected. Certes, fait tile, i<- lc scanmen, et ie tii ferry ton! ce que vous commandDame, fait Gallehanltj grant mercy. .'<• \»>u> prie que230 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.vous luy donnez vostre aniour, et le retcnez pour vostrecheualier a toujours, et devenez sa loyally dame toutevostre vie : et vous le aurez fait plus riche que si vousluy auiez donne tout le monde. Certes, fait elle, ie luioctroye qu' il soit men, et moy toute sieune et que parvous soient amended tous les meffaitz. Dame, faictGallehault, grant mercy. Or consent il commencementde service. Vous ne deuiserez riens, fait le royne, queie ne face. Dame faict il, grant mercy ; done raises ledevant moy pour commencement de rays amour. Dubaiser, fait elle, ie ne voy ne lieu ne temps, et ne doubtedpas, fait elle, que ne le voulsisse faire aussi volunteersqu' il seront ; mais ces dames sont cy qui moult se que nous avons tant fait, si ne pourroit estre queils ne le dissent. Important se il vault ie le baiserayvolunteers. Et il en est si ioyeulx, que il ne peltres poudre si non tant qu'il dit : Dame, faict il, grantmercy. Dame, fait Gallehault, de son vouloir e'en doubtedia } car il est tout vostre bien le sanchez, ne ia nul nes'en apperceuera. Nous trois serons ensemble ainsicomme se nous postillions. De quod me feroye ie prier,fait elle j plus le veil ie que vous. Lor se talent apart et font semblant de conseiller. La royne voit quele cheualier e'en ose plus faire si le parent par le mentonet baise devant Gallehault assez longuement."The dialogue between the party is interrupted, in theromance, at the moment at which the reading of Paoloand Francesca is supposed by the poet to be broken off-andthe circumstance, which was so fatal to the twolovers, seems to have been the most celebrated of all thestory long after the time of Dante. In the very rareKIM INI. 231edition of " Sir Lancelot' printed at Paris 1520, 3 vols,folio, there is a very clumsy wood-cut at the beginning,representing that scene which the poet supposes to haveso strongly affected the lovers of Rimini. We fartherlearn from the romance itself, that when Lancelot wasprisoner of Morgain the Fay, he amused himself withpainting the same occurrence on the walls of his placeof confinement. Arthur, on going to see Morgain, whowas his sister, observed these paintings, as well as someinscriptions which accompanied them. " Le roy," saysthe romance, " savoir bien tant de clergie qu' il pouoitbien cognoistre les scriptures qui la estoyent." Thisexcited some unpleasant doubts in his mind, and, havingasked from his sister some farther information, she,being jealous of Sir Lancelot, and on bad terms withthe queen, who had once imprudently promulgated someweakness of Morgain, gladly communicated the unw ishcd-for information, beginning ah novo, from the scene of thegarden, and informing Arthur how Gallehault " prytant la royne quelle octroya du tout en tout son amour aLancelot du Lac et Ten assist par hung baiser, tout ainsicomme ces peintures le vous mons trent tout clement.Assez, feist le roy, ni'en auez dit, belle ser: ie e'enveil plus our maintenant, car ie voy ma honte tropcvidamment et la trahison de Lancelot."In a work like tin present, we should consider itpedantry were we to enter into critical remarks on thebeauty of the |>as-;i<:<\ aid more particularly of the delicatemanner in which it is interrupted by the poet.Wishing I d selves to facts, to leave thepleasure of making such reflections .t- will undoubtedly232 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.present themselves to the reader of taste, we shall hereonly add, that the line,Soli eravam e senza alcan sospetto,seems to have been suggested to Dante by another romance,that of " Sir Tristan," which we know was verypopular in his time, as we learn from the oldest of hiscommentators, his contemporary, who says, " Every bodyspeaks of the death of Tristan and Lisette." Whentheir mutual love was discovered for the first time,among other circumstances, it is remarked in the oldromance : tl lis sont tous deux seul a seul, qu' iiz n'ontnul disturber, ne pour ni dung ni d'autre."TIVOLI.Parum para decent. "Mini jam non regia RomaSed vacuum Tibur placet.Horace.Tivoli, the Richmond of Rome, is situated abouteighteen miles distant from that city. It is the Tiburof the ancients, and was considered, from the number ofvillas by which the road to it was lined, as a sort ofsuburb of Rome. Those edifices have now disappeared,and the road lies through pasture lands, occasionally exhibitingthe ruins of the aqueducts which formerly conveyedthe waters of the Anio to the city. It also displayed,some years since, the unsightly spectacle of thelimbs of mangled malefactors who had been executedfor the numerous robberies committed in the neighbourhoodof Tivoli, which was long remarkable for such outrages.Before arriving at Tivoli the traveller twicecrosses the Teverone or Anio over the two bridges, thePonte Mainly and the Ponte Lucan. Near the latterstands the circular monument of the Platina family, nstructure resembling in plan the Moles Hadrianii. It isa picturesque object, and has been frequently ren -w life d ley landscape painters.The town <>f Tivoli is situated upon a mountain, formingpart of the range of the Apennines. The rocks "twhich tlii- mountain u partially Composed owe theirorigin t.» the Calcareous deposit of the waters of the234 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Tcverone, which, in situations exposed to their influence,Leave an animal incrustation of about half an inch. Theimpression of a cart-wheel is shown in the rock, formedby the incrustation of the deposit round the wheel. Thissubstance is precisely similar to the Travertine or libertinestone, quarries of which are worked in this neighbourhood,and of which the most magnificent edificesof ancient and modern Rome, the Colosseum, and St.Peter's are built. In a block of this stone an iron crowwas discovered, left in all probability by some Romanquarry-slave, and in process of time encrusted by thewaters of the Teverone.The most remarkable objects near Tivoli are theTemple of the Sibyl, tir Cascades, and the Grotto ofNeptune. Many curious remains of antiquity are alsofound in its neighbourhood, amongst which are the celebratedvilla of Hadrian and the Sabine farm of Horace.Upon a rocky eminence, opposite to the cascades, issituated the Temple of the Sibyl Such is the traditionalname by which these beautiful ruins have beenlong distinguished. Some antiquarian s, however, havebeen of opinion that Vesta was the goddess to whom theedifice was dedicated, and have given the name of theTemple of the Sibyl to some inconsiderable ruins in theneighbourhood. There appear, however, to be no verycogent reasons for rejecting the name which tradition(no uncertain guide in such difficulties) has assigned tothe circular temple. The only inscription on the rainsare the letters l. gellio l. f., from which it has beenconjectured that the temple was at some period restoredbv L. Genius, The architecture has been referred toTIVOLI.the age of Augustus. Only ten of the eighteen Corinthiancolumns which formerly encircled the cella nowremain. The late Lord Bristol having purchased thisbeautiful relic from the keeper of the adjoining inn., uponwhose ground it stood, had formed the design of transportingit to England, and was actually proceeding totake it to pieces, when his sacrilegious attempt wasfrustrated by the Roman government, who prohibited itsremoval.From the temple of the Sibyl, a path, constructedsome years ago by the orders of General Mills, andpresenting in the course of it a variety of beautiful prospects,leads to the celebrated grotto of Neptune, a caveformed by the action of the waters dashing against therocks. The falls, which add so much beauty to thisscene, are formed by the waters of the Anio, which,being confined between two hills as it approaches Tivoli,is driven with augmented velocity over the rocks whichit there encounters. Numberless beautiful cascades areformed by the division of the river into various streams,which refresh the orchards and gardens through whichthey are led. The contrast between the sparkling andbrilliant volumes of water which rush to the cave, andthe dark and solemn air of the cavern itself which receivesthem, render the view from the grotto of Neptuneone of the most beautiful and singular that Italyaffords. Lower down the falling waters arc viewed fromanother cavern called the Syren's Cave, where they presentanother magnificent pictniThe faDfl of Tivoli have been described by Gray in afriend West : — " It i> the most noble sight in236 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.the world. The weight of that quantity of waters, andthe force they fall with, have worn the rocks they throwthemselves among into a thousand irregular crags andto a vast depth. In this channel it goes boiling alongwith a mighty noise till it comes to another steep, whereyou see it a second time come roaring down (but firstyou must walk two miles farther) a greater height thanbefore, but not with that quantity of waters ; for by thistime it has divided itself, being crossed and opposed bythe rocks, into four several streams, each of which, inemulation of the great one, will tumble down too ; andit does tumble down, but not from an equally elevatedplace ; so that you have at one view these cascades, intermixedwith groves of live and little woods, the mountainsrising behind them, and on the top of one (thatwhich forms the extremity of one of the half circle'shorns) is seated the town itself. At the very extremityof that extremity, on the brink of the precipice, standsthe Sibyl's temple, the remains of a little rotunda, surroundedwith its portico, above half of whose Corinthianpillars are still standing and entire All this on onehand ; on the other, the open Campagna of Rome ;here and there a little castle on a hillock, and the cityitself, on the very brink of the horizon, indistinctly seen(being eighteen miles off), except the dome of St. Peter's,which, if you look out of your window ; whereveryou are, I suppose you can see." " The Hill of Tivoli,"says Mr. Forsyth, " is all over picture. The town, thevillas, the ruins, the rocks, the cascades in the foreground; the Sabine hills, the three Monticello, Soracte,Frascati, the Campagna, and Rome in the distance .TIVOLI. 237these form a succession of landscapes, superior in thedelight produced to the richest cabinet of Claude's. Tivolicannot be described : no true portrait of it exists :all views alter and embellish it : they are poetical translationsof the matchless original."Amongst the antiquities of Tivoli are some extensiveruins near the town, which have received the name ofthe villa of Maecenas. They are beautifully situated onthe highest ridge of the heights, and present, on the oneside, a view of Rome in the distance, and on the otherthe Teverone with its magnificent rocks and falls. Theruins are remarkable for the range of lofty doric arcadeswhich they display, and which add greatly to the beautyof a scene which attracted the admiration and employedthe pencil of Wilson. All the remains of the Libertinevillas have been appropriated, by the ingenuity of antiquariansand guides, to various classical owners, andthe traveller is conducted to the villas of Lepidus, ofArches, and of Propertius, without the expression of adoubt with regard to the proprietorship. A few of theancient edifices have a better title to the names whichthey enjoy, as the villa of Quintilian Varus, still calledQuintilian, and celebrated in the verse of Horace :Xulliim. Are, Sacra vite priiu sevens arborCirca mite solum Tiberius, et mania Catili.Tradition has assigned to the poet himself a villa athi favourite Tiber, in a lite worthy of a poet's habitation. The frequent pi in which the beautifuls every of Tivoli is referred t<> by him, and his assertion238 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.that tie was accustomed to compose Lis poems there., haveinduced a belief that he must have possessed a residence"Where the precipitate Ariio thunders down.And through the surging mist a Poet's house(So some aver, and who would not believe it?)Reveals itself.The following is the beautiful passage usually cited incorroboration of the opinion that the poet's mansion wassituated at Tibur :Ego apis MarineAlone mosqueGrata carpenters thyme per lahorePlurima, circa nemus undiqueTiberius ripa r , opera parvisCarmina fingo.But as a bee which through the shady groves,Feeble of wing, with idle murmurs roves,Sits on the bloom, and with unceasing toilFrom the sweet thyme extracts its flowery spoil,So I, weak bard ! round Tibur's lucid spring,Of humble strain, laborious verses sing.Horace," says Gray, in his Letters, " had anotherhouse on the opposite side of the Teverone, opposite toMaecenas's ; and they told us there was a bridge of communication,by which ' andava il ditto signor per trashcoll' istesso Oratio.' " Later critics In; ve doubtedthe fact of the poet's residence at Tibur, and have conjectured,that while he composed his verses there, he wasan inhabitant of Maecenas's villa. His Sabine farm atsome distance from Tibur, amongst the Sabine hills, hastivoli. 239been minutely described by Mr. Eustace, and forms adelightful excursion from Tivoli.Not far from the villa of Maecenas stands the villaReste, built by the Cardinal Hippclito Reste, the nephewof Ariosto's patron. Though most delightfullysituated, it is deformed by the bad taste in which thegardens and grounds around it are disposed. " The palace,"says Mr. Forsyth, " is empty and forlorn. Thegarden affects both regularity and confusion : rock workand girandoles of water, grottos and rows of perspectivetemples, mathematical mazes and a theatre of stairs."Gray has given, in a letter to his friend West, a whimsicaldescription of this villa. ft This day, being in thepalace of his highness the Duke of Modena, he laid hismost serene commands upon me to write to Mr. West;and said, he thought it for his glory that I should drawup an inventory of his most serene possessions, forthe said West's perusal. Imprimis, a house, being incircumference a quarter of a mile two feet and an inch ;the said house containing the following particulars, towit, a great room ; item, another great room ; item, abigger room ; item, another room ; item, a vast room ;item, a sixth of the same j a seventh ditto ; an eighthas before ; a ninth as aforesaid; a tenth, see No. 1.;then ten more such, besides twenty, besides which, nott" be too particular, we shall pass over. The saidrooms contain nine chairs, two tables, five stools, and acricket."In proceeding fr<>:n Rome ?<> visit Tivoli, the travellerpenally diver] the ruins of Hadrian's villa, situatedsear the bottom «>f the eminence upon which Tivoli240 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.stands. A remnant only of the imperial architect'slabours is to be seen. In the amplitude of its originalmagnificence the villa of Hadrian is said to have extendedthree miles in length and one in breadth, comprising,within its city-like limits, imitations of all the most celebratededifices and scenes in the world. The Lyceum,and the Academy, the Serapeon of Canopus, and evena mimic vale of Tempe were found within its borders.Numerous temples, three theatres, a naumachia and ahippodrome contributed to the magnificence of the scene.But the splendors which formerly adorned the imperialedifice have been long scattered over Europe. Goths andpontiffs, antiquarians and masons have plundered, or re •duce to dust and ruins, those wonders of architectureand sculpture which the villa of Hadrian once exhibited.Its site has become a farm, and strangers with difficultyfind a shelter within the ruins which formerly afforded aluxurious residence to the whole imperial court, and itsnumerous bands of guards. The villa of Hadrian, likethat of Maecenas, has given to the classical pencil ofWilson a subject for one of his most celebrated pictures.Civitas Castella.Rural mihi, et rigui placenta in vallies agnes,Alumina amen sylvasque inglorious.Virgil.Independent of the classical associations which throng:the imagination on approaching this ancient town, themind is impressed with the most romantic feelings asthe precipitous and lonely rock on which it is built risesinto view. In no part of Italy, perhaps, can the eyerest on wilder or more romantic scenery than is to befound in this neighbourhood. The hill over which thetown is scattered abruptly descends, on all sides, into adeep and thickly wooded dell. Along the bottom of thissolitude runs a small stream, pellucid, constantly murmuring,and forming a pleasing contrast to the wild andalmost savage aspect of the surrounding scenery. Thefortifications of the town and citadel are built along thevery edge of the rock, and are believed to have beensunned out of the ruins of a more ancient city.Antiquaries have not been successful in their inquiriesacting the original occupation of this remarkable site.Fur many yean the favourite opinion wis, that here Veilstood, and tin i Strongly supported by the peculiarityof the situation, and the natural advantages itForti d a warlike people.e masses of rubbish," says Mr. Eustace, " anK242 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.pointed out as the remains of a city once superior, evento Rome, in magnificence, and capable, like Troy, of resisting,for ten years, the efforts of an army of fifty thousandmen. But how vain is it to explore the situationof a place which has been a solitude for more than twothousand years !Nunc intra muros pastors lucina lentCantata, et in vestries osseous arva metunt.Within thy walls his tuneless hornNow slowly winds the shepherd swain,And where your bones neglected lie,Unheeding mows the golden grain.The flocks had fed in the streets, and the ploughsharehad furrowed the sepulchres of the fallen Veientes : amelancholy observation, applicable not to Veii alone, butto all the early rivals of Rome, License, Coining, Corol,Ardea, Alba. Not the site only but almost the memoryof Veii was obliterated in the time of Floras : — ' Whonow remembers that Veii ever existed r — What remainswhat vestige is to be found?' 'So perfectly have time and the ra ages of war donetheir work in this region, and so impossible does thetraveller find it to resolve those questions which in suchsituations are ever pressing upon the mind ! To scarcelyany district in the neighbourhood of Rome do the wordsof the poet more aptly apply than to this :The double night of ages and of her,Night's daughter, Ignorance, have wrapt, and wrapAll round us : we but feel our way to err: —The ocean hath his chart, the stars their map,And knowledge spreads them on her ample lamp ;Civitas Castella. 243But Rome is as the desert, where we steer,Stumbling on recollections : now we clapOur hands, and cry "Eureka!" it is clear,When but some false mirage of ruin rises near.The opinion respecting Veii was controverted byanother, which proved that city to be much nearerRome; and it is now more commonly supposed that Fesswas the precursor of Civita Castellanana. Whateverwas the precise situation of these towns, or theformer name of the spot on which we suppose ourselvesstanding, the eye here embraces within the circle of itsvision many a scene which old heroic daring or Romanvirtue has rendered sacred to the imagination. By someit has been believed that Civita Castellanana is the i; nt Falerium, which is known to have stood somewherein this neighbourhood; and, if so, it is justly hallowed bythe memory of as noble an action as any that grace thery of the world. The reader will, it is probable,recollect, that it was at a short distance from that townthat the patriotic Camillus received the proposals of oneof its citizens to put such a prize into his hands that hisfellow-townsmen would at once surrender the place torecover the lost possession, — that this traitor was theschoolmaster of the town, who had decoyed his pupils,the children of the chief persons of the city, to the Roicamp, — that he there offered to leave them with thered for a reward, which he b nbtofrcceiand that his infamous offer was received by Camilluswith j contempt, thi brave Roman exclaiming, thatthough at war with his townsmen, th of naturewm cried I* tween them; and then ordering his■ 2244 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.soldiers to bind the traitor's hands, and tear off his cloak,he desired the children to flog him back to the city.About two leagues distant from this interesting spot,Soracte towers against the horizon ; and at about thesame distance extend the mountains and lake of Comines,which equal, for romantic and picturesque appearance,the historical celebrity of the rest of the neighbourhood.The account which Livy has left of the loneliness andsavage wildness of this district in ancient times leadsus to believe that it was formerly the most unfrequentedof any in Italy, and that popular opinion had peopled itwith dangers which the bravest even of Romans wereunwilling to dare. The following passage, from the ninthbook of his history, affords a curious and not unamusingillustration of this general feeling respecting the forestsand fastnesses of Comines. It refers to the period whenthe Romans were at war with the Tuscan, a party ofwhom, after a battle, had set the former at defiance, byretreating into the forest :The Ciminian wood," says he, " was in thosedays more impassable and dreaded than the Germanthickets in later times 5 for never till that day had itbeen frequented or travelled through, so much as bymerchants ; nor had any one scarcely, but the generalhimself, the courage to advise a march into it. Whereuponthe consul's brother offered himself to go out, ascout or spy, and in a short time to bring them a fullaccount of all things necessary to be known. He had inhis youth been bred up, with some friends to his family,at Care, where he was taught the Tuscan learning, andspoke readily their language. Some authors I have metCivitas Castella. 245with that tell us, the Roman children were wont to beinstructed in the Tuscan letters in those days, as theyare now in Greek. But it is more probable that thisgentleman had some special accomplishment, or else hewould not in so bold a manner have hazarded himselfamongst the enemy. His only companion is said to havebeen his servant, that had been bred up with him, andso not ignorant of the language. In their journey, theymade it their main business to get, in a summary way,the nature of the province they were going into, and thenames of the chief persons therein, that when they fell intodiscourse they might not be taken tardy in any grossignorance or mistake. They went in shepherds' habits,armed with the usual weapons of country boors, eachof them with a falchion and two javelins; yet was itnot their tongue, their garb, or their arms, that keptthem from being known ; so much as that presumptionthe enemy had, that no stranger would be so mad as toventure into the Ciminian woods. Well, forwards theywent as far as to the Libertines in Umbria, where theRoman adventured to discover who they were, and beingadmitted into the senate they obtained promises of allianceand assistance. The consul hesitated no longer whatmeasures to pursue: he attacked the enemy in their fastnesses,and having completely routed them returned tothe camp, where by that time were arrived five commissariesand two tribunes of the commons, with peremptoryorders from the senate to the consul, that he shouldnot offer to pass through the Ciminian for-suchw;t> formerly the solitary and uncultivated conditionof a large portion of this romantic district, and24(3 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.such almost is the whole of it at the present day. Fromthe eminence on which Civita Castellanana now stands,the eye wanders over a wide extent of country — rich inthe beauties and promises of nature, but unpeopled anduncultivated. No vestiges remain of the wealthy peoplewho once inhabited it ; of the towns and fortresses whichcould defy armies by the strength of their walls and theresolution of their little garrisons : all is hushed andsolitary as when the gloomy woods and mountains ofCilicia sheltered hordes of half-barbarous enemies, andfrightened the traveller and merchant from the gloomyroad.The town, however, of Civita Castellanana itself is farfrom being the most insignificant of Italian cities. Besidescontaining several churches, it has an excellent square,adorned with a fountain, a bridge, and citadel, togetherwith many architectural relics of the remote period whenit is supposed to have been in its most flourishing state.Close to the gates there is also an aqueduct, said to bestill in good repair, the whole appearance of the townbeing strikingly in contrast with the loneliness of thecountry which surrounds it.TERM.O qui me glides in vallies stat,Et ingenii morum protect umbra !Del monte corner i russellCormorant, e la florida rivieraLambir french e scherzosi i vermicelli.Virgil.Monti.There are few places in Italy more deserving theadmiration, or more calculated to rivet the attention, ofthe tourist than Terni and its romantic neighbourhood.Situated in the centre of a plain, to which the wild,murmuring, and picturesque Nere imparts fertility andbeauty, encompassed by mountains clothed to the summitin continual verdure, and abounding in objects renderedinteresting by their antiquity or beauty, the environs ofTerni may justly be allowed pre-eminence, even in a countryso renowned for its magnificent scenery, and thesurpassing interest created by its monumental remains.The inhabitants of Terni claim for their city the distinctionof high antiquity, dating its foundation from thebiter end of the reign of Xuma Pompilius, second kingof Rome. The Rom) a colony thither in the yearU. C. 1-11, and called the city Interamna, from the circumstance<>f it being situated between two brandiesof tin Men or NaT, ■ river of considerable beauty andimport which rite* in the Apennine mountains, and248 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.discharges itself into the Tibur a little above Rome. Itmust have been originally a place of some importance, ifan opinion may be formed from the appearance of itsruins,, and the mention made of it by the earlier historians.There are now, however, but few traces of its formersplendour. Its extent and situation are alone marked bya few mouldering remains which time has yet sparedfrom destruction. In one part of the town there are someold walls and a few arches, which are partly stopped up,forming part of what is supposed to have been an ancienttemple to Hercules. Among these ruins may be stilldistinctly traced in very large characters the followinginscription : Domus Her cull Sacra, a house consecratedto Hercules.In other parts of the town there are various antiquemarbles, let into the walls to preserve them from fartherinjury, bearing curious inscriptions, one of which is thebasis of a statue erected by L. Lucilius, in honour ofAulis Pompous, for his having extricated this municipalcity" from some pressing danger. There is also a finepedestal, which anciently supported a statue of TitusFlaminius. Near the cathedral is an antique marble,with a mutilated inscription, from which may be gatheredthat the inhabitants of Terni, wishing to complimentTiberius, caused this inscription to be set up after hehad destroyed his insolent favourite Tetanus. The ruinsof the amphitheatre are still shown in the gardens of theepiscopal palace ; they only consist of some vaults andother trifling remains, from which not enough can ,>etraced of its former proportions to convey the slightestinterest.TBBNI. 240Terni, insignificant as it now assuredly is, lias the honourof being the birth-place of the Emperors Tacitus and florin,and likewise of Tacitus the historian. Their namesare inscribed over the gate known by the name of Spoleto.We are assured, by the guides of Terni, that, formerly,three monuments attested the claims of the city to thehonour of having produced such illustrious citizens, butthat during a violent storm they were destroyed by lightning,and the fragments having, from time to time, beenpurloined by travelling virtuosi, nothing now remains butfaith in the traditionary intelligence of the natives todetermine the exact site, or whether indeed they everexisted.The city, however, shorn as it is of grandeur, stillboasts of some handsome palaces, and, still better, ofwhat time cannot deprive it — a most enchanting situation.The necessaries, and even luxuries of life, arelikewise abundant ; the wines are good ; and the fertilityof its soil was so remarkable, in ancient times, thatPliny boasts of the turnips of Interainna weighing betweenthirty and forty pounds ! He adds, likewise, thatthe meadows were so luxuriant that four crops of grasscould be obtained from them within the year.But the object from which Tcrni derives its principalreputation, and to which the visits of travellers are chieflyted, ifl the beautiful and celebrated cascade in itsvicinity. Tnougn generally known by the name of theCascade of Tcrni, ital more classical appellation is that ofu La cantata <!• lie mormon . m called from the mountain■ nl rock over which the n ater ifl precipitated being chieflycomposed of a kind of yellow marble. The river Velino,250 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.whose course is thus so abruptly yet magnificently terminated,rises at some distance — an insignificant brook inthe Apennine mountains. It flows quietly along till itreach the lake of Lugo, whence it emerges with increasedforce, and continuing its course along the plainof Rieti, and gathering a deeper stream in its descent, itbecomes at last a resistless torrent, bearing away everythingopposed to its progress, until arriving at the brink,it is precipitated to the depth of three hundred feet, andforms a cascade, which, by the combination of its ownsublimity, with the picturesque beauty by which it issurrounded, can hardly be said to be equalled in theworld.The cascade is about three miles from Terni, althoughthe guides aver it to be considerably more, merely to increasetheir hire ; and there are three situations to whichtourists are directed as the principal points from whichit is seen to the greatest advantage. The way to thecascade lies through the valley of Xar. Sometimes overshadowedby the mountains, clothed to the summit withevergreen groves of pine and ilex, and then emerginginto an open space, whence may be descried all the varietiesof a richly featured landscape, with its beautifulcharacteristics of rocks, woods, and waters. The first viewof the cascade is obtained by climbing the opposite hill,whence the second fall is more distinctly seen. The wateremerging from the time-worn cavities occasioned by itsfirst precipitation, tumbles over a ridge of jagged rocks,indistinctly seen through a continual misty spray bywhich it is enveloped, and then pursues its way, infoaming agitation, to join the Xar.TBRN1 251The upper road to the cascade is also eminently beautiful.Having surmounted some slight difficulties in thepassage, the eye is regaled with a prospect of which nodescription can convey more than a faint idea. Theloud flowing Xar foaming along through the valley, " suffalbus aqua' as described of old — the ruined villageof Papignia rising in the centre, the city of Terniand its plain — the Velino bursting from its umbrageousconcealment over the precipice upon the rocks below,forms a picture which cannot be contemplated withoutwonder and admiration.Addison supposes this to be the spot represented byVirgil as the gulf into which the fury Alecto is receivedon her passage back to the infernal regions, andfounds his conjecture on the following passage in theseventh book of the-aeneid : —Est locus Italia? in medio sub montis artisbills, ct fama multi prioratus in oris,Sancti valley : dennis hung frontiers antrumI get utrinque latus memories, mediocre fraj.-lat sodium sais et torso vortices torn -Illic secus horrendum, et-avi-piraeus DitesMonstrantur, ruptoque ingens Acheron viragoPestiferous aperit fanIn midst of Italy, well known to fame,There lie a vale. Amnnctufl i> its name,\v the lofty mounts: on eithi r BideThick i forbidden entrance hide;'1 in the centre of the sacred WiI arm uiseth of t 1 l flood;Which falling from on high, with bellowing sound,Whirls the black wares and rattling-torn - around.I b re Pluto pan! out In cell,v . "i Hell.252 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Service, in his notes on the Aeneid, thinks a placein Apulia agrees better with Virgil's description ; but itmust be recollected that Apulia does not lie in " Italiamedia" and Horace, who was a native of Apulia, doesnot mention a word of any such natural curiosity. Swinburne,however, says, that not far from Friuli is a lakecalled Ansancto, which emits a sulphureous vapour 5 and,indeed, agrees far better with Virgil's description of theentrance to Pluto's domains than the beautiful cascadeof Term, which would inspire any thing but unpleasingassociations.This splendid cataract, which forms so important afeature in the scenery of Terni, is produced solely bythe hand of man, and is one of those few instanceswherein human industry rivals in its effect the magnificentworks of nature. Great injury was sustainedby the inhabitants of the vale of Rieti from the waters ofthe lake of Lugo, or, as it was originally called, Pie deLugo, overflowing its banks, and rendering the countryaround little better than a marsh. An artificial vent wasproposed and executed during the consulship of CuriousDentated. Expensive legal contests were the consequenceduring the time of Cicero between the citizens of Rietiand those of Interamna, who strenuously opposed thedischarge of the Velino into the Nar. The artificialvent, however, performed its duty but ineffectually, theriver still continuing to overflow its banks until the pontificateof Pius VI., who considerably enlarged the channel,and completed the work as it at present remains.It can hardly be supposed, while gazing on the torrent,and the awful gulf into which it is plunged, thatTERNI. 253any living being could have been precipitated from itssummit without being dashed into as many particles asthe watery spray which enshrouds its base ; and yet,some years since, an aged guide was in the habit of recordinga solitary instance to the contrary, which, heaffirmed, occurred during the lifetime of his father, andwas never doubted by any other than heretics.This story, at all events unique in its kind, being theonly marvel connected with the place which any one hasever had the hardihood to relate, may not be consideredunamusing.It is as long since, the story goes, as the year 1 700,in the month of March, that a worthy burgher of thecity of Sienna received private intelligence that bargainsmight be made of sufficient importance to insure the fortuneof any adventurous trader who might be bold enoughto undertake a journey to Naples.In those days the comforts of travellers were not sowell understood as at the present period of posting, ofventuring, and diligences ; besides, the roads were inaterrible condition by the small streams from the Apennines,and beset by hordes of ferocious banditti, whodwelt in the mountains. It, therefore, became a matterof serious debate with the honest trader and his wifewhether fortune should be tempted, and it required allthe glittering prospect of gain to stimulate his resolutiont«» the enterprise. To be sure, the courage of MesserPietro Boni was further excited by certain emblems ofmunicipal dignity which had from time to time floatedbefore him, in rather indistinct visions, it is true, but\. hit h an increase of wealth, lie shrewdly conjectured.254 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.might, at no distant period, realize. His wife, on thecontrary, not being tempted by such inordinate ambition,was contented with the competence which a long-continuedcareer of honest industry had procured them,and thought the chance of official dignity but too remoteto incur the certain danger of a long and perilousjourney ; yielding, however, to the continued importunitiesof her ambitious helpmate, and perhaps, in spiteof her judgment, not wholly free from those little sparksof female vanity which the title of lady mayoress couldnot but gratify, she granted her permission to MesserPietro to undertake the journey. One condition, however,accompanied her consent, and with which she wouldon no account dispense — that her spouse should, beforeproceeding on his way, make a detour of no inconsiderableimportance to the shrine of the most miraculous ofall ladies, that of Loretto, and implore her protection onhis journey, and assistance in the dealings which wereto ensue. Seeing that he could make no better terms,Messer Pietro was fain to consent to this arrangement,more particularly as his wife affirmed that such a proceedingwould render the success of his mission no longerdoubtful.It was with some degree of pride, though not unmixedwith grief, that the wife of honest Pietro surveyed herspouse on the morning of his departure for titian lands.The handsome and ample cloak, made of the best cloth ofthe looms of Padua, defended his portly person againstthe elements, from whose unceremonious assaults the comfortableburgher knew himself to be as little exemptedas the goatherd on the Apennine mountains j a hat ofTERXI. 255capacious brim, ornamented with a feather of no insignificantproportions ; a short blade suspended from hisside, hitherto guiltless of strife j with pistols in his holsters,never yet having been discharged since they wereproved by the maker, completed his outward equipment.He bestrode a nag, that was in every respect the counterpartof his master. His sleek comely sides boreabundant testimony to the care with which he had beentreated ; and his whole appearance betokened a life ofease very much at variance with the serious service intowhich he was now for the first time called.Behold, then, Messer Pietro mounted, his adieus madeto wife, family, and friends, and fairly on Lis way toLoretto! We will not follow him through the little adventuresof his journey, but join him on his arrival at theholy city. He had a letter recommending him to thecare of Father Urban, a pious Jesuit, and who, moreover,officiated at the hoi// lioxse. The good father took theworthy burgher under his especial protection, and setforward with him to unfold the mysteries of the santacasa. On his road, the Jesuit explained how, after thedestruction of Ptolemaic in Palestine by Malech Seraph,sultan of Egypt, the Virgin Mary, fearing lest the infidelsshould treat her dwelling w with disrespect, caused aband of angels to transport it, in one night, from its:" tatioD to a place in Dalmatia. The nee it madea second trip to the territory >na, and was removedf<»r the third time to a neighbour] . .tain,where, its possession being disputed by two brotheri such scandal, the Virgin caused its transportationt<> the-p*>t where it at present stands. To prevent the landscape annual.farther decamping, the pious Jesuits built a church overit, and thus made it a prisoner to their holy zeal. Pietrowas no bigot, though a religious man, and had evencreated some scandal at Sienna by his jokes respectingcertain modern miracles, which was indeed one reasonwhy his wife was strenuous that he should prove hisfaith by the present pilgrimage. But the miracle of theholy house was too well attested for him to doubt; andit was with no heretical feelings that, on entering thechurch, he beheld the Virgin's hut, and the numerouspilgrims who had flocked thither, of all nations, anxiousto prostrate themselves at the sainted shrine.It was with no slight edification, too, that Messer Pietrobeheld all these devout pilgrims, having finished their Latinlitanies, of which they understood not a word, enter theholy cottage, fall on their faces, and kiss the floor in themost pious ecstasy; then making the tour of the hut ontheir knees, all the while licking the walls with the mostprofound devotion, and uttering the most pitiful sighs andgroans, capable of touching the heart of a much sternervotary than our friend the burgher. As he was about toenter the holy cottage and pay his offering to the Virgin,w T ho is made of cedar-wood, and, as the Jesuit swore onhis honour, was constructed by the hands of no less aworkman than St. Luke himself, he was tapped on theshoulder by his ghostly conductor.But, my good son, Pietro," quoth the Jesuit, " beforeyou enter this holy cottage, it would be as well to confess.If thou hast any thing on thy mind, any little peccadilloin trade, or secret unbefitting thy present state, it wouldbe better for thee to make me thy confidant."Terns. 257Holy father!" replied Pietro, with a profound reverence,though unable altogether to conceal a waggishtwinkle of his eye ; " seeing that I have not had the pleasureof your reverence's acquaintance for more than halfan hour, perhaps you will not take it amiss if I keep mysecrets to myself.""Ah! friend Pietro, I see thou 'rt a wag," returnedthe Jesuit ; " but go in, and I pray to God thou maystcome out a better man."The walls of the holy cottage the burgher found to bebuilt much as other walls, but that the bricks were ill-joinedand clumsily put together, which plainly evincedthe structure had been raised with greater expeditionthan skill. And it might so happen ; for the Jesuitshave been accused before now of building an entire millin one night, near Grenada in Spain, in comparison withwhich the holy cottage is but a trifle. Over the windowby which the angel Gabriel is said to have entered isa crucifix of incorruptible wood, placed there by theapostles, which, the legend says, it is impossible to carryaway. Behind the altar is what is called the sanctuary,where, Father Urban assured the burgher, the VirginMary was in the habit of drying the clothes of the infantJesus ; and here the swarthy specimen of St. Lake'sworkmanship is placed for the adoration of her votaries.Pietro was astonished at the richness of her apparel,which was valued at fifty thousand crowns, besides adiadem on her head, covered with jewels of immenseprice. Tin eyes "t Metsei Pietro glistened at the si-fitiniirli wealth, and, with the true Spirit of a trader.'258 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.instead of paying adoration he began to calculate theamount in specie. Father Urban checked the cupiditywhich, spite of his better feeling, began to steal overhim by relating the story of a soldier, who narrowlyescaped with his life for fancying one of the ear-rings ofthe Virgin. He had been detected whispering, as hesaid, to the Virgin ; but in reality effecting the transferof one of her ear-rings to his pocket. He excused himselfby swearing it was a free gift of the Virgin ; and asno one could question her right and power to dispose ofher own property, it was enacted, to prevent similar actsof generosity, that no one should in future accept presentsfrom Our Lady under pain of death.On each side of the Virgin was a golden angel; one ofwhich was presented to her by the queen of James theSecond, king of England ; and the other by the Duchessof Modena, her mother, as a token of gratitude for thebounty of Our Lady in giving a Prince of Wales to theEnglish in such a miraculous manner that it surprised allEurope. There was likewise a stomacher covered withdiamonds, rubies, and emeralds, sent by the queen ofCharles the Second, king of Spain, hoping a similarfavour ; but whether the English queen had taken hermeasures better, or that the prayers of the Spanish princesswere not equally devout, it is certain that the Virgindid not accede to the request. Pietro likewise behelda statue of solid gold sent by Ladislaus, king of Hungary,which however did not prevent the destruction of himselfand his army near Varna by the Turks, in 1 44 ■ 3 ajust reward for his perfidy in breaking a solemn truceTERNI. 256with Amaranth the Second, at the instigation of the pope,Genius the Fourth, who declared all treaties with hereticsto be void. We are told by history that Amu-hathseeing the fortune of the day going against him,lifted his hands to heaven and cried aloud — " Oh, Christ !if you are the true God, as your worshippers assert,punish this villanous treachery of theirs in breaking theirfaith with me." He had scarcely said the words, whenLadislaus, instigated by a sort of madness, spurred hishorse to the spot where Amaranth was posted, and cuttinghis way through the ranks of the Turks dealt sucha blow on the head of the infidel prince as to render himincapable of defence ; but at that moment the horse ofthe king failed him, and so critically, that before hecould recover himself the Pacha Chererbeg cleft his headfrom his body with a stroke of his scimitar, and presentedit to the prostrate sultan. At this terrible lossthe Christians were dismayed, and fled ; and upwards of40,000 were killed on the field of battle and during thepursuit. The Turks still consider the battle of Varna,which happened on the eve of St. Martin, as one of thefortunate events of their history.It would be impossible to enumerate the differentcostly articles which Messer Pietro at that time beheldin the possession of our Lady of Loretto, but which theEmperor of the French, in after times, with a very indiest«» what he considered more healpurposes. It is sufficient to say, that MPietro made bia offering, the true value of which will bemore folly appreciated in the sequel of our story, and2(10 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.after thanking the Jesuit for his attention, set forwardon his journey to Naples.It was on the evening of the day on which he set outthat, wishing to make his road a little shorter, he followedthe direction of a peasant, who told him that bycrossing the ford of a river he would be enabled to savea considerable distance. On arriving at the ford, MesserPietro found the river considerably swoln ; but as itwas apparently often passed, the burgher entered withouthesitation. On approaching the middle of the stream,however, Messer Pietro found he had been too rash, andturned his horse's head to return, but the action wasfatal] for on endeavouring to turn, the animal couldnot hold his footing, and with his unfortunate rider warcarried away by the rush of waters. One cry of distressescaped from poor Pietro as he sunk in the stream 5but rising again, he endeavoured to make towards thebank, but in vain ! the rapidity of the torrent was suchthat he was borne along without the possibility of humanaid. In a short time the unhappy burgher reached theedge of the fatal precipice, and with one terrific plungewas hurried into the awful gulf below.Some peasants, who were wandering along the banksof the Nar in the Vale of Terni, descried a human bodylying on the grass by the side of the river. It was that ofa drowned person, whom they carefully remove d to Terni,where, after proper attention, he was happily restored tolife. It was no other than our friend the burgher ofSienna. It appeared from Messer Pietro's own acco nt,that on approaching the precipice, being fully aware ofTERM. 261his situation, he closed his eyes, devoutly recommendinghimself to our most merciful and miraculous Lady of Loretto.The efficacy of such an appeal can best be understoodby the fact of Messer Pietro being found unhurton the banks of the Xar, with no other injury than asevere drenching. The poor dappled beast which lookedso sleek the morning he left Sienna was never moreheard of, doubtless because his master, in the criticalsituation in which he found himself, forgot to includehim in his invocation. It is needless to say that MesserPietro Boni declined the further prosecution of his journey,and returning to Sienna, became from that time analtered man.NARXI.Narnia sulphuret quam gurgle candid amnisCircuit, incipit vix addenda juno.Martial.It would be difficult to find, throughout Italy, or,indeed, in all Europe, a spot more truly beautiful thanthat on which stands the town of Xarni. It is situatedon the declivity of a steep hill, as it is elegantly expressedby Filius Italics,et duro month per sana recumbentNarnia,and on approaching it from Terni, it resembles a magnificentamphitheatre, surrounded by rich rising groundsclothed with cypress, ilex, and laurel. On ascendingthe hill towards the town the view which presents itselfis surpassingly beautiful. In the vale below, the riverNar foams along, having traversed a space of about ninemiles since its junction with the waters of the cascadeof Terni. On the opposite side the Apennines arise intheir mildest and most beautiful form — clothed to theirsummits with evergreens, and spotted here and therewithlittle white hamlets. The ruins of the ancientRoman bridge likewise impart a peculiarly interestingfeature to the landscape ; few travellers, indeed, pass thisromantic spot without regretting, in their moments ofNARNI.enthusiasm, that fortune had not cast their lot in suchpleasant places. "Xarni was made a Roman colony in the year of Romeunder the consulate of T. Manlius Torquatus, and,according to Claudia, in his sixth consulate of Honoris,was then called by the name which it now bears, afterthe river which flows at the foot of the hill on which itstands. The town itself has but little to boast. Thecathedral has a handsome chapel underground, where ispreserved the entire body of the blessed Juvenal, notthe satyrist, but a certain Bishop of Terni, of whoserelics the inhabitants think much more highly than ofthose of the ancient heathen.The attention of the tourist who visits Narni is principallydirected to the remains of an ancient Romanbridge, which crosses the river Nar on the approach tothe town from the side of Terni. This bridge was oneof the four which Augustus ordered to be built on theFlamiuian road. The first was Pons Milvia, over theTiber, about a mile and a half from Rome ; the second,over the same river near Otriculum j the third, of whichwe now speak, at Xarni; and the fourth was erectedover the Marecchia, near Rimini, which joins the Fla-midianand the JEmilian roads. The bridge at Xarnifour arches \ and Procopius, in the first book of hisy of the Gothic wo. says they were the bigarch. ul ever Been* One only now remanbut, if we may jndfjthe la b »m the distance of the piers, it must have beenth. 'I i. which it is built■i tbk km u . the are joined toga thei264 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.without cement or cramps, and from their extreme soliditymight have defied the attacks of time, had not thefoundation of one of the centre piles given way, whichshattered the whole fabric. It is the Bridge of Augustusof which the poet Martial speaks in one of his epigrams,in which he thus addresses the city of Narni ;Sed jam parce mihi, nee austere Narnia Quinto,Perpetuo licet sic tibi Ponte fruit !Preserve my better part and spare my friend,So, Narni, may thy bridge for ever stand.Addison.It is now, however, notwithstanding the good wishes ofthe poet, dwindled into a mere object of research to thecurious traveller.The town of Narni is not half inhabited, and thereis something peculiarly impressive in the loneliness andsilence of its streets. It has suffered considerably fromwar, and has had but too good reason to regret its vicinityto the " Eternal City." What Virgil said of Mantuaand Cremona may, with a little variation, be well appliedto Narni and Rome : " Narnia vce misery nimium finitimaRoma." After Rome was sacked in 1527 by Charles theFifth's army, under the Constable of Bourbon, the inhabitantsof Narni refused provisions, which they greatlywanted themselves. The town was therefore besieged,taken by assault, and its defenceless inhabitants butcheredunder circumstances of the greatest atrocity. In ancienttimes Narni was celebrated for the wit and roguery ol itsinhabitants, and during the time of the Roman republic washumorously called Nequlnam, from the word neqiiam, aNARNI. 265rogue, though by others the name is differently accountedfor. Narni is celebrated for having brought into noticethe Fescenian verses, so called from their having beeninvented at Fescenino, a small town in the neighbourhoodof Xarni, and which afterwards became so popularat Rome. They consisted in epigrammatic personalattacks; and at one time were indulged in so bitter amanner at Rome as to occasion the most inconceivableanimosity. They are so beautifully described by Horace,in his fine epistle to Augustus, that we cannot resisttranscribing a short version of the poet's muse. Horace'sepistle begins —Agricola frisch, fortes, paroquet beati, &c.and endingAd bene dicendum delectandumque recti, &c.Our rural ancestors with little blest,Patient of labour when the end was rest,Indulged the day that housed their annual gainWith f«.a>t>, and offerings, and a thankful strain.The joy their wives, their sons, and servants share,Eased of their toil, and partners of their care :The laugh, the jest, attendants on the bowl,Smoothed ever)- brow and opened every soul;With growing years the pleasing licence grew,And taunts alternate innocently flew.But times corrupt, and nature ill inclined,Produced the point that left a sting behind:Till friend with friend, and familie ;it Strife,Triumphant malice raged through private life;Who fell the wrong, or prudent took the alarm,ApfM tied to law, and justice lent her arm.Ar length, by wholesome dread of statute! hound,The poet learned to please and not to wound !Poli •266 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.The Emperor Augustus sometimes amused himselfwith these Fesciniue verses, when they were so muchthe vogue at Rome. Macrobius tells us, in his Saturnalia,that during the triumvirate, this prince wrote some verysharp lines against Annius Pillion but when the friendsof Pollio advised him to answer them, he very wittilyand wisely replied — "At ego taceo; non est enim facilein eum scribere, qui protest iwoscribere." " No, silence ismy motto : it is no such easy thing to turn scribe againsthim who can turn round on one again and proscribe."In his " Voyage of Italy," it is observed by that quaintold writer Lassels, on his way to Xarni : " Here it wasI saw Tibur first ; and I wondered to find it such a smallriver, which poets, with their hyperbolical ink, had madeswell into a river of the first rate. Following on (theFlaminian Way) we passed by Castel Nuovo, CivitaCastellanana, Tripoli, and so on to Narni, so called fromthe river Xar. It was anciently called Xequinum (WickedTown) because of the inhabitants, who, being pressedwith-hunger in a siege, resolved to kill one another ratherthan fall alive into the hands of their enemies. Theybegan with their children, then their sisters, mothers,wives, and at last fell upon one another, leaving the enemiesnothing to triumph over but bare walls and ashes.This town is an ancient bishop's seat, and S. Juvenal(whose body lie th in a neat low chapel in the domo) wasthe first bishop of it. A little out of the town are seenhigh arches, belonging anciently to an aqueduct."LAKE AND TOWN OF LUGO.Hie vtr assiduous atque aliens mensis aetas.Virgil.Figlie di Nero, che inghirlandateDi verdi canne sul flutto argentI sollazzevoli ball guide.Voi che riempiere le tore concha,Triton, godete di soon festevoleCui ripercuotono 1* ime spelonche.Massa.The Lake of Lugo, or, as it is sometimes called, of Piede Lucy, was the Lacus Melius of the ancients, and issituated in the pleasant Vale of Rieti, a few miles fromthe Cascade of Terni. It forms the basin, or reservoir,into which the torrents and rivulets that descend from theApennines are continually flowing, and which, by theirfrequent inundation, before the channel was cut for theVelino that forms the cascade, proved so detrimental tothe inhabitants of the vale of Rieti, and reduced thatnaturally fertile district to little better than a mereswamp. This useful work was undertaken, as stated,by the Roman consul Curious Dentated.Tourists are generally so well satisfied with viewing thebeauties of the cascade of Terni, that they seldom wish to-deviate further from their route. Yet the quiet beauties• •f the Lake of Logo would amply reward them for thetrouble of seeking it. Having the advantage of somenotes, obligingly submitted to us l>\ G. aforant,jun. esq.,vrho iras recently tempted to explore tin source of the268 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Velino in the Apennine mountains, we obtained fromthem the following account of the lake."After proceeding about three miles from the cascadeof Terni, we were obliged to leave our carriage, andwalking to the side of the rapid river Velino, we wereferried across. The venerable appearance of our agedconductor, his crazy bark, and the turbid stream, remindedus of that prince of ferrymen, Charon. Aftertraversing some short distance we soon had a charmingview of the beautiful little lake and village of Lugo. It issurrounded by the richly wooded Apennines 3 the foliageof aged trees overhanging the lake, and forming one ofthe most placidly beautiful and secluded scenes we hadever witnessed. The village is but scantily inhabited ;and the few who reside there trust principally to thefish of the lake for their subsistence. On a great heightcommanding the town are the ruins of an ancient feudalcastle, the mutilated towers and battlements of whichproduced a truly wild and picturesque effect at thedistance from which we beheld them.We again embarked in a very rude and primitive sortof boat, and our ancient Charon availed himself of theassistance of his daughter in its management. Theyrowed us across the lake ; and, landing near a wood, weheard a most extraordinary echo, which I never heardsurpassed except by that at Simonetta near Milan. Ourboatman had provided himself with a large tube, throughwhich he made various noises to show the effect and therepetition of the sound. We departed on our adventurequite delighted with the quiet and sequestered beaut \ $the romantic lake of Lugo."LAKE AND TOWN OF LUGO. 269The following description of the lake of Lugo and theadjacent scenery is from the pen of the author of " TheClassical Tour :" — "Ascending still higher, you come toan angle, where the road is worked through the rock,and forming a very elevated terrace, gives you a view ofTerni and its plain ; of the dell below with the Nar ; ofthe mountains around with their woods ; and of the Ve-lino itself, at a considerable distance, just bursting fromthe shade, and throwing itself down the steep. Theroad still continues along the precipice, then crosses asmall plain bounded by high mountains, when you quitit, and follow a pathway that brings you to a shed,placed on the point of a hill just opposite to the cascade,and so near to it, that you are occasionally covered withits spray.Here we sat down, and observed the magnificentphenomenon at leisure. At a little distance beyond thete, rise two hills of a fine swelling form, coveredwith groves of ilex. The Velino passes near one ofthese hills, and suddenly tumbling over a ridge of brokenrock, rushes headlong down in one vast sheet, and inthree streamlets. The precipice is of brown rock ; itssides are smooth and naked ; it forms a semicircle,Crowned with wood on the right, and on the left it risessteep, and feathered with evergreens. On the one sideit ascends in broken ridges, and on the other sinks graduallyaway, and subsides in a narrow valley, throughwhich the Nar glides gently along till its junction withthe VelinOj after which it roll through the dell in .The artificial bed of the Velino i->straight, but before it reaches it. it wanders through a270 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.fertile plain spread between the mountains, and extendingto the lake Pie de Lugo.This beautiful expanse of water, about a mile inbreadth, fills the defile, and meanders between the mountainsfor some miles. The way to it from the fall is by apath winding along the foot of the mountain, and leadingto a cottage, where you may take a boat, and cross to abold promontory opposite. There, seated in the shade,you may enjoy the view of the waters, of the borderingmountains, of the towns perched on their sides, the villagePie du Lugo, and rising behind it the old castle ofLibro, whose dismantled towers crown a regular hill,while its shattered walls run in long lines down the declivity.We were here entertained with an echo themost articulate, the most retentive, and the most musicalI ever heard, repeating even a whole verse of a song, inasofter and more plaintive tone indeed, but with surprisingprecision and distinctness. We sat for some timeon the point of the promontory, partly to enjoy the view,and partly to listen to the strains of this invisible songstress,and then crossed the lake to the village nowcalled Pie di Loco, or ' ad Pedes Lucid.' This nameis probably derived from a grove which formerly coveredthe hill, and was sacred to Belinda, the goddess who presidedover the ' Lacus Velinusf.' Around and above thelake are the ' Roscius rural Velini J," so celebrated fortheir dews and fertility, and always so interesting fortheir variety and beauty.The foot of the grove. f The Velinian lake.| The dewy fields of the Venus.LAKE AND TOWN OF LUGO. 271"We would willingly have followed the banks of theVelino up to its source, and visited Rate, now Rieti,with its vale of Tempe, alluded to by Cicero j but theday was on the decline, and it would have been imprudentto have allowed ourselves to be benighted, eitheramid the solitudes of the mountain, or on its declivity.We therefore returned, again visited the cascade, rangedthrough a variety of natural grottos and caverns, formedin its neighbourhood by the water, before the presentspacious bed was opened to receive it ; and then descendingthe hill we hastened to Terni. "LONDON.PRINTED BY THOMAS DAVISON, WHITEFRIARS.