THELANDSCAPE ANNUAL1833.HIR 7 3 4-/0 toTHETourist IN ITALY,THOMAS ROSCOE.ILLUSTRATED FROM DRAWINGSBYD. HARDING. r»Dite series, timor, gli onendi strideDelia terra che ivan gene abbattuta,Spolpata aflfatto da' Tyranny inside.Dite la vita infamy e dissolute !Dite r usure e tyrannise voraciChe fa supra di noi la turba imniensaDe' vii Faraoni e degli Arsaci.Dite, che sol da' Principe si pensaA bandit pestle e cache : onde gli avaroSulla tame connie alcan la Mensa.Salvator Rosa.LONDON:JENNINGS AND CHAPLIN, 62, CHEAPSIDE.1833.LONDON:I'RINTF.IJ BY J. HADDON, Castile STRFLT, FINSUURY.RIGHT HONOURABLE LADY MONTAGUE,THIS VOLUMEOFTHE LANDSCAPE ANNUALIS,KY PERMISSION,RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED.C O N T E N T S.PageVietri ••• ^La Cava, Convent of L-d Santa Trinity . . 16Vico : Coast of Naples . . . . •Mole da Gaeta . .•The Giuliano•Castel GandolfoVilla MadameVico TaroConvent of Santo CosimatoNarniTerniConvent of VallonibrosaFiesoleVal di MagnaLa SpezziaGenoa . . . ■Savon aBreviAlienaClassicVentimigliaNice257Entrance to Ivrea261Verres263Fort de Bard265Entrance to Aosta269LIST OF PLATES.ENGRAVED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF MR. JENNINGS.Frontispiece — Entrance to Aosta.Vignette — Verres1. VIETRI.2. LA cava, convent OF LA SANTA Trinity.3. VICO : COAST OF NAPLES.4. MOLA DA Greta.5. THE Giuliano.6. CASTEL GANDOLFO.7. VILLA Madam.8. VICO Taro.9. CONVENT OF SANTO COSIMATO.10. NARNI.11. TERNI.12. CONVENT OF VALLOMBROSA.13. FIESOLE. ;14. VAL DI MAGRA. I15. LA SPEZZIA.16. GENOA.17. SAVONA.18. Brevi.19. Albania.20. Classic.21. VENTIMIGLIA.22. NICE.23. ENTRANCE TO IVREA.24. FORT DE BARD.IVIETRI.There is a pleasure in the pathless woods,There is a rapture on the lonely shore,There is society where none intrudes,By the deep sea, and music in its roar. Byron.II nome del bel for, ch' io sempre involvemane e sera, e tutti mi ristrinse,Animo ad avisar lo maggiore coco. Dante.The vivid, deep-glowing pictures of the sunny southare once more before us ; the fresh, warm, airs of Italyseem for the last time to breathe around us ; and thetourist, in our fourth volume, will gaze upon her landscapes,of which — from us at least — he will see no more.Still, her deep rich skies, reflecting their varied andmost brilliant hues on hills, and lakes, and shores,immortal amidst the ruins of empires, over whichnature is fast drawing a thicker and darker veil, — herstrange destiny, — fallen monuments like the fortunes ofher children, — and her old ancestral fame, would bidus linger in the birth-place of all that is most lovely,most grand, most absorbing to the eye and to the mind.For where is the country of which the history presentsso terrible a lesson to humanity, so marked a beaconto future times, — so well worthy the deep meditationof the statesman, the philosopher, the student of everyage and every class ? What wonderful revolutions havelevelled her successive dynasties with the dust; leavingnot a trace of the stern heroic republic — the mightierempire of the Roman — the competition of bold, free,B2 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.and polished states that rose from the night of barbarismwhich had so long shrouded the vanquishedmistress of the world ! Could the old republican haverevisited, " by glimpses of the moon," the scene ofRome's early triumphs, vainly would he have tried torecognise his descendant in the corrupt, voluptuousimperialists who fell before the Goth ; as vainly wouldthey have traced their countrymen in the free spirit ofItaly's young republics ; and least of all would thelatter be enabled to trace one feature of their heroicage in the broken, enfeebled character of the modernItalian, withering under the malignant influence of anoutworn system of government and religion, supportedby the power of foreign bayonets.It is a system, however, which happily cannot last ;events beyond the control of princes show that it istottering to its fall ; while other and nobler prospectsopen before the country of a Brutus, a Cicero, a Dante,a Cosmo, and a Lorenzo de' Medici — of thousands ofmartyred patriots ; prospects such as must eventuallyrescue her from the grasp of foreign aggression, andtyranny and superstition at home. Yet, with herbroken chains, how much of her romantic charms, andof her monumental beauty and grandeur in the lostfortunes both of her ancient and modern state, wouldvanish from the surface of her soil, when the genius offreedom and commerce shall once more repeople hersolitudes, rebuild her manufactories, replenish herbanks, and send forth her well-freighted vessels toevery quarter of the globe ! The shadows of the past,the magnificence of ruin, the desert air of her plains,VILTRI. 3lier groves, her hills, and every wreck-strev^^ed shore,will then gradually disappear. Italy will cease to be aland of wonder and enchantment in her mere externalaspect ; but beauty and glory of a different kind maythen fall to her dower. No more on her rich southernplains and shores will only the lowly peasant's roofreceive the traveller, the solitary wild flowers burst onhis quiet path, the silence of La Cava's valleys bebroken only by the vesper-song and the lone convent'sbell. The vintage songs will come more frequentlyon the ear ; wild picturesque retreats, studdedwith their white hamlets, glow richer with the darkbudding vine ; and the deep blue waters of the lakes,fed by the foaming torrents of the far hills, no longerresting in their unsought solitudes, be enlivened withthe white sails and the voices of rural industry or ofmirth. Then her fruitful and delicious campagna willno more present the sight of paupers, and wretchedchildren, prostrated along the road, and kissing thedust for the smallest mark of charity ; a generouspeople will no longer groan under their " little tyrantsof the field ;" the lovers of freedom will cease to bleedupon the scaffold ; and moral power, independence,and prosperity, at length raise Italy into somethingnobler than a relic of antiquity, the romantic ruin ofdeparted greatness, and the tomb of her once boastedliberties. Such at least, with all our veneration forclassic antiquities, will be our earnest prayer. But wehave done ! The genius of landscape, love and fiction,shrink from the voice of war and tumult, and summonus to more attractive and congenial themes.B 24 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.The bright-gemmed region of Naples, — her wild,picturesque shores, bays, lakes, and covered isles,teeming alike with fable and with truth," the retreatof the syrens, and the adoration of the sons of paintingand of song, glowing in all the brilliancy of Italiansunset, burst with confused magnificence upon theview. Here the Phlegrsean fields, Virgil and hisSibyls, Curse, the delicious Baiae, the gloomy Cimmerian,Portico, Vesuvius, famed Pompeii, the wallsof Possum, the plains of Sorrento, old Salerno, itscastle and picturesque hermitages ; and, lastly, thewild, broken shore, and summits of Vietri, crownedwith its little white hamlet that seems hung in air ;its abrupt declivities, varied with dark foliage, throughwhich you discern houses and villas, the darker conventsfrowning in the distance, and the blue shiningwaters of the bay that break and murmur at the footof yon bold promontory. Seen from the cliffs, theprospect is most imposing and magnificent ; and thetourist feels, as on first beholding the scenery atP8estum,the power of deepest solitude, and a strangereligious thrill, inspired, as it were, by the awful andthe vast.Yet here methinksTruth wants no ornament, in her own shapeFilling the mind bj turns with awe and love,By turns inclining to wild ecstacy,And soberest meditation." Italy.But a truce to description ; the neighbourhood ofVietri is associated with more affecting details. Inone of those secluded and romantic spots, embosomedamid the grand amphitheatre of hill, and dale, andVIET III. Orocky coast, which once made the southern shores ofItaly, with the abrupt picturesque head-lands, and thesplendid sea-views they command, so beloved by heryoung poets and painters, is situated a half-ruinedmonastery, the more venerable from its contrast withthe aspect of surrounding little hamlets and modernvillas. To the impressive character of its naturalscenery a more stirring interest is given by someevents of no distant date, produced by the most fearfuland absorbing of passions, — not the less strong andvivid for their too frequent display — those of thwartedlove and revenge. In that monastery sought a lastrefuge, as she herself has left it on record, the sufferingobject of a tale of deep treachery and wrong ; onewhich conveys more painful and thrilling sympathyfrom the circumstance of its being founded wholly intruth.Near this religious edifice was the residence of anofficer of distinction, who had retired from the Frencharmy soon after its occupation of Naples, under theunfortunate Joachim Murat, and apparently with thedesign of making Italy his future country. At thatperiod he was not more than forty-five years of age ;but he had more powerful reasons, it would appear,than mere taste for thus early courting retirement. Anoccasional gloom — a presentiment, as if of some evil,seemed to hang over him ; the clear unavailing eye, thevoice, the frank and radiant spirit of the true soldier,were not the companions of Colville's retreat. Yethe enjoyed all the advantages which high reputation,fortune, or beauty, could confer ; his wife, a veryTHE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.fascinating and accomplished woman, to whom he wasdevotedly attached, beloved by all those around herfor her gentle unobtrusive virtues, was more than fifteenyears younger than her consort.Of a high and wealthy family, connected with theancient noblesse of France, whose domains lay roundthe delightful village of Frontenac, so famed for its fineroses, in the romantic environs of Beaux, it was therethat, ere her sixteenth year, the young affections of thelovely Emilie de Roches were sought and won by onefully deserving of them ; but that one was not thehaughty Colville, her present lord. Eugene de Roches,the head of a distant but not prosperous branch ofthe same family, was the companion of Emilie's earliestyears ; and this long growing youthful intimacy assumedonly a more deep and tender interest on Eugene'sreturn, after completing his military studies in thePolytechnic school.The brief period that intervened before he was summonedto join the regiment in which he was enteredwas like a dream of Paradise, too blissful to continue,yet long enough to show the approaching storm, destinedto burst on their heads, and turn that paradise oflove into a wilderness of human woe.Eugene's chief fortune was his sword, and, confidentof the undivided heart of Emilie, it would swiftly haveopened itself an honourable path towards his attainingher hand. But her father's wishes were opposed totheirs, and, while refusing to sanction their mutualattachment till Eugene should have risen into distinction,a formidable and artful rival appeared on theVIETRI. 7scene. High connexions, wealth, glory, and the favourof the imperial captain of his age, were the claimsadvanced by Colonel Colville ; and these were irresistiblein the eyes of Emilie's father. A coolness ofdemeanour towards Eugene, and vainly repeated solicitations,at length assuming an air of authority andcommand, to change the current of his daughter'saffections, seemed already to declare the colour of theirfuture lot.Eugene, however, had a tower of strength in theheart of his Emilie, which neither the attacks andstratagems of his rival, nor the cruelty of paternalpower, could have taught to surrender, without somestrange accident to promote their schemes. This, alas !was not wanting. The regiment into which Eugenehad just before entered was the one commanded byColonel Colville ; and the feelings he now experiencedare not to be described. As a successful lover, he toowell knew that he was hated by his rival ; he stooddirectly in the proud Count's path ; he returned hatefor hate, and scorn for scorn ; they saw each other'sposition, and each resolved to give no undue advantageto him whom circumstances only had made hisenemy. The generous soul of Eugene would havemet his rival manfully and honourably ; but, findingthe advantage taken of his inferior station, he sawthe designs he had in view with burning indignation.With strong natural penetration he determined tofoil his adversary instead of falling into his snares ;and while he returned the stern indignant glance, andbitter sneer, with two-fold force before the world, as8 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.^^ soldier he fulfilled every duty, and suffered not thesmallest occasion for censure, from the lips of hissuperior officer, to escape him. Admirably as hesought, and long succeeded in maintaining, his clear-sightedand magnanimous purpose, disregarding athousand petty insults, yet the wisdom of the childrenof this world, too often " greater than that of the childrenof light," was at length an overmatch for him,and he fell into the ambush laid by his wilier enemy.The time, the means, and the result, were all premeditated,and selected as if to carry a double stingto the soul of the unfortunate and almost predestinedEugene. Even the object of all the young soldier'sdearest hopes on earth was employed by his deepplotting foe to become the cause of his utter discomfitureand dishonour.It was on the evening previous to the marching ofthe regiment to join the army in Italy ; Colville hadalready taken his leave of the Marquess and his daughterto attend the review of some new troops ; when,despatching Eugene to bring up a party of conscriptsfrom the village of Beaux, he put into his handsa letter, addressed to Emilie, with an order for him todeliver it at the castle on his return, and to bear him theanswer. The cheek of the young soldier flushed withpassionate indignation on receiving such a mandate,unconnected, as it was, with his military duties ; but,suddenly, the idea of thus once more beholding thatloved object of all his thoughts from the time he couldremember any thing, surmounted every other feeling ;and, despising the bitter smile with which it was given,VIETRI.he hastened to fulfil a mission at once so revolting, yetso eagerly desired. It was, perhaps, the last time hemight ever behold the face of her with whose happinesshe felt that his own fate and fortunes were inseparablyintertwined.The radiant joy that beamed in the dark eyes ofEmilie, the rich suffusion of her neck and brow, thequick yet faltering voice, convinced Eugene that hewas still unforgotten, and he met her with a smile oftriumph and delight. Yet, scrupulous in honour, heinstantly gave her his rival's letter, when in a momentthese brilliant proofs of love's power faded from herlovely face and form — a cloud came over her brow —pale and trembling she shrunk from its touch. Theexultation of Eugene, even in that bitter hour of parting,was some alleviation of the fearful fate he hadsoon to encounter and endure. Pledging again andagain their unalterable truth, and reminding each otherof a thousand young affecting instances of unbrokenattachment, and gentleness, and love — incidents thatknit their souls in a firmer and holier union than aftertimecould ever be thought to sunder in twain — withlooks and words of farewell, too sadly lingering andrepeated, the young, the beautiful, and the too-confidingtore themselves from a last embrace ; to meet —but how to meet again !On Eugene's departure, his ungenerous rival hastenedhis preparations for the review and marching of histroops. The bitter and insulting tone in which headdressed Eugene, on rejoining the regiment, drewthe attention of the whole troop. Stung also with10 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.jealousy at receiving no answer to his letter, nor sufferinghim to explain, he declared, in a still loudervoice, that the soldier who dared so long to linger onhis mission, in order to take a sentimental farewell ofsome love-sick girl, was ill prepared to reap laurels inthe field of death. Fired beyond the power of enduranceat the contemptuous laugh re-echoed by a thousandvoices about him, Eugene felt his sword springfrom its scabbard, and, rushing on his heartless insultingenemy, he struck him, and, would have laid himprostrate at his feet, but for the sudden interference ofa throng of officers, behind whom their commanderfound a dastardly retreat.In another moment Eugene was surrounded anddisarmed ; the same night a court-martial was appointed; the morrow saw him tried, convicted, andcondemned for ten years to the galleys at Marseilles.How those years were passed — what were ins sufferingsto whom honour was dearer than life — what theyet keener sufferings of her to whom his fate wasunknown, to whom his love had ever been '' like thecommon air," a part of her existence, the sunny climeof heart, and soul, and hope, in which she lived andbreathed, — must be left to the imagination of all butthe unhappy few who have made a like shipwreck oflife's dearest blessings, when in view of the happyshore. Had the excess of moral torture but half thesame power over the heart and soul as that employedon the human frame, what thousands of victims wouldnot death earlier number in his ranks ! What deep andstill deeper abysses of misery would be avoided, wereVieille. 11the arrows of grief and misfortune only barbed withthe sting of fate ! The expiration of ten years presentedEugene with the felon's passport, a yellow papercontaining the name and description of the freedgalley-slave, to enable him to go forth, a proscribedwanderer, upon the face of the dark-changed earth.Years flew on — wars and revolutions had levelledold dynasties and institutions in the dust — he seemedto gaze on the shadows of by-gone times — he no longerheeded whither he bent his steps. Napoleon, theimperial despot of Europe and of its subject-kings,had appointed them, as did ancient Rome, to be thegovernors of his provinces, and to the gallant Muratfell the choicest share of the Gallic eagle's prey. Itwas in the zenith of his power and fame that Frenchcommanders became the masters of Italian palacesand villas, — the delicious bays and coasts — the syrenretreats of emperors and generals of old.In the autumn preceding the grand Russian campaign,a party of French soldiers were loitering aboutthe little fort commanding the bridge in front of thevast bay of mountains, rocky heights, and coasts thattower above the town of Vico and the adjacent scenery.The evening was such as is to be felt only beneath aNeapolitan sky ; enchanting and magnificent prospectsevery where arrested the eye ; and the white sails ofinnumerable pleasure-boats were reflected in the clearblue waters which shone bright and beautiful as themirror of their classic ages. Approaching the littlepromontory which forms a sort of natural bridgebelow the old forts and town of Vico, a little sail was\2 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.observed swiftly gliding close upon the shores of thebay. When just opposite, one of the party, a lady,was seen to catch at some object falling into the water,and in the very act of bending down she was thrownover by the sudden impulse of its onward career, andleft struggling in the waves. It passed so instantaneouslythat the spectators on the bank saw the accidenteven before the party in the boat, and the same instanta soldier threw himself boldly into the bay, andreached the scene of danger at the precise time, perhaps,when the lady had reappeared for the last time.He supported her till the rest of the party returned toher assistance ; and, refusing himself to be taken intothe vessel, swam back and regained the shore.There, while receiving the praise due to his promptand spirited conduct from many lips, he was approachedby one of the party, then passing on their return home,and presented with the direction to the lady's villa, andan earnest request to attend and receive the expressionof her gratitude. Signifying his assent, the soldier,having obtained the permission of his superior officer,proceeded late on the same evening towards the lady'smansion — an elegant palace not far distant from themilitary station. On being shown into her presenceshe instantly rose, and was approaching him, when,struck by his sudden and excessive agitation, shepaused, and half withdrew the rich purse of gold sheheld in her hand. Fixing her eyes on his countenance,and marking its noble yet grief-worn expression, sheat once threw the money aside, exclaiming, " No !that can never shew my preserver, and to one whoseYiiyi'iu. 13looks". . . . But she was interrupted by the sudden startand exclamation of surprise which the sound of hervoice seemed to have produced. Pale and trembling,his eyes rivetted on hers, as if some spectral thing hadcrossed his vision, he murmured the name of " Emilie !"and while their looks, with a strange power of fascination,hung on each other, as if striving to penetratethe veil of the doubtful past, the lady, uttering oneshriek of recognition, fell powerless into the soldier'sarms. " Eugene !" '* Emilie !" were the only wordsbreathed forth, as they still gazed doubtingly in eachother's faces.'dost thou live? Is it — can it be my Eugene?Or hast thou risen to upbraid — to claim — to take meto thy place of rest ?"Oh, lost, lost — yet found at last. It is indeed thyEugene, my own Emilie !"'' Thy own !" exclaimed the unhappy lady. ** Theytold me thou wert long dead — it was sworn — proved —believed — or I had never been the lost, the hated thingI am."Lost — hated ! thou art for ever mine, my Emilie !"Ah, knowest thou not — knowest thou not all ?Then I am the wife of Colville ; thou wert dead —my father ruined — proscribed — reduced to extremestwant — a wanderer with Vender outlaws ; restored toall by Colville. I was the price — I wed him, for thouwert dead."Would that I had been ; nor ever heard theword thou now hast said ! Thou lightest have bademe, in blissful ignorance, go wander on my wretched14 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.way. The wife of Colville ! traitor — oppressor —murderer of my love, my soul, my fame ! Let himcome — let him take the dregs of life he has left !Grant me patience, sweet heavens !"Yes, Colville — traitor — murderer of all our loveand peace !" repeated Emilie,^' but never will I seehim, — never see my father more : cruel, cruel as theyhave all been. But thou, my Eugene !"*' Thy Eugene ! Ah, speak that again ! Wilt thoufly with me — wilt thou renounce and shun my hatedfoes ?""Thine, thine only, in the sight of Heaven ! DidI not pledge my lasting truth — my first vows to theewhile living ? But wert thou not dead ? There is yettime ; he returns not this night !"Then haste ! we must away !" cried Eugene ; andhe led her unresisting towards the door. At thismoment several domestics rushed into the room, withalarm depicted in their countenances, and handed toEmilie a yellow paper. Glancing a look full of fear atEugene, she cast her eye over it, and the horrid truthbroke upon her in a moment ; he was no longer herEugene — a soldier — but a convicted felon who stoodbefore her in all his terrors, — for what crime she knewnot, cared not. She shuddered and recoiled from him,as the fatal passport fell from her hand.Eugene stood rivetted with like horror to the spot ;he spoke not, sought not to explain, or to detain heras he gazed on her receding form, borne by her terrifieddomestics for ever from his sight.The sequel is soon told ; the unhappy Eugene,VIETRI.seized with the frenzy of grief, and no longer masterof his actions, rushed from the spot into the deepestsolitude of the woods and hills : there he some timelay concealed ; but, with an instinctive and maniacallove of revenge, he ever continued to haunt the pathof Colville, till at length he succeeded in his purpose.The mangled body of his former enemy and oppressorwas found, one morning, even in the very chamber ofhis palace in which he had the night before retired torest in imagined security and ease. Near it also laythe lifeless form of the early victim of his base ungenerouspower ; the expression of triumphant revenge,hate, and dark delight, with which he had planted thedagger in the heart of his rival, had not yet left hiscountenance, though his hand had directed the samefatal weapon to his own. His fingers were found stilltwisted in the hair of his foe ; he yet hung in a wildlythreatening attitude over his couch, as if glorying inthe deed.On the evening of Emilie's fearful interview with herlost Eugene, she had taken sanctuary in the neighbouringmonastery ; and there she closed the strange andunhappy story of their young love's wrongs.LA CAVA, CONVENT OF LA SANTA Trinity.lo parle meo, e riconosco in veroChe marchers sotto si grave pondo ;Ma '1 mio sermo desio tant 'e giocondo,Ch' io bravo e seguo la cation ch' io pero.GriTTONK d' Annzxo.Oh, heart effusions, that aroseFrom nightly wanderings cherished here !To him who flies from many woes,E'en homeless deserts can be dear !The last and solitary cheerOf those that own no earthly home,Say, is it not, ye banished race,In such a loved and lonely place,Companionless to roam ?Campbf.i.i,The romantic and magnificent scenery round theNeapolitan coasts-which affords the more daring foot-travellerample reward for his adventure, ushering mthe wilder region of the Calabrese-is rendered doublyimpressive b^ presenting the time-worn and majesticmonuments in the vicinity of Festum, Eboli, Salerno,Nocera, Vietri, and La Cava. Shunning, thereforethereat roads, he will make his own route : he wdlvisit Eboli, Salerno, and thence take his way acrossthe secluded paths till he comes with sight ofthe ruined walls of P»stum-a spot so powerfullyLA CAVA, LA SANTA Trinity. 17delineated in the lines of the distinguished touristand poet of " Italy :"They stand between the mountains and the seasAwful memorials, but of whom we know not !The seaman, passing, gazes from the deck ;The buffalo-driver, in his shaggy cloak,Points to the work of magic and moves on."Entering first the valley near the Sarto gate, thetourist proceeds through some plantations watered bythat river ; he v\?ill then reach the ancient Nuceria,taken by the Carthaginian during his fierce expeditionsagainst the Romans ; which became a Roman colonyunder Augustus, and which also received the rebelliousSaracens of Sicily. Towards the left, a little beyondthe modern town of Nocera, may be seen the church ofSt. Maria Maggiore, supposed to have been erected inthe time of Constantine, remarkable for its antiquefont, resembling that in the Baptistery at Pisa, andsurrounded with a balustrade surmounted by columns,with others of superior beauty which support the roof.Approaching, at length, La Cava, from the side ofNocera, you pass through a rich and diversified country,opening new prospects as you proceed. The townitself consists chiefly of one long street, like those atBologna, and has porticoes on each side ; it is spaciousand rather populous for its size, and is occasionallysought for retirement by foreigners, during the summermonths. A little beyond it are some remains, mostprobably of an ancient aqueduct, and a villa situatedc18 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.very pleasantly amidst hanging gardens. It is in thevicinity of Vietri, however, and the whole districtbetween that and Salerno, that the scenery assumes amore picturesque and impressive appearance. Situated,as is the former, on an abrupt declivity in the immensebay of Salerno, it commands a near view of Amalfi,the islands of the Sirens, and the promontory of Minerva;while on the other side is seen towering thememorable promontory of Leucosia, the promontoriumposition of the ancients. Here, too, is seen Salerno,hallowed by the footsteps of the poet, and so celebratedfor its enchanting environs, no less by themuses of old Rome than of modern Italy Once distinguishedas the capital of the Picentini, and still halfembosomed in its noble bay, with its valley surroundedon the northern and eastern sides by its noble andpicturesque mountains, it seems to have been selectedas the most choice and luxurious site for the establishmentof monastic institutions. In old times itwas celebrated as a school of medicine, and, duringthe reign of its Lombard princes, numbers of learnedArabs and men of science were accustomed to resortthither. It is now more frequented for its spring andautumn fair, and in particular that held in September,attended with the popular games and customs peculiarto the country. " From Salerno," says Mrs.Stare, " to the commencement of the cross road, isan hour's drive, through a rich, beautiful, and picturesquecountry, continually presenting little groupsof Calabria peasants, dressed as Salvator RosaLA CAVA, LA SANTA TRINITA. 19frequently paints them, and either employed in tillage,walking, riding, or regaling in temporary arbours closeto the highway."From Pompeii," observes Mr. Forsyth, " we rodethrough a rich and delightful plain. We then passedthrough a long street of houses called La Cava, whereevery portico was a shop. The pedlars of this placehave given name to the f arse Canaille, a low species ofdrama, exhibiting the tricks of some little Antiochus.The place itself took its name from a cave whichruns under the neighbouring abbey della Trinity, thelast' great foundation of the Lombards, and still therichest repository of their antiquities. We thenentered a valley between two convergent Apennines,and passed through a curious succession of landscape,or rather elements of landscapes, full of that savagepicturesque to study which Salvator Rosa purposelyresided in this country. In proportion as the valleycontracted, its sides became more precipitate, andtheir angles more frequent, more sharp, and moreexact to each other."At the close of his exquisitely beautiful and patheticpoem, stamped with all the vivid truth and nature whichrivet the eye and the mind in the landscape of Salvatorhimself, the author of '' Italy" makes a touchingallusion to the vesper song of the convent, heard at adistance in the valley of La Cava, conveying a deepimpression of the character of the scene :As night steals on,With half-shut eyes, reclining, oft, methinks,While the wind blusters and the pelting rainc 220 Thir, LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Clatters without, shall I recall to mindThe scenes, occurrences, 1 met with here,And wander in Elysium ; many a noteOf wildest melody, magician-like.Awakening, such as the Calabria horn,Along the mountain-side when all is still.Pours forth at folding-time ; and many a chant,Solemn, sublime, such as at midnight flowsFrom the full choir, when richest harmoniesBreak the deep silence of thy glens, La Cava,To him who lingers there with listening ear.Now lost and now descending as from Heaven."Rogers.There appears little in the convent itself to call forparticular description, and few travellers have givenany extensive account of its localities. It is remarked,however, by the inquiring Mrs. Stare, that " personswho wish to visit, on their way from Salerno to Naples,the Benedictine convent of La Trinity, near La Cava,should stop at the entrance of that town, and send for acarriage and two strong horses, to take them up alight rocky mountain of the Appennines, on which theconvent is situated, at the distance of two miles fromthe high-road, and in the mule-path to Amalfi. Theascent to La Trinity presents fine woods; and theconvent, which is partly hewn out of a rock, andpartly built upon it, is spacious even to magnificence,but contains nothing particularly worth examination,as the curious records once kept here were removedwhen the French suppressed this confraternity. Afterhaving seen the convent of La Trinity travellers usuallyproceed to Naples ; stopping, however, at Pompeii, andwalking through that city, while their carriage goesLA CAVA, LA SANTA TRINITA. 21round the outside of the walls, to meet them at thevilla-suburban." Strange and appalling in its monkishhistory — the sanctuary of titled desperadoes, andviolators of public or private honour, and startling fromits wild and solitary aspect. La Trinity is yet more remarkableas having been the witness of some fearfultragedies connected with the times of its founders,and political occurrences of an impressive and interestingcharacter. Among the latter are some recordsof terrific feuds between the rival princes of Salerno,in the dark feudal periods when Italy bled under thescourge of Guelf and Ghibelline. Not the least ofall, the people of Amalfi groaned under the bitternessof their exactions, till their insolent cruelty provokeda severe retribution on the head of one of these pettytyrants. They obeyed his summons ; and he fell avictim to his own tyranny.They are now forgot,And with them all they did, all they endured.Struggling with fortune. When Ricardo stoodOn his high deck, his falchion in his hand,And, with a shout like thunder, cried, ' Come forth.And serve me in Salerno !' forth they came.Covering the sea, a mournful spectacle ;The women wailing, and the heavy oarFalling unheard. Not thus did they return.The tyrant slain ; though then the grass of yearsGrew in their streets." Socinus.Nor was the civil discord which raged between theaspirants to sole dominion in the same family of a lessfearful and tragic complexion. Next to the fatalresults produced by the domestic tyranny of FrancescoCenci, a Roman noble, — which swept off an entire22 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.family, obliterating even the name, — may be classed theno less ferocious cruelty exercised by Guelfo, oneof the early princes of Salerno. His father, Tancred,having lost his consort while in the prime of life, hadagain married ; and Guelfo, on reaching manhood,with a chosen band of followers, joined the banners ofthe crusaders. To his dark and haughty spirit, thecastle of his ancestors, where presided a step-motherand her rising sons, was far less attractive than thetented field ; and his father, marking the gloom thathung upon his brow, opposed not his son's design.Years wore away ; and, having gathered laurels on theplains of Palestine, the soldier was on his return whenhe heard of the decease of Tancred, and that he haddivided his rich heritage, in place of leaving it todescend entire upon his eldest-born. The dominionof Salerno, its castles, and the coast was indeed reservedto the haughty Guelfo ; but, stung with rage,he made a bitter vow to possess himself, as well, of thatof Avellino and Benevento, fallen to the share of hisbrother Averardo. Hastening with his followers toSalerno, he entered its territories by surprise, bent onextinguishing his rival's claims in his blood ; and thelatter, wholly unprepared for so sudden an onset, withdifficulty made his escape, and with his family tookrefuge in a foreign land. With the lapse of time,however, circumstances arose which seemed to favourhis cause : the harsh rule of Guelfo had alienatedthe affections of his vassals, who could not but contrasthis severity with the mild and just sway of Averardo,during his brother's absence in the wars. The sons ofLA CAVA, LA SANTA TRINITA. 23Averardo, moreover, were verging upon manhood ; itbecame his duty to renew his claims upon part of theheritage of his father ; but, temperate and pacific as hewas brave, he had recourse to every other means, beforemaking an appeal to arms.His proposals treated with scorn, his conciliatoryoffers interpreted into cowardice, he was at lengthinduced to try the chances of open war. After a seriesof severe conflicts, in which not only their own vassals,but the partizans of the Guelfs and the Ghibellinestook a warm share, they ended in the discomfiture ofthe usurper, who was finally reduced to seek shelter inthe last and strongest of his castles. His sons hadfallen in the contest — one daughter was now all thatremained to him. Beautiful, affectionate, and faithfulto him, through crime, and error, and trial of thebitterest kind, the gentle, noble-hearted Richard*still refused to desert his side, soothing his fiery nature,and seeking, by every appeal of humanity and tendernessthat can be suggested by the soul of woman, toinduce him to listen to some reconciliation with hismore successful relatives. This, too, was the objectwhich Averardo had kept unceasingly in view, beingmore deeply interested from the circumstance of hisson Guido having beheld the charming Ricciarda, —and, having beheld, he loved her. His passion devisedmeans of meeting ; it was mutual ; and manywere the short and fearful interviews, snatched duringthe pauses of the destructive storm of war and hateIt is upon this admirable character that the great patriot and poet, HugoFoscolo, founded his bold and striking Tragedy of the same name.24 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.which raged around them. Often her lover conjuredher to leave the castle ; but she felt that she was theonly object on earth her father had now left to love ;she still bound him to humanity by the last and tenderestlink ; she still despaired not of winning himback to peace, hope, repentance, — of realizing theblissful dream of his uniting the hands of Guido andherself. Is it wonderful that such a daughter excitedthe affection and gratitude even of a parent so sternand unforgiving? At length, too, — oh, joy ! — her perseveringefforts of unwearied love and duty seemed onthe eve of being crowned with success. Guelfo nolonger refused to listen to his brother's terms : thoughsmarting under recent defeat, and the loss of hischildren, he sent hostages to Averardo, inviting inreturn his two sons, Guido and his brother, to comeand ratify the peace by partaking his daughter's societyand the hospitality of his castle. They went, empoweredby their father, and it is here the real tragedyopens ; events darken as we proceed, and hurry thewretched victims of paternal discord with breathlessspeed to the fulfilment of their doom.The feast was spread ; the beautiful and the youngwere there, reflecting in each other's looks the blissthat absorbed their hearts on this happy and unhoped-forchange. Guelfo smiled upon his guests ; the hallsof the castle rung with the many-voiced chords ofmusic and the song of the gay trouver ; the oldancestral portraits looked down, in the thoughts ofRicciarda, with less of sorrow and anger, as if rejoicingin the reconciliation of their children ; whenLA CAVA, LA SANTA TRINITA. 25suddenly a cry was heard ; the place shook as with anearthquake ; something' fell with a heavy unnaturalsound; and, to the eye of Guelfo, the form of hisfather, Tancred, swept like a whirlwind throughthe room. Was it conscience ? The massy pictureof his sire had fallen to the ground ; and at thesame moment Guido, on the point of drinking tohis uncle's pledge of peace, felt the beverage dashedfrom his hand ; it was Ricciarda, who, pale andhorror-struck, stood trembling at his side, andpointed to his brother, from whose lips that cry ofdistress had broken. Guido hastened to his assistance; but in time only to support him in his arms, andreceive his parting sigh. Wild with terror for thesafety of her beloved Guido, the fair girl threw herselfbefore her father's emissaries who approached toseize him ; and, at the same instant, throwing offtheir disguise, his friend Corrado and his followers, whohad gained admittance as partizans of the Guelfs,drew their swords, and, opening for themselves a way,bore him uninjured to Averardo's camp.What was his grief and indignation on learning soblack a proof of a brother's perjury, and the loss ofhis loved boy ; and what the still keener suffering ofthe unhappy lovers — thus fearfully torn from eachother ! The contest was renewed with fiercer hate onthe part of one, and despair of terminating it on anyother terms than the complete subjection of his rival onthat of the other. With this view Averardo entreated ofhis son not to think more of the lovely Ricciarda, untilthey should have secured the person of her terrific father.26 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.and rescued both her and themselves from the peril ofhis farther vengeance. Guido appeared to comply; but,alarmed for the life of the being he so much loved,he could not long resist the temptation of seeing her.By means of a secret and subterraneous passage hefound his way into the vaults of the castle, whitherthe wretched lady, too, was wont to repair and indulgeher griefs by weeping over her mother's tomb.In such a solitude, dark as the course of theirhapless love, they now first met to mingle their tears overthe grave of their dearest, vanished hopes. Eagerlydid that beautiful, and noble, but grief-stricken ladybeseech of him to consult his own safety, and for everabandon to her fate the daughter of the slayer of hisbrother ; and as eagerly and vainly did the absorbed,devoted Guido conjure her not to confide in a parentcapable of sacrificing his own relatives to his vengeance,but to fly with him from the perils impendingover them both. He then declared he would staywith her and share her fate ; but suddenly a footstepwas heard to approach ; the angry voice of the princecame near and more near ; and, half dead with terror,the lady hurried her lover into a place of refuge, andcalmly awaited the approach of her father.* " Stillhere," he exclaimed, '' pale, exhausted, haunting theregions of the dead ! Know ye not that the living calledyou ? How obeyed you not your father's summons?"Forgive ! Summoned I was, but left uncertain inwhat part of the castle you awaited me."For part of the ensuing dialogue we are indebted to the " Ricciarda"of Foscolo.LA CAVA, LA SANTA TRINITA. 27I, too, uncertain whether you were still withinthese walls. I know your footsteps, Ricciarda ; thouwert seen hastening hence."These calm abodes, my lord, are part too of yourpalace."*' And the best part ! Therefore didst thou seek thyfather among the ashes of his race ? Wouldst have itso — so soon ?"I sought my mother's tomb — to weep. To none,save one, alive, I breathe my griefs ; nor yet to himwould tell the cruel words a father utters to his child :how he suspects, how wrongfully, even while he lovesher,— cruel to her and to himself. Nos not for yours,I pray for mine own death."Here, then, beside thy mother's urn, it may pleasethee best to hear me. That I suspect you not unjustlyis well proved by the young traitor seen wanderinghere by night. Dost know it ?"It was so said; methought I heard" — replied thefair girl, trembling for her lover's safety.I see it in thy face! — pity, shame, terror — all forhim. And know you not that he escaped hence, unheard,unhurt? You are joyful now!"*' I, a stranger, and unknown !"*' So young, and yet a hypocrite ! Try to fool others,but not me. Believe me when I say that I rejoicewith you that Guido lives — is well. I would not, indeed,that he should ever perish — by other hand than mine.But I can punish ; go quickly, Ruggiero ! and let theheads of those, my sleeping guards, whose watch he justescaped, look down, a gory beacon from the battlements!"28 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.The soldier was about to obey, when Ricciarda,throwing herself at her father's feet, conjured him,for his own safety, not to exasperate the foreignbands on which he had to rely for his defence.It was in vain ; he reiterated his commands only withgreater fury, at the same time desiring their leader togive double pay to the rest of the troops. He nextsummoned Alberto, captain of the Norman band, topass the bridge and admit the envoy of his enemy,while he himself should remain a hostage till theother's return. In the same angry mood, he recurredto the subject most hateful to his thoughts; charginghis daughter with being an accomplice with him whomhe termed her seducer, and whose concealment orflight she had favoured. He informed her, moreover,that he had given orders for the envoy to be admittedinto the castle to receive a final answer from her lipsthat she would no longer listen to the vows of Guido,or any proposal from his envoy, preferring to buryherself with him under the ruins of his palace ratherthan to yield. " To this," he exclaimed, " I willcompel thee, spite of the affection I yet bear thee,and which, while it throws light around my fearfulpath, yet adds to the intolerable burden of my fate.Didst thou but love me, didst thou merit my love,thou wouldst hate those whom my very soul abhors, —who slew thy brothers, and would usurp my title andmy throne. Swear, then, before his vile emissary, thatthou wilt for ever renounce Guido and his tribe ;and I will love and honour thee as the noblest andmost heroic of daughters. But thou art silent ; —LA CAVA, LA SANTA Trinity. 29wouldst more joyfully abandon thy unhappy fatherfor the arms of his hated enemy, who comes with warand fire to summon thee for his bride. Nay, thou didstsave him even as he pressed the funeral beverage tohis lips ; and for that will ye both have to render meastrict account. But I hear the shouts of my bravewarriors. Prepare ! for it is the treacherous assault ofmy hated foe." He rushed from the place, leaving hisunhappy daughter bathed in her tears.Meanwhile, the disappearance of Guido from thecamp excited the utmost alarm ; and Averardo, toowell surmising the truth, trembled for the life of hisonly son. Instantly calling one of his most faithfulfriends and leaders, he expressed his deep anxiety ;and, with true chivalric spirit, Corrado offered to perilhis life by following him secretly to the castle, andexplaining the urgent necessity for his return, shouldthe envoy's proposals fail, and recourse be had toanother assault. Averardo, full of gratitude, embracedhis noble friend, and he departed. His effortswere unavailing, for, though he succeeded in reachingthe castle, he found it impossible, by any arguments,either of duty or of honour, to induce Guido to abandonher whom he loved. After a long and fruitlessinterview, therefore, Corrado, with the greatest difficulty,made his way back to the camp ; and it wasthen that Averardo, despairing of every other meansof rescuing his unfortunate son from the imminentperil in which he stood, devised the plan of sendingan envoy to treat again with his ferocious brother:he was himself that envoy.30 Trie LANDSCAPE Annual.Before his arrival, however, the mind of Guelfohad been goaded into fresh tumults by the reportedescape of Corrado, who had been seen and pursued inretiring from the castle. Nor was he without suspicionsof the stolen interviews between Guido andhis daughter : notwithstanding their utmost precautions,he had nearly surprised them ; and threatened theunhappy girl to have her interred alive, rather thanleave her a possibility of becoming the wife of Guido.It was in the midst of one of these paroxysms ofrevenge that the horn of the seneschal announced theapproach of a herald ; it was Averardo, who came toplead his cause and watch over his infatuated son,relying on his brother's being an utter stranger to hisperson, for his own safety.The beautiful Ricciarda having been summoned tobe present at the audience, the supposed envoy ofAverardo was introduced.Stand forward !" exclaimed Guelfo, " and judge ofthy reception from the place where thou art received."1 see around me, my lord, the tombs of yourancestors. I bear the olive-branch ; their spirits willrejoice to behold concord in the halls of their sons —sons and brothers !"'' Brother I never had ; true, while I shed my bloodin Palestine, Tancred, the slave of an artful woman,believed that she gave him a son. He fled on myreturn — untaught to wield the sword ; and now, whentwice ten years are flown, he comes in arms to depriveme at once of all— of honour, sons, and sway. He callsme the assassin of his children,— he storms my castle :LA CAVA, LA SANTA TRINITA. 31vengeance for vengeance, — arms I oppose to arms.I die, but never yield. He shall have no bloodlesstriumph. If I have injured him and his, hath he notdone it, and sorely wounded me in fame ?"But these are reasons why both should now desist.My master was an exile, — true ; you came with fireand sword. But that Tancred made unjust partitionof his dominions, I do not know ; but this I know,that had Averardo left his sons beggars he would havebeen unjust and cruel. He asked his rights, which youby force opposed. You lost your sons — but it was inthe field : they had their funeral rites and fame. Yourbrother conquered, yet here you reign ; and this,methinks, is ground enough for peace."'^ Nay ! it is cause of war to dare to speak it. Thywords are full of guile — thy mien is bold."Yes, bold — yet not so much, perchance, as Averardowould have me be ; his cause is just ; and guilehe need not use who conquers in the open field."But thou who speak'st thus, who art thou ?"^' I am Corrado ! thy brother's friend — a leader ofhis troops !"I see thou art a Ghibelline from thy aspect. Buttell me, brave chief, if I should trust the faith ofAverardo, how know I that some ambush lurks not inthe dark ? Ere Averardo deigned to ask my daughter,his son had robbed me of her noble heart ; he soughtto seduce her from me ; meaning to return, no doubt,and possess himself of my princely rights. I saw theplot ; but not in time to extirpate the whole of the32 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.detested tribe. Ah! would that I could have brought,also, within my grasp, the head of all this mischief —Averardo ! Then — then — a secret instinct would havetold me that he were the man ! Hearest thou ?"'rand whence this vengeance, prince? If his sonloved, and Averardo asked thy daughter as a pledge ofpeace and amity, why violate the laws of honour andhumanity, and stain the festive board with blood !Where is Guido's brother? Died he not in this castle?Did not his father, indignant at the outrage — at thecrime, appeal again to arms, and drive thee to the lasthold of thy castles ? Be wise ! Stretch forth the handof peace ; and let Salerno — let ravaged Italy breathefrom their savage conflicts, and taste repose."'' Never will Guelfo cease to call for vengeance onHIS head who robbed him of his sons. DegradedItaly I scorn ; and would not rule her, save with arod of iron. Let Guelf and vilest Ghibelline shareher spoils ; let foreign legions feast upon her charms,and each ambitious hireling trample her glory and herbeauty in the dust ! It is her fate, I say, and let it befulfilled !"If neither country, fame, nor pity touch thy soul,yet for thy own sake listen to thy brother's terms.Thy troops are few, and routed at all points ; theGerman front of war frowns on Salerno, awaiting butthe word to rush to storm and victory ! Be wise intime! You can make your terms ; for Averardo tremblesfor his son, whose fatal passion impels him to hisown destruction. Pity, and tremble too, for yourLA CAVA, LA SANTA TllINlTA, 33daughter, as Averardo trembles, — lest your crueltyshould at last compel him to stain his cause with yourblood."I wish it — if I shed not his. What is his lastproposal VThat you should govern in Salerno, its castles andits shores ; he in Benevento and Avellino ; and Guidowed thy daughter."Here is that daughter, ready to answer for me andherself. Speak, Ricciarda, wilt thou join hands withGuido ?"Alas ! what would Prince Guelfo have his daughtersay, and to his brother, who had selected her to be hisdear son's bride ? It must be said, albeit it rive myheart, and I die in uttering those fatal words. Theprince, my father, bids me swear to think no more ofGuido."To hate— abhor him !"*' I could not, and I would not be so vile ; him onlyhave I loved — I love him still ; his only will I die.Yet will I never — never be his wife ; I will obey myfather ; and to Averardo say, — it is his duty to consoleto save his son."*' You have heard," exclaimed Guelfo, " and whatyou have heard, report. I do defy my foe — even tothe last !""■ Then be it war ! I shall take back heavy tidings."And, with these words, Averardo withdrew, in the firmresolution of making himself master of the castle thatevening, in the hope of preserving the life of his son,by possessing himself of his brother's person, — everyD34 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.method of conciliation having failed. In retiring fromthe castle he was met by Corrado, who hastily assuredhim of his son's safety ; but that nothing could inducehim to leave the castle without being accompanied byRicciarda.Brief and fearful were now the words exchangedbetween the lovers, on learning that the attack wasabout to be renewed. Seeing Guido unarmed shehastily gave him a dagger; yet, the next moment,thinking of her father, in a voice of distraction, sheasks him for it again. As he is about to give it her,Guelfo suddenly entered the place : Guido concealedhimself among the tombs ; but, ere she can conceal it,her father seizes on the dagger. A terrific scene ensued ;he compels her to confess when and from whom shelast had it ; but she will not betray the place of his concealment.He threatened to kill her on the spot ; andto spare him the dread crime she declared that shewould sooner stab herself. Yet he then snatched theweapon from her hand, and, falling upon her neck,melted into tears. All, perhaps, had yet been well, butthe storming of the castle had begun ; shouts and theclash of arms excite anew the rage of the wretchedprince, who, tearing himself from his weeping daughter,rushed out to the defence of his castle, exposinghimself to every danger, and leading on fresh troopsto the walls.It was in vain. He again returned, brooding onlyon vengeance, to the vault, where he found Ricciardastill weeping at her mother's tomb. Seizing her, hebore her further along the silent vaults; and then.LA CAVA, LA SANTA TRINITA. 35in a voice of thunder, he called upon Guido, withevery epithet of contempt and rage, to come forth.No answer met his ear ; when, raising the dagger overhis hapless child, — '' Coward ! monster !" he cried,' come forth ! — or now thy promised bride is welteringin her blood ! Hear'st thou ?"I hear !" and at the same moment her loverrushed from his concealment ; but stood petrified onbeholding the deadly steel glittering over the bosomof her he loved.'^ Fly, fly," she exclaimed, " he will not, he darenot, hurt me ; is he not my own father ?"Fly," repeated Guelfo, " and her naked spiritshall pursue thee ! Move not, make no defence ; takefrom my hand thy fatal gift, or thou shalt see it drinkthe life-blood of her thou lowest !"I came to take it ! Not that I trust thy mercy, parricide! — kill me thou may'st ; but if thou dearest tostrike, to hurt a single hair of that loved head, I'lltake thee by thy parricidal throat — I'll tear thee limbfrom limb, and scatter thee in the sea that hoarselymurmurs below these towers — thy fitting tomb. Thisis MY will ; approach, for I know thine ! Silent I waitthy coming."No ! here is jny bosom ; strike boldly, father, here !"exclaimed the agonized girl, " for only through mybosom shall you reach him."'guido ! seducer ! villain ! come quick — or now — "The young lover approached, and in the same instantreceived a stab of the dagger. Ricciarda uttered apiercing shriek.D 236 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.'Tis slight ! — I scarcely bleed, — and better knowhow to die than thou, old man, to strike !"''Ha, hast thou 'escaped me! Ha! what noise isthere !" At the same instant, Averardo and his followersentered the vaults. Guelfo was on the point of stabbingGuido, but quitted not his hold of his daughter. Guidocalled on his father to stand back, or that Guelfo wouldkill Ricciarda ; and offered again to become the victimof her father's rage. He was prevented ; and then, concentratinghis whole fury upon her, Guelfo addressed afew bitter and fearful words to his conqueror, — declaringthat he will make him eternally miserable in witnessingthe wretchedness and remorse of his only son,withering in his presence day by day, — and plungedthe weapon into his daughter's heart. Breathing hermother's name — praying for forgiveness of her father'scrime— Ricciarda died ; and Guelfo, invoking cursesupon his brother's race, inflicted upon himself a voluntarydeath.VICO: COAST OF NAPLES.Quest '^ il gremio die ioniaA chi tanto s' adorn,A chi nitre sol carneSenza qua iii guidance,Dove tutti se volveIn ceiiere, ed in pole,E dove non d require o penitence,Fino a quel di de Ultima sentence.Andrea de Basso.Oh ! how severe God's judgment, that deals outSuch blows in stormy vengeance ! Gary's Dante.In the third volume of the Landscape Annual, for1832, is contained some account of Vico and the neighbouringscenery, with other places along the same lineof coast, to which we now refer the reader. Withoutfarther dwelling upon mere local topics, it may perhapsbe more interesting to resume at once the thread ofour historical narrative, comprising some of the moreremarkable events which have stamped the destiny ofthis most beautiful and ill-fated region of the earth.No times were more fruitful in political occurrences ofa striking and appalling character than those whichushered in and succeeded the reign of Queen Giovanniof Naples — the highly-gifted and accomplished successorof King Robert ; himself one of the most distinguishedamong the cultivators and patrons of literatureduring the thirteenth century. The life of Giovannipresents a practical refutation of the popularerror that women are incapable of great undertakings.THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.No one more completely triumphed over the aristocraticargument that they are mainly intended only forthe preservation of man ; confirming the illustriousexamples which show that all distinction ceases withthe sex, and that, while they are the most lovely anddelightful, they are not the least fascinating in otherthan mere exterior embellishment. The order of intellect,indeed, is found to vary in one as Avell as theother; but, in proportion to the number exalted to thehighest power, how many more of queens may we notrank in the lists of royalty, who have distinguishedthemselves far above the self-elected lords of thecreation ! In point of capacity and vigour of character,few monarchs, in stormy and perilous periods,displayed greater daring and decision, though superiorin the more estimable qualities of the heart, than theunhappy queen of Naples.This accomplished princess was born in the year1327 : she lost her father, the Duke of Calabria,the son of Robert, while that king was still uponthe throne, and only one year after her birth. Shehad a younger sister, Maria, the beautiful mistressof the celebrated Boccaccio, daughter of Mary deValois, and born after the king's death. Havingbeen educated in the court of her grandfather, Giovanniat the early age of six was betrothed to the sonof the King of Hungary, in order to accommodatesome political differences. At the age of seven, Andreawas accompanied to Naples, and by means of a papaldispensation the nuptials were celebrated with greatmagnificence and eclat.VICO : COAST OF NAPLES. 39Until the age of sixteen, Giovanna remained underthe guardianship of her grandfather — a monarch celebratedfor his wisdom and great qualities, and who survivedto an extreme old age. On his death she wasdeclared queen ; the pontifical legate assisted at hercoronation, and received the usual acknowledgment ofthe annual sum to be paid by the crown to ClementVI., and his successors in perpetuity. Prince Andreawas not permitted to share in the royal ceremony ;and to this circumstance was owing a series of strangecalamities. The young queen, although of a fiery andcommanding temper, was not the less a woman ; afoible without which she would have achieved farloftier objects than her peculiarly warm temperament,influenced at once by the pleasures of a court and asouthern climate, seemed to promise. She had a princefor her consort, from whom she ought not to haveallowed her thoughts to swerve ; but, with all thedomineering spirit of an Empress Catherine, she indulged,it is said, like her, in the licentious loves of anAgrippina. She had left to her princely husband onlythe undignified character of the queen's consort ; andeven here, it is recorded, that she dictated the conducthe was to pursue, and the precise time and manner ofhis visits more like a sovereign than an equal. Contemptand wounded pride were not the happiest ingredientsfor acting as a love-spell, and preserving fidelityto each other.Meanwhile, Ludovico, his brother, the King of Hungary,having learned that Andrea was wholly excludedfrom a share in the government, as well as from the40 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.title of a king, considered it an insult which redoundedto the discredit of the family ; the mild-temperedAndrea was at length roused by the earnestnessof that monarch's appeals, and they brought theirunited complaints before the papal court. The Pontiffsof that period assumed, as we well know, a powerover the respective monarchs of Christendom whichthey too often succeeded in carrying into effect ; and,after some negociation, Clement VI. issued his mandatethat Andrea's coronation should take place, and sent alegate to enforce its celebration. This occurred in1345, and Giovanna, who had as freely given the reinsto her inclinations as she had held them with a stronghand over the people, became seriously alarmed at thissudden invasion of her sovereignty.She was unwilling to admit of any companionship inwhat regarded the exercise of royalty ; and the ministerswhom she employed did all in their power toconfirm her in her opposition to the papal decree.Charles, Duke of Durazzo, her particular favorite, andwho hated Andrea as a rival, was the first to lay thetrain of a conspiracy of as black a dye as any thatdisgraces the annals of the royal houses of Europe. Topreserve her power by cutting at once the Gordian knot,it is asserted that the queen gave it her sanction ; anddifferent barons, who disposed of the great offices ofstate, were likewise parties to it. The execution of itwas given to Carlo, a natural son of King Robert, andto Beltram, the son of the said Charles ; men of themost violent and resolute spirit. The particulars ofthe plot having been fixed upon, the queen was givenVICO : COAST OF NAPLES. 41to understand that it could not be put into effect atthe court, on account of the number of Hungarianswho surrounded the Prince, and who were stronglyattached to his interests ; for this reason it was agreedthat Giovanna should induce the king to accompanyher on an excursion to the delicious environs of Averse.Extremely fond of his youthful consort, the gentleAndrea was delighted with her sweetness and affabilityof demeanour, and took with him only a small escort —his cruel and treacherous enemies, at the same time,bearing him company as part of Giovanna's suite.On the night of the 18th of September was perpetratedthe crime, to which, from the manner of its previousarrangement, she is accused of having been anaccomplice. After having retired to the couch of theyoung queen, Andrea was suddenly awakened, in thedead of night, by his attendants, with a message, thatsome of the ministers had arrived to inform him of aserious tumult which had occurred at Naples, and calledfor his immediate presence. The prince rose in haste,and left the chamber, the door of which, it is stated,was instantly locked behind him. In the passage hewas met by Charles of Durazzo, Beltram, and aCount Trelisiano, who at first amused him with somefeigned account, until they had conducted him into thechamber appointed for the deed. There Beltram seizedthe prince by his hair, and tried to throw him down.Turning round upon him, Andrea exclaimed, " Whataudacity is this !" When, being assisted by the others,Beltram at length flung him upon the ground. Theprince resisted to the last, seized the assassin's hand42 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.in his mouth, nor loosed his hold, it is said, until hehad actually bitten the part off, which was afterwardsfound between his teeth ! Trelisiano threw himselfupon the prince as he lay, and, assisted by Carlo,passed a noose round his neck, with which he was mostinhumanly strangled.The barbarous act was no sooner committed than theconspirators hastened to conceal the body ; but, as theywere proceeding down the staircase, the sound of approachingfootsteps again drove them into the hall,where, in the terror of the moment, they threw thecorpse from the window into a garden, without takingthe cord from the neck. In the train that had accompaniedthe prince from Hungary was an aged womanwho had been his nurse, and, being extremely attachedto him, she had hastened, on hearing some confusednoise to the queen's chamber. There she found Giovanni,seated by the side of her couch, alone ; and, onmaking some inquiry about the prince, she is said tohave replied with great levity, reflecting upon theyouth and inexperience of her lord, and declaring thatshe knew not what had become of him. The nurse,still unsatisfied, took a torch and went in search of heryoung master ; she approached the balcony from whichhe had been thrown, and, as she afterwards averred,saw, by a strange glowing light which indicated thespot, the body of the deceased, being guided thitherby some unaccountable impulse. She returned to thequeen, informing her that the prince was lying asleepin the garden, to which Giovanna replied, that she hadbetter let him sleep ; when the old lady, descendingVICO : COAST OF NAPLES. 43into the garden, cautiously approached, as if fearful ofawaking him. What was her horror to find him dead,the rope still bound round his neck, and a piece of thehand of one of the conspirators clutched in the mortalstruggle between his teeth. She ran shrieking from theplace, and instantly the whole palace was in an uproar.The queen set out instantly, accompanied by the assassins,for Naples, whither the body also was secretlyconveyed, and there she retired to one of her strongestcastles. The morning after, on the fact being divulged,the populace ran in crowds to the palace, calling forjustice upon the traitors — the slayers of their king.Giovanna prepared to meet the storm ; she issued anedict, forbidding any citizen to bear arms under painof death ; but such was the extreme excitement that,instead of allaying, it seemed to add to its fury ; andshe only owed her life and crown to the fidelity of hertroops.At the same time, under the direction of the Princeof Taranto, and Charles, Duke of Durazzo, not yetsuspected of participation in the crime, the peopleassembled at the grave of the murdered prince ; andhaving taken up the body, with loud cries of execration,they prepared a banner on which was exhibited alikeness of the king, with the rope hanging round hisneck ; and following this they returned to lay siege tothe castle, crying, " Death to the assassins ! Death tothe infamous queen !"The assault was continued for two days, at the endof which the people despatched three envoys to thecastle, insisting on the assassins being delivered up to44 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.them — a demand which was at first refused, till inducedby the arguments of Count Severing and others, Giovannicomplied, excepting only from the numberKing Robert's natural son, Carlo, Artuxio, and another,who fled to the castle of St. Agate, which theyfortified. The conspirators were instantly torn topieces by the mob, after which they proceeded withincreased fury against the castle, commanded by Carlo,which they levelled with the ground ; but, out of respectfor the memory of King Robert, spared him and hisson, whom they conducted under a strong guard, andlodged in a dungeon at Naples. There, however, theywere secretly put to death ; the queen being the soleperson in the whole list of conspirators who, for a time,escaped with impunity, on the supposition that she wasthen enceinte.It has, however, been questioned, on plausiblegrounds, whether she were really a party to the murder,a similar sort of mystery enveloping the whole transactionas was found to hang over that of Darnley, thoughthere seems little doubt that both may be ranked inthat long, black catalogue of royal assassinations withwhich the great Ogre family of Sultans and of Czarshas, even in recent years, so plentifully abounded.The tumult having subsided, it became the object ofGiovanna to exculpate herself, in the opinion of Lewis,King of Hungary, from the charge of being an accessaryto the murder. With this view she sent theBishop of Trapeia to supplicate that he would deign totake an unhappy widow, left with an orphan child,under his protection ; but the king replied to him inVICO : COAST OF NAPLES. 45terms which left no doubt as to his intentions of inflictinga severe vengeance on all the parties concerned.He was, in fact, busied in preparations to fall uponItaly with a powerful army, in expectation of beingenabled to possess himself of the kingdom of Naples,rather than from any motive of avenging the death ofhis unfortunate brother. Sensible of the approachingdanger, Queen Giovanna sought to strengthen hercause by forming a new alliance with some warlikeprince, and on the 20th of August, 1346, she gave herhand to Luigi, Prince of Taranto, a courageous leader,and in the flower of his age. But the storm wasalready on the eve of bursting on her head ; the kingwas in full march, and the Prince of Taranto hastilycollected his army on the banks of the Volturno, nearCapua, with the intention of disputing the passage ofthat river. The queen was supported by the barons ofthe kingdom ; and the King of Hungary, unwilling tohazard an attack on that position, directed his course byBenevento, where he arrived on the 11th of January,1348. On this astounding intelligence, the entirearmy deserted the banners of the Prince of Taranto,and returned into Naples. Giovanna, who had meanwhilefled to one of her castles, hearing the rapidapproach of the incensed Hungarian, snatched togetherwhatever treasure the time permitted, and, embarkingin a galley, sought to reach an asylum inProvence. The prince, her husband, hearing of herflight, accompanied only by his secretary, NiccoloAcciajuoli, threw himself into a little boat in themarsh of Siena, in the intention of rejoining his46 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.consort. Lewis, every where victorious, took possessionof the town of Aversa, where the whole assemblednobility of Naples had met to congratulate him. Theprinces of the kingdom, however, apprehensive of hisresentment, did not attend ; but they were soon assuredof a safe conduct, with the exception of thoseimmediately implicated in the murder of his brother.Carlo, Duke of Durazzo, came, accompanied by theothers, all of whom were received with marked distinction,and admitted to dine at the royal tables, littleanticipating the result. After partaking of refreshments,the king ordered his troops to be put in motion,with a view of entering Naples ; he passed by thepalace where his brother had been inhumanly put todeath, and, reining in his horse, he called for the Dukeof Durazzo, and inquired of him from which of the windowsthe body had been thrown after the perpetrationof the flagitious deed? To this the duke replied,trembling, that he knew nothing of that fatal business;on which the king drew a letter from his pocket, writtenby the duke to Charles of Artois, containing a minuteaccount of the whole transaction. '' Know you thathand-writing, sir ?" inquired the king. He answerednot, — guilt and terror were painted on his countenance ;he was seized and executed on the spot, the kingordering his head to be exhibited from the windowwhence he had thrown the body of the unfortunateAndrea. He then caused the remainder of the princesto be arrested, and had them transported into Hungary,as well as the young Prince Carlo Martel — thesupposed son of Andrea by the queen.VICO : COAST OF NAPLES. 47This act of royal treachery done, he entered thecapital in triumph, and during a sway of four monthshe made all ranks, but in particular the patricianorder, keenly sensible of the ruthless spirit in whichhe had come to establish his dominion. To add tothe severity of their sufferings, the plague broke outwithsuch virulence as to carry terror and devastationinto every quarter of the city. The common dutiesand charities of life were wholly suspended — thedearest ties of kindred were torn asunder — those whohad most loved fled horror-struck from each other —the rites of sepulture ceased to be longer performed —the avenues and staircases were choked with the deadthe physicians were swept away — and such even ofthe priests who heroically attempted to fulfil theirsacred office might be observed administering the hostto the dying in the streets, the holy wafer being placedat the end of a long stick. Society became utterlydisorganized ; and the multitude, as is observed in suchfearful visitations, becoming frantic with despair, gaveloose to the worst and most licentious passions, exulting,as it were, in the hideous revelry of doom thatraged around them, and satiating with that instinctiveappetite which seems to slumber in man — his firstsavage-born love of anarchy and rapine, which notime and no laws can wholly eradicate or subdue.It is no wonder that King Lewis hurried from sucha scene in time to save himself and his army, leavinghis new kingdom to its fate, and pursued by thecurses of the people. All eyes now turned wishfullytowards their former queen ; the people promising.48 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.themselves a greater degree of liberty and licentiousnessunder a sovereign whom they could neitherrespect nor obey. She had already left Provence forAvignon, where, with her consort Luigi, she onlyawaited a favourable opportunity for regaining thesceptre she had lost. Being destitute of funds shehad recourse to the expedient of selling the city anddistrict of Avignon to the Pope, from whom she receiveda sum of thirty thousand gold florins — a measureof which the justice was narrowly questioned bythe party most concerned. But it was not enough topurchase a kingdom ; and it was only by solicitationof her friends, and the party most favourable to her,that she added to it sufficient to engage ten Genoesegalleys ; and with these, and two hundred Germanhorse, she set sail for Naples, and resumed the reinsof government amidst the applause of all classes.Many of the strong places, however, remained in thehands of the Hungarians, under the command of CorradoLudo, who despatched a special messenger toapprise the king of what had taken place. The queen,supported by her warlike consort, and the whole people,soon recovered the places retained by the King of Hungary; but, unfortunately, the German troops in theservice of the queen went over to the Hungarians — anevent which threw her affairs into considerable disorder.The tide of success turned ; the forces of the kingretook the towns they had lost, and even approachedthe capital. An engagement took place, the result ofwhich was, as usual, unfavourable to the Neapolitans,and they were reduced to purchase their liberty at thevico : COAST or Naples.price of twenty thousand florins. The Germans,nevertheless, would not consent to withdraw from thewhole of their possessions without the payment of fourfoldthat sum. After this, the people rose with greatdemonstrations of valour, threatening the rear-guard ofthe Germans at a safe distance, as they retired. Thisshow of fight was a little too precipitate ; for KingLewis was again at hand at the head of fourteen thousandHungarian cavalry, and eight thousand Germans.He fell like a torrent upon the ceded castlesand cities, laying the whole country under contribution,and reducing the queen and her consort to themost lamentable condition in the last strong-hold thatremained to them.The papal power, in that age, being the grand courtof appeal between contending parties, Giovanna hadrecourse to Pope Clement VI., who readily interposedto compose the civil distractions which shook the kingdom.The King of Hungary refused not to listen tosome plan of reconciliation ; and his Holiness, havingpronounced the queen wholly innocent of the crimelaid to her charge, enjoined her to pay to Lewis threethousand florins of gold to meet the expenses of thewar. With more conscience, however, than the Neapolitanshad shown courage, the invader refused toaccept the proffered gift, conceiving it too bad, perhaps,after the sums he had already pocketed, fartherto fleece his Neapolitan sheep, that, in the language oftheir own proverb, were apt to make "much cry, butlittle wool." His object, he declared, was not rapine,E50 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.but justice ; and, having fully avenged his brother'sdeath, he consented to withdraw from the kingdom.Thus terminated the war : the chief delinquent wassuffered at this time to escape ; the avarice and hypocrisyof the papal court not permitting it to pronounceGiovanna guilty of assassination, from an apprehensionof losing its good city of Avignon. Each party,indeed, wore its mask ; even the people assumed oneof bravery, and, as has mostly been the fate of thepeople, they were the first to be stripped of their disguise,and exposed to all the insults and calamitieswhich want of moral vigour and unanimity universallybrings upon them from foreign and domestic foes.Giovanna, freed from her chief enemy, now aimedat becoming absolute sovereign of the country. Thepontiff favoured her views, and sent his legate to bepresent at the new ceremony of coronation, in whichher royal consort was also to appear. It took place in1342, and was celebrated by magnificent spectacles ofevery kind ; the whole of the princes and barons of thekingdom assisted, and a general amnesty was published,comprehending all past offences. Fortune, from thistime, seemed to smile on the two sovereigns ; and,learning that Sicily was reduced to extreme distress,both by famine and its many baronial feuds, especiallybetween the Catalans and the Chiaramonti, theyresolved to take advantage of the conjuncture. Theking forthwith set sail with six galleys, well armed andvictualled, with the intention of gaining over the peopleby affording them unexpected and most opportuneVICO : COAST OF NAPLES. 51relief. This argument was seconded by a show ofstrength; and the cities of Palermo, Trapani, andothers, mounted the new colours, and testified theiradherence to the Neapolitan crown. But the newdynasty did not long continue, nor could Giovannaincline the Sicilians to submit so easily to absolutesway. Both parties prepared to renew hostilities ; andcivil war and discord had soon reached their height.A pause occurred in 1355, by the incursion of CountLand, at the head of some German troops, whichcommitted the most horrible enormities throughout theprovinces. Giovanna recalled her consort to theirdefence ; but he found them, as usual, so obstinate todislodge, that it was only by the old plan of buyingtheir absence for 100,000 florins of gold, drawn fromthe pockets of merchants and nobles, that he couldrestore tranquillity.About this period, Don Lewis of Arragon died, andwas succeeded by his brother Federigo ; but the islandwas again convulsed by the faction of the Chiaramon-test, and the fresh exactions enforced by the new king.The Sicilians, indignant at this treatment, invited backGiovanna and her consort, declaring that they wouldthrow ofl* their present yoke, and become altogethertributary to the crown of Naples.The royal pair hastened to embrace the offer ; theMessinese had already hoisted their colours, and ontheir arrival they were conducted with every mark ofmagnificence into the city, where they received thehomage of all classes. In the following year, KingLuigi, who had been crowned with his royal consort,E 252 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.attempted the subjugation of Catania, but failed withthe loss of his entire armament ; a misfortune whichwas aggravated by a sudden insurrection in Naples,organized by the Duke of Durazzo. The new sovereigns,therefore, were compelled to retrace their steps,in order not to risk the loss of their own kingdom forthe uncertain chance of obtaining possession of another.But no sooner was the disturbance quelledthan they sought to renew their claims ; the Siciliansrefused to aid them, and they were compelled to enterinto negociations; and a peace, which promised to beof some duration, was the result.During this interval of repose, it might have beensupposed that Giovanna would have remained satisfiedwith the possession of a kingdom, and a noble consortin the vigour of his age. Both parties, however, wereof a violent and licentious character ; Luigi was invariablysurrounded by men of abandoned principles,who gradually alienated from him the love of Giovanni,and led to contests so bitter and personal that,it is asserted, Luigi frequently inflicted upon his consortsevere corporeal chastisement. It was believedthat his death, which occurred soon afterwards, wasthe consequence of this imprudent conduct ; he wasseized with a slow fever, attended with severe internalsufferings, of which he died in 1362, not without somesuspicion, though founded only on the foregoing circumstances,of having been poisoned.In no long time, the queen finding it difficult, withoutsome alliance, to repress the unruly, excitabletemperament of her subjects, encouraged by theVICO : COAST OF NAPLES. 53ambition of her barons, turned her thoughts to a thirdmarriage, and shortly after received proposals from theKing of France, on the part of Duke Philip of Tours,his youngest son ; but Giovanna preferred the claims ofGiacomo of Arragon, son of the King of Majorca,and a handsome and valiant prince, v^^hose ambition didnot soar beyond bearing the title of Duke of Calabria.On these terms the contract was entered into, on the14th of December, 1362 ; but her youthful lord did notmake his appearance in Naples till the end of theensuing year. She did not long retain his affections ;for, deporting herself with all the pride of an absolutesovereign, she never consulted him upon affairs ofstate, till, indignant at the humiliating part he played,he became a party to all the intrigues and dissensionsprevailing at the court. Urban V., who had sanctionedthe contract between the parties, now exhorted theyoung duke to abstain from mixing himself with politicalaffairs, and rest satisfied with his own rank ; butGiacomo was of too vehement a temper to obey, andopenly ridiculed an alliance which made him appearmore in the light of a cavalier servant than of anindependent lord.He was not sorry, then, to avail himself of the eventof a war in Spain, in 1365, to leave Italy, on the pleaof going to the assistance of his father. He took hisdeparture with ill-repressed joy ; but misfortune pursuedhim ; almost on his arrival he was taken prisonerin a skirmish; and he was compelled to apply for hisransom to his wife, who had the magnanimity, notwithstandingthe ill usage she had received from him, to54 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.purchase his liberty for sixty thousand ducats. Itfailed to produce the effect she had, perhaps, intended ;with singular ingratitude, on his arrival at the Neapolitancourt, he resumed his intrigues, and demandedto be admitted to an equal share in the government.Giovanna, finding that neither gratitude nor reason hadthe slightest influence over his mind, resolved to try adifferent method, and had him instantly placed underarrest, suffering him to remain six months in close confinement,in order to tame down his fiery and presumingspirit. Meantime, her Sicilian dominions had fallenfrom her grasp ; Federigo had again become masterof nearly the whole island ; but Giovanna, beingin quiet possession of her Neapolitan territories, nolonger judged it politic to interfere, confining herviews to preserving the undisputed sovereignty in herown hands.In the year 1367, the kingdom was invaded by anarmy of adventurers, under the conduct of AmbrosiaVisconti, who laid waste, with fire and sword, all beforethem. The queen immediately summoned the wholeof her disposable force, and despatched them, withGiovanni Malacca at their head, against the marauders.They came to an engagement, in which theNeapolitans had the rare fortune of coming off victorious,returning with the most extravagant marks ofexultation, and bearing the ferocious Visconti and anumber of his companions along with them, to take uptheir residence in a dungeon.The spring of the ensuing year brought tidings ofthe renewal of the war in Spain, with every aggravationIVICO : COAST OF NAPLES. 55of inveterate hatred and revenge. The unfortunateGiacomo, now set at liberty, took the resolution ofleaving' Naples for the second time, departing almostwithout the queen's knowledge, accompanied only bya small suite of followers. With a strange fatality hehad hardly landed on his native shores, on the eve ofa terrible battle, when, leading on a small body oftroops, he was killed. The tidings of this event aresaid to have been received by Giovanna with markedindifference. She soon after repaired to Rome, whereshe was admitted to kiss the foot of Pope Urban, andreceived from his hand, as a mark of honour, the goldenrose.For the third time a widow, the queen seemed nowto devote her attention entirely to matters of state :she suddenly renewed her claims to Sicily; and, soimposing were the preparations that Federigo, in greatalarm, applied to the Holy Pontiff, beseeching him tointerpose his good offices, and lay the ground-work ofa permanent peace. At his express recommendation,Giovanna listened to Federigo's offers ; and it wasultimately concluded that Federigo should hold thesovereignty of the island as a fief from the crown ofNaples, paying the annual sum of fifteen thousandflorins, and assuming only the title of King of Trinacria,leaving to Giovanna that of Queen of all theSimiles.Till the year 1375 Giovanna continued in her singlestate ; but at that period she cast her eyes on Otho,Duke of Brunswick, a prince of the empire, sprungfrom the imperial lineage. The negociation was soon56 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.brought to a successful close ; the prince accepted theproffered conditions, that he should possess no title orauthority in the state, and the nuptials were celebratedon the 25th of March, 1376. On the death of GregoryXL, in 1378, Bartolommeo Pregnant was elected pontiff,by the title of Urban VI., an event extremelygratifying to Giovanna, who deputed her husband,Otho, attended by a splendid retinue, to bear her congratulations,with rich presents and assurances of dutyand obedience, to the feet of his Holiness. The duke'sreception, however, was such, that he returned utterlydisgusted with his embassy, making statements whichentirely changed the queen's views with regard to thecharacter of the sovereign pontiff. She threw her influenceentirely into the opposite scale, embracing theinterests of the French cardinals, and even openlydeclaring against the papal power. On hearing ofher rebellious conduct, the pope is said to have observed,smiling, '^ that he would send Madam of Naplesto spin in a convent ; a better trade than she had yetexercised ;" words which, on being reported, threw thecourt of Naples into a blaze, rousing the furies ofdiscord to the highest pitch.It was now the cardinals who had withdrawn fromRome, having formed a new conclave, pronounced theexcommunication of Pope Urban, as a usurper ofthe apostolical see, at the same time investing thecardinal of Genera with the dignity of anti-pope, bythe title of Clement VII. Shortly after his election,the new pontiff repaired to the court of Giovanna, who,relying on the protection of the King of France, hadvico : COAST OF Naples. 57become his avowed patroness. He was received byher with every demonstration of respect; but thepeople did not participate in the royal feelings, retainingthe same reverence as before for their countrymanUrban. A Neapolitan revolt was soon organisedagainst the anti-pope ; and such was the rapidity withwhich it spread that Giovanna, to save herself, compelledhis Holiness to decamp from her court asspeedily as possible. He went to Fondii, and fromthence to Avignon, where he fixed his see, amusinghimself by making a number of cardinals, superintendingprocessions, and hurling fresh anathemas at hisenemy. The latter now proceeding with vigour againstGiovanna, she was, in turn, assisted by the anti-popewith a supply of men and money ; but Urban, havinggot possession of the castle of St. Angelo, held by anadherent of Clement and the queen, soon after gave asignal defeat to the anti-papal forces — an event whichled his rival to adopt measures for a speedy retreatfrom Italy.The queen, confounded by this unexpected intelligence,sent off ambassadors to Rome, appealing tohis clemency, and assuring him of her hearty repentance,and a return to the most perfect obedience to theHoly See. Too incensed to listen to so early anaccommodation. Urban commanded the envoys to bedismissed with every mark of ignominy and contempt.Nor did his Holiness stop here; he entered into asecret treaty with King Lewis of Hungary for the purposeof dethroning Giovanna, and raising Charles, Duke ofDurazzo, to the royal dignity in her place. He farther58 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.launched forth one of his bulls, denouncing her as aconfirmed heretic, guilty of high treason, deprived ofall her dominions, — her effects to be confiscated, — hersubjects absolved from their fealty, &c. &c., exhibitingaltogether a lively specimen of the then temporalauthority of the Holy See. He next invited KingLewis to hasten his preparations to fall upon Italy, andchastise his enemies and those of the church ; but thisthe Hungarian monarch, now far advanced in years,declined to do, contenting himself with despatchingCharles of Durazzo, after terminating the Venetianwar, to take possession of the whole Neapolitan dominions,and to dethrone the queen.Giovanna foresaw the approaching storm ; she resolvedto meet it ; and, by the advice of the anti-pope,she adopted Louis, Duke of Anjou, and brother ofCharles V. of France, for her son and heir. Owing,however, to the death of Charles, the arrival of theduke in Italy was followed by no favorable results.The Prince of Durazzo proceeded towards Romewith nine thousand Hungarians, and five hundredarchers, where he arrived at the close of 1380. Hewas received by the pope with great distinction, madea senator of Rome, and invested with a title tothe kingdom of Naples, which he prepared to takepossession of in the following spring.Giovanna had not been idle; while, the time havingarrived for the expedition. Urban collected his troops,gave them his solemn benediction, and placed themunder the command of his favourite champion the duke.On her part the queen relied on the known valour ofVICO : COAST OF NAPLES. 59Duke Otho, her consort, and on the support of theNeapolitan barons ; but, with their usual consistency,they failed her at the hour of proof. Duke Othoopposed himself manfully to the enemy on the frontiers; but he was compelled to retire, and ultimatelyto Naples itself, where he prepared to stand a siege.Powerful demonstrations were made, on both sides,for another struggle ; but traitors to their commanderand their queen opened the gates to the enemy on the16th of July, 1381 ; and the new-invested king, rushingeagerly to the storm, carried every thing before him ;the queen, with difficulty, finding refuge in CastelNuovo, where she was besieged by the victor. DukeOtho fled to Aversa ; and, reduced to the utmost extremity,Giovanna consented to capitulate, if, at theend of fifteen days, no relief should arrive. Otho, onlearning her distress, resolved to make one effort for herrescue ; and on the 25th of August, the last day of theterm, he attacked the king's army with the utmost impetuosity,till, being grievously wounded and madeprisoner, his most faithful followers were cut to piecesaround him, and his army put to the rout. This battledecided the fate of the queen : she surrendered to theconqueror, by whom she was sent, a close prisoner, tothe castle of San Felice.In the beginning of 1382, Louis, Duke of Anjou,the adopted heir of Giovanna, made preparations tocontend the sovereignty of the kingdom with his rival,and succour the imprisoned queen. He assembled apowerful army, and, with the usual impetuosity of theFrench, fell like a tempest upon Italy, to the surprise60 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.and dismay of the new-made king. Up to this periodthe latter had treated Giovanna with some degree ofhumanity ; but, aware that his rival's title rested on herfor support, he had recourse to terror to bring her overto his own views. He desired her to give orders to thecommanders of the Provencal galleys to acknowledgehim for their lord. They had been sent for the supportof the queen's cause, but had found, on arriving,that she was already a prisoner. With courage aboveher sex, she commanded that the captains should beconducted into her presence, and, in the face of herconqueror, exhorted them, by every argument, to remaintrue to their honour, faithfully serving the kingshe had adopted, Louis of Anjou, her lawful heir ; butnever to submit to the sway of a robber and assassin.A reply so haughty and insulting called for strongmeasures ; Charles ordered her to be committed tostill closer confinement, and despatched a specialcourier to King Lewis of Hungary, informing him ofwhat had passed, and requiring to know in whatmanner he should dispose of the deposed queen.The answer returned was, that she should suffer thesame death which had been inflicted on the unfortunatePrince Andrea, her first husband. Upon the samenight when this strangely retributive sentence wasreceived, however barbarous (and perhaps unmerited)we may pronounce it, it was carried into execution,and she was inhumanly strangled in prison on the 21stof May, 1382.Thus ignominiously perished the lovely, gifted, andaccomplished daughter of a distinguished monarch.VICO : COAST OF NAPLES. 61who had been loved and venerated by his people.With a lofty intellect and courageous spirit — thoughgreatly obscured by early crime and error — she alsoemulated her grandfather's example in the cultivationand patronage of letters. She was the friend (it isstated, also, the mistress) of Boccaccio, who wrote mostof his celebrated works either at her instigation or thatof her sister; and had she not, like the unhappy Queenof Scots, formed an unfortunate alliance in the outset,she might have realized the expectations of heryouth, and pursued a career more worthy of her signaltalents, and the example of her great predecessor.But the slave of fiery passions, she was hurried intoacts of criminality ; she was the queen too of a dastardand faithless people ; and the same ungovernablesubjects who had applauded her beauty and accomplishments,sworn allegiance, betrayed, and recalledher repeatedly to the throne, deserted her at her utmostneed, and gazed with apathy on the beautiful, half-nakedform, exposed, without a single adjunct ofhonour, or of royalty, to the scorn of the public eye.MOLA DA Greta.'Tis a wild life, fearful, and full of change,The mountain-robber's. On the watch he lies,Levelling his carbine at the passenger;And, when his work is done, he dares not sleep.Rogers's Italy.Whether in reference to the more ancient or themore modern character of Mole and the adjacentterritory, the unpleasing and rather startling tone ofthe above motto will be found, it is feared, any thingbut unjust and inapplicable. From the period ofUlysses's voyage to that of the establishment ofSpanish dominion in the kingdom of Naples, Mole, theancient Formiae, founded by the Lcestrygones, — thoseAnthropophagi of the old world — has possessed theunenviable notoriety of having devoured an incrediblequantity of human flesh ; its nobility and princes also,if we may believe the highest poetical authority,having been particularly attached to that species ofantiquated diet. Into the port between Mole andGaeta, Homer, it is conjectured, conducted Ulyssesand his friends; it was there they were so terrifiedwith that gigantic race of Loestrygones, " Whosequeen they found vast as a mountain's top." The accountleft us, by the great father of the Epic, of themanners and appearance of the former inhabitants — ifindeed he was describing the place at all — with hisMOLA DA Greta. 63vivid description of the scenery round the bay, is tooadmirable to omit ; and we shall give it almost entirein the spirited version of Pope. After innumerablestorms and perils, the Prince of Ithaca and his companionshail the fair aspect of Italy : —** Six days and nights a doubtful course we steer,And next proud Lamps' stately towers appear.And Lffistrygonia's gates arise distinct in air.♦ ^ ^ ^ "Sr ■SfrWithin a long recess a bay there lies,Edg'd round with cliffs high pointing to the skies ;The jutting rocks that rise on either sideContract its mouth and break the rushing tide.Our eager sailors seize the fair retreat.And bound within the port their crowded fleet ;For here retired the sinking billows sleep,And smiling calmness silver'd o'er the deep.I only in the bay refused to moor,And fixed without my halters to the shore.From thence we climbed a point whose airy browCommands the prospect of the plains below :No tracks of beasts, or signs of men we found,But smoky volumes rolling from the ground.Two with our herald thither we command,With speed to learn what men possessed the land.They went, and kept the wheels' smooth beaten road,Which to the city drew the mountain wood,When, lo ! they met, beside a crystal spring,The daughter of Antipater, the king ;She to Artacia's silver spring came down(Artacia's streams alone supply the town) :The damsel they approached, and ask what raceHer people were? who monarch of the place 1With joy the maid the unwary strangers heard.And showed them where the royal Dome appeared.They went ; but as they entering saw the Queen,Of size enormous and terrific mien.64 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Scarce yielding to some bulky mountain's height,A sudden horror struck their aching sight.Swift at her call her husband scoured awayTo wreak his hunger on the destined prey ;One for his food the raging glutton slew,But two rushed out and to the navy flew.Balked of his prey, the yelling monster flies.And fills the city with his hideous cries ;A ghastly band of giants hear the roar.And, pouring down the mountains, crowd the shore.Fragments they rend from off the craggy brow.And dash the ruins on the ships below :The crackling vessels burst ; hoarse groans arise.And mingled horrors echo to the skies.The men, like fish, they stuck upon the flood,And crammed their filthy throats with human food."That the great poet, in the foregoing description,meant to refer to the port lying between Mole andGaeta, with the high promontory above it, acquiressome confirmation from the observation of Cluverius,that the classic authors have all along understood itas such. He cites, too, the lines of Ovid, where hefelons Tenets to have met with Tertius Macareus, oneof the voyager's companions on the Capstan shore.They are to be found in the fourteenth book of theMetamorphoses, and are to the following purport :'' Talis convex per iter memorable Sibylla," &c.The sibyl mounting now from nether skies,And the famed lilian prince, at Cum rise.He sailed, and near the place to anchor came.Since called Cajeta, from his nurse's name.Here did the luckless Macareus, a friendTo wise Ulysses, his long labours end."It would appear, moreover, that Rome's great oratorand patriot, Cicero, who sometimes lived, and whoMOLA DA Greta. 65died near the spot, had understood Homer as speaking ofForming, if we may judge from a passage in one of hisletters : Si vero in hanc,^ TrjXsTrvXov veneris, * Aai'^pvy ohio(Formiasdico) qui fremitus hominem! quam irate animi!'' If you come into this wide-gated Lsestrygonia (I meanForms), what murmuring of men, what angry minds !"It is admitted, beyond doubt, that Cicero possessed avilla at Formiae, as well as at several other places,from frequent mention of the fact in his epistles toAttics; but it is not equally clear that the villa formingin what is called Cicero's garden, is the one whichbelonged to him, it being situated most probablynearer to the sea. The extent of the ruins, and itsevident traces of ancient magnificence, point it out,in the opinion of many, as the palace of the Mamurrse.Forms itself is termed by Horace the city of theMamurrse ; and here he stopped to refresh when weariedwith his poet's journey, of which he has left so amusingan account:In Mamurrararum lassie deinde urge manus."It derived its name, most probably, from havingbeen the birth-place of the Mamurrse; and M. Dacier,whose inquiries on this head are extremely precise, isof opinion that the city was the property of one ofthat family, the friend of Caesar, and known to beone of the wealthiest men in Rome. For thisreason the most remarkable of the ruins shown atMole is less likely to have been once the residence ofCicero, than of him who was proprietor of the entireplace. Its real site, with more probability, lies beyondThe exact words used by Homer.F66 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Mole, fronting a bay formed by the sea in the remoterpart of the promontory of Gaeta, where the Appian roadis covered with remains of houses, one of which is supposedto he Cicero Formianum. Enough has escapedthe ravages of time to show the antiquity of theirconstruction in the peculiarly small and elegantrooms, the windows, and the doors ; every thing wasfound faced with marble, and the decorations weredistributed with singular classic chasteness and taste.Opposite these houses is a gentle declivity, once surroundedwith olive-groves and gardens, and leadingto the sea-side. It was there, according to receivedtradition, that Cicero fell a victim to the resentment ofAntony and Fulvia ; and this spot, if we may givecredit to Appian, travellers from all parts used to seekout, with a veneration little short of religious enthusiasm:"Grey and o'ergrown, an ancient tomb is there."Rogers.The Via Appian, or Appian road, is skirted by anumber of other small towns and buildings, besidesMole da Gaeta. It is, perhaps, one of the moststriking proofs that remain of the power and wealth ofthe Romans. It was constructed solely at the cost ofPius Claudius ; it took five days to traverse it fromRome, and extended through the kingdom of Naples toBrundusium. Its breadth admitted of two waggons tomeet and pass; it was formed of immense stones of blackflint, each as large as two men could bear, and so closelycongested that they remained solid and unyieldingduring the space of 1 800 years. By the continual passageMOLA DA Greta. 67of horses and mules, the surface of the road is saidto have become so bright and smooth as to assume ata distance, and in particular on a clear sunny day, theappearance of a glittering silver expanse, extendingas far as the eye could reach. Its more modern constructionboasts at once durability and magnificence.The next towns to Mole, on the Roman road, areTerracina and Fondii, the latter of which is recordedto have been burnt and ravaged by the celebratedBarbarossa, admiral of the Turkish fleet. He commencedhis career as a pirate, and so successful washe in his buccaneering exploits that he at lengthbecame Dey of Algiers, a place which he easilyinduced to shake off the Spanish yoke. It was whilepursuing his depredations in the Mediterranean Seathat he was informed by his spies, ever on the alertfor prizes of this kind, of the extraordinary beauty ofGiulio Gonzaga, widow of Vespasian Colonia, andthe most accomplished as well as lovely woman ofher times. The daring pirate resolved to include heramong his other conquests. He ascertained that shewas residing at Fondii, in a palace not far distant fromthe shore. He approached cautiously in the dead ofthe night, landed his men, and, while the town layburied in slumber, had surprised and nearly surroundedthe mansion of the intended victim of his lawlessattempt. Another moment, and she was lost. But,apprised by one of her domestics of the sudden attack,she hastily arose from her bed, and, leaping out of oneof the back windows, near the ground, more thanhalf undressed, she 'arid away," in the words of an oldF 268 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.traveller, '* in her very linen, and escaped so narrowlythat, had she staid to put on any clothes, shehad for ever put off all liberty. The pirates, missingof this fair Helena, failed not to make a burning Troyof Fundi, ransacking it and carrying away the bestof its inhabitants : such dangerous things are greatbeauties to weak towns."That the depredatory character of this region wasnot confined to the sea, we have the authority of amore modern traveller, though he has certainly overchargedthe picture, when he observes that " a frontierbetween two such states as Rome and Naples mustabound in crimes. At Terracina every fifth man youmeet is a sbirro, or an assassin, or both. The Pontinemarshes were infamous for robbery in Juvenal's time ;and most of the postillions who are now stationed therehave retired from punishment to the horrid asylum ofa climate, where none but criminals could be found toreside. At present, the postillion's horn and whip-crackingare forbidden on the roads of Italy, wherethey served too long as a call for robbers.On entering Fondii, we drove to the custom-house,and there we found a tall Castrato, muffled up to hisnose in a cloak, and basking over a pan of charcoal.He struck me as a modern edition of the scribe whoamused Horace at this town. Advancing solemnly,with a pen at his ear, he fell into argument with aNeapolitan advocate, one of our party, and he pretendedto teach him the law of Naples. Their altercationwas at first civil enough, till the lawyer, ashamedof his opponent, called him a music otto. ' Do youMOLA DA Greta. 69know whom you insult ? ' cried the man of office : ' Iam here the organ of government.' — ^ And a well-tonedorgan thou art !' said our companion, ' theprettiest treble that I ever heard in a custom-house.'This poor joke cost him dear ; for the vindictive scribereturned to the charge, and condemned a small package,which had occasioned the dispute, to be carriedby express to Naples, at the punster's expense,At every stage on this road you perceive a markeddifference in the female costume, and those provincialmodes never vary. The young women of Mole havecoiled their hair ' alia lunacy,' from ancient times ;for this mode is common on Greek statues. I observeda group of those nymphs standing up to their kneesin a fountain at washing-stones ; while their idleswains were leaning over a bridge, admiring thosecoquetries which are natural to all women on a partialdisplay of their forms. Such figures come often intoItalian landscapes ; and here the painter might bringin the Lsestrygonian princess filling her pitcher ; forthis fountain, like Homer's Artacia, is a source emittinga full stream, and flowing direct to the sea just withoutthe town."The description of a quaint old English travellerought not to be here omitted : " Arriving at Mole,"says Lasses, '* I went to see Cicero's tomb, whichstands in a garden not far off. And I the morewillingly believe it to be his, because it is certainthat Tully had a villa in Forms (which was thisplace); thither he was going in his litter, when hewas overtaken by the executioners of the Triumviri70 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.and beheaded. There are no words upon his tomb,of which, if you ask me the reason, I can only tellyou, that either words in prose could not speak, theirTully being dead ; or verses would not, out of envy,praise him who had made prose so famous.*' Having seen this, some of our company and Itook a boat and four lusty watermen to row us toGaeta and back again, while the rest stayed at Moleto provide dinner. Arriving in little more than halfan hour at Gaeta, we went up to the castle, where wesaw the skeleton of Charles Bourbon, once constableof France ; but afterwards, taking against his own kingupon a disgust, he served the emperor Charles V., andwas made one of the generals and governors of Milan ;where, having borrowed money of the Milanese, andhaving laid a deep curse on himself (wishing he mightdie in the first enterprize he undertook) if he paid notback the money by such a time, he failed in his word,but his curse did not. For his next enterprize wasto go and sack Rome : and there his curse met him ashescaled the walls ; and, being shot with a musketbullet, he was forced to pay his debt to nature too.His body was carried to Gaeta, where it stands, withits clothes, boots, and spurs on, in a long box, straightup, with this Spanish epitaph over his head (thusEnglish) :France gave me milk, Spain great employments gave,Rome gave me dcutli, and here Get' a grave.' "At Mole," says another traveller, no less amusingin his way, " I asked for a barber: immediately afterMOLA DA Greta.comes in a tall, swarthy, meagre man, with whiskers,a coat all in tatters, and a spada of an enormouslength ; in a word he appeared to be a brave descendantfrom the ancient Lsestrygones : after all theItalian ceremonies previous to this operation, heshaved me with such terrible dexterity and despatchthat I never before nor since met with the like, andwas glad when it was safe over. I did not forget toask what countryman he could be, and where he hadlearned his trade : he told me he was a Catalonia,and was just come from Constantinople, where for sixyears he had practised shaving, but could hardly keeplife and soul together, being but a bungler in comparisonwith the Turkish barbers."Nearly all that belongs to the modern town of Moleis a single street extending to the bay, which is coveredtowards the west by the promontory of Gaeta, commandinga magnificent view of the surrounding scenery.The hill where Formiae stood has since becomea fruitful garden of the vine, but the tourist may yettrace the remains of a wall of extraordinary thickness,consisting of very large stones uniformly cut in embossments.The sort of embellishment they exhibitmust have been the work of extreme care and labour,the materials being composed of hard silex, united bya natural cement, to which naturalists give the Englishname of pudding : and of this consists, in one entiremass, the extensive promontory of Gaeta.The adjacent hills, of which this promontory formsthe continuation, were for a long period the haunt ofsuccessive gangs of banditti, chiefly deserters from theTHE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.armies which, during most part of the sixteenthcentury, were engaged in hot contest for the masteryof the kingdom of Naples. These truly black bands,peculiar to some parts of Italy, were no unworthysuccessors to the exploits of the men-eating Laestry-gone ; and in fact they formed themselves into asort of republic, which, if the Spanish viceroys did nottolerate, they seldom ventured to disturb. While inpossession of their strong-hold of the hills and rockyeminences round the castle of Gaeta, travellers neverapproached the vicinity except in company of numerouscaravans, and all being well prepared for a contest.It was in Mole da Gaeta, when on his journey to Rome,that the celebrated Torquatus Tasso, with his companions,were stopped in their progress by a report ofthe famous bandit Sciarra being in the neighbourhood,with a formidable troop of his followers. " Tasso'sardent temperament," says Mr. Stabbing, " could illbrook the constraint occasioned by an interruption ofthis kind ; he had already taken a hasty leave of hisfriends Peregrine and Attendolo at Capua, while hisescort, Procaccio, at the same time urged him forward.Thus situated, he wrote a letter from Mole to hisfriend Feltro, in which he stated, ' that he greatlywished to go forth and employ the sword he had givenhim, but was prohibited from stirring, by the commissaries,till the country should be quiet.' How longhe might have had to endure this species of imprisonmentit was impossible to tell, but, just as his stock ofpatience was exhausted, he received, to his astonishment,a letter from the robber himself, which intimated thatMOLA DA Greta. %3not only was the road open to him, but that Marcodi Sciarra was ready to provide him both protectionand every accommodation to render his journey safeand agreeable. Tasso could not but return his gratefulacknowledgments for the honour thus paid his name ;but, fearing he might injure himself with the commissariesif he accepted the proposal, he rejected thebandit's offer. Marco, however, fully resolved uponmanifesting his regard to the poet, immediately sentword to Tasso that he would withdraw his bandaltogether from the neighbourhood* — a testimony tothe power of his genius and the extent of his fame ofprecisely the same nature with that which Ariostoreceived at Garfagnana."tTime was, the trade was nobler, if not honest ;When they that robbed were men of better faithThan kings or pontiffs; when such reverenceThe poet drew, among the woods and wilds,A voice was heard, that never bade to spare,Crying aloud, • Hence to the distant hills!Tasso approaches ; he whose song beguilesThe day of half its hours ; whose sorceryDazzles the sense, turning our forest-gladesTo lists that blaze with gorgeous armoury,Our mountain-caves to regal palaces.Hence, nor descend till he and his are gone,Let him fear nothing.' "Rogers.It was not till towards the close of the seventeenthcentury that the kingdom of Naples was effectuallycleared of those formidable bands, dreaded alike bystrangers and by the natives ; and for this it was insMaiiso. t Stabbing's •' Lives of the Italian Poets."74 THL LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.debated to the courage and energy of the Marquis diCarpi. The travellers of all countries unite in commemoratinghis bravery, among whom Father Pavillon,Mission, and Bishop Burnet are none of the leastgrateful, and lavish of their encomiums upon hisconduct. Some record of the lives of the more extraordinaryof these bandit-chiefs of Italy has byaccident been preserved ; and, though affording fewinstances of the chivalric and honourable feeling shownby Sciarra, abounds in singular and almost marvellousadventure. In this latter respect, none perhaps canvie in interest with the memorials left us of the far-famedNeapolitan, Siberia Squilletti, commonly calledFra Paolo, whose crimes, whose daring exploits, andwhose subsequent conduct and extreme sufferings,have all more the air of a romance than of real occurrences.Squilletti was born about the year 1595, in thesmall territory of Catanzano, situated at the extremityof Italy, below the promontory of the gulf of Otranto,in the kingdom of Naples. He early became anexplorer of the lonely woods, the hills and wilds,around the coast and in the vicinity of Mole da Gaeta.Tn his youth he was remarkable for his fiery and activespirit, combined with great intellectual acuteness ; and,as he grew to manhood, he gave evidence of markedtalent, as well as a frankness and boldness of demeanourwhich produced a very favourable impressionupon strangers, no less than on those who knew him.His habits unfortunately did not long keep pace withthe improvement of his personal qualities and hisMOLA DA Greta. 15mental capacity ; he became vain and arrogant in thiscarriage, violent and quick in quarrel, in addition toa suspicious, sceptical, yet reckless turn of mind.He went with his father at an early age to Naples,where he entered the royal college, and prosecutedhis studies with a view of pursuing a legal career.He made rapid progress ; but this was interrupted bythe untimely death of his father — the origin, mostprobably, of all his future errors and excesses, andbut for which, with such talents, he might have becomethe boast and ornament, instead of the terror andexecration, of his country. Instantly throwing up hisformer pursuits, he quitted Naples for Rome, wherehe was fortunate enough, at first, to meet with severaleminent and respectable prelates, by whose persuasionhe was led to complete the course of academicalstudies he had already entered upon.But the regard of some distinguished personages towhom he was subsequently introduced proved by nomeans equally beneficial to him ; for, under theirpatronage and encouragement, the worst features ofhis character took deeper root, and showed themselvesin a strange combination of hardihood and malignityof purpose. This was appreciated by the more abandonedof his noble associates ; and he was soonemployed in various secret and difficult undertakings :he was set as a spy upon the motions of their adversaries,and, by no wonderful transition, he thus becamethe fit tool of their most fearful and desperate designs.A faithful minister to the wants of powerful vice, hewas nevertheless hated by his employers as the decTHE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.repository of their secret plots ; and, aware of his ownimportance, his arrogance soon became intolerableto them.Playing a double game, he had by the most artfulmeans gained the confidence of the exiled party ; andthis coming at length to the ears of his early patrons,they withdrew from him not only the conduct of theiraffairs, but the proceeds he had hitherto drawn fromsuch a source ; it being the custom of such lordly personagesto seek out for ministers for their iniquitousviews — to enforce strictest secresy — and, when theirobjects shall have been fully accomplished, to " whistlethem down the wind, a prey to fortune." This ledSquilletti seriously to consider his position; he resolvedto change his plans, and, under the veil of religion, togive a freer impunity to every species of extravaganceand vice to which he was most addicted. Retiring,at once, from high company and from courts, he tookupon himself the old hermit's penitential garb, and,with scandalous hypocrisy in a beginner, he withdrewinto a small half-ruined church, which lay on thehigh road from Rome to Naples. There, instead ofcounting his beads, he noted the character of all thosewho went by ; and when of sufficient wealth, or withother recommendations, he contrived to convey intelligenceto the exiled parties, who took measures ofvengeance, for plunder, or other enormities, whichthey perpetrated against their real or supposed enemies.The hermit-chief thus succeeded, by observing themost sanctified exterior, in reducing robbery andextortion to a complete system, till, growing insolent byMOLA DA Greta. 77success, he fell under the suspicion of a Roman noble,who had been plundered near the spot, and whocommunicated what he had observed to the pontificalcourt. It was directed that the proceedings of thenew anchorite should be strictly watched ; and, spiteof his caution, it was proved that he was an accomplicein the daring attacks upon life and property thathad created so much terror through the adjoiningdistricts. But, informed of the impending dangerby the counter-spies he employed, Squilletti suddenlythrew off his hermit-garb, and with it the name ofFra Paolo, given him by the people in his penitentialretreat. He betook himself to the mountains nearMole da Gaeta, extending his depredations to theconfines of Naples and Rome; and, while pursuing thesame career more openly, and in a wider field ofoperations, the ecclesiastical court offered au immensereward for his head, and despatched at the same timea captain of police, with forty men, the better to effectits object. Anticipating their approach, Fra Paolo,having given directions to his partizans, assumed thedisguise of an aged shepherd, and went boldly to givehis enemies the meeting, with the hope of betrayingthem into the hands of his exiled colleagues lying inwait to fall upon them.Taking up his quarters at a neighbouring inn, hepresented himself to the police on their arrival, ashaving just come from the mountains; and, findingthe party much stronger than he had expected, hechanged his design, and informed the captain that he78 THE LANDSCAPE Actual.would discover for him the abode of the whole bandof exiles, whom he represented as being most formidable,and lying in ambush to receive him. Thecaptain, without any suspicion, accepted the proposal,and, giving into the snare, invited the feigned shepherdto take supper with him. Fra Paolo then retired ; but,instead of going to rest, he put four gold pieces intothe host's hands, and, bidding him inform the captainthat he whom he was in search of had paid for themboth, and that a leader of police ought to know hisman before he attempted to catch him, he hastened torejoin his friends. The confusion and alarm createdamong the whole party on the delivery of this messagewere such, that the captain could not prevail on themto venture farther, from the dread of falling into thefatal ambush said to be laid for them by the exiles.He was thus compelled to abandon the expedition.Soon afterwards, apprehending the result of leaguingwith some disaffected nobles of the kingdom, heabandoned both the Neapolitan territories and thoseof the church, and transferred the seat of his operationsto Florence. He had taken the precaution whenat Rome, as well as at Naples, to supply himself withletters of recommendation from influential personages,mostly obtained by bribing their secretaries, especiallythose of the cardinals, and with them he confidentlypresented himself at the court of the Grand Duke,Ferdinand U. So well did he play his part, and suchwas his plausibility and address, in making himselfboth useful and agreeable, that he was soon takenMOLA DA Greta. 79into the ducal service ; nor was he less a favourite withthe ministers and ladies of the Florentine court.Unfortunately Fra Paolo knew better how to acquirethan to merit good fortune ; and he had no soonersucceeded in his object than his natural arrogance andlove of intrigue armed against him some of the chiefpersonages in Florence, whose faults or foibles he wasimprudent enough to ridicule in the presence of the dukeand his friends. The offence was mortal ; his footstepswere dogged ; and one day, as he was walkingalone, in the vicinity of San Niccolo, he received theblow of a stiletto in the back, which had very nearlyproved fatal. Sensible of the extreme peril he hadthus incurred, and severely admonished at the sametime by the duke, he no longer boasted his exploits ; hegave up his correspondence with foreigners and exiles ;and, apparently devoting himself with passion to literature,he printed a volume of his poems, dedicated tothe charming Marguerite Costa, his favourite, and amost accomplished woman.In 1643, the Grand Duke and the Collegiate havingtaken up arms against the Bartering, the bandit-priestwas made captain of a company of Ventured, drawnfor the most part from the kingdom of Naples andthe territories of the church, and equipped solely atourhero's expense. With this force he was commandedto keep possession of some posts in theneighbourhood of Siena, in which he acquitted himselfnot only to the general's satisfaction, but with considerablecredit. On the return of peace, in thesubsequent year, Fra Paolo resumed his literary purseTHE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.suits, by means of which he made himself favourablyknown to the Bartering, offering; to devote his talentsto the service of the family, and supplicating thecardinal to grant him absolution of all his former sins,with liberty, after adopting an irreproachable life,to re-visit the city of Rome. His request, secondedby supposititious letters from different princes, waseasily granted, upon obtaining which, he solicited hisconger at the hands of the Grand Duke of Tuscany.This at first was denied him, his patron pointing outto him the danger he would incur, and the certainadvantages he would sacrifice ; but, still persisting inhis solicitations, under plea of returning to his nativeplace, they were at length complied with.On his arrival at Rome, he assumed the ecclesiasticalhabit — a habit quite indispensable to those who wishedto figure in the papal capital, and in no long timebegan to distinguish himself in a manner which drewa wide line between his present and his former character,and raised him to honours that made it difficultto recognize him. Yet this rapid career, combinedwith other circumstances of a suspicious nature,attracted the curiosity of the people and the attentionof the holy court. Doubts and suspicions were soonafter turned into certainty ; when, having appearedwith striking eclat for a period of some months, hewithdrew from ecclesiastical life with as much speedas he had entered upon it, and, resuming his militaryaccoutrements, once more entered the duchy of Tuscanyat the head of a small troop. On reachingFlorence he understood that the duke was then re-moleDA Greta. 81siding at his villa Ambrosial, on which he instantlyput spurs to his horse, and, alighting at the palace-gate,required to be admitted to an immediate interview.This, the master of the ceremonies, a cautious man,prudently refused, stating that the Grand Duke would,on the morrow, hold an audience at Florence ; andthe new soldier was compelled reluctantly to retrace hissteps, and await the hour assigned at the palace.It never came : the Grand Duke, hearing of FraPaolo's strange importunity to be admitted, withoutstating his object, took the alarm ; and gave orders forhim to be instantly arrested. On the following morning,therefore, the captain of the guard, having meantimeascertained that the stranger had appointed to go tothe shop of a certain handerajo,'^ situated in the districtof Calimaruzza, and having disposed his attendantsat different spots, saluted our hero just as he wasabout to enter, and, bidding him good day, laid hishand on him, informing him that he was the duke'sprisoner. At the same moment his soldiers advancedwith levelled pieces, surrounding him on every side,while the passengers and inhabitants hurried in terrorfrom the spot. Casting one glance around him, toascertain if any of his own party witnessed his capture,he quietly gave up his sword to the chief of the police,finding it would be utterly useless to contend againstsuch fearful odds. This (for him) disastrous event,occurred in November, 1644, and when he was in theforty-ninth year of his age.A finisher of the pomp and pride of war.G82 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Having thus suddenly fallen from his loftiest hopes,into the hands of judicial power, the unhappy Fra Paolofound his lot still farther aggravated by being orderedinto solitary confinement. On first recovering fromthe shock, he solicited the use of a pen and ink fromhis gaoler; and these were not refused him. He wroteto some of his most influential connexions, beseechingthem to put some engine to work, in order to inducethe duke to state his reasons for confining him ; and,if possible, to set him at liberty. This was attendedwith no success ; to every application made to himthe uniform reply of the duke was, that he was fullyacquainted with the extent of his prisoner's delinquencies,and knew what he was about ; — an answerwhich closed the door to all farther intercession inhis favour. Finding himself thus confined to a livingtomb, after making some fruitless efforts to alleviate hissufferings, the intellects of the unhappy prisoner grewdisordered ; he furiously attacked his keepers, and onpartial recovery felt himself heavily ironed, and securedwith redoubled vigilance. His aliment consisted ofthe coarsest food which he procured with four livres theday ; a sum out of which he contrived to save sufficientto hire an attendant whom, at length, he bribedto procure him some files. By such means he succeededin liberating himself from his chains. He wasalready also in the act of making his way through thewalls, when an alarm was given; he was again secured,and exposed to severer privations than before. Astone pillar to which was attached an immense chain,was fixed deeply in the earth, and to this the wretchedMOLA DA Greta. 83Fra Paolo was bound by an iron collar, while otherirons were replaced upon his feet.As time elapsed, the grief and rage by which hehad been before instigated, became more calm ; hopeyet whispered the possibility of escape, and the desireof vengeance, serving as a subject on which to brood,kept him from sinking into utter idiocy and raving.He succeeded so far as to bribe one of his attendants,by splendid offers, to convey letters for him to hisformer associates, acquainting them with his dreadfulcondition, and beseeching them to lose no time indevising some plan for his deliverance from the tortureshe endured. Moved by this appeal from their oldcommander, they conceived it touched their honour tomake the attempt; — each swore to stand by theirleader and one another, and peril their lives for his.On the last day of June, twenty-five of the numberagreed to enter Florence ; and, the less to excitesuspicion, they were to go separately, and as privateindividuals, each intent on his own business. Atmidnight they were to meet at an appointed spot, andproceed rapidly, joined by their brethren, towards thegates of the prison. Armed from head to foot, theywere to seize on the sentinel; — wrench from the gaolerthe keys under penalty of his life ; and, bursting intothe prison, to rescue their chief from his terrific doom;and at the same time give freedom to the whole of theunhappy inmates of the place. By these they were tobe supported in their retreat to one of the gates of thecity, where a larger force was in readiness to givethem support.G 284 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Even had this wild and daring enterprise failed inthe object for which it was intended, it must, nevertheless,,have excited the most serious alarm amongthe citizens, at the dead hour of night, — sunk inslumber, and wholly unprepared for an invasion of thekind. They were spared the trial by the act of a renegadeto his honour and his band, who betrayed the plot tothe government. Precautions were adopted ; the unhappyprisoner was consigned, if possible, to stillharder dress ; he was prohibited the use of pen andpaper, and condemned to the lowest felon's lot. Thespirit of Fra Paolo was no longer proof against sucha fatal reverse ; he at first attempted to starve himselfto death ; — to beat his head against the walls of hisprison; — but escape, even on these terms, was deniedhim; he was ordered to be chained down as a madman,and to be fed. — He yet persevered, he succeeded insettingfire to his dungeon, but it was extinguished,and thenceforth only iron utensils were placed withinhis reach. At length, the freedom which man andhis own efforts denied him, age and wearied nature,bestowed ; exhausted by violent passion, by long suffering,and voluntary fast, Fra Paolo closed his strangemisguided career, — but not till he had reached theeighty-first year of his age.He had undergone three and thirty years of solitaryconfinement ; and, doubtless, he died as he had lived,a hater and despiser of princes, as he might well be, —if not a contemner of all laws, whether human ordivine. The crimes committed in his youth had beenabandoned, if not deplored, and were fearfully ex-moleDA Greta. 85plated by long years of suffering and sorrow. Thecause of his imprisonment was never made known;but, most probably, it consisted in the wounded prideor false alarm of the duke, who, having detected theimposition practised upon him, attempted rather tosatiate his vengeance than to provide for his safety ;inasmuch as, had his prisoner succeeded in escaping,he would, it is natural to suppose, have retaliatedupon his ungenerous oppressor.Similar in many points of character, and still morelike in the evil fortune which pursued him, was MichaelAngelo America, called Caravaggio, who closed hisstrange and chequered career, on his return fromNaples to Rome, most probably in the vicinity ofMole da Gaeta, when he made the attempt to setsail from an adjacent port. He first rose into reputeas a painter, by the vigour and buoyancy of his owngenius, having commenced by holding the pallets andgrinding the colours for other artists. He made himselfa name among that splendid galaxy of art whichshed lustre on the sixteenth century; but hardly had hebegan to acquire celebrity by the singular productionsof his pencil, than the fierce, arrogant, and satiricalturn of mind to which he fell a martyr, began todisplay itself. Such was his devotion to his art, inearly life, that he was accustomed to take his meal,without moving from his labours, on an old piece ofcanvas that served for napkin and board. He wasfond of modelling, and used to call the mendicantsand other singular characters who sat to him as subjects,86 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.his COLLECTION OF ANTIQUES. When a friend wasonce pointing out to him some splendid Grecianstatues, '' Yes," he replied, '' but you shall see hownature has given me specimens of the beautiful antique;"and sketched upon the spot a lovely gipsy girl whohappened to be passing along the street. It was thusthe lazzaroni and other of the lower orders suppliedhim with materials for his studies; and from this cause,it is said, there is frequently wanting in his groupsthat elegant and classic air in the heads, a fault whichmore than once led to the expulsion of his worksfrom the interior of palaces and churches.Owing to his fiery temperament, Caravaggio madefew friends ; he became miserable and unsociable ;and usually took up his quarters at a tavern. Oneday, not having wherewithal to make up his smallaccount, he painted a new sign-board for the landlord,and this was subsequently sold for a considerable sum.In a sudden and fierce dispute which arose betweenhim and another artist, who persisted in loading himwith abusive epithets, Caravaggio drew his sword toattack him, and, in the very act, ran it through thebody of another person who hastened to separate them.In this emergency he sought an asylum in the houseof the Marchese Justinian, who induced by the representationshe made of the affair, not only grantedhim his protection, but obtained for him a pardon. Thefirst step he took, on receiving this favour, was tochallenge the man who had originally insulted him,and who replied to it by stating that he was a gen-moleDA Greta. 87leman, and a cavalier, who never consented to drawhis sword except against his equals.Stung to the quick by this contemptuous treatment,Caravaggio abandoned his country, and set out on hisvoyage to Malta, with a view of acquiring for himselfthe dignity of knighthood, of which his hatedrival had so much boasted. His expedition, in thisrespect, was crowned with success ; he obtained theregard of the grand-master, who created him achevalier of the ancient order of Knights of Malta,gave him two slaves to attend him, and made him apresent of a grand chain of gold. He was notdestined, however, ever more to confront his insultingfoe. The natural temperament of the artist was notcorrected by this sudden influx of prosperity andhonour; he bore himself so haughtily as to give umbrageto a knight-commander, of illustrious family residingin the place, the result of which was unfortunate tothe weaker party, and ended in his being thrown intoprison.Although strictly guarded, Caravaggio did notallow his courage to droop ; and one night, withinfinite difficulty, he contrived to make his escape.He instantly set sail, and sought refuge for a periodin Sicily ; but not considering himself in a state ofsafety in those parts, he took ship for Naples, withthe intention of making application in that city, toobtain the pardon, if not to be restored to the favour ofthe grand-master of Malta. But scarcely had he setfoot in that city when he was attacked and woundedin the face by a party of armed men ; and in the idea88 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.they had been despatched to slay or Imprison him, hefled, and took refuge on board a felucca, with the viewof reaching Rome. He had not, however proceededfar on his course, when, having stopped in one of theadjacent ports, a party of Spanish soldiers arrestedand threw him into prison, in mistake for another cavalierof whom they were in pursuit. At length,having made himself understood, he ran towards theport to rejoin his vessel, on board of which were thewhole of his effects : — it was no longer there, havingjust set sail without him. Overwhelmed by the occurrenceof so many disasters, in quick succession, heset out on foot along the coast, unprovided either withmoney or with food. Anxious, excited, and worn outwithfatigue, his intellects became disordered, and withouta friend or hope of any kind to cheer his faintingspirit, wandering under a scorching sun till he sank, heperished miserably on his way.As some relief to these sombre features of Italiancharacter, I shall give a sketch of a different kindfrom the lives of their contemporaries, Bernardo Fio-riteand Pietro Lauri. Both were artists of some repute,and of a lively as well as eccentric turn of mind.Fioriti, too, was somewhat credulous, which offeredhis friend Lauri opportunities of amusing himself athis expense. Having one evening supped with a numberof their acquaintance, and kept up their convivialityfar into the morning, it was agreed they shouldnone of them retire home, but continue to spend theremainder of the time in the house of Lauri, who hadprovided beds for the party. He, when the othersMOLA DA Greta. 89were wrapped in slumber, rose quietly from his couch,and, taking the garments of Fioriti, so refitted themas to detract considerably from their former size. Afterreplacing them he stole to his own couch, and beganto utter the most alarming and discordant cries. Hisfriends ran to his assistance : he told them he was inhorrible pain, and dreadfully swollen, in consequence,he supposed, of his having taken poison. ^' It is themushrooms!" every one cried. " What shall we alldo !" Fioriti, meantime, hearing the uproar, beganto hurry on his clothes, and, finding them much toostrait for him, he too called out that he was dreadfullyswollen — that he felt strange pains coming on him,and entreated for the love of heaven that some onewould find an antidote, or run for a doctor. Whilehe went on, bewailing himself as a dead man, Lauriremoved the anxiety of his other friends by declaringthe truth ; and the attention of all was now directedtowards the unfortunate Fioriti. Some of them, observingthat all human aid was vain, asked him if hewould like to see a priest. " No, no ! an antidote —a doctor!" he cried, '' I am not yet past hope — I thinkI am not!" His friends sought to console him, andinsisted upon his drinking a large quantity of wine,which they declared was the best antidote that couldbe found. The patient did not spare the bottle ; andsuch, at length, was its effect, that he forgot the desperatecondition he was in, and fell into a profoundslumber. He was carried to his chamber — his habilimentswere restored to their original width ; in duetime he awoke, and, feeling the size of his stomach, he*90 THE LANDSCAPE ANNtJAL.once more cast a wistful eye at his clothes, and againtried to sleep.At length, summoning his utmost resolution, he triedon his garments, and, finding they fitted, shouted outin delight that he was cured, and that the wine hadwrought miracles in his behalf. Such was in fact hisgratitude, that he betook himself at once to his bottle,embraced his friend Lauri as the best physician in theworld, and, being a sculptor, vowed that he would commemoratethe event by a statue to him. Whenever anyof his acquaintance complained, he declared that theirillness was owing to not drinking enough of wine ; thathe had found it to be a specific against all maladies —in particular vegetable poisons. Unfortunately Fioritistuck so closely to his own grand specific that heshortly became a confirmed tiller ; Lauri began tofeel some qualms of conscience, and, taking counselwith his friends, they resolved to retrace their steps,and, if possible, enable him to get the better of sodangerous a habit.With this laudable object, one day, when they wereall in a most sociable mood, at a certain tavern celebratedfor the best Italian wines, the wily painter hadthe address to extract the key of Fioriti's own houseout of his pocket. He passed it forthwith to a numberof his friends, who were instructed in the plot, andwho instantly adjourned to the house of the sculptor.There they proceeded to fix up a public signboard overthe door; — they placed a number of long tables in thecourt ; — they, in fact, made it an open house, with theentire air and appearance of an inn.MOLA DA Greta. 91Fioriti, meanwhile, finding nearly all his friends hadleft him, and having as much of his favourite antidoteas he could well carry, bethought him at last of retiringhome ; but, on reaching the spot, he was not alittle puzzled what to think, and how to act ; for therehe beheld the original residence metamorphosed, andfully occupied, inside and out, by a party of noisy,drinking, good fellows. Stopping at some distance hegazed upon the place in a thrill of wonder and admiration: he could not credit his own senses. " I amwrong," he cried aloud, '* and yet this is assuredly thestreet, only it is not my house. There is our parishchurch ! there is the barber's shop ! and that is my . .(going a little nearer) ; — no ! it is not my house. Howthe d 1 is this, and where am I ? Is it I myself, orisit my house, that is changed ; yet how changed intoa tavern ?" While thus logically settling the point,two friends of Lauri made their appearance, as if bychance, and inquired what he was doing standing byhimself and star-gazing at that hour in the street.'' Oh dear !" he exclaimed, " I am strangely affected ;help me, my friends, to recover myself, for I no longerknow myself or my house!" "That is the effect ofdrinking," replied the others; "you have lost yourmemory, and you will soon lose your senses, if you persistin such a course. Try to compose yourself, andcome home with us, and we will try what can be donefor you to dissipate this strange illusion." The poorsculptor obeyed, thinking his house possessed by a legionof devils, and put himself under the direction ofhis humane friends. He was no sooner gone than92 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.every thing resumed its former appearance ; — hisfriends accompanied him home — and he would frequentlyrelate, with religious gravity, how miraculouslyhe was cured of the crime of drinking.THE Giuliano.Quanti alpestri enter, quanti palustiiNarreio io, di niorte e langue pieni,Peel varia de regni e state illusory.Machiavelli.Proceeding along the Appian Way for some milesfrom Mole, the country opens into wider views ; itassumes fresh beauty and luxuriance ; the wild fig-treeand the myrtle throw their shade over the ruinedtombs that skirt the path, and the wild aloes are seenshooting up their huge stems from, the marshy lowgrounds. The campagna round becomes richer andbetter cultivated, yet scarcely a dwelling meets theeye. The rural population retire to a distance fromthe noxious exhalations which prevail in this region,taking up their nightly residence nearer the Apennines,at such little towns as Traietto and Trimenzo,situate more pleasantly on an extensive slope of greenhill, and at Castel Oporto, where they make a trafficeven of its natural production of vipers.From this hill the remains of the old Saturnianaqueduct stretch across the plain, till approaching theruins of an amphitheatre which stand in lonely majestynear the banks of the Garigliano. These mostprobably belonged to the ancient town of Minturna,94 Tie LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.of which hardly another relic appears, and are distantabout six miles from the town of Mole. Here, as atother places, like the departed Luna, Populonia, Curse,and Baise, the traveller in vain tracks the solitarywild, or cultivated field, for the wrecks of the nobleMinturna. ^' Etiam pride ruins," is fast becomingits appropriate epitaph, like the fuit Ilium of olderdays, " which, though it be travellers' loss," as it hasbeen quaintly observed, " yet it is man's comfort thattowns do die as well as he." For this reason Luciliussays:Non indignemur mortal corpora solve ;Cernimus examples oppida posse mori.Approaching the ferry, you behold a tower based onthe marble tomb of an ancient Curio. This proudRoman, as is justly remarked, appears from the inscriptionto have been insatiable even in death, and tohave endowed, like other great men, some sepulchralbanquet, such as an annual or a decennial supper.Here the Liris, the old name for the Garigliano, as itdaily more and more encroaches on its soft banks, isstill biting silently into the plain :Rural quae Liris quietaMordent aqua, taciturn aiunis."Hon.those rich fields where Liris runsWith quiet streams and wanton play."We saw," says Mr. Forsyth, " large herds of buffaloesgrazing on the Saturnian marshes, from the Ga-giulianoon to the Massic hills. We stopped at St.THE Giuliano. 95Agatha, in hopes of drinking some real Valerian, butwe found this degenerated wine far inferior to theForeign which we had drunk at Mole. Indeed theValerian was naturally harsh ; it required more agethan modern Italians allow to any wine, and, thoughMartial calls it the Immortal, it soon lost that celebritywhich it owed principally to the Augustan poets.Wfe then passed from the rude Appennines into theluxuriant Campagna, and drove too rapidly througha succession of beauties which elude description. Westopped but a short time on the parades of Capua andin the markets of Aversa, the translated descendantsof old Capua and Stella."In former times the river Liris, it is said, was madethe boundary of Latium, the same which is now denominatedthe Campagna di Roma ; and the entireregion, stretching from the Liris to the extreme vergeof Calabria, would seem, during the reign of Nero, tohave been known as Magna Grecian. After crossingthe Garigliano on a bridge of boats, there is a roadconducting to St. Agatha, agreeably situated nearJesse, a small town, formerly called Lemiessa. Leadingfrom St. Agatha is a delightful walk, by which youproceed over a magnificent bridge, near which are tobe observed a number of curious antiquities. The distancefrom hence to Capua is about sixteen miles,through an improving region of luxuriant vineyardsand corn-fields. In the meadows which border theGarigliano, consisting formerly of the fens of Minturna,the vanquished Marius is known to have concealedhimself; and there, to use the words of an old traveller,96 THE LANDSCAPE AN IS Bal.** with his stern looks and manly voice, saying, Barestthou kill Caius Marius? so terrified the slave that wassent thither to kill him, that he let him escape to hisship, and so into Africk. He may speak big thatspeaks for his life, and any looks become a man whenhe looks well to himself in dangers. While we rodealong these meadows we saw before us the mountainof Caro, anciently called Mons Cassius, famous forexcellent wines, as well as the country thereabout,which was called Ager Avernus, so famed by poets forits vinum Falernmn. Passing thus along, we came atnight to St. Agatha, and the next morning betimeswe entered into Campania Felix, so surnamed becauseof its admirable air, wonderful plenty of corn andwine, and pleasant prospects on all sides, which makesan ancient call it Certain Ceres et Bacchi, thestrife of Ceres and Bacchus. It was this countrywhich, with its delights, broke Hannibal's army, whichneither snow could cool, nor Alps stop, nor Romansvanquish, saith Seneca. Indeed, the pleasantness ofthe country made us full mends for all the ill way wehad before : Nature having set that scurvy way thereonpurpose that we might like her favourite Campaniathe better after it. I call this country Nature's favourite,in imitation of Pliny, who calls it Ohmsffaudcntis Natures, that is, a country made by Naturewhen she was in a good humour. It is a heathen thatspeaks, and you must pardon him."The approach to Capua, on this side, is beautifuland picturesque ; but the modern town is two miles'distance from the place where old Capua stood — a cityTHE (lARIGLlANO, 97of such importance as to rank second or third even inthe plenitude of Roman power, and, like Carthage, tochallenge competition with the mistress of the world.It demanded, indeed, to be treated more like an equalthan a subject, insisting for some time that one of theannual consuls should always reside there. But theCapua of old, with its glory and its luxury, has perished,and its successor can boast little title to noticeor distinction, if we except the daring resolution ofsome of its females, on occasion of one of the numerousFrench invasions. Having held out with more obstinacythan was expected, the commander gave somehours' pillage to the soldiery, when several young andbeautiful women, who found their last sanctuary invaded,threw themselves with desperation into the riverVolturno, to rescue themselves from dishonour.The banks of the Garigliano are memorable forhaving witnessed the severe struggle between the Frenchand Spaniards in the year 1503, in which Piero de'Medici, the eldest son of the celebrated Lorenzo, perishedafter the battle, in his attempt to cross the river.After many fruitless attempts upon the Spanish coast,the commanders of the French fleet had been obligedto take refuge in Marseilles. At the same period anevent occurred which exhibits the conduct of thecontending monarchs in a singular point of view. Anegociation was entered into between them for therestoration of peace ; and the mediator to whom theyagreed to appeal for the reconciliation of their differenceswas Federigo, the exiled King of Naples, thepartition of whose dominions had given rise to theII98 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.war. In the course of these discussions Federigo wasalternately flattered by both parties with the hopes ofbeing restored to his crown ; and so far had he obtainedthe favour of Anne of Bretagne, the queen of Louis XII.,that she earnestly entreated the king to concur in thismeasure. It is not, however, to be supposed that itwas the intention of either of the contending monarchsto perform such an act of disinterested justice;on the contrary, the pretext of appealing to the decisionof Federigo was probably only employed bythem for the purpose of obtaining from each othermore advantageous terms.The Duke de la Tremouille having united his troopswith those of his countrymen at Gaeta, and beingreinforced by the Marquis of Mantua, who had nowentered into the service of the French, possessed himselfof the duchy of Trajetto, and the district of Fondii,as far as the river Garigliano. He was, however, soonopposed by Gonsalvo, who had been joined by Bartolommeod' Alviano, at the head of a considerable bodyof troops. The French, disadvantageously posted onthe marshy banks of the river, had thrown a bridgeover it, intending to proceed by the speediest route toNaples; but Gonsalvo, having arrived at San German,was induced, by the remonstrances of D' Alvi-ano, to attack them before they could effect theirpassage. On the night of the 28th of December, 1503,*the Spaniards formed another bridge at Suit, aboutfour miles above the French camp, over which Gonsalvo,with a considerable part of his army, secretly passedCurator; and (he Life and Pontificate of Leo X., vol. ii. p. 2.5, ct scytheGATITGI.TANO. 99the river. On the following morning the French weresuddenly attacked by D'Alviano, who carried thebridge which they had erected ; and, when the engagementbecame general, Gonsalvo, taking theFrench in the rear, routed them with immense slaughter,and pursued them as far as Gaeta, which place hesoon afterwards reduced.This day," says the historian, " terminated theunfortunate life of Piero de' Medici, who had engagedin the service of the French, and taken a principalpart in the action ; but, finding all hopes of assistancefrustrated, and being desirous of rendering his friendsall the assistance in his power, he embarked on boarda galley, with several other persons of rank, intendingto convey to Gaeta four pieces of artillery, which hehad prevented from falling into the hands of the conquerors.The weight of these pieces, and probably thenumber of passengers who endeavoured to avail themselvesof this opportunity to effect their escape, occasionedthe vessel to founder ; and it was not untilseveral days afterwards that the body of Piero wasrecovered from the stream,*' In the days of his gaiety, and amidst the delightsof Florence, Piero had assumed a device, intended tocharacterize his temper and pursuits, for which Poli-pianohad supplied him with an appropriate motto.The device represented green branches, interwoventogether, and placed in the midst of flames, and themotto wasIn viridis general exurit lamia medullas.' "II 2100 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.His misfortunes or his misconduct soon providedhim with other and more serious occupations ; and tenyears of exile and disappointment consumed the vigourof a life which had opened with the most favourableprospects. In the year 1552, Cosmo I., Grand Dukeof Tuscany, erected to the memory of his kinsman asplendid monument at Monte Casino, with an inscription,commemorating, not indeed his virtues, norhis talents, but his high family connexions, and hisuntimely death.After a series of calamities of more than ten years'continuance, during which there was hardly any partof Italy that had not severely suffered from the effectsof pestilence, of famine, and of war, some indicationsappeared of happier times. The pretensions of LouisXII. to the kingdom of Naples had received an effectualcheck by the defeat of his troops on the Ga-giuliano; and, although the remains of his army hadeffected a retreat to Gaeta, yet all that remained forthem was to obtain a capitulation on such terms asshould secure for them their liberty and their arms.These terms were readily conceded by Gonsalvo, whopermitted his humiliated adversaries to march out fromGaeta with military honours and to carry off theireffects, on condition that they should return to France,either by land or sea, of which he offered them thechoice. Both these courses were adopted, and in boththe French soldiery were equally unfortunate. Thosewho embarked at Gaeta and Naples perished for themost part by hurricanes, either in their passage or ontheir native coasts; whilst those who attempted toTHE Giuliano. 101return by land fell a sacrifice to sickness, cold, hunger,and fatigue, insomuch that the road was strewed withtheir dead bodies.In his Life of Gonsalvo, the great captain whosevictory over the French we have already recorded, thehistorian, Ransome, breaks out into the following patrioticlamentation : " Alas ! I have seen those veryplaces; I have even been on the Garigliano. It wasat sun-set, when more than at any other time of theday the shades and manes began to appear like ghosts :the noble souls of our brave French who expiredthere seemed to rise from the earth to speak to me,and, as it were, answered me, talking of their battlesand their glorious death."This capitulation was speedily followed by a treatybetween the contending monarchs, by which it wasagreed that Ferdinand, who had survived his queenIsabella, and who, on account of his dissensions withhis son-in-law the Archduke Philip, was earnestlydesirous of male offspring, should marry the youngand beautiful Germaine de Fix, niece of Louis XII.,who should bring with her, as her dower, all suchparts of the kingdom of Naples as had been allottedto the French monarch ; and, in return for these favours,Ferdinand agreed to pay to Louis XII. onemillion of gold ducats, by annual payments of onehundred thousand ducats, as an indemnity for hisexpenses in the Neapolitan war. With these favourableindications of returning tranquillity, other circumstancesconcurred. The power of the Borgiafamily had been suddenly annihilated by the death of102 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Alexander VI., and the consequent imprisonment andexile of Caesar Borgia ; whilst the death of Piero de'Medici seemed to promise repose to the agitated republicof Florence. Many of the principal Italian leaders,or Condottieri, had perished in these contests ; othershad been stripped of their possessions, and so far reducedas to be no longer able to follow the trade ofblood ; whilst the people, wearied and exhausted by acontinual change of masters, by unavailing carnage,by incessant alarms, exorbitant exactions, and all theconsequences of prolonged hostilities, sighed for thatpeace which they ought to have commanded, andwhich alone could remedy those evils of which theyhad so long been the victims.Nearly about the same period as the death of Pierode' Medici thee was committed an act of such atrociousand almost diabolical revenge as to startle even thecourts of Italy, accustomed as they had been both toprivate and public crimes and horrors that make theblood run cold. This tragic event occurred in thefamily of Este, and in the reign of the Duke AlfonsoI., an event which endangered his safety, anddestroyed or interrupted his domestic tranquillity. Besideshis two sons, of whom Impolite, the younger, hadbeen raised to the dignity of a cardinal, the late dukehad left by his wife Leonora, daughter of Ferdinand I.,of Naples, an illegitimate son, called Don Giulio. Attractedby the beauty of a lady of Ferrara, to whomthey were distantly related, the cardinal and DonGiulio became rivals in her affections, and the ladyherself, in confessing to Impolite her partiality to hisITHE Giuliano. 103brother, dwelt with apparent pleasure on the extraordinarybeauty of his eyes. The exasperated ecclesiasticsilently vowed revenge ; and, availing himself ofan opportunity whilst he was engaged with Don Giulioin the chase, he surrounded him with a band of assassins,and, compelling him to dismount, with a diabolicalpleasure saw them deprive him of the organs ofsight. The moderation or negligence of Alfonso, insuffering this atrocious deed to remain unpunished,excited the resentment, not only of Don Giulio, but ofhis brother Ferdinand, who, uniting together, endeavoured,by secret treachery, to deprive Alfonso at onceof his honours and his life. Their purposes were discovered; and, after having confessed their crime, theywere both condemned to die. The paternal kindnessof Alfonso was not, however, wholly extinguished, and,at the moment when the axe was suspended over them,he transmuted their punishment for that of perpetualimprisonment. In this state Ferdinand remained tillthe time of his death in 1540, whilst Giulio, at the expirationof fifty-four years of captivity, was once morerestored to liberty.These events, which throw a gloom over the familylustre of the house of Este, and mark the character ofthe cardinal with an indelible stain, are distinctly,though delicately, adverted to in the celebrated poemof Ariosto.*Life and Pontificate of Leo X., vol. ii. p. 26, 27, 36, 37, &c.CASTEL GANDOLFO.Gia il (lotto e il ricco ed il patricii vulgo,Decoro e mente al bel Italy regno.Nolle adulate reggio ha sepulture,Gia vivo e i stemmi unica laude.FOSCOLO.Agreeably situated on the summit of a hill, withthe beautiful Ago Castella and the woods on one side,and a view of the Campagna and Rome itself on theother, it is no way surprising that the popes shouldhave selected this spot as their country residenceduring the summer months. From the castle there isa delightful walk which leads down to the lake ofAlbano, the banks of which present to the eye twogrottos, or Nymphs, conjectured to have been firstformed by Domitian, who is known to have chieflyresided at Albano previous to his succession to theempire. The vicinity of this classical spot adds to itsother amenities, situated, as it is, between Castel and Ariccia; and occupying the site of Pompey'sVilla, called Albany Pompeii, while near it aresome evident remains of ancient baths. In the vicinity,also, are considerable relics of an amphitheatre, areservoir, and a Praetorian camp, most probably thework of Domitian. The object here, however, whichmost deserves attention, is the Museum belongingto Signor Carnival, which contains a number ofCASTEL GANDOLFO. 105sepulchral monuments discovered under a bed of lava,near Alba Long, the ancient capital of Latium. Theshape of these singular monuments is that of a vase ;and within each of the vases was found a small cineraryurn of Terra Cotta, containing ashes and bones,made, as is conjectured, in the precise shape of thehuts of the aborigines of the spot. Each cineraryurn exhibits unknown characters ; and these monumentshave likewise doors, with curious fastenings.The cinerary urn was placed in the centre of eachmonument, and encircled with small Terra Cotta vessels(one to hold the sop for Cerberus, others for thepurifying water, wine, oil, bread, incense, &c.) ; alamp like those of pottery now used in cottages ; astile passed through a cancelled ; knives, and a lance.*The depth of the Ago Castella near Palazzo,the site of Alba Longs is calculated at four hundredand eighty feet ; and its subterranean outlet, called theEmissaries, is one of the most extraordinary works ofthe ancient Romans, and was made during the siege ofVeii, in obedience to the Delphic oracle. It is carriedabout a mile under the hill of Albano to the plain,and measures in breadth between five and six palmi,and in height from nine to ten. It appears that, aftertracing the line of this canal above ground, pits weresunk at certain distances from each other ; by whichmeans several labourers were let down, and enabled towork at the same time ; so that the canal was completedin the course of one year, — that of Rome 335.Pits of a similar description seem to have accelerated• Mrs. Stare. Environs of Rome, &c. ; Travels in Europe.106 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Camillus's admission into the citadel of Veii. Theentry to the canal from the lake, and its issue in theplain, are wonderful specimens of the solidity ofEtruscan architecture ; and the interior part of thisancient tunnel seems perfect as when first completed.Another path, to the left of Castel Gandolfo, leadsback to Albano ; and the ilexes, which shade this walk,are some of the largest in Italy. Outside of the gateof Albano, leading to Ariccia, is an ancient tomb, onthe left, called that of the Muriatic ; though there doesnot seem to be any ground for this assertion, as monumentswere erected to their memory near the FosseCluilice, where they fell. It appears to be very ancient,and somewhat resembles that of Porsenna at Elysium,described by Pliny.*'' We went up the woody hill of La Ricciaa," observesMr. Forsyth, " by traverses which brought Lavinium,Tarentum, and the scene of half the aeneid, into view.Near La Ricciaa was the retreat where Egeria tookcharge of Hippolytus, not that where she met Numb,for in Numb's reign Ariccia was distant and foreignfrom Rome. Afterwards, indeed, when Rome spreadinto the country, and encircled his Egeria grotto,Ariccia, being then more solitary, was thought thescene of their mysterious meetings ; and thus werethe two different retreats of the same nymph confounded.La Ricciaa is a little removed from the siteof its ancestor ; yet, as it traces its origin from Ariccia,and Ariccia from the first Sicily, it may, perhaps, disputethe palm of antiquity with Corona itself."Travels in Euiopc. Remarks on Antiquities, ike. Forsjtli.CASTEL GANDOLFO. 107In preference, however, to enlarging upon localdescriptions of the vicinity, a brief sketch of the papaldominion in early times, with anecdotes of a few ofthe more remarkable characters who wielded the thundersof the Vatican, may not, perhaps, be thoughtinapplicable to the present subject. About the middleof the 12th century, when Frederick Barbarossa hadreceived the crown of Italy from the Germanic diet,the power of the popes had already become formidable.Having entered Italy with a powerful army, plunderedand burnt the towns, the Emperor was crowned atRome by Pope Adrian IV. Lombardy, after the mostgallant defence, bled under a foreign scourge ; and thedeath of Adrian, in 1159, only opened the way tofresh humiliations. The holy conclave were equallydivided between two candidates ; both were declaredelected by their respective parties, and Rome beheldtwo vicegerents claiming the patrimony of St. Peter ;but Frederick decided upon Victor III.; and AlexanderIII. was constrained to seek an asylum in France,though all Europe was nearly unanimous in his favour.While one council rejected him, another still moreresolutely anathematized his rival. Alexander at lengthhurled an excommunication at the emperor ; andsought to conciliate the regard of the people, by declaringhimself in favour of the liberties of Italy. Thequestion at length seemed brought to a close by thedeath of Victor, when Frederick caused a successor to beimmediately nominated ; but the violent opposition hemet with induced Alexander to hasten to Rome, wherehe assumed the papal chair ; entered into an alliance108 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.with the king of the two Similes ; and, rousing thewhole south of Italy, bade defiance to the emperor.The latter, highly indignant, marched towards Rome,and, approaching within sight, beheld the army of thepontiff, assisted by the people, drawn up in battlearray. They awaited the onset of the German veterans,but were routed with immense slaughter ; andthe victor, entering Rome, laid siege to the Vatican.Finding its defenders obstinate, he set fire to the adjoiningchurch of Santa Maria ; and Pope Alexander,seized with a panic, made his escape by the Tiber.Frederick received the submission of the Romans ;but, having delayed his departure till autumn, a terrificmalady broke out among his troops, and princes, commanders,and two thousand knights, were alike sweptaway with the common soldiery. The emperor soughtto retreat ; traversed Tuscany and the Lunigiana ; buthis route was every where marked by the dying and thedead. The conqueror of nations had the humiliationto be opposed by the little town of Pontremoli ; and,unable to make good his passage, was driven to seekthe Appennines by new and untraversed paths. Such,however, was his unabated spirit, that, on arriving atPavia, he threw down his glove, challenging the wholeof the Italian states which had leagued against himto meet him, and his skeleton army, in the open field.Returning to raise fresh hordes of barbarians, the statesof Italy, during his absence, strengthened their alliance,and, in the year 1174, witnessed his return at thehead of a more terrific armament than before. Hedescended upon Italy by Mont Cenis, burnt Susa, andCastel GANDOLFO. 109took Asti ; but a city of the League, with only its mudwalls, afterwards called in derision Alexandria deltaPaglia, successfully opposed the greatest warrior ofGermany during four months. He was compelled bythe Lombard League to raise the siege, and retire torecruit at Pavia.After some fruitless negociations with the Lombardsand the pope, he marched with an additional army,threatening to devastate Milan, as he had more thanonce razed it to the ground. Fifteen miles from thecity, at Lignano, he was met by the Italians, who wereat first driven back ; but the battle being restored bythree hundred devoted youths, called the Company ofDeath, ended in the entire rout of the emperor, whoonly made his escape by concealing himself; and,after many days, reached Pavia, where the empresswas mourning his fall. He now thought of peace ;and both the hated Pope Alexander, and the vanquishedmonarch, repaired to Venice to adjust theirdifferences. There the latter declared he was ready tosubmit to the church ; and a truce of six years wasfinally agreed upon, during which the supposed rights,on both sides, were to be suspended ; after which thefoot of the haughty pontiff was placed on the neck ofthe most warlike monarch in Europe. After his death,moreover, the hated pope became the guardian of hisson, Frederick U., and withheld from him, for severalyears, both the imperial and the Lombard crowns.The Guelfs, however, selected Otho IV., Duke ofBavaria and Saxony — the Ghibellines, Philip L, Dukeof Swabia—as rival kings of the Romans. The struggleno THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.between these princes continued till Philip fell a victimto private revenge. Otho then marched into Italy ;but, finding all his actions controlled by the pope, abitter enmity ensued, and the pontiff openly declaredfor Frederick, heir of the Ghibelline house, still underhis tutelage ; and he was crowned King of the Romansand Germans. The contest ended only with the lifeof Otho, in 1218, from which period the parties of thechurch and the empire merged in those of Guelf andGhibelline, and the former became declared enemies ofthe pope. The minority of Frederick II. affordedtime for the free states to form a more regular government,till the elevation of Innocent III., who exercisedso great and marked an influence on the destinies of thechurch. A Roman noble, he was elected to the papalchair in his 37th year, and at once extended the sovereigntyof the church and the freedom of the people ;at the same time instituting the two orders of Franciscansand Dominicans, to the last of whom he gavethe terrific power of the inquisition, with orders to extirpate'heresy, and pursue the new sect of reformersto utter destruction. He exhorted the French to rootout the Albigenses, sparing neither rank, age, nor sex ;he commanded kings in a tone haughty as that ofGregory VII. ; and, by his wily policy, triumphed overthe eastern church by conciliating the patriarch ofConstantinople. He caused the first crusade to bepreached in France ; and, with singular inconsistency,organized a sort of republic in Rome, which he dividedinto thirteen districts. He despatched delegates torevive a spirit of liberty in the provinces under GermanCASTEL GANDOLFO. HIsubjection, and formed two powerful leagues with theGuelfs, and the smaller cities of Italy. In becomingtheir ally, however, he also became their sovereign,and attempted to extend the same system into Tuscany.But it ended with his death ; and his successors,Honoris III. and Gregory IX., supported hisenemy Frederick, exhorting him to enter on the crusadeagainst the Saracens. On the eve of departure hewas seized with illness ; and for this delay the popepunished by excommunicating him. He even sent hisanathema after him into the Holy Land, and was highlyindignant at hearing that the emperor had entered theholy city by treaty, instead of slaughtering the wholeof the infidels. The emperor, in requital, attackedthe states of the church on his return ; but the popebeing defended by the Lombard league, a peace wasconcluded between the belligerents in the year 1230.Frederick met with no better treatment from InnocentVI., who instigated the council of bishops to pronouncea sentence of condemnation against him ;declaring that, for his crimes and iniquities, the Lordhad utterly rejected him, no longer permitting him tobe either an emperor or a king. His subjects werereleased from their allegiance, and forbidden, underpenalty of excommunication, from obeying him in theleast matter whatever. They were invited to electanother emperor, while the pope proceeded to appointa new monarch for the two Similes. On hearing:of this tremendous law, Frederick summoned a nationalassembly, and, placing his golden crown upon his head,he declared that he still wore and knew how to defend112 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.it. But the conspiracy of the church and the monksextended to his courtiers and most confidential attendants; they plotted to carry him off, either by poison orthe dagger ; his private secretary and friend, Pietrodelle Vigne, being equally terrified, or corrupted, likethe rest. In his turn the emperor grew suspicious andcruel, and sacrificed some of the most innocent alongwith the guilty. He again attacked Italy and, afterwaging war with the church and the Guelfs duringthirty years, he was at length compelled to yield tocircumstances ; and with a form and mind alike brokendown, a rebellious family, and faithless friends hismisfortunes appeared to affect his intellect. He wasdisturbed by the denunciations of the pope, and thedread of eternal punishment, with which he had beenso incessantly threatened. He offered to undergoevery humiliation which the church pleased to impose :to make a pilgrimage, or lay down his life for the HolyLand, so completely was his mind subdued.About the year 1256, Alexander IV. preached acrusade against that monster of tyrants, the ferociousEzzelin, Prince of Padua ; such was the dread he hadcreated in every neighbouring state. He was defeatedby the Lombards, and the family of Romano perished.In the fourteenth century Innocent VI. united, withsome of the free states, in expelling the armies of theAdventurer, — in other words, of disciplined robbers,which infested Italy from one end to the other. Thefirst company, headed by an Italian noble, attemptedto surprise Milan, but was itself defeated with greatslaughter at Parabaggio. One of the most terrible ofCASTEL GANDOLFO. 113these miscreants was a German duke named Werner,who carried before him, as a motto to his deeds, '' Theenemy of God, of pity, and of mercy !" — one whichtoo many of his sanguinary and prolific race, even inthe present times, might, if equally sincere, as justlyappropriate to themselves. They devastated the entirecountry ; they put their prisoners to death with horribletortures, and had even the temerity to aim at possessionthemselves of the wealth of Florence. Butthe citizens closed the passes of the Appennines, armedthe peasantry, and gave the adventurers a decideddefeat at the passage of Catella. They again returnedto the charge with increased ferocity ; theFlorentines were advised to purchase their safety, butto their honour they scorned the proposal, and, raisingan army entirely of Italians, commanded them to meetthe marauding nations on the frontiers. With thecowardice of robbers, they retired before the Italians,until they were fairly followed out of Tuscany withoutstriking a blow.Towards the middle of the fifteenth century the corruptionof the church and the power of the popes, combinedwith foreign aggression, gradually broke down thefreedom of the noblest republics of Italy. The Lombardsfailed in their last struggle at Milan and that ofa Roman citizen, under the pontificate of Nicholas V.,was equally unfortunate at Rome. Though a distinguishedpatron of learning, this pope exacted theutmost submission from his subjects. To this system,Sterno Porcari, a noble, manfully opposed himself;114 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.and, taking advantage of a sudden insurrection, attemptedto turn the tide in favour of liberty ; but itended in his own exile to Bologna. Yet he did notdespair ; he had for companions four hundred banishedcitizens ; he persuaded them to league with him, andthe hour was appointed for them to meet in Rome ; hehired also three hundred soldiers, and succeeded ingetting into the city. The entire body were preparedto rush forth, and call the people to freedom — theirleader was in the act of addressing them for the lasttime — when, in a moment, the place was surrounded,the doors were forced, and before the liberators hadtime to arm, they were seized, and consigned to theirfate. The citizens, on the ensuing morning, beheldthe body of Porcari, and nine of his companions, hangingfrom the walls of the castle of St. Angelo ; andexecutions were continued, without intermission, tillthe whole of the patriots had fallen ; the pontiff succeedingin getting into his power even those who hadtaken refuge in other states ; when the last hope ofRoman liberty was extinguished in their blood.The politic and warlike Julius II. formed the designof liberating Italy from foreign spoliation ; and in1510 the French were simultaneously attacked in theMilanese, in Genoa, at Modena, and at Verona. Hefinally compelled the Sire de Beaumont to retire ;and, during the greatest severity of the season, heattacked the state of Miranda under the French protection; and, leading on his pontifical troops in January,1511, entered the capital by storm. His troopsCASTEL GANDOLrO. 115were not so successful under the Duke of Urbino, whowas defeated with loss at Casalecchio ; where, fromthe circumstance of the French officers driving assesloaded with booty from the field, it was, in derision,termed the day of the ass-drivers. But Julius persevered; he roused Europe against the French; broughtthe Venetians and a powerful Spanish army to marchagainst them, whose progress was checked only by thecelebrated Gaston de Fix. With the rapidity of aNapoleon, he engaged and worsted both armies, retookBrescia, and, following the armies of Spain and thepope, compelled them to engage him once more nearthe city of Ravenna. This memorable battle left thefield covered with 20,000 dead, among whom, thoughvictorious in death, lay the distinguished and chivalrousGaston himself. His death did more to promotethe designs of the pontiff than all the exertions of hisallies, though the results could only be transitory ;fresh hordes of robbers, poured in by the bandit monarchsof Europe, still succeeding each other, and layingwaste Italy's fairest provinces. They seemed to takedelight in the infliction of wanton cruelties, such as thestorming of Rome and of Florence — in the utter annihilationof the liberties of the old republics — and inmassacre, plunder, and violation of every law, humanor divine ; as if mankind had only been created forthe natural prey of those monsters in human formcalled conquerors and kings. The evils springing fromthe power of the popes, and the internal dissensionsof the Italian states themselves, would have beenI 2116 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.mitigated, if not removed, by the progress of events,and the triumph of sounder principles ; but there wasno hope of deliverance from the rival claims of barbarousand ambitious princes, whose system it was,and is, to destroy the weakest, and to root out thegerms of liberty all over the world.VILLA Madam.Risorga della tomba avaro e lordLa putrid tua selma, O donna crude.Andrea di Basso.But hark ! the portals sound, and pacing forth,With solemn steps and slow.High potentates, and dames of royal birth,And mitred fathers, in long order go. Gray.The Villa Madama, situated beyond the PortaAngelica, was constructed in the year 1520, on theside of the Monte Mario, anciently the Clivus Cijince,and is known to have been designed by the immortalRaphael. It was chiefly executed, however, after hisdeath, by his distinguished pupil Giulio Romano.The frieze of one of the large rooms, painted in fresco,with some festoons, supported by dancing nymphs, isfrom his hand ; and the portico was painted in conjunctionby Giulio and his friend Giovanni da Udine.These are yet in preservation, although the edificeitself has partly fallen into ruins. On the ceiling arerepresented the cars of Diana and Apollo ; birds,beasts, and, among others, the figures of a sleeping lionand a goat, about to be offered in sacrifice, drawn withsingular truth and spirit. In the same apartment areanumber of valuable cartoons, but which appear tobe fast hastening to decay ; throughout the entirepalace, in fact, there exist the neglected remains of itsformer splendour and magnificence.118 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.The prospects seen from the summit of the hill areextremely beautiful and diversified, commanding, insuccession, the Ponte Molle, the Tiber, the city ofRome, and the mountains of the Apennine. Betweenthe Villa Madama, and the adjacent one of Melting,there is a communication by a pleasant, winding path,terminating on the higher part of the mountain, fromwhich appears also a distant view of the MediterraneanSea. The Villa Madama, although the production ofthe master-mind of Raphael, has been strangely deserted; it was recently occupied as a farm, and theruder uses of rural toil have helped to accelerate theprogress of time and dilapidation. It now belongs tothe King of Naples.The most remarkable historical interest, associatedwith this edifice, is the fact of its having been theresidence of one of the Medici family, — and one ofthose who not only tarnished the lustre of that distinguishedhouse, like so many of its later branches,but utterly disgraced the name, — the infamous Catherinede' Medici, the Queen of France, and the motherof Charles IX. Never, perhaps, did the genius of onewoman exercise so terrific and malignant an influenceover the destinies of any country, as that of the wilyand cruel Italian, for upwards of thirty years, overFrance. By her false policy and perfidious arts shegradually transformed a chivalrous and generous nation,such as it had appeared during the two precedingreigns, into bands of ferocious persecutors and assassins.A consummate mistress of dissimulation, and ofthe coolest courage — fond of pleasure, and possessedVILLA MADAMA. 119of the most seductive manners, she concealed herdeepest designs under the mask of dissipation ; shecould plan a massacre while partaking a banquet, andcaress with irresistible blandishment the victims shehad long destined to destruction. She vied, at thesame time, with the most munificent princes, in thecultivation and patronage of the liberal arts, and displayedmany of the gentler and winning graces whichadorn the most accomplished woman. She possessed,in short, genius and powers of mind which, had theynot been wholly perverted and applied to the mostexecrable purposes, would have rendered her as trulygreat and beneficent as they made her hateful andterrible in the eyes of her adopted country.Catherine was the daughter of Lorenzo de' Medici,Duke of Urbino, and Madeleine de La Tour. Bornat Florence in 1519, during the stormiest period of itshistory, her childhood was exposed to extreme perilfrom the hatred borne by the citizens to Pietro, andothers of the exiled Medici ; she was deprived of allher family possessions, and, at nine years of age, confined,a close prisoner, in a convent. During thememorable siege of Florence, in 1530, some of themore violent republicans carried their detestation tosuch lengths, as actually to propose to check the progressof the enemy by placing her between two battlementson the walls of the city, exposed to the fire ofthe imperial artillery. A still more unmanly speciesof vengeance was even suggested, that of exposing her,in case of assault, to the brutality of the soldiery ;but it was unanimously rejected by the council, though120 THE Landscape ANNUAL.it was known that the Prince of Orange, the commanderof the imperial army, eagerly aspired toobtain her hand. Her uncle, afterwards ClementVII., entertained still higher views for her ; and thesethe death of the prinec, soon after, left him at fullliberty to pursue. After the fall of Florence a negociationwas entered into, by means of the Duke ofAlbany, between Francis I. and the pope, for the marriageof the princess with Henry, Duke of Orleans ;and, having been escorted to Marseilles by her uncle,the cardinal, it was there celebrated with great pomp,in October 1533. With a remarkably fair complexion,Catherine had large eyes, full of vivacity and fire ;she had a tine shape ; a beautiful countenance, blendedwith great dignity; and such is stated to have beenthe admirable symmetry of her feet and legs, that inorder to display them to the most advantage, she firstwore silk stockings very tight ; her hands and arms,likewise, surpassed in beauty those of all other ladiesat the court, both as respected their form and delicacy.Add to these charms that her neck and bosom were ofsuch dazzling whiteness, " so full and round, as to callforth the most enthusiastic praise from the beholder,"and, in particular, from the historian Ransome, whodwells on the subject with singular complacency. Sheknew, moreover, how to exhibit her person to the bestadvantage, displaying an admirable taste in dress, aswell as the most alluring manners, and appearingremarkably well on horseback. With this view, shechanged the mode of riding till then in use ; andprided herself on the address with which she guidedVILLA MA DAM A. 121her palfrey. From her boldness in the chase, indeed,she met with several accidents, and once broke herleg — happy for France had it been her neck — besidesreceiving at another time so violent a blow on the headas to be obliged to undergo the trepan. Nevertheless,her fondness for field-sports never abandoned her, andshe continued the exercise up to her sixtieth year,when she still retained much of the lustre of her earlycharms. The chief drawback on these, perhaps, wasthe size of her head, which was, out of proportion,large ; and she was unable to walk much at a timefrom a strong disposition she felt towards dizziness.It was not till the accidental death of her consort,Henry II., by the spear of Montgomery, in a tournament,that Catherine began to emerge from the obscurityin which the great military and political talents ofthose in power had hitherto held her. She feared andhated the Guises ; and the constable Montmorencywas even more obnoxious to her. He had insinuatedsuspicions of her nuptial fidelity, by observing that, ofall the children she had brought the late king, not asingle one resembled him, while his natural daughterwas a remarkable likeness of her father. He hadeven advised Henry to repudiate her on the ground ofsterility, some years after their marriage ; after whichit was soon known that she was likely to bring him anheir ; and he had, moreover, never ceased to taunt andpersecute the greedy and plotting Italians whom shehad brought in her train. Dissembling her resentment,she awaited a favourable opportunity before she madehim feel the full weight of her vengeance ; and in anr22 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.equal degree she attached herself to the princes ofLorraine, who had flattered her by offering up to her,as a sacrifice, Diana de Poitiers, the favourite mistressof the late king. She had the good fortune, however,to withdraw in time from court ; and, satisfied with thistriumph, Catherine did not judge it worthy of her dignityto drag the duchess from her retreat, permittingher even to retain the splendid possessions made overto her by her royal lover. This rare instance of magnanimityon her part did her the more honour, fromthe Cardinal of Lorraine having consented to the lady'sdeath, while the sanguinary Marshal de Savannasentreated of the queen-mother to permit him thehonour of cutting off her nose. Such vengeanceCatherine scorned — cruel by policy, and not by taste;she had the satisfaction to receive, as a mark of theduchess's gratitude, a present of the superb palace ofChaumont-sur-Loire, situated in the centre of theestates granted to the queen as her dower.Immediately on the death of her consort, the Guiseshad conveyed his successor, Francis, yet a minor, tothe palace of the Louvre, whither Catherine instantlyfollowed them; quitting the royal body, contrary tothe established usage, till then invariably preserved.Her extreme eagerness to share in the governmentimpelled her to abridge the forty days of retirement,till the royal obsequies should be performed, into oneor two. When the constable Montmorenci repaired tothe court to tender his duty to his young sovereign, hewas given to understand, at the instigation of theGuises, that he would be permitted to retire fromVILLA MADAMA. 123active service to Chantilly, under plea of his advancedage. He yielded to superior influence ; but Anthony,King of Navarre, urged by his brother the Prince ofConde, came forward to assert his claims over those ofthe Guises, as a prince of the blood, but was receivedwith marked coldness and indignity at court. TheGuises threatened him with the vengeance of the Kingof Spain, if he presumed to dictate to the queen -mother in her choice of the king's ministers ; at thesame time bribing him with a hope of the restitution ofhis lost kingdom. To remove him from court, moreover,he received from the young king a commission toconduct the Princess Elizabeth, his sister, to the frontiersof Spain, she being then on the eve of herunhappy marriage with the gloomy and bigoted tyrant,Philip II. of Spain.The Hugonots, unwilling to resign the governmentinto the hands of the queen-mother and the Guises,without a struggle, a council of the Calvinist lords, atthe head of which was the Prince of Conde, the greatAdmiral Coligni, and the King of Navarre, was summoned,to consider on the most advisable measures tobe adopted at such a juncture. After considerablediscussion it was resolved to adhere to mild proceedings; and Anthony of Navarre was deputed to gainover, if possible, the support of the queen-mother totheir views. But, too deeply versed in Italian wiles,Catherine overreached the King of Navarre, and, byalternate threats and flattery, induced him wholly toabandon his party, and the designs he had in view.Time Duke of Guise, and his brother the Cardinal, both124 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.of foreign lineage, now combined with the queen-mother,assuming the entire power of the crown, tothe exclusion of the native princes and ancient noblesan exclusion which amounted almost to banishment,and excited the general indignation of the people. Toadd to its intolerance, the ministry, excited by sanguinaryzeal, reminded the weak-minded monarchthat he ought to follow the example of his father, andproceed to exterminate the Hugonots. The ecclesiasticalcourts were invested with new inquisitorialpowers, and, from the severity of the penalties inflicted,they were termed the Chambres Ardentes. The violenceof the persecutions which followed soon compelledthe unhappy Hugonots to rise in self-defence ;and they were the better enabled to face their enemiesowing to the impolitic conduct of the Guises, who, inanswer to the numerous solicitations of military menat court, commanded them to withdraw, under pain ofbeing hung up on a gibbet, expressly erected for thepurpose in the forest of Fontainebleau. These menjoined the banners of the Hugonots, whose oppositionacquired fresh strength from the cruel execution of oneof the best and noblest of their party, — the excellentAune du Bourg, — distinguished for his high talentsand erudition.Their first efforts, however, under the brave LaRenaudie, proved unsuccessful, and the persecutionswere redoubled on every side ; the streets of Amboiseran with human blood ; and the queen-mother, withher three younger sons, accompanied by the principalladies of the court, scrupled not to be present at theVILLA Lima DAM A.horrible executions which took place, beholding themfrom the windows of the castle. Two of the chiefs,in the agony of torture, were induced to accuse thePrince of Conde as a participator in the conspiracy,while others bravely exonerated him, in spite of thesufferings they endured. With expressions of thedeepest indignation the prince vindicated himself fromthe charge, offering to meet his calumniator in singlecombat, intending to signify the Duke' of Guise. Thelatter, masking his rage under the guise of friendship,so far from taking the accusation to himself, wished tobecome the prince's second, while attempting to accomplishhis destruction by every means in his power.Jealous, however, of the Guises, Catherine nowencouraged Conde and the Hugonots in their demandsof toleration ; she advised the king to summon a convocationof the nobility, and it was attended by Montmorenci,Coligny, and a large train of followers. Itwas held in the queen-mother's apartments ; Francis,the young king, being present in person. The admiralthrew himself at his sovereign's feet, and, after presentingthe petition of his subjects, addressed him in astrain of impetuous and commanding eloquence onbehalf of the unfortunate Protestants. His languagecalled forth expressions of such vindictive asperityfrom the princes of Lorraine that a quarrel ensued uponthe spot, and Francis was obliged to interpose andimpose silence on the enraged parties ; Coligny treatingthe two Guises in language of undisguised contempt.The assembly broke up in confusion ; and126 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.the matter was referred to a meeting of the States-general.Meanwhile, Condé, and the King of Navarre, wereconcerting measures in Guienne, more effectually tooppose the power of the Guises ; but their designswere betrayed to the court, and in particular implicatedthe governor of Chartres, Francis de Vendee,a personal enemy of the Duke of Guise. One of themost brave and gallant noblemen of the age, DeVendee, was accused by the Protestant writers, whodetested Catherine, of having been specially favouredby her, along with many other lovers, declaring thatshe added to her other faults and crimes that of secretgallantries. But ambition, not pleasure, seems tohave been her reigning passion ; and, if we may judgeof her conduct towards those ladies of the court whooffended in this point, such allegations can scarcelybe well founded, unless we suppose her capable ofassuming the most useless, as well as base hypocrisy.In the instance of Mademoiselle de Lemuel, whenseduced by the Prince of Conde, — though at theregent's express instigation — she not only reproached,but inflicted severe personal chastisement upon thelady, — a system she is known to have adopted andfrequently applied in similar cases of a breach of propriety; although, when for state reasons it fell in withher views, she, as peremptorily, insisted upon thesacrifice of their honour to promote her object. Withsimilar duplicity she now prepared to betray the twoprinces of the blood into the power of their enemies.VILLA MADAMA. 127On their way to the States-general, both Conde andNavarre received frequent communications not toentrust themselves in the hands of the king, and togo well armed ; but, confiding in their near relationship,they scorned to show any distrust. On arrivingat Orleans they were shown into the king's presence,and received a cold and ungracious reception. Asthey prepared to depart, two captains of the guardstepped forward and told them they were the king'sprisoners. In vain did they appeal ; the Prince ofConde was imprisoned, and his brother, the King ofNavarre, was carefully guarded ; while their partizanswere every where arrested. Though doubtless herown plot, Catherine, with her usual dissimulation, expressedthe utmost concern for the princes, affectedto intercede, and even to shed tears upon the occasion.After the mockery of a court-trial, at which theintrepid Conde refused to plead, the 25th of Novemberwas supposed to be the day appointed for hisexecution ; the Guises boasting in public " that attwo blows only they would cut off the heads of heresyand rebellion ;" meaning to follow up his death bythat of his brother of Navarre. Davila gives a singularaccount of the queen-mother's conduct duringthe whole of this eventful period. Her object was toappear innocent of the crime to which she had previouslyconsented : she wore a face full of sorrow anddistress ; she continually sent for the Admiral Coligny,and his brother, the Cardinal de Cotillon, on pretenceof finding some expedient to extricate the Kingof Navarre and the Prince of Conde. She despatched128 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.the Duchess of Montpelier to Anthony of Navarre,with kind and condoling messages ; and so exquisitely,in short, did she dissemble, that even those who knewher best hesitated in pronouncing whether she weresincere or not in the deep concern she exhibited.The king, in order to avoid being present at theexecution of one of Conde's partizans, — for he wasweak both in mind and body, — had gone out to thechase. On his return he was taken extremely ill, andthe Guises, apprehensive of the event, and dreadinglest their prey should escape, forced on the trial ofthe prince with unprecedented and most indecenthaste. He only owed his life to the courage of theCount de Sancerre, who three times refused to signthe warrant, although he received repeated orders tothat effect from the king — in other words, from Catherineand the Duke of Guise. Anthony, King ofNavarre, expecting to fall with his brother, being astate-prisoner, came to the resolution of disputing hislife with his sword. Calling to him Reins, one of hisgentlemen, in this perilous moment, " If they assassinateme," he said, '' carry my shirt, all bloody, tomy wife and son (afterwards Henry IV.) ; they willread in my blood what they ought to do to avenge it."Anthony then entered the apartment where theyoung king, Francis II., was seated, and, approachinghim, kissed his hand with profound submission. Softenedby this behaviour, and affected by his noblepresence, the king is said to have changed his resolution,and omitted to give the sign previously agreedupon for the surrounding attendants to fall upon theVILLA MADAMA. 129King of Navarre. '' It is asserted," observes DeThou, 'that the Duke of Guise, finding his projectabortive, exclaimed with a voice full of indignation,Oh, le timide et lace enfant !' ' You vile, cowardlyboy !* " In the near anticipation of Francis's death,his mother, with the utmost coolness, took every precautionto secure for herself the first place in the governmentunder his successor. On the death of his brother,Charles IX. was only ten years of age ; and a fiercestruggle for the regency ensued. Montmorenci, onhearing the event, set out with six hundred horse, andmaking use of his authority, as constable, he drove theguards from the gates of the city, threatening to hangthem as traitors if they longer dared to surround theking in time of peace, preventing the access of hisfaithful subjects. Nothing could be more artful thanthe conduct of Catherine ; she flattered and gainedover the man she hated, declaring Montmorenci to bethegreat arbitrator and moderator in all things ; sheentered into a secret compact with the King ofNavarre and Conde, whose lives she had so recentlysought ; and while engaging the constable to mediatebetween the Princes of Bourbon and the Guises, shesecured to herself the entire power of the regency,and undisputed empire over the mind of the youthfulking. From this period may be dated her real politicalcareer, one which plunged the country into everyspecies of crime, of wretchedness, and ruin — thevictim of a false and cunning policy, founded onutter selfishness and love of sway.The system of government now adopted, toreK130 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.asunder every bond of society, — was alike destructiveto public and private faith, — and undermined everyprinciple of human action, till it became fully developedin the fearful massacre of St. Bartholomew.It is impossible to contemplate the reign of CharlesIX. without feelings of mingled horror and commiseration.France, shaken to its centre with thefury of civil factions, became a blank in the map ofEurope ; and successive invasions of German, Spanish,and English armies, bore a small proportion to thetremendous evils inflicted upon her by her ownprinces, and the unhappy rivalries that prevailed.Independant of his mother's wily and perniciouscouncils, the character of Charles cannot be betterillustrated than by the nature of his amusements.He is known to have been extremely fond of beheadinganimals, and afterwards dissecting them ; he alsoperformed all the functions of an executioner andof a butcher with singular precision and address.He was accustomed to work at the forge, and to makethe barrels of muskets and harquebusses with his ownhands. He was equally dexterous at striking coinsor medals, whether in gold or silver, and so perfectwere his imitations as to deceive the nicest eye.We have heard much of the pastimes of princes ; andamong others of a less sanguinary kind, Charles, onone occasion, introduced ten thieves, common cut-purses,into the drawing-room of the Louvre, duringa crowded ball and festival ; he gave them orders toexercise their utmost address, at the expense of theguests ; he watched their feats of dexterity, lookedtfVILLA MADAMA. 131over the proceeds of their night's adventure, exceedingin value 1500 crowns, and even permitted them topocket the spoil. Then dismissing them, he declared,with no idle menace, that if he ever heard of their being-engagedin the same traffic, he would himself string themup in a row upon the gibbet. He was addicted, indeed,to every kind of wild, or, what is termed, practicaljoke, and so much was he in the habit of it withhis friend the Count De La Rochefoucault, that on theassassins of St. Bartholomew knocking at his door,the unfortunate Count imagined it to be the kinghimself, with whom he had been playing the nightbefore, bent on some youthful frolic ; with this idea herose from his bed and dressed himself, exclaiming allthe time, " These are just the tricks of the late king,your father, but you will not catch me so." He ranand opened the door, and received more than onedagger in his bosom. On leaving the palace thenight before, the king would have kept him in hisown cabinet, but, on his refusal to stay, observedlaughing, ' It is the will of God, — there goes a deadman!" If we add to the wholesale murders andassassinations of the period, the immense loss of livesby duels, as they are described in the Memoirs ofD'Aubigne, the picture of a profligate court and corruptedpeople will be complete. The battle, by swordand dagger, was reduced to a regular science, andthe most accomplished men of the age incurred thegreatest expences, and made long journeys, for thepleasure of meeting in their shirts to decide their relativemerits in the noble art of defence. D'AubigneK 2132 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.himself set out from the vicinity of Orleans to ,in Gascony, across a great part of France toencounter La Madeleine, with whom he had quarrelledon account of the reputation he had acquired by hishaving despatched eight gentlemen in single combatwithout losing a drop of blood. On the morning ofthe duel, he states, that he rose early and prayeddevoutly to God : such being the rage for this fatalfashion as to rank among its votaries even the mostreligious and elevated characters of the times.The practice was sometimes attended with a degreeof capriciousness, cruelty, and atrocity, difficult to bebelieved. A noted duellist having received a challenge,gave his rival a hint that it would be more prudent inhim to desist; but on being further urged, he declaredthat he would only consent to put him to death uponthe following terms : these were, that whichsoever ofthe two gained the victory, he should have the satisfactionof gibbeting, and burning, as well as killing,his adversary. It was agreed; and on going to thefield the challenger actually beheld a gallows readyprepared, and near it a funeral pile and a lightedtorch to set fire to itOne of the most formidable swordsmen of his agewas Baron De Vitaux, to whose rare coolness andskill an immense number, both of professors andamateurs, had fallen victims. His vengeance alsoknew no bounds ; and even the monarch on his thronetrembled at the idea of giving umbrage to a man ofsuch daring resolution and prowess. His renownspread over all Europe ; and foreigners who visitediVILLA MADAM A. 133the country were eager to behold a champion of theart who had never met with his match. He was atlength compelled to take refuge in Italy to avoid payingthe penalty of his life, — sought by the friends ofthe numerous rivals he had slain ; but soon weary ofhis exile, and having a new project in view, he sufferedhis beard to grow, and having assumed the disguise ofa lawyer, he hastened back to Paris to revenge himselfon a gentleman named Milhaud, who had killedthe baron's brother. Attended by two brothers, calledCouchant, whom he termed his lions, he attacked hisenemy, though supported by five or six men, in theopen street; and not only did he leave him dead, butsucceeded in making his escape. Afterwards, whentaken, he found no difficulty in obtaining a pardonfrom the crown. But the son of Milhaud havingattained to manhood, became eager to revenge hisfather, and, seeking out the baron, demanded instantreparation. The baron advised the young man todesist, but in vain ; they met beyond the walls, with asword and poignard, and stripped to their shirts. Itwas now the baron, betrayed by his good fortune, andhis contempt for so youthful a foe, paid the penaltyof his deeds, receiving a mortal wound of which heexpired on the spot.Such, in part, were the fruits of a system, foundedupon Machiavelli principles, and practised with trueItalian refinement by Catherine, who maintained herpower by opposing the leading parties against eachother. The excellent Chancellor Olivier had died ofgrief and horror on witnessing the enforcement of the134 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.sanguinary edicts of the crown. In vain did thevirtuous U Hospital oppose the fury of the torrent,refusing, as he had done, to affix his signature to theking's order for the Prince of Conde's execution. Itis a singular fact that none of the three sons ofCatherine, who died during her life-time, fell withoutstrong suspicions of having been poisoned ; all at theperiod of their death had begun to question herauthority, and she received a strong accession ofpower at the decease of each. Nor is it astonishingthat a woman who could systematically urge her ownchildren to the violation of every principle of justiceor of mercy, should, to atchieve her own ambitiousviews, embrue her hands in the noblest blood of France,and maintain her power even by the sacrifice of herown offspring. Though not sanguinary from disposition,state expediency was her supreme law ; and howfar such a law can justify, in the eyes of royalty, everycrime, the court-annals of modern Spain, Portugal,and Russia, dyed red in kindred blood, bear mournfulwitness to the world.Catherine being now regent, and the king of Navarregeneral of the kingdom, an event occurred whichthreatened to interrupt the negociations for peace.The Duke of Guise was invited to return to court,and, on his way, he stopped at the little town of Massy,where he went to hear mass. While thus engaged, acrowd of Calvinists, who were assembled in a barn,disturbed the ceremony by their hymns. A disputefollowed between his domestics and the people ; and,on interfering to preserve peace, the duke himself re-villaMADAiMA. 135civet a blow on the cheek from a stone. Perceivingthe blood flow, his attendants instantly drew theirswords, and killed or wounded above two hundred ofthe Hugonots. Redress was sought by the Prince ofConde in vain, and the regent soon beheld a civil war,chiefly produced by her own ambiguous and interestedmeasures, on the eve of taking place. The Duke ofGuise, followed soon after by Montmorenci, appearedwith a large force at Fontainebleau, while the King ofNavarre, on the other hand, anticipated them, bymaking himself master of the king's person, and removinghim along with the regent to a more secureresidence. It was not done without compulsion ; andsome of his party even threatened to throw the queen-motherinto the Seine if she dared to oppose the journeyto Paris. Appealing to Catherine, the young kingburst into tears of indignation as he was led away.The Prince of Conde, perceiving no other means ofsafety, declared for open war, and, marching towardsOrleans, arrived just in time to support the Hugonots,in making themselves masters of that city. This wasthe signal for general war; the King of Navarre joinedthe royal party, along with the Guises — Conde andColigni that of the Hugonots. Success, however, attendedthe former, and the kingdom became a scene ofrapine, violence, and desolation. The most barbarousexcesses were committed by both parties in a sanguinaryengagement at Deux, where the genius of theDuke of Guise again triumphed, even after the battleappeared lost. The constable, Montmorenci, was madea prisoner, and Coligni, after performing prodigies of136 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.valour, made a masterly retreat, leaving the Prince ofConde in the hands of the enemy. He was treatedwith honour and humanity by the Duke of Guise, who,having no better accommodation, lodged him in hisown tent, and even shared his couch with him, thoughhe had so eagerly sought his life, both on the scaffoldand in the field. The prince was heard to declarethat he could not sleep, but that the duke sleptsoundly the whole of the night. The distinguishedMarshal St. Andre, one of the triumvirate, fell in thisbattle. It was first reported to Catherine as being lost,upon which, in anticipation of the triumph of the reformeddoctrines, she is stated to have exclaimed, withan air of levity, ^' Well, then, we must for the futurepray to the Lord in French ! " All that she was anxiousto ascertain, was, with which party she could enjoy thelargest portion of absolute power. The next day, indeed,she evinced her mortification on learning thevictory of the duke, standing in awe, as she did, ofhis decided and commanding character : yet she worea face of joy, and ordered a series of balls and festivalsto celebrate the event. But another event soon changedthe whole aspect of the war ; the Duke of Guise, returningone evening, without his armour, from examiningsome works, attended only by one gentleman,an assassin lying in wait discharged three balls, whichstruck him in the left shoulder. He expired at theend of eight days, with the reputation of one of thegreatest generals of the age : his repulse of Charles V.and his taking of Calais from the English being includedill the number of his exploits. The MADAiMA. 137gent, as if conscious she would be suspected of instigatingthe deed, insisted upon being interrogated inthe duke's own chamber, before his family and anumber of the nobility. The assassin, Poltroon deMere, a gentleman of Anjoumois, was taken, whileasleep, by one of the duke's secretaries ; and, on beingput to the torture, he was led to accuse the virtuousColigny of having been a party to the commission ofthe deed. This, however, did not save him, and he wastorn in pieces by wild horses — the punishment reservedby law for regicides and traitors.By the duke's death, Catherine was left without arival in the cabinet : she directly entered into negociationsto amuse the leaders of the different parties,and sought to detach the Prince of Conde from theHugonots by the most magnificent offers. Aware ofhis love for one of her maids of honour, she secretlyinsisted upon the sacrifice of her virtue to draw himfurther into her snares ; but, when the unhappy girl'sruin was accomplished, Catherine expelled her withevery mark of virtuous indignation from court, and, insteadof being united to, as she had hoped, she wasabandoned by the prince. On hearing this shamelessconduct, it is said the consort of Conde was so deeplyaffected at so disgraceful a proof of his infidelity, as tohave died of grief.About this period, 1564, the queen-regent commencedthe magnificent structure of the Tuileries, onthe site of the palace of the Ourselves, in which herhusband Henry II. had expired. In this undertakingshe engaged the most distinguished architects of the138 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.times, whom, it is only' justice to state, she rewardedwith liberality, as she did most of the eminent charactersin other branches of literature and the arts.Magnificent in all her tastes, she would have beenadored in the country she had adopted, had the qualitiesof her heart corresponded with those of her intellect,and had she devoted herself to the honour andadvantage, not to the disgrace and ruin, of her familyand her country. By successively betraying every partywith which she acted, she became feared, hated, andat length despised by all ; and the memorable wordsin which Charles on his death-bed addressed hismother, declaring that she was the cause of the evilsthat had fallen on the country, and warning the Kingof Navarre not to trust himself in her hands, speakmore than volumes as to the real character of Catherine.Embracing his cousin, afterwards Henry IV.,the dying kiijg said, '' I recommend my wife anddaughter to your care, and God bless you ; but do nottrust yourself in the power of" . . he was aboutto name his mother, when, interrupting him, she cried,Do not say such a thing — say not that." " I mustsay it," replied Charles, " for that is the truth !" Whata reproach to a mother from the lips of a dying son !What a fearful thing is royalty, that can thus transformnature herself into all that is most hateful andloathsome to the soul.Henry HI., who succeeded him, was Catherine'sfavourite son : he had been elected to the throne ofPoland, and, on showing extreme repugnance to leaveFrance, Charles, from jealousy and resentment, hadVILLA MADAMA. 139commanded his instant departure, and his mother imploredhim to obey, giving him her promise that onlya brief period should elapse before his recall. Theaffairs of the kingdom under Henry grew more hopelesslyembarrassed and distracted than before : bybreaking the royal faith with the Hugonots the horrorsof civil war were repeatedly renewed. The celebratedMontmorenci, Conde, St. Andre, many of the mostnoble and virtuous of every party had perished in thefearful struggles that ushered in the execrable massacreof St. Bartholomew. After Coligni had fallen in thatnight of horrors, the brave Soubise, covered withwounds, we are told, after a long and gallant defence,was at last put to death under the queen-mother'swindows ; where, however incredible, the ladies of thecourt with unfeeling curiosity went to view his nakedcorpse, disfigured as it was. The bodies of the slaughteredHugonots were collected and thrown in heapsbefore the palace of the Louvre, to satiate the vengeanceof Catherine, who, it is said, expressed hergratification at so lamentable a spectacle. The Marshalde Savannas also, who had engaged among themost eager and ferocious in the execution of this vastpolitical murder, ran through the streets of Paris,crying, '* Let blood, let blood ! bleeding is alwayswholesome — in the month of August as well as inMay ! " Even Charles IX. himself, having onceovercome the terror and reluctance he felt whenyet upon the threshold of the fatal act, whollyinsensible of the character of a monarch or a man,personally assisted in the slaughter of his subjects;140 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.firing upon them with a long marquess from thewindows of the palace, and aiming at the fugitiveswhom he saw attempting to escape from the FaubourgSt. Germain.The head of the Admiral Coligni was carried to thequeen-mother ; and Charles, with several of his courtiers,went to survey the body which had been exposedto public view. Some of them turning away in disgustfrom the offensive smell, " The body of a dead enemy,"exclaimed Charles, imitating the Roman emperor,'* always smells sweet." The princes of the blood,Henry, King of Navarre, and the young Prince ofConde, had been spared, and, having been orderedinto the presence of the king, he commanded themwith many imprecations instantly to abjure their religion,or suffer death. The King of Navarre yielded,but the prince firmly refused, declaring he would neverdesert his religious principles, till Charles, half franticwith passion, addressed him in these few terrific words:Mort, Messe, ou Bastile ! "Every enormity which could be perpetrated stainedthe fearful week during which the royal butchery continued— more than 5000 persons of all ranks in thecapital, and 20,000 throughout the country, are believedto have fallen victims — the Seine was loadedwith dead bodies ; and, as a proof of the spirit thatactuated the royal councils, it is stated that a butcher,who entered the palace during the fury of the massacre,boasted to his emulating sovereign, while he laid barehis gory arm, that he had himself despatched morethan one hundred and fifty Hugonots. Such as wereVILLA MADAMA. 141afterwards taken were condemned to capital punishment,and, by an excess of barbarity difficult to imagine,Charles IX. was desirous of beholding their lastagonies. When hung at night, he commanded torchesto be raised up to the faces of the criminals, with aview of observing the effects which the sudden approachand progress of death produced upon theirfeatures.Catherine survived to an advanced period of life, andtill nearly the close of the reign of Henry III., whoseimpious, ferocious, and despicable character seemedeven to refine upon the horrid maxims inculcated byhis mother. She died in her seventieth year, and wasattended in her last moments by a physician namedSt. Germain. It is said that she had been cautioned,early in life, to bcM^are of St. Germain, which had ledher to avoid staying at the palace so named for anylength of time ; and it was jocosely remarked by theParisians, that, spite of her care, St. Germain hadended her at last.VICO Taro.Donius Albumen resonant,Et precepts Anno, et Tibur Incus.Thor.A SUCCESSION of landscapes, scarcely equalled inany part of the world, conduct the tourist, with intermitteddelight, from the Tiber, winding under theshadow of imperial Rome, to the lovely glens andvalleys, where it purls quietly along, as if rejoicing toforget the habitations of the Caesar, and their history,amid the harmonies of unchanging nature. Tivoli andthe Allan hills, and Vico Varo itself, lying embosomedamid green mountains, form a little district of sylvanbeauty which is as attractive from the variety, as fromthe loveliness, of the. scenery. The mountain has itsconvent or its castle — the valley its sparkling streamand white-walled village ; and, when the eye wandersinto the distance, it is not simply a mass of forestfoliage, or the monotonous grandeur of mountains thatfix the attention, but whatever is most lovely innature, associated with some object which at onceprevents the mind from trusting for its pleasure to themere reveries of the country. The ruined aqueducts,which so often cross the traveller's path in Italy, areconspicuous objects amid soft luxuriant scenery.They remind us more than castles or palaces of the convictTaro. 143edition of the country in its days of opulence : andtheir ruins consequently are more indicative of changeand poverty than those of more showy and magnificentstructures. On the road to Vico Varo there are tworuins of this description, and the scenery is repeatedlyheightened in its effect by the strange contrast theyform with their heavy crumbling masses, poised alongthe brink of the dells, to the bright wavy woods throughwhich they are traced.Vico Varo is, at present, a clean and pretty town,but retains little of the importance which in formerages induced the Romans to fortify it with a wall ofimmense strength. It is mentioned by Horace by thename of Varia, and its present similar appellation,with the ruins of its fortifications, are all that remainto awaken the recollection of its antiquity. Mr. Woodobserves that he heard of a temple here, but found instead,only a half Gothic octagonal chapel of moderndate. The anecdote he relates of his inquiry after thisbuilding will serve to show the state of the peasantryin the neighbourhood. ^' I had plenty of offers," sayshe, " to carry me thither, and to Vicenza, and thevilla of Horace, and I engaged a ragged little fellowfor that purpose : on the way he told me how manyAngles he had served, and what fine handsome menthey were ; and, of course, how generous, and howwell they had paid him. He inquired my name, and,when I had told him, he exclaimed, ' Bel nome!* era ilnome del Merito di Nostra Signora.' And I was immediately' Signor Giuseppe,' Signer Mio Giuseppe,'What a fine name ! it was the name of our la(l>'s husband !144 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.and ' Caro Mio Signor Giuseppe ' He then proceededto tell me he had gone to bed without supper, and hadeaten nothing that morning : (E nondimeno sto sempreallegro cost) : but a modification was added afterwards,that he had eaten nothing but the tops of the traveller'sjoy (clematis vital), which indeed we saw aparcel of women and children gathering for a similarpurpose I gave my young ragamuffin," continuesMr. Wood, " his dinner at Vicenza, and five paul whenI got to the gate of the convent, but he still beggedfor more, and followed me into the monastery, andinto my bed-room, to obtain it. I told the superiorhow much I had given, and he replied that it was toomuch, and that two paul would have been sufficient.All this passed in the boy's hearing, yet he still continuedhis importunity. The lower classes here seemto find no shame in begging, under any circumstances.As nothing is therefore lost by it, and they may possiblygain, they consider that it is foolish to lose anythingfor want of asking, or even of urging their demandsto the utmost." Strange is it, would a theoristbe apt to exclaim, that the beauty with which thesepeople are surrounded does not give them a greateraversion to mendicity and its attendant servile vices :but thus it is. Poverty, when it presses too closely onhuman beings, shuts both their hearts and senses tothat which makes music for the well-fed and happy.SAN COSIMATO.Ciua tibi Divin effigies et temple pueri.Virgil.The Franciscan convent of San Cosimato affordsanother instance of the good taste with which thefounders of monasteries have usually chosen the sitesof their establishments. San Cosimato stands beetlingon the edge of a rude precipice, the sternness ofwhich, with the gloom of the surrounding thickets, iswell calculated to inspire the most sombre reflections.But, solemn as is the aspect of the scenery at particularpoints, the solitary traveller has not far to go before hefinds himself surrounded with objects of quiet, gentlebeauty, which quickly soften the less genial feelingsthat may have taken hold of his imagination. Thehills, which here and there open into small dells of themost delicious verdure, give birth to numerous littlesprings, which, finding their way through the fissuresin the rocks, seem to invite the summer, with her wholetribe of wild flowers, to make a perpetual stay. Mr.Wood compares the country about this convent to thefinest parts of South Wales, but at the same timepoints out a striking difference ; the inhabitants of theItalian province having placed their villages on the very146 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.summit of the cliffs. " There is more cultivation,"says he ; " the wood is carried higher up the mountains,and the rocky points above are loftier and more abrupt.The villages are on the hill-tops ; and if youwere to imagine Settle placed on the summit of thehigh hills which rise behind it, or Griggleswick at thetop of the scar which bears its name, we shouldstill have a very inadequate idea of their situation."In the neighbourhood of the convent are someopenings in the rocks, which the people regard withveneration, as the supposed retreats of the celebratedfounder of the Benedictine order. There are severalcircumstances recorded in his life which agree wellwith the supposition that he spent some portion of histime in these wild caverns. He began his career byfleeing while a boy to a deep mountain-cave, whichwas impenetrable, except to steps which dared themost fearful precipices. In this solitude he was fedby the charity of a monk, who let his morsel of breaddown to him by means of a rope. His piety at lengthbecame generally known, and the brothers of a neighbouringmonastery forced him, notwithstanding hisentreaties to the contrary, to become their abbot.Such, however, was the strictness of the rule he instituted,that, in order to free themselves from theburden, the monks formed a plot to murder him. ButBenedict discovered their intentions; and, biddingthem recollect that he had told them from the beginningthey were unfit to live together, took hisdeparture into another district, and resumed hisausterities undisturbed.SAN COSIMATO. 147The history of saints and martyrs gives a solemnand not unpleasing interest to such scenes as these.They mistook their duty, perhaps, in forsaking theworld ; but their piety and virtue, as far even as itcould be practically exercised, were of the highestorder. Would, however, that we could say ofVallombrosa, and its kindred institutions, what hasbeen so beautifully said by Wanton of the monasteriesof England ! —INIuch can we pardon to th' ingenious muse ;Her fairy shapes are tricked by fancy's pen :Severer reason forms far other views.And scans the scene with philosophic ken.From these deserted domes new glories rise ;More useful institutes, adorning man,Manners enlarged, and new civilities,On fresh foundations build the social plan.Science, on ampler plume, a bolder flightEssays, escap'd from superstition's shrine :While freed religion, like primeval light.Bursting from Chaos, spreads her warmth divine.L 2Tarnishedjam parce rnilii, nee austere, Narnia, Quinto ;Perpetuo liccat sic tibi Ponte fui.Martial.Were the tourist in Italy compelled to limit hisvisit to a very small number of places, Narni wouldbe one in his catalogue. There is a beauty in thestream which flows through its fertile valleys, and inthe olive plantations that shade the precipitous mounton which the town stands, that might delay the mostimpatient traveller on his route, and make him forgetmany a more famed city, and hills and valleys ofhigher classical fame. One circumstance respectingNarni especially deserves to be noted. Full as itis of picturesque beauty, it has just sufficient ofantiquarian interest about it to give a sombre, quietgrace to the attractions conferred on it by nature.There is little in its neighbourhood to set invention onthe rack ; no monuments, bearing inscriptions which,once seen, disturb for months after the slumbers of theantiquary, arise amid its shades. The only object ofimportance is the ruined bridge, through the nakedarches of which the Nere pours its waters as fresh andjoyously as it did a thousand years ago. Nor is the spectator,when inclined to indulge in contemplating thecontrast thus afforded between the perishable thingsiNARNI. 149of man and the lasting works of nature, startled fromhis reverie by any doubts as to when the picturesquebridge before him was erected. The Emperor Augustusis universally allowed to have given directions for itsconstruction ; and the simple sentiment of venerationfor the massy ruins, remains to blend itself with thedelight inspired by the murmuring of the waters, theloveliness of the valley they irrigate, and the greencliffs which shadow them in their course. Tranquil,beautiful Narni ! we could well linger among thygroves, and recall with pleasure the dream of thysylvan solitude ; but, like the traveller who has onlyreturned for a momentary glance at some favouritespot, we must be contented with this passing tributeto thy beauty.TERNI.Nee desunt varia circum oblectamina vit.Stat 1 us.Terni, as well as the gay and lovely hills of Narni,has already attracted our attention ; and in the sameway as we returned for a passing glance at the latter,we look again for a while on Terni, with its wondrouscascade and magnificent landscapes. The town hasbeen described too particularly to require furthermention; and we shall therefore give M. Simon'samusing picture of the neighbourhood through whichthe traveller passes in his way to the most splendidobject of his search.The ascent," says he, " its long and steep, and inmany places cut into the perpendicular face of therock — a noble work performed by Pope Libertineabout seventy years ago. This princely road, abouttwo-thirds the way up, passes through a village whichseemed wholly inhabited by beggars — a sort of townrather, for an old wall swept round it on the brow ofthe hill. It bore on its elevated battlements an irregularsuccession of mean buildings, with sasheswindows and moss-grown balconies, out of which thetattered linen of each family was hanging to dry. Theinterior, of which we had a glimpse as we drovethrough, resembled a den of thieves much more thanTEIINI. 151a country village. Out of their murky holes a beggarlypopulation of women and children hurried tomeet us, wildly chanting tanta fame I — while the men,muffled up in their dark cloaks, one side thrown overthe left shoulder, a slouched hat over their black unshavenfaces, with a red feather or a bit of green, withred berries stuck in the hatband, stalked gloomily inthe rear. Thus escorted, we proceeded on foot througha very pretty natural wilderness, a sort of sheep-walkor goats' walk, with clumps of trees and bushes, tothe Velino, a rapid torrent, very full, and breakingfinely over the rocks of its rude channel. This channel,two miles in length, and very wide, is artificial ;but the hammer and chisel of twenty centuries haverendered it natural. We learn from Cicero that anindividual had it made simply to drain his countryvilla. Annoyed and alarmed by our company, whopressed round more and more, I thought it prudent tocome to an understanding with them ; which was, thatif they would turn back and wait for us, we shouldreward them handsomely, while, if they persisted infollowing, they would get nothing. A treaty was thusfinally concluded, and the conditions were so far kepton their part that they went no further ; but insteadof going back they made a full stop. From the fallwe afterwards could see our ragged regiment drawnup on the height where we had left them, watchingus, and on our return we were again closely surrounded."The road to the falls, notwithstanding the annoyancespointed out by M. Simon, has attractions15'2 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.amply sufficient to compensate the traveller for histoil. For a considerable way it is lined with refreshingshades of evergreen oak ; but at the village of Papilioit branches off into two paths, the one of which conductsto the summit of the rock from which the torrentis precipitated — the other to its base. The former ofthese roads, after ascending a steep limestone hill,runs for near three quarters of a mile over an almostlevel track, the surface of which is formed from theconcretions left by the water, and returns a hollowsound to the tread of the feet. Of the many spotsfrom which the traveller is directed to contemplate thefalls, the most advantageous is that on which stands alittle summer-house, said to have been built by Buonapartefor the accommodation of visitors. The firstpoint from which the water is hurled is at an elevationof about forty or fifty feet ; the second, or, as it istermed, the perpendicular part, falls from a height ofnear five hundred and ninety-eight feet ; and thedepth of the chasm through which it afterwards rushes,in one vast stream, into the Nere is said to be twohundred and forty : making in all a descent of eighthundred and thirty-eight feet.VALLOMBROSA.Vallombrosa ;Cost fu nominata una bahia,Sicca e bella, non men rcligiosa,E cortes a chiunquevi vena.Ariosto.Which crowns with her enclosure green,As with a rural mound, the champaign headOf a steep wilderness.Milton.The power of the poet is shown in few things moreremarkably than in that of his giving a perpetuity ofremembrance to the places he may chance to mentionin his song. What would the generality of Englishreaders have known of Vallombrosa, had not Miltonnamed it ? And who, since he spoke of it, hasnot dreamt of its tangled wilds, and dim, religiousbowers ; — of its awful groves, strewing the brookswith their autumnal leaves," and all the other sador solemn images of " Etruria shades !" But neverdid poet fix upon a richer scene from which to drawthe forms that people his world than Vallombrosa,The perfect solitude of its thickets, preserved fromintrusion by the height and almost impassable cragsof the mountain, fits it for the constant residenceof meditation, and of minds that have bidden adieufor ever to the world and its concerns. It has beenelegantly observed, by the author of the " Philosophy154 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.of Nature," that the founders of abbeys, and otherreligious houses, have evinced a remarkable taste inselecting the most delightful situations for their devotionalretreats. The woods and rocks, however,which give beauty or sublimity to the scene, create infact the solitude ; and the latter, in such a country asItaly, could rarely be found without the former. It isnot, therefore, in all instances that we can attributethe beautiful situation of a monastery to the tasteof its founders for the charms of nature. ButVallombrosa owed its selection to individual enthusiasm,and whatever strongly affects the mind andheart in conjunction, disposes to the love of scenery.The founder of this far-famed abbey was JohnGualbertus, a Florentine of noble family, who livedin the early part of the eleventh century. He wasled to think more seriously of religion than he hadhitherto done by a singular circumstance. One of hisrelations having fallen a sacrifice to the resentmentor avarice of some person, the murderer became anobject of pursuit to the rest of the family, who,according to the custom of the age, considered themselvescharged with the duty of avenging on his personthe death of their relative. It so happened thatJohn Gualbertus was the first to meet the criminalin a place which admitted not of his escape. Thatone must fall seemed the necessary result of thisrencounter. But whether the wretched man hadtruly repented of his crime, or was struck with asudden sense of fear that prevented his defendinghimself, he fell prostrate at the feet of Gualbertus,VALLOMBROSA. 155and solemnly besought him to spare his life for thesake of Jesus Christ. The appeal was hearkenedto; John felt his desire of revenge overpowered bynew sentiments of mercy; and, yielding to the benignimpulse, he bade the offender depart in peace.This occurrence made a powerful impression onthe mind of Gualbertus. No sooner was he leftalone than he hastened to a neighbouring church,and there, with fervent prayers, blessed the Almightyfor having given him grace to forgive so great anenemy. The pleasure he experienced from thisfirst act of religious devotion induced him to determinethenceforth to pass his days in the service ofGod, and utterly to forsake the world and its concerns.He was, for some time, opposed in this resolutionby his father ; but his mind was fixed on the attainmentof a virtue and holiness which he did not believecould be effectually pursued without retiring from allsecular intercourse. The firmness with which he persistedin his resolution at length overcame the unwillingnessof his relatives, and he was allowed toenter the Benedictine monastery of St. Minas, atFlorence. On the death of the abbot, his pietyrecommended him to the monks as the worthiest oftheir number to succeed the late superior, andhe was accordingly elected to the chief station inthe establishment. But he had no greater inclinationto incur the responsibilities of such an office than hehad to engage in the business of the world. Finding,therefore, that the brothers were intent upon forcinghim to accept the vacant dignity, he retired from156 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.the monastery, and entered that of Camaldoli, situatedbut a few miles distant from Vallombrosa.This institution, which almost equals in reputationthat which we are about to describe, had been butlately established by Saint Ronald, one of the mostdistinguished men of the age. Like Gualbertus, hewas descended from a family of rank, and, likehim, owed his conversion to a strong conviction ofthe wretched state of morals which prevailed in histime. He had often, it is said, when pursuing thepleasures common to his age and rank, felt disgustedwith their folly ; and often, when he happened inhunting to find himself alone in some retired spotof the forest, he would exclaim " How much betterwould it be to spend one's life amid these tranquilshades than to pass it in the midst of the world !"These feelings received a considerable accession ofstrength, when his father, who is described as a manof the most violent passions, obliged him to be presentat a duel which he fought with some one who hadoffended him. From that moment Ronald determinedto pass his life in religious solitude, and topromote, by every means in his power, the same dispositionin others. His efforts, in respect both to himselfand to those whom he addressed, proved eminentlysuccessful. The growth of his piety was accompaniedby a corresponding increase of reputation and influence.He was thus soon enabled to form a littlecommunity of persons devoted to the same principlesas himself; but even while still a young man, andunder the tutelage of a hermit, to whom he had joinedVALLOMBROSA. 157himself, he had an important share in persuadingPeter Creole, the Doge of Venice, to resign hisill-acquired dignity. After a long life, of variedlabour, and some peril, he founded the monastery ofCamaldoli, and soon after died.The discipline of that establishment was of thestrictest kind, and Gualbertus remained there a considerabletime. But at length the superior expressedhis desire that John should be chosen his successor,which induced him to retire from this monastery ashehad before done from St. Minas. On his wayfrom Camaldoli, he passed through the wild, untroddendistrict of Vallombrosa. The united beauty andsolitude of the place arrested his steps, and he resolvedupon passing the remainder of his days among itsshades. There was a small spot of level ground, inthe heart of the rugged precipice, which seemedformed expressly for the abode of a little brotherhood,intent only on the worship of God and the exerciseof personal austerities. The stern Appennines hemmedit in with their rocks and woods. Not an echo wasto be heard that bore any murmur of the peopledvalleys. Here and there a stream, gushing throughthe interposing crags, broke the silence but not thesolitude of the scene; and the birds, that sung hiddenin the impenetrable foliage of the forests, were bythe very nature of their race afraid, like the holyhermit himself, of being subject to man, or hiscustoms. In this lonely spot, therefore, Gualbertustook up his residence. There were already, it is saidby some writers, two eremites in the neighbourhood ;158 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.and, having united himself to them, he obtaineda grant of the glade from the superior of anabbey to whom the district pertained. He was soonjoined by several persons who venerated him for hissignal piety; and, a humble building having beenerected, a brotherhood was formed, of which heremained the venerated head to the end of his days.The rule which he followed in the government of thesociety was that of St. Benedict, in the strictestform ; and there is sufficient evidence to prove thathe felt the necessity of adhering to it, as the onlysafeguard against the corruptions which, even insolitude, lead men to imitate the world. His feelingsrespecting the growing vices of the monastic orderswere strongly shown whenever he saw them indicatea love of luxury or ostentation. A legend reportsthat, going on a visit one day to a neighbouringmonastery, he was astonished and disgusted to find thatthe building had more the appearance of a lordlyresidence, than of one intended for the simpleshelter of the servants of Jesus Christ. "What!"exclaimed he, addressing the abbot, " have you builta palace with the money which might have nourisheda multitude of the poor and distressed ?"Then, turning towards a little brook which ran near,he said, '' O Almighty God, who of the least thingsart often pleased to make the mightiest, may I seethis little stream overthrow this edifice, so unworthyof our profession !"The legend states that, soon after he retired, thebrook overflowed, and, by the increased strength andVALLOMBROSA. 159rapidity of its current, loosening the rock on whichthe monastery was built, brought down the sumptuousstructure. On another occasion he proved not onlyhis fear of luxury, but his disinterestedness. Havingheard that a person had entered the establishmentwho had bequeathed it his possession to the prejudiceof his natural heirs, he went and demanded the testament,and taking it in his hand immediately tore itin pieces. His humility was also shown in anothermanner, when Pope Stephen IX., in passing near Vallombrosa,sent messengers with an intimation that hedesired to see him. John, however, was unwell, andexcused himself on that plea. The pope again sent ;and, expressing the most earnest wish for his company,told the messengers that if he could come in noother way he must come on his bed. Excuses werenow in vain, and the abbot, believing that the pope'searnestness was simply the result of a useless curiosity,prayed God that he would not oblige him to have hispride or vanity thus pampered. His prayer, it issaid, was heard. A violent storm came on as theywere carrying him down the valley, and the attendantsfound themselves obliged to return with speed to theabbey.Such was the founder of the monastery of Vallombrosa; nor will the traveller, as he throws himselfbeneath the shade of the old venerable trees thatfrown about his path, forget the virtues, the benevolence,and humility of John Gualbertus. Beautifulas these wild scenes are by nature, he will now feelhow doubly interesting they are rendered to the human160 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.mind by any connexion with human history. HadVallombrosa been an uninhabited valley, far lesslovely would have seemed its peace and solitude ; lessmusically would its brooks have murmured to theear of 'melancholy ; less solemnly even would theleaves of its shadowy forests have fallen on the watersof the stream.Mr. Forsyth has left an interesting record of themanner in which he was treated by the brothers ofthe convent, when he visited it in 1801, at whichperiod it was still in safety and affluence. " Beingintroduced," says he, "by a letter to the abbot, andaccompanied by the brother of two Vallombrosans,I met here a very kind reception. Those amiablemen seem to study hospitality as a profession. Peopleof all ranks and religions are equally welcome, andentertained without either officiousness or neglect.Though the monks then resident were fourteen innumber, their familia, including novices, lay-brethren,menials, and workmen, exceeded a hundred. Insummer, the Forester of the abbey is usually fullof strangers ; and, during the winter half-year, all theindigent neighbours flock here for their daily loaf.Such indiscriminate hospitality is, however, but thevirtue of barbarous society. Baneful to industry andindependence, it feeds poor men, but it keeps thempoor ; it gives them a lodging, but it weans themfrom home. Not that I grudge this community themeans of being so bountiful ; I rather grudge it theyouth, the talents, and the active powers which theinstitution entombs : I grudge it the very virtues ofVALLOMBROSA. 161the men whom I found here. Those virtues tendonly to palliate its defects, and correct its generalinfluence, by the good which they do in detail.These excellent men bring economy to the aid ofbeneficence. While they give bread to hundreds,to themselves they allow but the modest stipend ofeighteen crowns a year : yet the revenues of theabbey are about 40,000 crowns. Its factories arepalaces ; its farms are highly cultivated ; and itstenantry wealthy: while the institution, by maintainingthe same unalterable plan, and training allits members to the same habits, secures itself fromthe misgovernment which a private inheritance isoccasionally exposed to. The private gentleman,perhaps, spends his time more profitably to thepublic revenue. His rents do not return so directlyas the monk's into the mass of the people, whichis the ultimate destination of all property ; but theyreturn through more taxable channels, through cellarsand shops."MFIESOLE.A thousand fantasiesBegin to throng into my memory,Of calling shapes, and beck'ning shallows dim,And airy tongues that syllable men's names.On sands, and shores, and desert wilderness?.Milton.The neighbourhood of Florence is rich in agreeableassociations. Her splendid history fills the mind ofthe traveller, as he walks her streets, with images ofthe past that will ever make her name glorious. Butmemory loves the calm and silent retreats of ruralsolitudes. She loves, too, the visions of scenes thateven in their actual existence partook of a spiritsoft and tranquil as her own. In Florence, theshadowy dream of glory that arises on her pathseems agitated with a still bold and restless spirit.The genius of her history sits clad in her robe andcap of liberty, with more of daring than sorrow inher look, and delighting more in Dante the fierceGhibelline, and Lorenzo the magnificent, the fatherof Ducal Medici, than in Dante the poet, and Lorenzothe Platonist. But we pass the gates of the city,and the soft amenities of stream and shade — thepleasant farm-lands — the mild variety of hill andflowery dell, win our thoughts from the images whichhad given a hurried motion to the imagination ; andwe begin to enjoy all the luxury of recollections keptFIESOLE.from being tame by the vicinity of scenes yet hauntedby the grandest of spirits — but deep and tender,because cherished by the bland tranquillity of nature.How sweetly does the green hill of Fiesole, with itscypress and ilex groves, intermingled with the darkpine, rise before the traveller who has just left thestreets of Florence ! The shades of her greatest menseem to have accompanied him on the way; and, asheenters the calm recesses of the lovely village, andlooks down on the gentle Arno, gliding brightly atthe foot of the mountain, he half thinks himself oneof the little circle of philosophers whom the excellentLorenzo de' Medici used to assemble here, to renewthe pure and beautiful dreams of Plato's academy.Both Position and Milton have spoken with delightof this enchanting spot. The first of these writershas described it in Latin verse of the greatest beauty,and fondly alluded to the pleasure he enjoyed therewithhis enlightened patron :Hie resonant bland tibi pinus amata susurro ;Hie vega confers ins ibi lat aura cypresses :Hie seatebris salit, et bullantibus incita venusPure eoloiatos interstrepit unda apollos.Talis Faesuleo lentus meditabar in intro,Rue suburban medium, qua mons sacer urbem,Masonic, longitude alumina depict arne,Qua bonus hospitium felix, placidamque quieterIndulgent Laurels, Laurels non ultima PhoebeGloria, aetatis Laurels fide anchor Music.Here thy loved pines with grateful murmurs sigh,The gale through cypress shades flits whispering b} ;And here from bubbling veins fresh fountains pourTheir waves along the pebbly marbled shore.M 2164 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Fiesole ! in these thy rural bowersHow oft I've passed the meditative hours !Or, wandering 'mid the Medicean groves,Saw from the sacred brow where Arno lovesTo lead his waves in winding folds alongThe fair Devonian city famed for song !For here Lorenzo, who in Phoebus' trainMight well of glory the best gifts disdain,Lorenzo, of the muse the sure support,Oft holds his peaceful, hospitable court.To an English ear, the mention of Fiesole by Miltongives it a still higher poetical consecration. It wouldbe difficult to find, in the whole compass of universalpoetry, a sublimer comparison than that in which itsname thus incidentally occurs :His ponderous shield,Etherial temper, massy, large, and round,Behind him cast ; the broad circumferenceHung on his shoulders like the moon, whose orbThrough optic glass the Tuscan artist viewsAt evening from the top of Fiesole,Or in Valdarno, to descry new lands.Rivers, or mountains, on her spotty globe.Nor are the agreeable associations excited by theallusions of the poets at all weakened in their effectby the mention made of the philosopher Galileo. Itis the observation of the celebrated D'Alembert, in histreatise on the Connexion of the Sciences, that, nextto Homer, no man deserved more admiration in the oldworld than Archimedes, and that the study of mathematicsexercises the imagination not less than poetry.The remark of the French philosopher is one of thosestartling propositions which amuse the mind, howeverthey may fail to convince it ; but there are someFIESOLE. 165instances on record which give it a much greatersemblance of truth than we are at first willing toallow it can at all possess. Galileo on Fiesole, or inhis solitary dwelling at Camaldoli, presented himselfto the musing eye of the poet in a far different lightto that which he appears in to an ordinary thinker.He who knew that philosophy was " musical as isApollo's lute" had an instinctive feeling of the truth,when the recollection of the calm, bright Fiesole, reposingin the azure beauty of an Italian night, calledup the vision of Galileo.We must, however, again turn from these quietscenes, and leave poets and philosophers, to meditateon the busy page of Florentine history, — on the annalsof that city which we must now imagine ourselvescontemplating from the spot where Position sat, whenhe sang the praises of Lorenzo, and looked withrapture on the pure Arno, gliding, as it were, in thevery light of poetry, among the poplar groves ofthe town. In making this transition, we may remarkthat Fiesole was not always the tranquil retreat itnow is. It was a considerable place before Florenceor even Rome itself existed. It was on its hills thatCataline met for the last time the forces of the Senate ;nor was it till the eleventh century that Florencesubjected its fierce inhabitants to her sway.Here, therefore, resuming the historical sketch ofFlorence and the neighbouring states, we shall takea rapid view of some of the more remarkable eventswhich distinguished their early and more chivalrouscareer, and which it was found impossible to dwell166 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.upon in the last volume. The wars with the Pisans,the strange and daring character of the leaders, andthe restless ambition which engendered dissensionsthroughout the whole of the free states of Italy, preparingan easy prey for foreign spoliation, — all deserveto be considered, as the primary sources of thosegreat political evils and embarrassments which stampedtheir future unhappy destiny. Had they rested contentedwithin their just and natural boundaries, cultivatedinternational peace and security, and viedwith each other in genius, industry, and commercialenterprise, in place of striking at each other's independence,Italy would have presented a truly formidablebarrier to the gigantic growth of moderndespotism in Europe.It is a good political maxim, that any state whichaims at undue power must sacrifice itself in theattempt, inasmuch as it is opposed to every admittedlaw, whether human or divine. This truth wasstrikingly exemplified in the Florentine wars with Pisa,and in the life and actions of one of the chief instrumentsof his own and his country's fall, — Count Ugo-lino de* Ghirardeschi. He commenced his dark andturbulent career about the year 1275, when the twogreat factions which divided Italy had already involvedin their fanatic zeal and ruthless lust of sway some ofthe most distinguished families belonging to differentstates.The count, a Guelf by profession, had risen bydegrees to so high a station in his native city as todirect nearly the whole of its civil and military affairs.FIESOLE. 167It was not long, therefore, ere he fell under thesuspicion of the people ; but so little did he giveattention to the murmurs of the storm, that a revoltwas organized by some of the heads of the citizens,and a general outcry raised for his immediate exileas an enemy to the public liberty. It was in vainUgolino sought to oppose the torrent by the usualmeans; he was overpowered, and compelled to seekrefuge beyond the walls of the city. He instantlyrepaired to Florence, and joined the most formidableand detested foe of his country.The Florentines were always eager to profit by anypolitical calamity, and they received the renegadecount with open arms. They even appointed himCaptain general of a part of their forces : and, asearly as July following, marched upon the Pisan territories,which they laid waste without deigning toassign the most trivial motive. In this first inroadthey got possession of Vicopisano and some othercastles, after which they returned in triumph toFlorence. The Pisans were the more greatly exasperatedby this insulting attack, from the fact ofits having been conducted at the instigation of a rebel.They had suffered not a little ; and they prepared foraspeedy revenge. By the month of September theyhad collected a tolerable army, and hastened toretaliate ; nor did the Florentines refuse the challenge,and a sharply-contested engagement tookplace at Castel d' Asian. After a great display ofstrength and courage on both sides, the Pisans wererouted with tremendous slaughter ; they lost a number168 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.of prisoners, and the castle fell into the enemy'shands, and was given by them to the people of Lucca.Animated by this event, the exiled party, unitedwith the Florentines, and led by Count Ugolino, againattacked the Pisans, carrying terror and devastationwherever they appeared. The political pretext advancedby the invaders was the reinstatement of theGuelfs in their native city ; but their renegade commanderhad far other views.Too sensible of their inferiority, the Pisans declinedan open engagement, but employed themselvesin erecting an immense rampart of ditches, to theextent of more than ten miles, commencing nearPontadera, and stretching to within a short distanceof Pisa. It was called the Fosse Arnonico, from itscommunication with the Arno, and it was fortifiedwith stockades and tower-guards upon a plan supposedto render it impregnable to the enemy.Perceiving its strength, the Florentines declined anopen attack, and had recourse to stratagem. Havingascertained there was no point of approach, where itwould be safe to attempt a passage, except that ofits union with the Arno, less watched on account ofits supposed security, they resolved, by making a feintelsewhere, to carry their whole force on this communication.Making a powerful demonstration ona part most remote from this position, while thePisans hurried thither to the attack, the renegadecount with the other chiefs made good their passage,and, followed by an overwhelming force, fell on thePisan army, both in flank and rear, which, struck withFIESOLE. 169surprise, after a heroic struggle and many individualacts of bravery, was thrown into complete confusion,with the loss of a large number of prisoners. Theresult of this victory on the part of the Florentineswas fatal to the independence of Pisa. Compelledto sue for peace at the hands of her more powerfuland artful enemy, she was condemned to the humiliationof restoring the exiled citizens to their rank ;in particular three of the most obnoxious families —those of Count Ugolino, the Upezzinghi, and theVisconti ; besides ceding to the people of Lucca thetwo castles of Castiglione and Cotton.Thus reinstated in more than his former authority,the count had the policy to conduct himself withsingular courtesy and moderation, insomuch thatthe people, in a short time, began to confide in him,entrusting to his management some of the mostimportant negociations in the state. In this laudablecourse he persevered until the year 1284, when he wasmade admiral of the Pisan fleet, amounting to onehundred galleys, intended to act against the Genoese.The naval warfare between these two states hadcommenced as early as 1278, the deadly rivalshiphaving taken its origin in some trivial dispute betweentheir respective merchants at Constantinople. Suchwas the inveteracy with which it was carried on that bothrepublics put forth their utmost resources to destroyeach other, and had suffered in a nearly equal degree.The Pisans had last sustained a severe defeat ; and,exasperated at their loss, they made incredible exertionsto place themselves again upon an equality,170 THE Landscape ANNUAL.giving the supreme command to Ugolino, and forhis seconds Andreotto Saracen, and Alberto Orsini,their Podesta. The flower of their nobility joinedthe fleets, and the entire wealth and vigour of thestate were staked upon the enterprise. With thisnoble armament the count sailed direct for the portof Genoa, and there, as a bitter insult to the enemy,he shot a number of silver arrows into the city, atthe same time challenging and lavishing the mostcontemptuous epithets upon the Genoese, for notcoming forth to meet him. The Pisans afterwardsburnt what shipping they found in the port ; andsetting sail for Varale, where they committed the samedepredations, they went and cast anchor at Leghorn.They had hardly retired when the Genoese admiralZaccaria, who had been in search of the Pisans,appeared in sight. Such was the rage of the Genoesethat they would not allow him to enter the port,but, calling the whole of their naval force together,which amounted to one hundred and thirty galleys,they placed it under the command of Alberto Doria,with orders to seek out and annihilate the Pisan fleet.It had then returned to Pisa, but, on learning theapproach of the Genoese, sailed forth amidst theshouts and acclamations of the whole people. Theymet, and joined battle near the rocks of Memoria ; andall that skill and courage could achieve was broughtinto play; little time was allowed, for missile andspear, the ardour being such on both sides as toimpel every vessel to board its rival, and the two fleetsthus grappled presented a scene of combat moreFiesole 171resembling that on land than upon sea. The conflictcontinued thus during many hours, without victoryinclining in favour of either, when, seizing the opportunity,the Genoese concentrated their efforts againstthe Pisan capitan; and, having boarded, tore downher colours, scattering the fragments to the winds,from which moment the result was no longer doubtful.Towards the close of the battle, also, the Pisanswere betrayed ; for Ugolino, instead of bearing downon the enemy with his galleys at the most importantjuncture, basely deserted the station he had takenup, and bore for Pisa, spreading the tidings of adefeat, which, for the worst political reasons, he hadbeen mainly instrumental in producing. The commanderhaving fled, a total discomfiture was theresult ; twenty-eight galleys remained in the handsof the Genoese, a large number were sunk, and onlya few dismantled vessels reached the port.Pisa was thrown into universal despair; and inthe midst of her sufferings the Count of Ghirardeschi,having thus treasonably freed himself from most ofhis enemies or rivals, resolved to seal his country'sfate by usurping the remains of her freedom. Seizingthe moment when his noblest fellow-citizens hadbeen consigned to death or captivity, he convokedthe general council, and, under plea of providing forthe public safety, prevailed upon the distracted members,by motives of fear or interest, to elect himCapitan delle Magnate, a sort of dictator withalmost absolute dominion.The next object which Ugolino had in view was172 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.to confirm himself in his power by promoting anunion between Florence and Pisa; and this hecarried on the grounds of expediency, in order not tobe engaged with enemies both on sea and land, andto bring over the Florentines to assist them againstGenoa ; but in reality to establish him in hisabsolute rule. Wholly indifferent to the welfare orreputation of his country, he made a disgracefulcompact with Florence, by which Pisa was boundto deliver up a number of her most important castles,besides other concessions of a humiliating kind.Owing also to this treaty, the Genoese pursued theiradvantages with far more inveteracy than before,plundering the unfortunate Pisans whithersoever theydirected their course. The citizens ardently wishedto restore their fleet, and ransom the prisoners ; butboth were opposed by the count as being inimicalto his designs.Meanwhile, he was engaged in rebuilding theTower del Porto, and appointed Guglielmo Alberti,as his lieutenant ; his next step was to arrogatethe title of Captain of the People, and take uphis residence in the Palace of the Lords, fromwhich he issued his commands as master of thecity. Marking the change in his deportment, manyof the citizens began to suspect his motives ; inparticular Nine Visconti, the Judge of Gallura, who,albeit the nephew of Ugolino, was the first to laythe train for a regular conspiracy. He brought abouta secret meeting of all the Ghibellines who had beenbanished from Pisa; he farther introduced themFIESOLE. 173into the castle of Pontadera, which they held on hisaccount, besides fomenting the civil distractions invarious other districts, and in Pisa itself, until thewhole became divided into two factions, — namely,those of the judge, and of the count.It so fell out, that, just at this period, a naturalson of Ugolino, along with several of his followers,killed one Cano Scornigiani, belonging to thejudge's party, and a young man very generallyrespected and beloved. So greatly did this incensehis friends, and the party, that a tumult was theconsequence ; and nothing but cries of " Death tohim who will have no peace with Genoa !" was heardto resound on all sides ; but they were not joinedby any considerable body of the people ; and forthat time the revolt was appeased. The Judge ofGallura, having failed here, had recourse to othermeans ; he sought to exasperate the citizens againstUgolino, on the ground of his having taken up hisresidence at the Palace of the Lords, as a proof ofthe tyranny which he was attempting to establish. Thepeople were on the point of rising in arms, andwere only prevented by several influential men, who,deprecating their rashness, urged them to delay thehour. They then submitted that the matter shouldcome under the jurisdiction of the magistrates andthe Uffiziali delle Art.Count Ugolino, dreading open violence, consentedto abide by the decision of the officers, and by themhe was admonished '^ to reside in his own house like agood citizen, and not to dictate in the affairs of the174 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.republic." Dissembling his rage, he obeyed ; but lostno time in collecting a large body of his partizansand troops, an example which was as eagerly embracedby the judge and his followers. At thisjuncture the Podesta of Pisa arrested a certainCoccio di Guido, for contravening the existing lawwhich forbade the carrying of arms. He was arelative of Count Ghirardeschi, who, on learninghis imprisonment, sent an order to the Podesta torelease him ; but the latter refused, in the apprehensionthat he would by so doing subject himselfto the imputation of being one of his partizans. Onthe ensuing night, however, the count, indignant atthis contempt of his authority, took a company oftroops, and, going to the palace, instantly set theprisoner at liberty ; then, turning the Podesta outof doors, he ordered his own banners to be hoistedon the walls ; and, having garrisoned it with hisfollowers, he retraced his steps to his own house.Aware that the opposite faction had originated withthe Judge of Gallura, Ugolino now secret resolved tocut him off, whatever should ensue ; and the better toeffect this he listened to the suggestions of the ArchbishopUbaldini, a man of some authority, and of awily, plotting character, which rendered him as dangerousas he was ambitious. He began by throwingout the strongest insinuations against the judge ; andthey soon came to a perfect understanding as to themeasures to be employed, either to kill, or imprisonhim for life. His entire party was to be exiled ordestroyed ; and, in order that Ugolino might not beFIESOLE. 175suspected of having any part in these transactions,he left Pisa, and repaired to Setting, intrusting theexecution of the plot to Ubaldini.By great good fortune, the judge received intelligenceof what was going on, and had time to withdraw fromPisa with the whole of his party, and take possessionof the castle of Calcinaga, in his own jurisdiction.Hardly had he retreated from the city when the archbishop,with a number of his followers, went armed tothe Palace of the Commons, where he fixed his residenceas the absolute lord of the city. Intelligenceof the judge's departure no sooner reached the countthan he hastened his return to Pisa, and felt not alittle puzzled and dismayed when he beheld the goodprelate conducting every thing with the hand of amaster. He received a hint that the count was in nowant of a colleague in the government ; but he couldnot be made to understand the force of the argument,the love of reigning, so attractive to every order ofanimals, great and small, making him deaf to everyappeal of the kind. The supporters of both sidesnow interfered, and it was agreed that the countshould resume the reins of government ; and thearchbishop retired to his usual ecclesiastical residence.In this manner did Count Ugolino della Ghirardeschibecome absolute lord of Pisa ; and, throwing off themask, carried on the public affairs without the interventioneither of the magistrate or the council. Butthe Genoese war still continued to make the countunpopular; for it was known that, so far from showingany disposition to restore to their friends the unhappy176 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.prisoners who lingered in captivity, he used everyeffort to foment discord and dissension. The archbishopwas on the alert to increase the discontent ofthe people, being instigated by the deepest hatredtowards the count, for having succeeded in deprivinghim, by means of arbitration, of the princely power hehad assumed. His malice might, nevertheless, haverankled in his own breast, had the count known how toexercise his new dignity with courtesy and moderation ;but wanton cruelty has been invariably observed tofollow in the footsteps of successful usurpation. Itwas by such means he sought to confirm his authority ;nor is the doctrine yet exploded, — too many examplesin modern times showing the decided tendency of ill-wonpower to sustain itself by any means, and to aimonly at undivided and absolute control.* The firstvictim was Anselmo, Count of Carrara, whom hecaused to be strangled on account of his being afavourite with the people ; and a number of the bestcitizens were exiled for the same reason: admitting, bysuch acts, that he lived in constant terror of seeing hisself-assumed authority snatched out of his hands.In the year 1288, the sufferings of the people wereaggravated by a famine, which gave rise to bitter complaints,and denunciations against the policy of theirruler, for neglecting to provide for the arrival of sogreat an evil. A nephew of Ugolino, feeling deeplyAs a curious illustration, I may here refer to the absolute Czar of all theRussia, and to the citizen King of France, both of whom were raised totheir thrones over the lilacs of the elder and legitimate claimants, andestablished as real a despotism as could have been exercised by a Constantineor a Charles.FIESOLE. 177the public calamity and the reflections upon his uncle,conversed with him one morning upon the extent ofthe evil, advising him to attempt some remedy, whileyet time, to give satisfaction to the public. Scarcelyhad the noble-minded youth uttered these words whenthe count, suspecting that he wished to cultivate thefavour of the people, in a moment of anger attackedhim with his poignard, crying, ^' You, too ! would yourob me of my power !" — and after grievously woundingwould have killed him, had he not been rescued fromhis grasp by the attendants.Among other persons whom the uproar called to thespot was a nephew of the Archbishop Ubaldini and aparticular friend of the wounded youth. Borne awayby honest indignation, he inveighed bitterly againstUgolino, reproaching him to his face with the epithetof a cruel tyrant, which so incensed the brutal countthat, seizing a weapon which lay at hand, he struckhim a blow which laid the speaker dead at hisfeet. The body, bathed as it was in gore, was carriedforthwith to the residence of the archbishop,who on first beholding it was struck speechless, andso remained gazing upon the corpse of his favouritenephew, with fixed eye and quivering lip, but withoutshedding a tear. At length, recovering hisrecollection, and mastering the rising indignationof his soul, he turned to the spectators, and, withthe singular cunning and presence of mind whichmarked his plotting genius, he observed, " This is notthe body of my nephew, and I know Count Ugolinoto be incapable of such an act ; you would deceiveN178 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.me ; take it away, and never let me hear mention of itagain !"But, like a secret and suppressed fire, which onlyrequires more air and space to burst forth withirresistible fury, the hate and deep-seated revenge ofthe prelate burnt only the more intensely within.Brooding over schemes of horrible retaliation, he, forsome days, appeared perfectly serene and cheerful, andat the end of that time he called together a few ofhis most confidential friends. He then gave a looseto his feelings, heaping upon Ugolino every reproachwhich his most violent, unnatural, and crueltyranny could dictate to injured man. Such was theeffect of his appeal on those who heard it, as to leadthem to adopt the resolution of freeing the countryfrom the yoke, or perishing in the attempt. The conspiracyspread with incredible rapidity, and such wasthe secrecy preserved that the tyrant had not the leastintimation of its existence. After various consultations,it was agreed the first day of July shouldwitness their deliberate assembly in the church of SanBastinado, where the declaration of peace with theGenoese, and the ransom of their fellow-citizens,should be unanimously given out. It was expectedthat the council of the magistrates, and the heads ofthe useful arts, would attend ; and on the arrival of theday, in the presence of Ugolino, the questions werebrought forward in the church. After a considerablediscussion, however, nothing was resolved upon, andthe meeting was dissolved. Perceiving that nothinghad been done, it was resolved by the heads of theFiesole. 179people to call another council on the same morning, —to come to some decision before the count shouldanticipate their movement. This excited his suspicion ;he dispatched one of his sons to assemble the wholeof the Guelfs in arms, which no sooner reached theears of the archbishop than he summoned the conspirators,and informed them that they must instantlyrush to arms. The call was obeyed, and the heads ofthe people traversed the streets, every where bearingthe republican banners, and uttering the astoundingshouts of " Long live the people ! Death to the tyrantand the traitor — Count Ugolino !" — and, while the airrung with their cries, the great bells, sounded only intimesof extreme emergency, began to peal, and thepeople to pour forth in throngs.The fearful tocsin struck upon the ear of the tyrant ;but he was not dismayed. With the few partizans,and the troops he had mustered, he made a gallantdefence, and more than once met the fury of the citizens,beating it back upon their own heads. Thestruggle soon became general, and was carried on withresolute desperation in different parts of the city :every street was a field of battle, and every house afortress ; and it was long before victory declared itself.But nothing could resist the increasing enthusiasm ofthe citizens ; they fought against a tyrant, and thepartizans of his cause began to waver, while more andmore rushing to the aid of the archbishop, the countwas compelled to retire to his palace, where he fortifiedhimself as well as he could. The archbishop, withoutallowing the enthusiasm of the people to subside,N 2180 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.called upon them instantly to raze the palace to theground, and he himself led on a powerful body to takeit by storm. It was then that desperation and fear ofa worse death led the assailed to make efforts almostsuperhuman ; they repulsed the people repeatedly withimmense loss ; but the archbishop, still undismayed,invoked the citizens to bring fire to the aid of thesword, and burn the palace and the tyrant together.He was obeyed ; immense piles of wood were heapedabout the base, and these, being ignited round aboutthe gates and doors, were thrown on all sides over thewalls. There was no valour could stand the test ofsuch an attack. The besieged party yielded to theirfate ; the palace was burnt ; and Count Ugolino, histwo nephews, and two sons of tender age, with manymore, were made prisoners ; among whom the tyranthimself was consigned to close captivity. The Pisans,having thus thrown off the yoke, began to re-organizetheir government. This done, they banished all therelatives of their former ruler, while they levelled hissplendid palace along the Arno with the ground.Lastly, they took into consideration in what mannerthey should dispose of their terrific prisoner, and ofhis sons and nephews. The archbishop, still mindfulof the loss of his nephew, desired, as a favour, that thecare of the prisoner and his relatives might be intrustedto him, if they thought they were in any wayindebted to him for their newly-acquired liberties ; itwas granted, and the prisoners were placed in hishands.There was an old tower, belonging to the CasaFIESOLE. 181Gualandi, situated in a square called the Sette Vie, orSeven Ways ; and the tower itself was accustomedto go by the same name ; since called the Tower ofFamine. There the archbishop commanded one ofthe interior chambers to be prepared, with strong ironworkextending over the whole walls, for the dungeonof the prisoners. When completed, he had themescorted thither under a strong guard, — namely. CountUgolino himself, his two sons, and two youngnephews. Being enclosed in this living grave, he issaid to have locked the door, and there leaving themto die of famine to have thrown the key into the Arno.This is the terrific tragedy which has been described insuch grand and forcible colours by the greatest ofItaly's poets.Such was the lamentable end of Ugolino and hisunfortunate family, a fate which powerfully illustratesthe observation of Tacitus, that *' governments basedupon violence are never of long duration."To quit this fearful episode : it was long beforePisa fell under the power of her more successfulrival. Florence had been engaged in a series of struggleswith the tyrants of Lombardy, being nearly theonly republic which had preserved her freedom up tothe close of the fourteenth century. The possession ofPisa, Leghorn, and Porte Pisano, would consolidate herfreedom, and was become the object of all her efforts.It was as strenuously opposed by the Genoese, untila new doge, in the interest of the King of France,determined upon making the liberty of Pisa an articleof traffic. He agreed to sell it to the Florentines for thesum of 400,000 florins ; but the Pisans rose, disarmed182 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.the garrison of the Lombard tyrants, and madethemselves masters of the city gates. The Genoesegovernor, who still possessed the citadel and castles, inconjunction with Gabriel Maria, then lessened thedemand, and required only 206,000, which he receivedfrom the Florentines. Half of this sum he wasto pay to his colleague ; but, instead of fulfilling hisengagement, he charged him with a plot against theKing of France, and caused him to be beheaded.Having thus become possessed of so many strongplaces, the Florentines offered the most favourableterms for the submission of Pisa. But the citizens,with a republican pride worthy their oldest exploits,answered only by laying siege to the citadel, whichthey retook at the point of the sword. They thendemanded peace, offering to reimburse the money paidby the Florentines ; consenting, at the same time, torecall from banishment Giovanni Gambacorta, longfavoured by their rival, and name him Captain ofthe People. But Florence required submission, notpeace ; and the indignant Pisans again flew to arms.They made incredible exertions to meet the Florentinesin the open field, by employing their entire wealthin purchasing the services of the bravest Condottieri,whom they collected from every quarter, and mingledin the ranks of their own devoted and patriotic defenders.The Florentines pressed on the war with extraordinaryvigour ; but it was not till the expiration of ayear that they were enabled to possess themselves successivelyof all the Pisan fortresses and territory ;until they were at length closely besieged within thewalls of the city. During the campaign of 1406, theFIESOLE. 183siege had been turned into a blockade ; but no privationscould subdue the spirit of this heroic people,even when sickness and famine were added to theseverity of their lot. Unhappily for them, an equaldegree of heroism was not evinced by the chief theyhad selected for his high talent. Gambacorta enteredinto a secret treaty with Florence ; for the sum of50,000 florins, and the county of Bagnio, he consentedto open the gates of Pisa to her rival, — an act oftreachery which took place on the nights of the eighthand ninth of November, 1406. The Florentines soughtto reconcile the vanquished citizens to their fate byevery means in their power; provisions in large quantitieswere distributed by the hands of the soldiers to thepeople ; but great numbers of the noblest citizens disdainedto live under the yoke, and removed with theirfamilies to other states. The young men even left thearmy to enlist in foreign service ; and the republic ofFlorence confirmed for a time her own freedom by destroyingthat of a rival. But the succeeding centurywitnessed her own fall, and by the arms of a familyonce her proudest ornaments and defenders. After thebanishment of Pietro de' Medici, Girolamo Savonarola,a Dominican monk distinguished for his eloquenceand energy of character, assumed the popular dictatorshipof the city. The Signora was filled 'vvithhis partizans, and the anathemas of the papal courtwere hurled at him without effect. The pontiff had atlength recourse to another plan ; he sent a Franciscanmonk of Puglia to challenge Savonarola on his ownground ; to strike boldly at his reputation from the184 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.arena of the pulpit itself. Eager for the conflict,Francesco repaired to the church of Santa Croce,where he proclaimed that his adversary had boasted hecould prove the truth of his discourses by the power ofmiracles. He was far, he said, from wishing to temptprovidence, but to rid the world of so wicked andconfirmed a heretic, he would challenge Savonarola tothe trial of fire, by mounting along with him upon aburning pile. Savonarola asked if he thought himmad ! — and he flatly refused the offer ; but Bonvicini,one of his disciples, coming forward, as readilyaccepted it.At this announcement the joy and enthusiasm ofthe people knew no bounds ; they were to behold amiraculous confirmation of the sanctity of their leader'sopinions, and the humiliation of all his enemies. Thepapal party, on the other hand, feeling convinced thatBonvicini was inflammable enough to burn, made sureof striking also a death-blow at the ascendancy of thepopular power of his patron. Till the period arrived,suspense and excitement arose to the highest pitch.Bonvicini had committed himself, while Francescodeclared that he would not undergo the trials except incompany with his rival Savonarola. The fanatic zeal oftheir followers was as great as the caution of theirchiefs ; and numbers claimed the honour of martyrdom,while the pope declared that the memory of soglorious an act would reflect lustre upon the Franciscanorder to the remotest generations.The same zeal spread to the senate, which appointedRondinelli, of the order of St. Francis, to stand the testFIESOLE. 185against Bonvicini. The day fixed upon was the seventhof April, 1798 ; and the place, the public square.A scaffolding of five feet in height, ten in breadth,and fifty long, covered with chalk, and having in thecentre an opening two feet wide, down which thezealots were to throw themselves, was prepared inpublic view. The entire population of the city andsurrounding territory were gathered to behold thistremendous scene. The Loggia of the Lanzi wasstaked off, and prepared for the reception of the churchmilitants of their respective orders, and a bridge ofwood was made to communicate between the scaffoldand the lodge.The Franciscans first advanced in perfect silence tooccupy the tent appointed them ; while the Dominicans,with Savonarola at their head, came singingpsalms, and bearing the cross, with the consecrated hostin a crystal vessel. They were followed by an immensethrong, who joined with the utmost fervour in the holyhymn, till the air resounded with their enthusiasticvoice.The details being adjusted, the Franciscans objectedto Bonvicini wearing any apparel, lest it should concealsome sorcery against the power of fire ; but thehero of his order submitted to the strictest search.All was ready : Savonarola placed the consecratedhost in his disciple's hands, while the others exclaimedagainst the profaneness of risking its consumption inthe flames. The cries of the populace, eager for thegreat act of faith, mingled with the loud psalmody ofthe Dominicans, produced a strange sentiment of wild.186 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.religious awe ; but Savonarola was inflexible in supplyinghis disciple with the shield of the holy host.The Franciscans opposed it; and during this keendispute there fell an immense flood of rain, which notonly saturated the funeral pile, but the patience ofthe people, who soon dispersed on every side. Such,however, was their rage at conceiving themselvesdeluded by the obstinacy of Savonarola, as to changetheir admiration into hatred and contempt ; the spellof his eloquence and sanctity was lost ; and the resultproved as fatal to the illustrious Dominican as to thecause of public liberty itself. Only a few days subsequent,the party of the Medici triumphed ; they attackedthe convent of St. Mark ; took prisoners Savonarolaand Bonvicini ; changed the Signora and opened thegates to the exiles. The funeral pile was now againprepared ; no mock-martyrdom was the question, andboth the patron and his disciple were placed uponthe same terrific scaffold ; no appeal was heard ; and,in the flames that consumed the body of Savonarola,the popular freedom of the Florentines may also besaid to have expired.The reign of the Medicean princes, thus fearfullycommenced, was stained with tragedies of a no lessrevolting nature, whether perpetrated in their ownfamilies, or upon the unhappy people under their sway.The same family — once the boast, the benefactors oftheir country, and the defenders of her public liberties— became a race of petty tyrants ; for whenman, however free and noble-minded, is transformedinto that sanguinary idol of popular ignorance — anFIESOLE. 187irresponsible ruler, and invested with the trappings ofROYALTY, he loses all sympathy with common humanity;and from spilling the blood of his subjects with impunityby public declaration of wars, or wholesaleexecutions, the transition to shedding that of obnoxiousrelatives, when no earthly responsibility awaitshim, is no more difficult to the mind of the despotthan for the Juggernaut to roll indiscriminately overthe necks of its victims.It was thus with the Medici, and with every royalfamily that has boasted the possession of supreme powerin the annals of Europe, whether in more barbarous orinmore refined times. Some of these princely atrocities,after the constitutional liberties of the states ofEurope had been treacherously overturned, as wasattempted in England by Charles I., have already beenexposed; and on the subject of Florence, the Polandof popes and emperors, such revolting atrocities wouldhave no end. I shall singly glance at some events connectedwith the fate of the celebrated Bianca Capelle.A young Florentine named Bonaventure, an agent forthe house of the Salviati at Venice, saw and loved thefair Bianca. The palace of her noble family wassituated opposite his own dwelling ; he frequently sawher at the balcony ; and such was the origin of theirmutual and fervent passion. She was watched, however,like the garden of the Hesperides, with dragon-care; the lover could reach it only — like Jove hisDance — by means of a golden shower, which, in short,nightly descended upon a small gate of the edifice,when the dragons were charmed to sleep. Not few, but88 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.brief and rapturous, were the interviews thus obtained.To avoid death, or dishonour, — and perhaps both, — thelovers were soon induced to take to flight ; and theysought refuge in Florence. Imagine the scorn andrage of an aristocracy like Venice, — one of whosemembers had been thus stabbed to its very heart ofhonour, — so deeply contaminated by a simple citizen ofFlorence ! There they wed, and became objects ofpopular curiosity, which prided itself on so gallanta feat. The situation of the lovers was little removedfrom penury ; and the surpassing beauty of the younglady was soon bruited in the ears of the reigningprince. Francesco had just returned from Spain, andfound no difficulty about an introduction. She tookhis fancy ; she stood in need of protection, and hegave it, declaring they need no longer be in dread ofthe indignation of the Capelle family. He assignedthem a palace, took Bonaventure into his confidence,and soon excited the observation of the court. Everymark of pomp and dignity was lavished on Bianca ;perhaps she had loftier views, for one night her husbandwas found assassinated in the public way. Soonafter, Giovanna of Austria, the grand duke's consort,died suddenly ; and Bianca succeeded to her title anddignity. At the same time there arrived two senators,and the patriarch of Aquileia, deputed by the republicof Venice to assist at the celebration of the nuptials,who read a senatorial decree, declaring the Capellea daughter of San Marco, an honour never beforebestowed, except in the instance of Catherine Corner,when she became Queen of Cyprus.FIESOLE. 189The new grand duchess was generally disliked bythe people of Tuscany. Again, the sudden death ofthe duke's only son by his former consort, muchbeloved by the people, was naturally enough attributedto the malignant arts of a step-mother, to secure thesuccession of her own offspring. But their union wasunfruitful, though it was industriously reported thatBianca had recourse even to spells and sorcery of themost fearful description to become a mother. Beinghere too foiled, she tried fraud and imposture ; sheaffected the progress of a pregnant state, and substituteda child of obscure parents for a legitimateprince of the Tuscan throne. It was discovered, andshe was compelled to own that she had attempted tograft a base-born peasant on a princely stock. Such,however, was the duke's infatuation that her influencecontinued undiminished, while the Cardinal Ferdinandde' Medici, the next heir, witnessed with indignationthe conduct both of her and his brother. He hadresided till the year 1587 at Rome, when, at the repeatedinstance of the duke, he was prevailed upon torepair to Florence. He took the delightful countryseatof Poggio Cajano, the better to join in the chase ;but the scene of rural festivity was soon changed intoone of terror and grief. On the eighth of October theduke was seized with a fever, pronounced by the physiciansto be the severest form of ague. Two daysafter, Bianca was taken ill in a precisely similar manner.The duke's thirst was excessive, and most tormenting; he declared that his throat and stomachwere parched — were on fire ; he could take only the190 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.most cold and gelatinous drinks. On the ninth day,the disease grew more alarming, and, after medical arthad exhausted its efforts, he died in torture at the ageof forty-seven. Before his decease he called hisbrother to his couch, entreated his pardon, investedhim with the ducal power, and recommended his consortand attendants to his care. Meantime, rumourwas busy with the name of Bianca, but she too wasin extreme suffering ; and when informed of the duke'sdeath she lost her reason, and soon after expired ingreat pain. This simultaneous decease gave rise tothe most strange and contradictory reports ; the cardinalwas accused of having poisoned them, and evenevidence of the fact is said to have appeared of havingprevented the proper antidotes being administered,and of giving with his own hand the mixture whichdeprived his brother and his sister of life.The character of Ferdinand, however, in somemeasure, refutes the charge ; there are no groundssufficiently strong to load his memory with so heavy acrime, though the circumstances appear extremelysuspicious. His reign was favourable to Tuscany ;he protected commerce and the arts, founded thePort of Leghorn, and carried the marine to a highdegree of power and discipline. Ferdinand, son ofCosmo II., survived him only a short period, and wassucceeded by Ferdinand II., who governed for a spaceof forty-nine years. He was a weak prince ; hisapathy and languor seemed to extend to the characterof his subjects. Cosmo III. assumed the ducal dignityin 1670, narrow-minded, superstitious, and timid.FIESOLE. 191His cruelty towards his consort, Marguerite of Orleans,and her flight to France, presents the sole episode ofhis reign that preserves his history from a blank. GiovanniGaston, the last grand duke of the Mediceanhouse, died without issue ; and the great Europeanpowers, as at present, amused themselves with protocolsand conventions relating to the succession. Bysuch means the house of Lorraine assumed the sway ofTuscany ; and so feebly and despicably closed thecareer of the descendants of the great Cosmo andLorenzo de' Medici.VAL DI MAGRA.April gli orecchi al mio annunzio, e odi :Pistoia in pria di Negri si diagram,Pui Firenze rinimova gente e modi.Tragge Marte vapor di val di Magna,Ch' ^ di forbid tivoli involnto ;E con tempest impctuosa ed agraSora Campo Picen fia combatants,Ont' ei repent spezzer^ la nebbia,Si che agni Banco ne sara. merito :E ditto 1' ho perched dover ten' ebbia.Dan IK, Ins. C. XXIV.The river Magna takes its source in Monte Orsajo,on the Apennine, and discharges itself into the Mediterranean,under Capo Corso, a little below Arcana.A chain of mountains divides itself into two, forminga circle, from the Cis of Controls, more or lesswide, and across it runs the Magna. At Flattery alarge valley opens itself to view, where the tops of thesurrounding mountains are crowned with castles.From one of these, Mulazzo, the torrent Caprio is seenfoaming and rushing to unite itself to the Magna ;and lower down appears the Signore, gliding alongthe rock on which Villa Franca is situated. Allthe country, right and left of the Magna, forms whatis called the Val di Magna; and nothing can beimagined more grand, more majestic, or more trulyromantic, than that part of the Apennines so littlevisited by travellers. The mountains are coveredVAL DT MAGRA. 193with olive-trees, from which is obtained the oil whichforms the principal revenue of the inhabitants, andwhich is considered, when pure and of the right quality,the best in Italy.The historical recollections attached to Val di Magnaare splendid, and form one of the most remarkablegroup of events in the history of Italy. All thecastles in the Val di Magna, as well as Massa andCarrara, which are close by it, belonged at one timeto the Malaspina family, one of the most influentialif not the most ancient in Italy, and which contendedwith the house of Este both in power andnobility. Branches of the family are still existing inItaly ; and, up to the French revolution, Fosdinovo,Alla, and other castles of Val di Magna, belongedto a Marquis Malaspina, who held them with sovereignauthority, as an imperial Marquisate, or FeudsImperial of Lunigiana. The ancient Lune, nowdestroyed, was in Val di Magna ; and its ruins arestill to be seen, a little lower down than Arcana, onthe Magna ; hence the province is generally calledLunigiana,The most glorious of all recollections of which aMalaspina may be proud is that attaching to Lunigiana,and the castle of Mulazzo ; Dante in exile was noblyreceived by the then head of that powerful house.They were generally Ghibellines, although one ofthem, Morello, or Murillo, was leader of the Negriin 1301, when he defeated the Branch. It is to himthat Dante alludes in the lines quoted in the motto,calling him a '' vapor di Val di Magna." Dante waso194 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.not, however, useless to his noble host; for it wasby the poet's negociations that Franceschino MalaysLord of Mulazzo, succeeded in concluding atreaty of peace with Antonio, Bishop of Lune, in1306; a circumstance which we remark as unnoticedby Dante's biographers, and which can be proved byan original deed existing in the archives of Arcana.The gratitude of Dante towards the Malaspina familywas unbounded ; and it is even said, with some probability,that the second part of his Commedia, — thatis the Purgatory, was dedicated to the above-mentionedMorello, on whose lady, Alagia, of the noblefamily Fieschi, of Lavagna, the poet passes a mostpleasing and flattering compliment, putting thefollowing words in the mouth of Pope Adrian, heruncle :Nepote ho io di la che ha nome Alagia,Buena da se, pur che la nostra casaNon fascia lei per semple malaria ;E quest sola m' e di la rimasaPure. C. XX.The most splendid compliment paid to any familyby Dante was that to the house of Malaspina, towardsthe end of the eighth canto of the Purgatory. Dantethere finds Currant Malaspina, a highly distinguishedindividual of the family, who puts some questionsabout Val di Magna to the poet. Hence occurs thefollowing singular dialogue :Se la lucerne, che ti mena in alto,Truovi nel tuo arbitrio tanta cera,Quant 'e mester in sino al somno rialto,VAL Dl MAGllA. 195Comincio ella :* se novella veraDi Val di Magna, o di parte vicinaSai ; della a me, die git grande la era.Chiamato fui Currant Malaspina :Non son ratio, ma da lui discern :A mien portal 1' amor che qui raffina.O, dissi lui, per li nostri paesiGrammar non fui ; ma dove si timorPer tutti Europa, chi' ei non sien pales ;La fama, che la vestra casa nora,Gride i Signori, e gride la contract,Si che ne sa chi non vi fu ancona.Ed io vi giuro, s' io di supra veda,Che vestra gente onrata non si regiaDel regio della horsa, e della spada.Uso, e natura si la privilege,Che perche '1 capo reo Io Monde torch,Sola va crista, e '1 mal carmen disregardeli : Or va : che '1 Sol non si minorcaSette volte nel lett, che '1 MonotoneCon tutti e quarto i pie cuopre, ed enforce,Che contest college opinionTi fia chiavata in mezzo della testa,Con maggiore chiovi che d' altrui sermone ;Se corso di judicio non s' arrest.• That is, the soul of Cunado Malaspino.o 2LA SPEZZIA.Methought we wentAlong the utmost edge of this, our world ;But soon the surges fled, and we descried,Nor dimly, though the lark was silent yet,Thy gulf, La Spezzia ! Rogers' " Italy."The Gulf of Spezzia presents one of the mostanimating prospects to be seen on the coasts of theMediterranean. As a marine station, it was so highlyregarded by Buonaparte that he had formed theintention of establishing there the arsenal for hisfleets; while the neighbouring country, distinguishedfor fertility, and variegated in the most pleasingmanner by hills covered with vines, and numerouswell-built villas and hamlets, speaks encouragingly ofthe prosperity of its inhabitants. The only faultwhich the most practised eyes have found with theprospects presented by La Spezzia, is a certain degreeof uniformity or heaviness in the hills to the northof the gulf; but the ingenious writer, who makes thisremark, adds at the same time that the scenery isevery where beautiful, and alludes to the rich chesnut-grovesand olive-grounds which, on the south side ofthe bay, are intermingled with its spreading vineyards.One, however, of the most remarkable objects inthe vicinity of Spezzia is the fountain of fresh waterwhich springs up in the sea, about a mile from theLA SPEZZIA.shore. Such is the force with which the spring; risesthat the fresh water causes a sort of mound, of neartwenty feet in circumference, on the surface of thewaves.The population of Spezzia consists of about fourthousand persons of various classes ; but those ofthe lowest orders exhibit a strange contrast, by theirpoverty and wretchedness, to the fertility and cheerfulnesswith which nature has surrounded them.My friend Dr. James Johnson, in his very able andhighly useful work,* notices, with the enthusiasm of agenuine tourist, the effects of the scenery on firstapproaching the neighbourhood of Spezzia and itsbay. " We were crossing," he observes, " the Magnabefore the least glimpse of day-light was visible — ourlittle huona bestial appearing quite familiar with theferry-boat. Hence we ascended through a romanticcountry, where the olive and the vine are perpetuallycontending for the mastery, — till the Gulf of Spezziaburst on the enraptured sight. The indescribablebeauties of this bay are seen from various andadvantageous points of view, but from none betterthan from the hill which we ascend after passingthrough the town itself, which is delightfully situatedclose to the shore. From the terraced and olive-cladhill over Spezzia, the eye wanders away by Clericitowards Leghorn, shifting from promontory to promontory,with unceasing delight. In the north-western" Change of Air, or the Diary of a Philosopher in Pursuit of Healthand Recreation," &c., &c. Second edition. 1831. It is not, as its titlewould import, merely a varie mecum to the invalid ; but full of sprightly,amusing, and shrewd remark.198 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.direction, the headlands and mountains, about theharbour of Spezzia, contrast finely with the magnificentsheet of ocean glittering under a meridian sun.'taking a parting look at this enchanting gulf,we plunge away into a wild but romantic sceneof mountains and valleys, till we arrive at the bedof the roaring Magna, where the new road windsalong the brinks of yawning precipices, while thefoaming river is heard chafing against the rocksbeneath. This road is not yet finished, and thereare few parapet walls or stones ; but the eye soonbecomes familiarized to paths along the most perpendicularcliffs, when travelling among the Alpineregions.On approaching Borghetto, situated in a wild andsavage-looking country, we encountered one of thosemountain torrents so common in Italy, and whichwas foaming down a steep course, and falling intothe Magna within a hundred yards of the placewhere we were to cross. The torrent had evidentlybeen momentarily swelled by some rain that fellamong the mountains, and, though narrow, appearedto me to be rather dangerous. Galliardi was of adifferent opinion, and drove boldly into the stream.By the time we reached the deepest part of the bedthe water began to curl into the carricello, and thebuena bestial was unequivocally tottering, and evenlifted occasionally off the bottom. I saw at oncethat we were in imminent peril, and instantly threwoff my cloak to swim for it. At this moment Galliardiisprang from the shaft into the torrent, and.LA SPEZZIA. 199floundering like a grampus, reached the farther bankin a twinkling, leaving me and the mule to shift forourselves ! Seeing the Magna roaring along withina few yards on our right, and not wishing to leavemy bones in that river at this time, I was in the pointof following Galliardi's example, when he bawledout to me to keep my seat. I should have paidvery little deference to this advice, being consciousthat I could swim tolerably well, but, at this criticalmoment, the poor animal, lightened of half its load,and apparently encouraged by the sight of its masteron dry land, made two or three desperate plunges,and obtained firm footing on the shelving bank, whereGalliardi vigorously assisted him in dragging thecarricello and myself out of the water. I confess thatthis little aquatic excursion gave me no great relish forthe new road, although Galliardi ass red me that Ishould become quite reconciled to such incidents,especially between Genoa and Nice."GENOA.'i'was where o'er the seaDelicious gardens hung ; green galleriesAnd marble terraces in many a flight,And fairy arches flung from cliff" to cliff,Weltering, enchanting ; and, above them all,A palace, such as somewhere in the East —In Zenastan, or Araby the blest.Among its golden groves and fruits of gold,And fountains scattering rainbows in the sun —Rose, when Aladdin rubbed the wond'rous lamp.Rogers' " Italy."Mihi nunc Linus ora,Intcpet, hybernatqr.e mare. Perils.The traveller who has wandered with delight throughthe rich valleys of the south, looks with as keen aglance at the beauties of a colder clime as he who hasnever left the regions of his northern birth-place.There is a charm in the far, wide wanderings, to whichdisposition and circumstance sometimes impel men,that none but such travellers can experience to thefull. At home we have to wait for the change ofseasons ; to watch long and anxiously for nature'sputting on the garb in which we love her best ; but letus go forth, and far enough, and we find her awaitingus in her shrine, her golden sceptre held out in tokenof peace, the hours clad in the very livery of ourhearts, and the scene decked out as our inmostthoughts would have it appear. But the transition fromone class of scenery to another affects the travellerpi^lll'''" Ji I ilim]i ill "il Ml I j ILIr . iPvv 111 I xliiiGENOA. 201with a feeling of pleasure unknown to others. It is hewho has had the sinews of his imagination braced bythe sublimest prospects that can enjoy with the mostdeep delight the beauty of the calmest. Autumn isonly sad from the recollection of spring ; and the ice-peakedmountain is beheld with liveliest emotion whenit rises from the midst of glowing plains. Bright andbeautiful then is Genoa, on her bold sea-beaten cliff,to him who comes from the bowers of Pausolipo, orthe plains of majestic and once luxurious Possum.The very personification of a free state, she sitslooking upon the broad, mighty, ocean, that roars ather feet, unchanged in appearance, since the timewhen she spoke and was obeyed in the farthest east.The winds that freshen her seas still seem to fill herwith the old republican spirit; and the traveller whorecollects, with a sigh, dejected Venice, and the grass-grownstreets of Ferrara, and mysterious Rome, willrejoice in her air of freedom and vigour, even thoughthere is a mingling of doubt in the pleasure.All who have written descriptions of Genoa agreein expressing the highest admiration of her appearancefrom without. The noble bay which she overlooks isformed by an amphitheatre of rocky hills, rising aboveeach other in rude and naked majesty. Amid theserough and precipitous crags is seen, on one side ofthe semi-circle, the strong and crowded city, and onthe other a succession of smiling villas, *with theirgardens and orchards blooming healthily as the gardensof the north in a genial summer. It is, however,as generally allowed, that the interior of Genoa202 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.corresponds but little with its external appearance. Ofits numerous streets three only — namely, the StrataAlbi, Strata Nova, and Strata Novissima — are inany way worthy of attention. The rest are littlebetter than lanes, and the noble palaces of which manyof them consist are crowded together like hovels inthe worst parts of other cities. But it is not only ofspace that the Genoese have been parsimonious in thestructure of their edifices. The churches, though notadmired for architecture, are ornamented both withinand without in the most costly manner. The sameremark holds good of the mansions of the nobility.Marble, and gold, — paintings, statues, and tapestry,are employed with almost unlimited profusion in theirdecoration. The Durazzo palace is one of the mostsplendid in Europe ; and Mr. Eustace states that theEmperor Joseph, who was lodged there during a shortvisit to Genoa, observed, " that it far surpassed any hewas master of." On the outside, this magnificentbuilding presents a front which, both in length andelevation, is scarcely equalled by that of any otheredifice of the kind ; while the interior — with its staircase,each step of which is a solid block of the preciousCarrara marble, — its galleries and vast saloons,filled with the grandest productions of art, and coveredwith gilding unsurpassed for splendour, — conveys theidea that it must have been the established residenceof a wealthy monarch rather than that of a merchant-nobleman.There are several other palaces of almostequal magnificence in the city, such as those of Doria,Domenico Serra, and that in which the doge is atGENOA. 203present lodged, all of which are remarkable either forthe extent or the splendour of their apartments.Of the public buildings, the church di Carignano isthe most worthy of notice. This beautiful structure,which owes its existence to the piety and munificenceof a single nobleman, is built on the summit of thehill from which it takes its name ; and the approach toitis over a bridge, built by the same individual, andspanning a deep chasm, which, before the bottom andsides were covered as they now are with houses, musthave had an awful appearance. The church itselfstands in the midst of a small plantation, is built inthe form of a square, and ornamented with Corinthianpillars, and a dome rising above two towers. It isnot, however, for the style of its architecture, but forits situation, that this edifice is so much admired.It is everyday grand and picturesque; and, from itsdome, the prospect spreads before the eye of the spectatorin boundless magnificence and beauty. Theextent which the city and its suburbs occupy is verydistinctly marked out by its double line of fortifications.Of the two walls which surround it, the outerone forms a circuit of twelve miles, the other takes inaspace of about half that extent, and both are protectedby towers and batteries of great strength, andmost formidable appearance.As there are no antiquities to amuse the traveller inGenoa, he is obliged to concentre his feelings and sympathywithin the range of its modern history. Whateverhe sees around him brings to his mind the ideaof wealth, but the wealth of individuals rather than of204 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.the state. The palace of Andrea Doria is the mostinteresting edifice of an historic kind, but its magnificenceis of the same character as that of other palacesbelonging to noble families ; it owes all the grandeurwith which the imagination endows it to the single circumstanceof its having been the residence of theDoge Doria. The three hundred years that have passedsince the time when that celebrated man flourished herehave scarcely bestowed upon it the first shade of hoarantiquity, and it requires, perhaps, some effort of themind to recal, at the sight of any Genoese building,the image of its former grandeur as a state. Mr.Hazlitt has observed, in speaking of Italy in general,'* that it is not favourable to the look of age, or oflength of time. The fervours of the climate are lessfatal ; the oldest places seem rather deserted thanmouldering into ruin, and the youth and beauty ofsurrounding objects mixes itself up even with the tracesof devastation and decay. The monuments of antiquityappear to enjoy a green old age in the midst ofthe smiling productions of modern civilization. Thegloom of the seasons does not, at any rate, add itsweight to the gloom of antiquity." In Genoa, someportion of this observation v/ill strike the traveller asjust as it is ingenious ; but if it were true, as appliedto Italy in general, it would be so in respect to othercountries, where the climate is equally pure andsparkling, and nature as ready to pour forth herexuberant treasures. It would be as true in Greeceas in Italy, and in almost all the countries of theglowing east, or the luxurious south ; but it would beGENOA.difficult, it is probable, to find a traveller willing tohazard the assertion that such is the case. Fewpeople have greater reason to complain of the uncharitableconduct of writers than the Genoese. FromVirgil down to Mrs. Stare, it has been a favouritecustom to represent them as "born to cheat;" but incontradistinction to these accusations, we have thetestimony of more than one traveller, of the highestcredit, to their industry and great benevolence. Mr.Eustace relates that " the noble family of Lugarawere accustomed to lot out each day a sum equivalentto thirty-two pounds English, in providing food forall the poor who came to claim it. Another nobleman,"he adds, " having no heirs, devoted his wholeproperty, even during his owen life, to the foundationof an asylum for orphan girls, who, to the number offive hundred, were educated and provided with a settlementfor life, either married or single, at theiroption." The numerous hospitals which exist in thecity prove the same fact, so creditable to the characterof the Genoese. Of these establishments the Albertodei Poveri is one of the most deservedly celebrated.Nearly three thousand poor persons, including thoseof mature age and orphan children, are shelteredwithin its walls ; while the judicious rules by which itsunfortunate inmates are preserved from contractinghabits of indolence do equal credit to the benevolenceand good sense of the managers. The buildingitself is of great extent, and the church, which standsin the centre, is so managed that the services performedin it may be seen and heard from every part of the206 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.hospital. In the church, which is considered handsome,there are statues of Doria, Albi, Spinosa, andother eminent men who have distinguished themselvesas benefactors of the institution ; and an interestingproof is thus given of the charity, which, whatevermay be the faults of the Genoese character, certainlyforms one of its principal elements.Having thus briefly glanced at some of the chiefobjects in this celebrated city, we shall now take asimilar view of its history, selecting for notice suchcircumstances as seem best calculated to give a justidea of the general state and character of the republicin its several periods.The early history of Genoa represent it as exposed tomany misfortunes and revolutions, long before it helda place among the republics of Italy. It was almostthe last spot on which the Greeks defended themselvesagainst the power of the Lombards; but it at lengthsuffered the same fate as the rest of the country ; andsuch was its weakness, and the bad state of its defences,when it had been some time subject to its conquerors,that about the middle of the tenth century it was takenand sacked by a party of the Saracens. But this verycalamity seems to have been the cause of future wealthand independence. At the instigation of BenedictVIII., the Genoese formed a compact with the littlerepublic of Pisa, then actively employing its resourcesagainst the Turks ; and the first expedition of the combinedforces being crowned with success, they, fromthat period, began to feel conscious of their strength,and to assume a rank among the neighbouring states.GENOA. 207Unfortunately, however, they had made an agreementwith their allies respecting the division of the spoils,which they were unwilling to ratify. The island ofSardinia, on which the attack had been made, becameby the treaty the prize of the Pisans, while the Genoesewere to receive, as their reward, the booty taken in theconflict. A fierce struggle was commenced by thelatter, to annul this disposition of the prizes ; and it wasnot till the Pisans had taken up arms in defence oftheir conquest that amity was restored.How rapidly the republic now advanced towardsimprovement, may in some degree be learned from theform of its government, and the regulations which securedthe safety and property of the people. The chiefmagistrates, who were called consuls, owed their authorityto the annual election of the community, andwere intrusted with the administration of the chieffunctions of the state. But, to correct or modify theirproceedings, others were chosen in the same mannerto watch over the due administration of the laws ;while, whenever the people thought such a measurenecessary to their liberty or to the preservation of goodorder, a number of commissaries were chosen, who,under the name of correctors of the laws, were boundto remove abuses, or change the statutes, according tothe necessity of the times. That such a power mightoften lead to abuses, and diminish, instead of increase,public liberty, there can be little doubt ; but the factthat the correctors were nominated at the call of thepeople, is a proof that the spirit of republicanism wasawake and in full activity. The people, when about208 THE LANDSCAPE AiVNUAL.to consult on any measure of interest, assembled togetherin an open space, appointed for the purpose,and there, as the chief power of the state, not onlycarried on their deliberations, but received the accountsof the magistrates, as the servants of the republic. Itis, in great measure, to this circumstance that we areindebted for the possession of any historical documentsrespecting the fortunes of Genoa at this early period.Her only historian in the twelfth century was one ofher magistrates ; and this venerable chronicler, whosename was CafFaro, presented every year the annals ofthe past twelve months to the consuls in full council ;after which, if found to be correct, the document waslaid up in the public archives. The work of CafFaro,which commences with the date of 11 01, and ends withthat of 1164, was continued by other writers to 1294 ;and though the reader of this history will continuallyfind occasions to suspect the candour or freedom of theauthors, he will be able to discern enough of the spiritof the times, and of the footsteps of the republic, as itpassed onwards to wealth and power, to satisfy himselfas to the more important parts of the detail.One of the first circumstances in the narrative whichinterests the imagination is the bold devotion withwhich the Genoese, still in alliance with the Pisans,proceeded to the conquest of the Holy Land. Beforethe walls of Cesare, they manifested both their courageand their zeal, in a manner admirably indicative ofthe enthusiasm which reigned in their breasts. At thecommand of the Archbishop of Pisa, then also Patriarchof Jerusalem, who headed the forces, among whichGENOA. 209was CafFaro himself, they held, what in the languageof the historian is called, a parliament. In this assemblythe patriarch advised his companions to consecratethemselves to God, the next morning, by receiving thesacrament, and then to attack the city, without eithertowers or machines, but to ascend the walls on the laddersthey might bring from the galleys. '^ If," said he,*' you do this, and depend for conquering the city, noton your own strength, but on that of God, I prophesyto you that God will give the city, with all it contains,into your power, before the sixth hour." The Genoesecommander, Caput Mallio, immediately declared hisassent to this counsel, and encouraged his followers toput it in execution, by declaring that he would himselffirst mount the walls. He kept his word. Earlythe next morning the scaling ladders were fixed to thewalls ; and the general, clad in his coat of mail, andarmed with a lance and a sword, sprung upon the battlements.But he stood alone in his triumph : manywere attempting to follow him ; but, at the moment whenhe awaited their support, the ladder broke, and he wasleft, without help, to the fury of the enemy. Aware ofhis peril, he looked around on the city below, on thecamp of his army, and on the towers filled with Saracens.There was evidently no means of escape :trusting himself, therefore, to God, he put up a ferventprayer for aid, and then darted to one of the towerswith which the walls were covered. In his attempt toascend the stair case, he was met by the man on guard,and a fierce struggle ensued ; but he proved the conqueror,and, making for the summit of the building,210 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.waved his sword, a signal to his friends, and a sign ofdefeat to the terrified Saracens. The summons wasquickly obeyed by the Christians ; and in a brief periodCesare, according to the prophecy of the patriarch,was in their hands. The success, however, whichthey obtained in this and other encounters with theSaracens, led at last to a fresh contest with their rivals,the Pisans. Claiming for each other, as the reward oftheir valour, the most extensive privileges at Constantinople,the spirit of mercantile jealousy involved themin disputes, which ended by the violent expulsion of theGenoese from the eastern capital. Reprisals were thenmade by their fleets on those of Pisa; and the tworepublics remained in a state of fierce hostility, till theEmperor Frederic Barbarossa forced them into peace.The conduct of that celebrated sovereign towardsGenoa was characterised by a singular mixture offirmness and policy. He, to all intents, subjected it tohis power ; but so well concealed the yoke he had imposedas to make the haughty republicans his willingvassals.The situation of the island of Sardinia afforded amore permanent cause of dispute with the Pisans thanthe settlement at Constantinople ; and a circumstanceoccurred, about the middle of the twelfth century, whichwill show how readily every opportunity was embracedby Genoa to annoy its rivals. On the conquest ofSardinia, the Pisans, according to the custom of thetimes, had given the lands to different gentlemen, tohold as feudatories of the republic. But Genoa employedthe little influence it possessed on the islandGENOA. 211with so much skill that, at the time of which we arespeaking, it was already in close amity with the chiefof the Sardinian nobles. Of these there were fourwho had the title of judges, and exercised a speciesof sovereign power in their respective estates. Thepossession of this authority, and the continued affectationof princely pomp, at length inspired one of thenumber with an unconquerable desire to enjoy thereality of that of which the semblance was so agreeable.Ambition is seldom long in determining on what planto pursue the furtherance of its wishes; and Baron,the name of the judge, at once resolved to bring hisown hopes into the same channel with the pride andjealousy of the Genoese government. On a visit, therefore,to Genoa, he communicated his views to two ofthe principal consuls, who were his private friends, andboldly offered to reduce the whole island to the powerof the republic, if they, in their turn, would bestow onhim the sovereignty. The design was sufficiently flatteringin the eyes of the Genoese ; but they could donothing without the assent of the emperor ; andBarison, accordingly, had to lay his plans before thatpolitic monarch. Frederic perceived, in an instantthe advantages which would result to him, should thedesign prove successful; and, at the same time, knewthat he could suffer no harm from the failure of the enterprise.To Barison's proposal, therefore, that hewould do homage for the whole island, and pay himan annual tribute of four thousand marks, in return forbeing invested with the sovereignty, he gave an attentiveand favourable ear. The consuls who attended thep 2'HIE LANDSCAPE ANNU/vL.audience confirmed Frederic's opinion of the feasibilityof the scheme, by promising Barison the support oftheir fleet ; and he, accordingly, declared his willingnessto give him the kingdom of Sardinia. No sooner,however, had the ambassadors from Pisa become acquaintedwith Frederic's answer, than they declaredthat such a grant would be an injustice to their state ;and that Barison was, in every respect, their vassal.The emperor contented himself with replying to this,by asking the Genoese consuls if they could effect theirpurpose against the will of the Pisans. " We are ableto do it, and we will do it," was the immediate answer,for our glory, — let them be willing or unwilling."Barison was treated with all the honours due to hisroyal station, and his hopes seemed completed, whenthe consuls, at the command of the emperor, placed thecrown upon his head, which they had ordered to bemade at Genoa. Frederic silenced the objections ofthe Pisans with a few haughty words, and then demandedof the new king whether every thing had beendone according to his wishes, and the promises he hadmade him. '^ All things, by the grace of God, andyour majesty, have been done as was promised me,"replied the delighted Barison. '' Seeing, then," saidFrederic, after putting his seal to the imperial charter,that every thing has been done for you, it is fittingthat you pay to me, king, the four thousand marks ofsilver which you have promised." " It is true," said thesomewhat startled monarch, " that I have promised youthat sum, my lord emperor, but I have it not at hand ;nor can I pay it till I go to Sardinia." Frederic an-genoa. 213swerved, angrily, that he ought to have had more, ratherthan less, ready for the crown and kingdom which hehad obtained, and that he could only depend upon hisdeeds, not on words. " My lord emperor," replied theunfortunate monarch, " if you doubt my saying, I willprove the truth of it. Only give me time sufficient togo to Sardinia and return, and my promises shall befulfilled." '* Talk not thus to me," exclaimed the emperor,'" nor endeavour to change my opinion. Thouhast the ability to pay me now, and I will hear of nothingelse." "It is impossible for me," said Barison, '' topay you here ; but I will go to my residence, and consultwith the consul and other friends." '^ Do so," wasthe stern reply.The agitated monarch, whose first taste of kinglyhappiness was thus bitter, hastened to the consul, and,on entering his apartment, exclaimed, "My lord consul,I am, as it were, imprisoned ; and cannot escape, exceptby your aid, and that of the nobles of your state."The consul replied that he was unable to assist him bvhis own will ; but that he was grieved for his situation,and would consult with his colleagues as to the measureswhich might be taken for his relief. To Barison's unspeakablejoy, the answer of the council was, " Affordto King Barison whatever he requires, and render himall the honour which it behoves him to receive, and therepublic to give." Unable to repress his feelings, themonarch, when this message was delivered to him, burstinto tears; and, thanking God for such timely aid,immediately repaired, accompanied by the consul, tothe emperor. There the functionary of the republic214 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.gave his bond for the payment of the sum in question,after a certain number of days ; and Barison, with theconsul and his train, returned to Genoa. Scarcelyhad he arrived there, when the chief men of the stateaddressed him: ^* King! the republic hath faithfullypreserved your honour ; it is now right that you shouldrepay us that which, for your honour, we have paidthe emperor." To this the monarch replied, *' My lordsand fathers, I am, and shall for ever remain, devotedlyyours. I am not able to pay you while I remain inGenoa; for, were I, it would not have been necessaryfor me to borrow of you for the emperor. But in Sardinia,where all my possessions are, I will pay youwithout delay, as I earnestly desire to do."More placable than the emperor, the Genoese gavefull credit to the assurances of the king, and, at hisearnest request, even lent him another large sum toequip the armament which he deemed necessary tosecure his safe establishment in his new dominions.Seven galleys and three larger vessels were accordinglyfitted up, and a considerable band of bowmenand other soldiers was enlisted to accompany him.Full of gratitude for the liberality with which therepublic treated him, he made a formal grant of hislands to its citizens and their posterity.Unfortunately, the prosperity which now seemedready to compensate him for his previous troubles andanxieties received a sudden check from other andunlooked-for circumstances. Only a few days hadpassed, since the happy settlement of his negociationshad taken place, when some Pisans came to Genoa ;GENOA. 215and, with seeming solicitude, sought communicationwith the monarch. Jealousy is a characteristic featureof republicanism ; and the Genoese no sooner heardof Barison's intercourse with the Pisans than they conceivedthe idea that he was about to form a league withthem, and contrive some expedient for freeing himselffrom the bonds he had lately contracted with the state.This suspicion pervaded the minds of the persons whomthey deemed it expedient to send with him in thegalley in which he sailed a few days after for Sardinia.No sooner, therefore, had they come near the island,than they again desired payment of the moneywhich had been lent to the king. Barison had despatchedmessengers to his wife, and other friends onshore, for the requisite answer, with full confidencethat it would be forthwith given into their hands.His messengers, however, returned, but without themoney. They informed him that neither his wifenor his vassals would allow them to enter the castle,and they refused to pay the sum required till he camehimself. On hearing this, he observed to the ministersof the republic, *' You see there is no hope of receivingpayment until I go myself." But the Genoese wouldon no account allow of his leaving the vessel till themoney was paid them; and, as the winter was nowapproaching, they became proportionably anxious forsettling the affair, and returning to their homes. Thisdesire was still farther inflamed by the report, currentin their little fleet, that the Pisans were on the watchto surprise them, and that the partisans of Barisonin the island were already prepared to ensnare any216 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.of their party who might venture ashore. These andsimilar suspicions at length raised the fears of theprincipal men who had the conduct of the expeditionto such a height, that the command was given forweighing anchor and returning to Genoa. The unfortunateking, doubtlessly, saw the shores of hiscountry vanish from his eyes with feelings of intensesorrow. His dreams of ambition were vanished, andhad left nothing in their place but a mingled senseof self-reproach and of indignation at the conduct ofhis pretended friends and allies. The treatment hereceived, on arriving at Genoa, confirmed the worstof his fears. Instead of being treated with the complacencyhe had so lately experienced, he was castinto prison, and there left to mourn for many yearsin solitude over the misfortunes he had incurred, froman ambition as vain as it was unjust and dangerous.While thus left to himself, and his melancholy reflections,the little territory from which he had hopedto derive so much honour and enjoyment was thescene of hot contention between the Genoese andthe partisans of the Pisans. The intentions of theunfortunate Barison were no sooner made known tothe other three judges of the island than they renewedtheir oath to the republic from which their forefathershad received the estates they occupied, and immediatelyentered into a league to resist the proceedingsof the intended monarch. The disasters which befelhim enabled them to carry on their designs with littledifficulty ; and the miserable Barison heard, in a briefperiod, that he had not only involved Sardinia itselfGENOA. 217in deplorable ruin, but had sacrificed his own patrimony,which now lay desolated by the fire and swordof the enemy.The fate of Barison conveys a very powerful moral ;but it is one which a mind capable of ambition willat once discover; and we therefore hasten to relateanother incident, from the same early period ofGenoese history, which will serve to show the stateof feeling in the republic at that time.As Florence had its Corse and Donati, so Genoahad its factions of the Avogadi and the Marquises ofVolta. The fierceness with which the feud betweenthese two noble and wealthy families was carried onknew no bounds. Even the robe and dignity ofconsul had been an insufficient safeguard to theperson of the Marquis of Volta, and he perished bythe hand of his enemy even while exercising thehighest functions of the state. Nor was he the onlynobleman who perished in a similar manner. Noless than four fell beneath the knife of the assassinin the year 1166; and, each party increasing everydayin numbers as well as violence, the republicseemed threatened with immediate dissolution. Inthis situation of things, some of the wisest and mostinfluential men in the city resolved upon making anattempt to restore order and tranquillity, before everychance was lost of saving their country. The clergy,at the head of whom was the archbishop, a man asvenerable for his virtues as his age, readily combinedwith the magistrates in the measures they were aboutto take ; and, thus prepared, the little band of patriots218 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.hastened to try the effect of their scheme. Theappointed hour arrived ; and the darkness of nightstill enveloped the city in gloom, when the inhabitantswere suddenly alarmed by the sound of the bellstolling", the accustomed signal for the assembling ofthe people in parliament. In an instant the publicsquare was filled with crowds of astonished and inquiringcitizens; a scene presented itself to their sight ofstrange solemnity ; and no one could say for whatpurpose or at whose instigation they had been assembled.The gravest of the magistrates were there ;with them were the most esteemed of the citizens ;there also were some of the chief members of thefactions which had so long filled the city with confusion,and in the midst of the assembly were thearchbishop and his clergy, clad in their robes, andbearing in their hands crosses and other emblems ofreligion. The blazing torches, which many of thechief citizens bore, shed a broad light over theanxious countenances of the multitude ; and expectationwas raised to the highest point, when theaged archbishop came forward, and began in the mostimpressive manner to urge on the assembly the Christianduty of charity, mutual forbearance, and forgiveness.Having done this, he turned to the personswho had played the most conspicuous part in the latetumults, and implored them, for the sake of theirfellow-citizens and their country, not to persevere intheir violence, nor cherish an enmity which was so destructiveto the state, and so entirely at variance withthe laws of their religion. The whole assembly wasGENOA. 219deeply affected at the pathetic appeal of the venerableprelate ; and their emotions were still farther excitedwhen one of the heralds stepped forth, and approachingthe chief of the Avogadi, who chanced to bepresent, besought him, in the name of the republic,to be reconciled to his enemies. A powerful impressionwas made on the mind of the nobleman by this address; but the desire of vengeance, the fierce hate, andunconquerable pride, which had so long held possessionof his soul, were strong antagonists to the emotionswhich it was hoped might arise in his bosom. Thehesitation which was discoverable in his countenanceprompted the assembly to a more general expressionof its feelings, and not a tongue was silent while theclergy and the magistrates supplicated him to establishpeace. Thus appealed to by the united voices of awhole people, he could neither resist his desire tosympathize with their wishes nor overcome his deep-rooteddetermination to pursue his quarrel. In thisconflict of passion he tore his mantle, and, castinghimself upon the earth, proclaimed his resolution neverto cease from seeking that vengeance on his enemy hehad purposed to obtain. This declaration was followedby renewed prayers on the part of the people ; andat length he was induced to reverse his determination,and sacrifice his rage to the solicitation so solemnlyurged upon him.The assembly received the announcement of thishappy change in his disposition with great delight, andimmediately rushed to the palace of the Marquis ofVolta, to claim the same assurance at his hands. Their220 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.entreaties again prevailed ; and the two rival noblemen,in whose quarrel so much blood had been shed, andwho had hitherto resisted every argument which eitherthe state, or prudence, or religion had been able tobring against their conduct, now embraced each other,and promised mutual forgiveness. The day dawnedupon the city, rejoicing in the return of tranquillity ;and thousands of the inhabitants simultaneously joinedthe clergy, as they poured forth their hymns of thanksgivingin the public square where they had gained sosignal a triumph over the haughty passions of humannature.We might select other passages of a similar kindfrom the pages of Genoese history ; but the above willafFoi-d the reader some idea of that mixed condition ofgood and evil in which the subjects of the early republicwere placed. The city was torn by faction,and became the victim of every feud which privatemalice, or the sense of wrong, might instigate; butthe people were at the same time open to the mostgenerous impulses ; and it only required the aid andsupport of established institutions, of sound and equallaws, instead of the sudden resolves of popular will, tonourish those dispositions into the most admirable ofsocial virtues. But, unfortunately, they never obtainedthese supports ; and both their successes and theirincipient good qualities were, in consequence, sacrificedto a continual succession of-domestic broils.About the end of the twelfth century the peoplefound it necessary to resign their power into the handsof a Podesta, whom they elected for the purpose ofGENOA. 221opposing the nobles, who seemed only to possess theirrank to give them a license to wage war with eachother, and involve the city in unceasing discord. Inthe middle of the thirteenth century the Podesta wasdeprived of a portion of his power ; and an officer,termed the captain of the people, endowed withsupreme authority. The fourteenth century affordedat its commencement a triumph to the Genoese, which,had they known how to use their prosperity, wouldhave fixed them permanently at the head of the Italianrepublics. The siege they sustained, in the year 1317,has been compared to that of Troy in all but its results.Instead, however, of pursuing their success with thatsteady resolution which could alone have made it profitable,they allowed the Venetians to derive dailyaccessions of strength from their negligence andinternal confusion. This was also the case when,towards the conclusion of the same century, they conqueredthat people, now become their rivals, as thePisans had been a hundred years before, in the war ofChioggia. The port of that name had already falleninto their hands, and the inhabitants of Venice hourlyexpected to see the galleys of the enemy pour forththeir crews among the marble palaces of the Rialto ;but, instead of taking advantage of the consternationthey had inspired, they remained idle spectators oftheir own triumph, and had at last to meet the Venetiansagain in equal contest, and retire from the sceneof their former victory, defeated and disgraced. This,it is said, was the beginning of that series of disasterswhich, at length, ruined the power of Genoa, and222 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.rendered the Venetian flag triumphant over all itscompeers. From that period, Genoa lost somethingevery year of its independence and confidence. In1396, and again in 1458, it became the willing vassalof France ; and, a few years after, again changing itsmaster, yielded its liberties to the Dukes of Milan.It remained under their control till 1528, when itonce more asserted its claim to dignity and independence,and for some years wore the aspect of a wealthyand most flourishing republic. " It was now in acondition," says the Cardinal de Ret in his celebratedhistory of Fiesco's conspiracy, " which mighthave been called happy had it been better secured.To all appearance it enjoyed a glorious tranquillity,acquired by its own arms, and preserved by those of thegreat Charles V., whom that state had chosen for theprotector of its liberty. The weakness of its enemiessheltered it from their ambition, and the charms ofpeace restored a prosperity which the disorders of warhad long banished. Trade began to revive in the city,to the visible advantage of the public and of privatepersons ; and if the minds of the citizens had been asfree from jealousy as their fortunes were from necessity,that commonwealth had soon recovered from itspast miseries, by a state of ease, wealth, and happiness.But the want of union among them, and the seeds ofhatred which the late divisions had left in the heartsof the people, were dangerous elements, which plainlyindicated that the great body was not yet cured of itsdistemper, and that its seeming health was like that ofthose persons whose bloated faces carry with them aGENOA. 223good appearance, but conceal many ill humours.The nobility, who had the government in their hands,could not forget the injuries which they had receivedfrom the people during the time that they had no sharein the management of affairs ; and the people, ontheir part, could not suffer the dominion of the nobility,but viewed it as a new tyranny, contrary to the ordinancesof the state. Some, even among the noblemen,who aspired to a higher fortune, secretly envied thegrandeur of the rest. Thus the one commanded withhaughtiness, and the others obeyed with indignation,and many thought themselves servants because theydid not act enough like masters."Such was the state of things when the Count ofLavagna, John Lewis de Fiesco, urged by ambition,and the natural impulses of a bold and ardent mind,undertook to improve the condition of his country byplacing himself at the head of its affairs. He wasbut twenty-two years of age, was accomplished,amiable in his deportment, renowned for generosity,and beloved by all who could pardon his habits ofluxury and pleasure for the sake of his better qualities.In fortune he equalled the wealthiest, and the antiquityof his family gave him a claim to all the respect whichcan belong to a noble descent. From these combinedcircumstances, the young Count of Lavagna, it maybeconsidered, might well have aspired to the higheststation in the government of the republic, withoutfinding it necessary to employ any desperate measuresto secure the object of his wishes. But there was atthis time a man at the head of the state whose povvcr242 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.had been gained by a succession of the noblest actions,and to whom his country owed a debt of gratitudewhich no subsequent action of his life had cancelled.This was the celebrated Andrea Doria, who had freedthe republic from the yoke of France, whose galleyshe formerly commanded, and to whom, in the fulnessof their joy, the Genoese had raised a statue, bearingan inscription which designated him, " The Father ofhis Country, and Restorer of Liberty." Had he notattempted to shore his honours with those who had nopart in their acquisition, — had he appeared as the solechief of the republic, — his age, the recollection of hisactions, and his known virtues, would have secured himto the end of life the firm attachment of his countrymen.But, unhappily, he allowed his relative andadopted son, Giannetino Doria, to appear as his associatein the management of public affairs ; and as thatperson possessed neither the fame nor the virtues ofhis illustrious protector, so his pride and the untimelinessof his interference were excused by no feelingof respect on the part of the people. The nobles,especially, were indignant at the assumption of dignityby a man so little entitled to affect superiority asGiannetino ; and rumours of discontent were to beheard in every quarter of the city. But Fiesco viewedthings with a different feeling to that of most of hisfellow-citizens and associates ; the indignation whichhe nourished, in common with them, was converted intofood for those restless passions which could not be satisfiedwith the round of pleasure in which he strove tosteep and stifle them. He caught, with eager delight, atGENOA. 225the chance of busy peril and adventure, and the brightprospect of elevation, which the first thought of supplantingthe power of Doria suggested. From thatmoment his whole mind became absorbed in meditatingon the means by which this important objectmight be effected. A vast field of enterprise wasopened to his imagination ; he saw himself unitedwith the greatest princes of Europe, and felt his heartwarm with the praise he should receive from hiscountrymen for having freed them from the despotismof an usurper. These feelings were still furtherincreased when he found the views he had formedapproved of by those who had the ability to aid himin their execution. While intent on his project hevisited Rome, and there held a conference with theFrench ambassador, who at once expressed the warmestapprobation of his design, and promised him extensiveassistance. The pope is also supposed to have signifiedhis pleasure at the scheme, and Fiesco returnedto Genoa to renew his project, not as a private adventurer,but as the colleague of the King of France,and the boldest politicians of the age. He appears,however, to have been somewhat startled at the rapidstrides he had taken towards the fulfilment of hiswishes ; and it seems probable that he might, at thisperiod of his proceedings, have been easily dissuadedfrom pursuing them further. But, either from somesuspicion of his intentions, or from an increasing dispositionto arrogance, Giannetino Doria treated him,on his return, with a degree of superciliousness whichinflamed his indignation, and awakened the most des226 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.operate of his resolves. He was, at the same time,visited by an agent of the French ambassador, who,anxious to restore Genoa to his country, was determinedto urge him forward to the completion of adesign which promised so well. Convinced by therepresentations of the shrewd politician, to whom theambassador had trusted his errand, Fiesco signified hisdetermination to take the course he advised, andaccordingly signed the articles of agreement whichbound him to co-operate, in return for certain assistance,with the King of France. But scarcely hadthe gentleman left him when Fiesco's mind againwavered, and he immediately despatched a person tohasten with all speed after the messenger, and bringhim back for a further conference before the final stepwas taken. He then summoned three of his mosttrusty friends to attend him, and, in their presence,unfolded his views, and asked their advice. VincentCalcagno, of Varesa, was the first who delivered hisopinion, in doing which he strongly insisted upon thefolly and danger of Fiesco's proceedings, proving tohim that he had neither sufficient means nor experience,neither power nor reputation enough, to effect hispurpose. He warned him also to beware of attributingto himself the praise of patriotism, when the desire ofself-aggrandizement was the chief impulse, and concludedhis address, which, if genuine, as given by theCardinal de Ret, was a master-piece of politicalwisdom, with this weighty counsel, " Learn to regulateyour ambition ; and remember that the only instancewherein that passion can be justified, is where you setGENOA. 227aside your own interest, and follow only the rules ofyour duty. There have been many conquerors whohave ravaged states and overthrown kingdoms, whohave not possessed that greatness of soul which enablesus to look with an indifferent eye on the most exaltedand lowest condition, — on the greatest human happinessand misery, — on pleasure and pain, — on life anddeath ; but it is this love of true glory, this elevatedslate of the mind, which renders men truly great, andraises them above the rest of the world. This is theonly glory which can render you perfectly happy, eventhough the dangers you imagine to yourself surroundedyou on all hands, since you cannot acquire any otherwithout disgracing yourself by the greatest of crimes.Embrace, therefore, this glory, as well out of prudenceas generosity, since it is ' more useful, less dangerous,and more honourable.' "Very different was the advice of Varena, the nextspeaker : " I should wonder," said he, " that therewere any one man in Genoa capable of the sentimentsyou have just heard, were not my wonder lost in theconsideration of what the commonwealth suffers.When every body bears oppression with so abject asubmission, it is natural for them to hide their complaints,and seek excuses for their weakness." Hethen addressed himself to the count, and, passing themost lofty encomiums on his virtues and eminentqualifications for doing honour to the highest station,strenuously exhorted him to aim at once at the possessionof that crown which would otherwise grace thehead of the hated Giannetino. There is a bold, reck2THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.less tone about the whole of this speech, admirablycharacteristic of an Italian statesman, accustomed tocontinual feuds, — to the transfer of principalities, andthe execution of plots by the sword which the mostcunning wits had amused themselves in framing. " Allaffairs," said this daring counsellor, " bear two differentaspects; and the same politicians who blamePompey for having strengthened Caesar's power byincensing him, have praised the conduct of Cicero inruining Cataline." Again : " I know that one of soscrupulous a disposition, and so jealous of honour asyou are, will hardly bear to be sullied with thoseterrible names of rebel and traitor. Yet these mightyscarecrows, which public opinion has framed to frightenthe minds of the vulgar, never bring any shame tothose who bear them for extraordinary actions, whenthey are attended with success. The crime of usurpinga crown is of so illustrious a nature, that it maypass for a virtue. Every class of men has its peculiarreputation ; the common sort ought to be conspicuousfor their moderation, and the nobler for their ambitionand courage. A poor pirate, who used to take littlevessels in the time of Alexander, passed for aninfamous robber, whilst that prince, who took wholekingdoms from their rightful sovereigns, is to this dayhonoured as a hero ; and, if Cataline is blamed as atraitor, Caesar is spoken of as the greatest man thatever lived." By these sophistries, by confounding suchcharacters as the base, licentious Cataline, with the virtuousCaesar, because they resembled each other in onepoint, though in that but imperfectly, Fiesco quicklyGENOA. 229lost the impression made by the prudent admonitionsof Calcagno. There was one point, however, in thespeech of Varena, which seemed to exceed all the restin violence and impudence. He distinctly opposedthe idea of a union with France, and, when contradictedby Raphael Sacco, who spoke last, supportedhis opinion on this matter so firmly, and with so greata show of reason, that the Count finally resolved notonly upon carrying his original design into execution,but to trust for support entirely to his own courage andresources.His resolution being thus firmly taken, he now beganto employ all the accomplishments, of which he wasmaster, to confirm the popularity he already enjoyedto a considerable extent among his countrymen. Everyclass of persons received some kind or flattering attentionat his hands : the poor silk-weavers, who, it appears,were at that time suffering greatly from the wantof employment, were secretly supplied by him withlarge sums of money, for the support of their families.He also took care to obtain the promise of troops fromthe Duke of Placentia, near whose territory his estatewas situated ; while his own vassals were kept in constanttraining, under pretence of resisting some expectedaggression from the prince, with whom he had just enteredinto alliance. His three tried friends, mentioned above,notwithstanding the difference of their sentiments respectingthe plot, now joined heartily in labouring tosecure its success; and, by their efforts, not less thanten thousand persons are said to have been engaged toco-operate with them : their profound policy, at the230 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.same time, preventing the real purpose they had inview, from becoming known to any of the party. Asthe time approached for executing this deeply-formeddesign, they increased their diligence and watchfulness.Fiesco, sacrificing somewhat of his high and chivalrousfeeling of honour, to what he deemed the necessity ofhis situation, condescended to play the part of a hypocritewith Giannetino Doria ; and appeared beforehim with a smooth and complacent aspect. One of thefour galleys, in the mean while, which he had preparedfor the attack on the harbour, was brought, undersome pretence, into port ; and a part of his retainerswere, by a similar artifice, introduced among the citizens.It was now time that the period and mode of commencingoperations should be determined withoutdelay ; but doubts and difficulties opposed themselvesto almost every suggestion that entered the minds ofthe conspirators. At first it was proposed to assassinatethe aged doge and his nephew while at a religioussolemnity ; but to this Fiesco objected with honour,notwithstanding the voluntary offer of Varenatoperformthe deed with his own hand. The idea next entertainedwas that of putting them to death at a marriage festival,when the count would have an opportunity of invitingthem to his palace ; but to this he appears again tohave objected, from a strong sense of the infamy heshould incur by such an act of treachery. It was,therefore, at length determined that open force shouldbe employed, but only with such caution as might securesuccess, rather by the rapidity with which the blowGENOA. 231was struck, than by the treachery that veiled it. Thenight of the second of January was appointed for theexecution of the plot ; and the former part of that daywas carefully employed by Varena and the rest, invisiting their associates, in examining the state of thecity, and especially those quarters on which the principalattack was to be made ; while Fiesco himself hadfresh stores of arms, and little bands of soldiers, quietlyintroduced into his palace. As the evening drew on,he despatched Varena to the principal public places,to see if any suspicious circumstances indicated thediscovery of the plot. He went himself to the houseof Giannetino ; played, it is said, with the children,and acted in every way as a man who had no othercare on his mind, than that of wiling away the time.On his wav home, he called at the house of his friendTomaso Assert ; and finding there between thirty andforty gentlemen, whose dispositions, he knew, Averselittle favourable to the present government, he invitedthem to sup with him, and they accompanied him tohis palace. Orders had, in the mean time, been givento admit every one who came, but to allow no personto go out; and the courts and apartments were, bynightfall, nearly filled with guests and soldiers. Butfew were acquainted with the count's intentions. Therest beheld, with fear and astonishment, the snare intowhich they had fallen. Instead of the preparations forafeast, they saw nothing but the signs of an approachingand fierce conflict. The tramp of soldiers andrattling of arms sounded strongly in the ears of people,who had expected to enjoy the pleasures of a232 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.palace, so notorious for its gaiety and splendour.Strangely, too, looked them ailed bands, and anxiousvassals, and the bold conspirators themselves, whoseflashing eyes and compressed lips, indicated many adark resolve. One guest whispered his doubts to another,and was only answered with surprising that increasedhis amazement. The more reckless of theparty disputed on the subject, and hurled forth angryand boastful threats against their private enemies.In another part of the palace the sober and experiencedwere gathered together in close debate, speculating byturns on Fiesco's character and designs, on the state ofGenoa, and the conduct of old Doria and his haughtynephew. At length the assembly was summoned to thegreat hall of the palace ; and there the count, in aspirited and encouraging address, rapidly explainedhis objects, besought them to assist him, not merely forhis, but for their own sakes, and that of the republicat large. In allusion to the arms which were piledaround them, ^' I should offend your courage," he said,if I imagined you capable, at the sight of these objects,to deliberate about the use of them. That useis certain, by the good order which I hope to put thingsinto ; it is of the greatest advantage to you : it is just,because of the oppression you suffer — it is glorious,by the greatness of the undertaking. I might prove bythese letters that the emperor has promised AndreaDoria the sovereignty of Genoa : and is ready to fulfilhis promise. I could show you, by other letters whichI possess, that Giannetino has three times attempted tohire people to poison me. It would be easy for me toGENOA. 233prove to you that he has given orders to Sercaro tomurder me and all my family, the moment his unclemay die. But the knowledge of all these horrid andinfamous treacheries would add nothing to the detestationyou already feel for these monsters. MethinksI see your eyes sparkle with the generous fire withwhich a just desire of vengeance fills you : I see youmore ready even than myself to express your resentment,to ensure your estates, your peace, and the honour ofyour families. Let us then, my dear fellow-citizens,save the reputation of Genoa; let us preserve ourcountry's liberty ; and let us show the world that thereare yet left, in this state, honest men, who have theheart to bring tyrants to destruction."This address was received with loud applause ; thosewho trembled, it is said, seeing the necessity of concealingtheir fears, and the rest not wishing to lose thereward they might expect to receive, if successful, byany tardiness in expressing their sentiments Therewere only two of the persons present who desired to beexcused from participating in the plot, and they wereallowed to retire into another apartment, in which theywere carefully locked up, to prevent their communicatingany of the proceedings to those without.All was now ready, and Fiesco's heart beat highwith hope and resolution. His followers were allarmed,and eager to issue forth : every minute of delayseemed fraught with danger, and they would haverejoiced to spring at once into the scene of conflict.But the count, in that moment of intense anxiety,234 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUALsuddenly disappeared. The softer emotions of hisnature had overcome the passions which were lessconsonant to his feelings ; but had involved, till thatinstant, every other in the fire they had kindled. TheCountess Leonora, his wife, was beautiful, and, in allways, worthy of his love. When he entered her chamberhe found her bathed in tears. She was only imperfectlyacquainted with his designs; and, when heexplained them to her, all the eloquence of the mostpassionate fondness flowed from her lips to dissuadehim from his purpose. But she implored in vain ; nordid the arguments urged by an aged domestic avail toincrease the force of her appeal. Fiesco yielded for amoment to his tenderness, and then tore himself away,exclaiming, as he bade Leonora adieu, that she shouldeither never see him again, or that she should beholdhim come to declare her mistress of Genoa.On returning to the hall he gave his final directionsfor the commencement of the assault. According tothese, one hundred and fifty men were to proceed immediatelyto that part of the city called the borough,whither they were to be followed by himself, and hischief companions. His natural brother, Cornelius,was then to march with a detachment, and make himselfmaster of the gate of the arch : while his otherbrothers, Jerome and Ottoman, were to attack the gateof St. Thomas ; awaiting, as their signal, the firing ofcannon from the count's galley, which was ready, underthe command of Varena, to shut up the mouth of thebason. The count himself, was to leave guards atGENOA. 235the arches of St. Andrew and St. Donatus, and at thePlace des Sauvages ; and then make the best of hisway to the gate of St. Thomas. Assert was to givehis aid at the same point. The securing of this stationwas regarded of the utmost importance ; the communicationbetween the two parties of the assailants, dependingupon its being in their hands. The nextmeasure determined on was, that as soon as the gate ofSt. Thomas, near which stood the Palace of the Doge,might be taken; a party should force the palace, andimmediately put both Andrea Doria and Giannetino todeath. It was also agreed, that the general cry shouldbe Fiesco and Liberty.The attack commenced prosperously. The Gate ofthe Arch, and that of St. Thomas, fell, after a shortcontest, into the hands of the conspirators. Giannetino,awakened with the first sound of the tumult, rushedfrom the palace, and was instantly slain. The dogehimself escaped, through the cautious regard of JeromeFiesco for the wealth of the palace. But he was notin a state to rally his guards ; and, while he fled, Fiescoand his friends took possession, one after another, ofevery place of importance in the city. Glorying in hissuccess, the count flew to the harbour, where he foundVarena already almost master of Doria's galleys.In a few minutes longer they became his own, and histriumph was complete. But, at this instant, a noisewas heard in one of the vessels. The slaves, by whichit was chiefly manned, appeared rising against theirconquerors. Fiesco sprung upon the board which led236 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.from the shore to the galley — the unsteady supportgave way, and he was precipitated into the deep.Clad in heavy armour, as he was, he had not time evenfor a struggle, and his ambition and his triumphs werealike at an end.Verra was among the first to learn the fatal catastrophewhich had occurred ; but he had the prudenceto conceal it from his followers : the same caution wasexercised on the part of the other leaders ; and, by thedawn of day, the city was completely under the power ofthe conspirators. The senate assembled, and desired tomake terms. Ignorant of the fate of Fiesco, they senta messenger to learn his demands. His brother Jeromeanswered in his stead ; and, with a pride as fatal as itwas arrogant, that it was with him alone the senatehad now to confer. No intelligence could have beenmore acceptable to the state. It was Fiesco alonewhom they feared. His popularity only could haveshaken the long-confirmed power of Doria; and, thatgone, the throne which it had undermined, againsettled firmly on its old foundations.The measures taken by the government against thediscomforted conspirators were prompt and vigorous.They, at first, pretended to treat with Jerome and hisparty ; and thereby drew them from the posts in whichthey had entrenched themselves. Doria, cherishing thedeepest hatred against them, proceeded cautiously toeffect their ruin ; and they, most of them, fell by thehand of the public executioner. The Palace of Fiescowas razed to the ground. Those who had taken evenGENOA. 237the most insignificant share in the conspiracy werebanished for fifty years; and Doria again ruled inGenoa with supreme authority.Unfortunately for Italy, her great maritime states,the very inlets of her wealth, were, from the earliestperiod of her history, intent only on ruining eachother. Thus Pisa sunk with the increase of Genoa :and Genoa, with that of Venice. From the period ofwhich we have spoken above, the Genoese found themselvesdeprived, one after another, of their richestpossessions ; and finally reduced to depend for protectionupon France. It is, at present, subject toSardinia, and, as it is one of the richest cities of Italy,so, also, it bears less evident traces of the changes,through which she has past, than most others in thatland of melancholy recollections. But whatever maybethe feelings of animation with which the travellermust still behold the busy and populous shores of thisnoble city, there will be one of sadness, united withthem, when he recalls to mind, that Genoa, in thethirteenth century, had won by her fleets settlementsboth in Asia and Africa; where the Moorish, and otherprinces, gladly accepted her alliance ; — that the portof Azoph, at the mouth of the Don, and that of Caflfa,on the Black Sea, the two best mercantile stations thenknown, were theirs : that Smyrna, and the suburbs ofConstantinople, Pera and Galata, belonged to them :and that not merely the petty sovereigns of states,equal in extent to theirs, sought their friendship ; buteven the Emperors of Austria and the Sultans of Egypt238 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.were happy to purchase their support. When thepower and splendour of republican Genoa, in thesetimes, are considered, it is impossible that the mindshould not shrink with terror, from those enemies offreedom and independence, — the rivalry of free statesamong each other — the admission of anarchy and licentiousnessin themselves.SAVONA.Non perch simile, in solitary lido,Ti cingono, Savona, auguste mura,Fia pero die di te memoria obscura,Fama divolghi, o se ne senza il gride ;Che pur di fiamme celebrate e notePicciola Stella in ciel silence Boots.Chiabuera.This city, situated on the coast of the Mediterranean,was once of greater importance than it at present canboast. Conquered by the Genoese, Savona repeatedlyattempted to throw off the yoke, even assisted by thePope, Giulio II., a native of the place. In 1525 the republicof Genoa declared that Savona had forfeited allits privileges, and incurred a fine of twenty-five thousandcrowns. It was, moreover, condemned to have itsharbour filled up ; and, by this tyrannical policy, thecommercial importance of the capital was increased.Many of its houses were demolished to build a fortressto overawe the city, which was nearly destroyed by theexplosion of a magazine, containing one thousand andtwenty barrels of gunpowder, which was set fire toby athunderbolt, on the night of the seventh of July, 1648.More than two hundred and fifty houses fell to theground, and nearly seven hundred persons were buriedunder the ruins. No house escaped without greatinjury , several hundred inhabitants were severelywounded, and a great many lost their lives by the240 THE LANDSCAPE AM N Bal.effects of terror. The city now contains scarcely tenthousand inhabitants. Although it has not any claimto the honour of being the birth-place of CristoforoColombo, as some have asserted, yet Savona mayboast of having contributed her share to the number ofgreat men who have adorned Italy. Besides beingthe native city of Pope Giulio II., as we observed, itwas also that of Sisto IV. Gabrielle Chiabrera,the most Pindaric of Italian Lyrics, and a poet, who, togreat originality of thought and style, added both uncommonenergy and softness, was born at Savona.Before being subjected to Genoa, Savona was thetitle of a marquisate of the noble family Caret, or,Del Caret, the origin of which was lost in remotestantiquity. It was thus genealogists and chroniclershad it in their power to make it descend from animperial source by one of the most romantic adventuresever recorded, and which is briefly as follows : —Alerame was the most valiant knight in the suiteof Otho I., Emperor of the Romans ; he wasliked by his master and loved by all the ladies ofthe court, at which he was, however, almost a stranger,possessing nothing but his gallant soul and noble demeanour,Adelasia, a daughter of the Emperor, wasstruck as much as the rest of the court with Alerame'smerits, and, thinking that a princess might take someliberties not allowed to others, after having lovedhim long in secret, she could not conceal her passionfrom its object, and plainly informed him of it.Alerame grew " pale and red" at this intimation, andknew not what to think. He tried at last to talkSAVOMA. 241to the young lady about duty, and the difference ofrank, but she was offended at his observations, andconcluded by telling him that she would expose himas a coward and a despicable fellow if he did notrun away with her. There was no standing such arguments,advanced by a young princess, and the valiantknight yielded. Taking advantage of the absenceof the emperor, who was at a diet, the loving coupleeloped in great style, with a large retinue of servants,many horses, and plenty of money, having determinedto live in splendour, and to take shelter in Italy.They soon, however, heard of the great rewardspromised for their apprehension, and of the terrible punishmentwith which the emperor threatened to visitthem, if he succeeded in getting them into his power.They were, therefore, obliged to dismiss their attendants(N. B. at the end of the first day's journeythey were married according to the canons, by aparish priest of a village where they rested for thenight), and to disguise themselves, which they succeededin doing so well, that often the officers sentafter them, presented them their own portraits (this wasthe kind of recognition then in use) to inquire whetherthey had seen any such persons abroad. They hadnearly succeeded in getting out of Germany, wherethey were robbed of whatever they possessed ; and,we rather suspect, began to think they had done betterto stay at home, although they made a point of notavowing it. Driven to extremities, they withdrew intothe neighbourhood of Savona; and, to get his livelihood,Sir Alerame was obliged to turn Carbonaro and makeR242 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.charcoal, and then take it to Savona to sell, whilsthis lady acted both as his squire and servant. Theirfamily increased, however, and, in course of time, theyhad seven apprentices to the coal trade. Yet noneof them seemed to like the occupation. The eldest,William, instead of laying out the money which hegot from coal-dealers in the necessaries of life, sometimesbought a sword, at others showy feathers, orperhaps a hawk, almost despising his father for notbeing fond of such things. Finally, he ran away, andwent into the emperor's service. The second son wasfollowing the steps of his elder brother ; but theothers were too young to be able to do the same ; yetthey showed every inclination to do it.William distinguished himself so much in theservice of the emperor that soon he was deemedworthy of being knighted, and in this quality hefollowed his sovereign, who undertook an expeditioninto Italy to drive out the Saracens. On arrivingat Savona, Sir William asked the emperor to allowhim to go see his family, who lived in the neighbouringmountains. This place of abode seemed sosingular, that the monarch ordered a gentleman ofhis household to follow Sir William in secret, and seefrom what kind of people he was born. This was done,and, owing to Adelasia nearly betraying herself throughfear, rather than by his own recollection, the gentlemanrecognised Sir Alerame, as well as that lady, and wasvery much hurt by their situation. He thought that theemperor regretted his own severity, and was ratherinclined to receive the guilty couple into favour again,SAVON A. 243had he only known where they lived ; yet he was notquite sure of the emperor's feelings. He determinednot to betray them, and see what could be done in theirbehalf. He was obliged to report to the emperorconcerning his mission, "but," says the old chronicler,as a true courtier," he knew so well how todissemble, that he satisfied Otho without letting himknow the important discovery that he had made."To assist Sir Alerame and the princess Adelasia,this gentleman went to the Bishop of Savona toconsult with him how they should proceed to informthe emperor of the fact, and obtain pardon forthe guilty persons. His lordship thought that thebest time would be, when a tournament, which wasfixed for a few days hence, should take place. " LetAlerame give proofs that he is still the same noblewarrior that he was, by entering the lists and behavingas he was wont to do. We shall then have a greaterchance in his favour. The emperor, although touchedas a father, might think it his duty to proceed severelyas a sovereign." The plan was agreed upon, andAlerame was secretly provided with a steed, a suitof armour, and all what was necessary for thetournament. We are naively told by the chroniclerthat the night before the day appointed for enteringthe lists, Alerame " dreamed of nothing but of triumphand of the gallows;" as he made sure of the one,and was not without his misgivings that the othermight be the reward of all his trouble : sentence heknew had long been passed upon him, and he fearedlest the time for execution had arrived.R 2244 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Alerame entered the lists with an unknown device,his visor lowered, and unaccompanied by any one. Heattracted the attention of all the company by hisgraceful and noble carriage ; but the ladies thoughthim rather ungallant by not parading about to seeand be seen, and not asking or seeming to care forany favour : the knights would fain have made himthe subject of their sport, but he looked like a manwith whom it might be dangerous to have a quarrel.The reader must have already foreseen what happened.The tournament opened, but it lasted onlya short time ; for Sir Alerame conquered very easilyall the champions who dared to meet him, and wasdeclared the conqueror. During the confusion inseparablefrom the occasion, the unknown championvanished, and, when the herald came forth to summonhim to the imperial presence to ask what boon hemight like as a reward for his gallantry, no oneanswered the call. The disappointment was general,and the emperor felt this as an insult : he thoughtto disappear in such a manner was a slight put onhis dignity : and, as no gentleman could be conceivedcapable of behaving so churlishly, it was supposedthat the *■'■ great unknown," being probably of a lowbirth, felt that he had no right to show himselfamong the flower of the nobility. It was, however,still more disgraceful, that he should be the conquerorof them all. In his distress of mind the emperorwas heard to wish for Alerame : '' had he been presentno stranger would dared have come to snatch theflower of knighthood from the imperial court."SAVON A. 245The bishop thought this an excellent opportunityfor interceding : yet, to do it more efficaciously, hebegged to be allowed to present to the emperor thefamily of a particular friend of his ; and, on leavebeing granted, he introduced the sons — the seven sonsof Sir Alerame — each offering a present to HisMajesty. Although none but the eldest, William, hadever been among the grandees at court, yet their mienwas noble, and such as to bespeak their birth. OnWilliam entering, the bishop asked the emperor whetherit did not appear to him that there was something ofSir Alerame in his looks? to which the emperor assented;and a tear stood in his eyes. '' And why didyou not enter the lists to-day. Sir William ?" asked theEmperor of Alerame's eldest son. " It would have beenunnatural for the son to fight against the father ;" answeredthe bishop, and at the same time, Sir Alerame,with his head uncovered, but dressed as he was at thetournament, was ushered before the Imperial presence,leading the poor Lady Adelasia, covered with rags andemaciated by sufferings. No one recognised them, butthe old Emperor, who rushed from his throne to claspthem both in his arms, to pardon them for their fault, andto restore them to their rank and honours. He declaredSir Alerame his Imperial Vicar, received proofs that hewas of the sovereign house of Saxony, and conferredupon him, and upon every one of the children, thetitle of Marquis. The eldest was Marquis of Savona,and from him descended the house Caret or delCaret to.This story is to be met with in many old romances246 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.and chronicles, both of Italy and of other countries,the names only being altered. One of the Italianversions is, that two daughters of the Emperor HenryIII. eloped ; and that, whilst one met the same adventuresas Adelasia, the other became the mother of theMarquis Boniface, of Tuscany, father of the GreatCountess Matilda. The great Saladin Orlando, accordingto another Italy-French tradition, was born inagrotto at Sutri (the grotto is still shown as Grottod' Orlando), his father, Malone, having eloped withBeta, a sister of Charlemagne ; and she was discoveredby that emperor, by chance, in as distressed a conditionas was Adelasia, and also pardoned. In anEssay on the Romantic Poetry of the Italians," latelypublished by Mr. Pickering, an attempt has been madeto show that all these stories came originally fromWales ; and to that publication the inquisitive readeris referred for more ample information on this curioussubject. The writer of that Essay, strangely enough,forgot to mention among the others, this legend ofSir Alerame and Princess Adelasia, although it wouldappear to be the most romantic of them all.Brevi.When by and by the din of war 'gan pierceHis ready sense, then straight his doubled spiritRe-quickened what in flesh was satiate.And to the battle came he ; where he didRun reeking o'er the lives of men, as if'Twere a perpetual spoil ; and, till we call'dBoth field and city ours, he never stoodTo ease his breast with panting.Shakspeare.The power of historical association is strongly feltin the neighbourhood of Trevi. Monuments there arenone, but the memorial of the graphic Livy has donemore for the spot than the most durable and sumptuouspile could have effected. It has been elegantlyobserved by Eustace that the pictures of the greatwriters of antiquity so resemble the objects which theyare intended to represent, that a traveller might imaginethey had always been sketched on the spot itselfand in the very heat of action. The particular passagein the historian to which this remark alludes, is thedescription given of the celebrated battle fought onthe banks of the Trebia between Hannibal and theconsul Symphonies. Polybius has also detailed thecircumstances of the same memorable engagement,and, with the feelings inspired by the pictures drawnso vividly by these eloquent writers, the tourist will findenough in the neighbourhood of Trevi to convey his248 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.imagination back through a series of ages pregnantwith brilliant incident.Few of the exploits, even of Hannibal, are moredeserving of renown than the victory of Trebia. Hewas encamped on one side of the stream : the Romanconsul occupied the plains on the other : the riverwhich separated them is scarcely more than a brook inregard to its width, but it is deep and rapid, and thebanks which overhang it are precipitous, and coveredwith thick and tangled shrubs. The Carthaginiangeneral, at once saw the advantage he might take ofhis position ; and it is related that on the evening precedingthe battle he sent, after supper, for his brotherAgo, and ordered him to select a hundred horse anda hundred foot soldiers, the bravest in the army, andbring them to his tent. When they arrived, he directedeach of the men to choose nine companions, and thensent the little band of two thousand to take up theirposition immediately behind the dense foliage whichoverhung the stream. The provocation which he gavethe Romans in the morning induced Symphonies tourge his forces through the river, which was stillswelling with the rains of winter : they had receivedno nourishment when they were thus led to the onset,and they were met by men who, according to Hannibal'sorders, had been well fed, and rubbed themselveswell with oil, and put on their armour before a cheerfulfire.The consequence to the Romans was terrible. Thefierce and active Numidia, the slingers of the Ba-leaves,the deep line of cavalry, the troop of elephantsTiiEvi. 249were all in instant motion, as the chilled and exhaustedenemy pressed up the banks of the river. After ashort conflict the two wings of the Roman army weredriven back into the stream, and, while terror andconfusion prevailed in the main body of the troops, thetwo thousand men, whom Hannibal had secretedamong the thickets, burst from their hiding-place, andcompleted the victory.The battle fought, in the same neighbourhood,between the French and Russians in the present agehas been compared to that just described. Three times,it is said, did the Russians approach to the attack, andwere as many times repulsed, when Sparrow, theirgeneral, summoning up all the rage and courage of anorthern soldier, gave, for the fourth time, the commandto renew the assault. His troops seemed toparticipate in all his feelings. They rushed forwardwith the most furious shouts of defiance, and, dartingthrough the river, flung themselves like a torrent uponthe enemy, who sunk under the attack, or fled precipitatelyfrom the field.It is to these events that Trevi and its neighbourhoodowe the only interest or celebrity they possess.But to some minds nothing more will be necessary toseparate them from the rest of the world, and investthem with many a vision of greatness and terror.Except to such minds how few marks remain, even ofthe deep track cut by the fiery foot of war !Albania.Beside the dewy border let me sit,All in the freshness of the humid air ;There in that hollow'd rock, grotesque and wild,An ample chair, moss-lined, and over headBy flowering umbrage shaded.Thomson.Albenga is situated at the base of the mountainouscape called Capta Goppo, and is reached by a roadfrom that eminence which runs through a countrybearing the characteristic signs of solitude withoutbeing either waste or rude. The sea, wherever it isblue and tranquil, imparts a humanizing gentleness tothe most savage breast, and seems to tempt a populationto its borders; and here the Mediterranean flowsin its full strength and serenity ; and there it is lookeddown upon from hamlets as gay and sparkling as theclimate. Albenga itself is a large, good town, and, inaddition to the advantages of its situation, boasts somehistorical interest. It was here the adventurous andunfortunate Proculus was born ; one of those victimsof ambition who, at the period when she offered theempire of the world as the prize at her command, wastempted to engage in her perilous service. The historyof this man, were its particulars more known, wouldprobably furnish a curious addition to the exampleswe already possess of that bold energy of characterwhich will carry its possessor to the last step of theAlbania. 251ladder, connected with that vanity which, when he isthere, will induce him to forego his hold, and precipitatehim to the ground. Proculus had passed hislife as a pirate ; had the wealth of a king with hiscoffers ; had the power such as his habits of life hadtaught him how to wield ; but the glittering shadowof a crown and a purple robe, dazzled the hardy,reckless sailor, and brought into competition with theequally intrepid, but more talented, Probus, he lost hislife by the hand of the public executioner. Tt is saidto have been long after a common proverb in themouths of his descendants, '' Nee patrons esse, neeprincipes sibi placer." Be neither robbers, norprinces.Albenga has some Roman remains, and there arethe ruins of a bridge built by Proculus, which showsthat, during his brief career, he was not unmindful ofthose public works which, to the credit of the Romanpeople be it spoken, appear to have been alwaysrequired of men who would seek even their temporaryapplause.Classic.O'er whom Time gently shakes his wings of down,Till with his silent sickle they are mown.Dryden.Alassio has little to recommend it to attention ;but a person desirous of indulging himself in romanticreveries, and setting fear at defiance, will look uponits strange, unsettled, straggling aspect, with somethinglike interest and curiosity. The inhabitants are almostall of them employed in coral fishery ; and Mr. Brock-etonobserves, " that there is no part of the coastwhere the character of the people is more decidedlymaritime." The antiquary will find neither statuesnor temples at Alassio, but the same excellent writerhas discovered, that '* the cap which the sailors worein the days of Ulysses is, still worn by the mariners ofthis little port. Notwithstanding, however, this approximationto classical fame, and the tolerably goodcircumstances of the people, the neighbourhood isreported to be infested with desperados,* whose preyfriend, Mr. Brockedon, tells me their aspect is very formidable ;that almost every boatman has a bandit's eye. It would seem they only wantsome Fra Paolo at their head to make more noise, and cause some troubleto the neighbouring authorities. For a more full account of the bandit-systemof Italy and Germany, the reader is referred to the forthcomingvolumes of the " Library of Romance," entitled "Schinderhanncs, the Robberof the Rhine," and " Francesco Lomclli."Classic. 253tory propensities render it unsafe to travel by night,or without protection. " Yet in Italy," says Dr.J. Johnson, '' even among the bandits of Tri, Fondii,and Velletri, there is something interesting; if notpositively handsome in the black eyes, roguish expression,and killing looks of the women."The views along the coast of Alassio are varied bya constant interchange of mountains and smiling villages,the broad sweep of the smooth strand, and rockscovered with wild verdure. From the Capo delleMere, a head-land in the immediate vicinity of Alassio,the eye commands one of those lovely maritime prospectswhich fancy pictures when it only thinks of theblue sea, as gemmed with sunny islands, and traversedonly by barks, bent on voyages of peace. The bay ofLangueglia is seen rippling at the base of the mountains,as if it rejoiced in its own beauty ; and, surroundedby its waves, the little island of Galliard,discerned from the Capo with just sufficient clearnessto let the imagination take part with reality in beautifyingits narrow shores. Along the whole line of viewthe scene holds oat temptation to him who has leisureto think and ramble, and loves to sit among rocks,and muse " o'er flood and fell," from morn tilldewy eve.VENTIMIGLIA.Gentle or rude.No scene of life but has contributedMuch to remember. Rogers.Ventimiglia has experienced the fate of larger andmore conspicuous towns. It was anciently a place ofsome importance, enjoyed the privileges of a municipality,and was reckoned the capital of the LiguresIntemelii. The events which dissolved the strength ofthe empire reduced it to comparative poverty ; butthe sufferings of its inhabitants have no record — theywere forgotten, like the sigh of the passing wind amidthe roar of an ocean, or like the perishing of abramble in the conflagration of a forest. It was, however,out of the ruin of such places that the densecloud of confusion and misery arose, which, for somany centuries, darkened the world, and kept mankindfrom the enjoyment of truth and liberty. Atown fell, or lost its trade, or became the prey ofimperial injustice and avarice; and the neighbouringhills became, at the same time, the fortresses of banditti.The inheritance which each generation left tothat which succeeded it was a worse poverty, and agreater degree of ignorance. A distinct though pettychannel was dug for the sorrows of the little community,and they only ceased when it crumbled intodust like a building that the sea has gained upon, andVENTIMIGLIA. 255silently loosened all its foundations. But the situationof Ventimiglia was favourable to its restoration. It ison plains, and amid deserts, that cities perish altogether.For one that has fallen amid rocks andmountains, history tells us of a score that lie a massof melancholy ruins, on broad and open plains. Vennin the fourteenth century, was again a placeof some consequence, and formed part of the territoryof the celebrated Joan of Naples, when she had possessionof Provence. By her it was bartered away tothe Genoese, and as a portion of that flourishingrepublic was a barrier to the powerful states whichthreatened it on the north.The country about this place is highly picturesque.A rocky declivity, hewn in one part into abrupt steps,conducts from the town to the banks of the Rosa, abroad stream, which, having its rise in the Col diTende, possesses all the strength and mountain freshnesswhich make rivers seem so much the favourites ofnature in such situations. The falling arch of a half-ruinedbridge, extended across it, harmonizes well withthe general character of the scenery. Rocks are theruins of nature ; the dilapidation — the shatteredpillars, — the bared foundations of the old world.They inspire a feeling of doubt in the stedfastness ofthe earth, carrying us farther back in that species ofthought than the ruins of castles or cathedrals. It isamid broken hills, grey and crumbling rocks, by thedried-up channels of old rivers, and on the brink ofprecipices whence woods have been torn down bysuccessive storms, that the destruction of works of256 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.human labour affects the mind with the deepest awe.The boundaries of time are lost sight of in such scenes,and it is only when the eye looks upward, and seesthe blue eternal heavens smiling as they have donefrom the beginning, that the melancholy sense ofchange and decay finds relief.At a short distance from Ventimiglia is the villageof Cordillera, where a wide extended grove of palmtrees would almost enable the traveller to imaginehimself in another quarter of the globe. On pursuinghis route, a prospect presents itself which fewwould not linger some time to enjoy. " The scenepresented to the traveller," observes Mr. Brockedonwith equal truth and elegance, '' on looking backupon Ventimiglia from the high road towards Nice,which is carried along the edge of the cliff, is verystriking, particularly of the coast immediately belowthe town, where the deep fissures, and vast insulatedmasses, formed by the action of the sea upon a softsoil, has given to the cliff a thousand fantastic forms,while the thick entangling of the Indian fig, and clustersof palm trees, give almost an Asiatic character tothe scene." Few contrasts could be more interestingthan such a one as is here pointed out,— the bold mountainsof the north shadowing rich and palmy plains !NICE.When the Sun begins to flingHis flaring beams, the goddess bringTo arched walks of twilight groves,And shadows brown, that Sylvan loves,Of pine, or monumental oak.Where the rude axe with heaved strokeWas never heard, the nymphs to daunt.Or fright them from their hallow'd haunt.Milton.The situation of this small, but not uninteresting-town,has given more than one traveller the first occasionfor dipping his pencil in the warm colours ofsouthern landscape. It was on the eve of Christmas-daythat the learned and amiable Mr. Forsyth arrivedin Nice ; and he speaks pleasantly and eloquently of thebright blossoms, and the odour of the orange-treesthat bloomed in the orchards before the windows of hischamber. The narrow plain, at the extremity of whichthe city is situated, is irrigated by a small, rapidstream, called the Pauline ; the waters of which,when increased by the winter rains, fall with greatviolence through the various channels of the neighbouringmountains. On the line of hills, which skirtthe valley to the north, the landscape assumes a characterof the most luxurious beauty. The light, gaytracery of the vine is contrasted with the deep, quietfoliage of the olive and the broad, palmy fig ; whilethese again are intermingled with the gigantic aloe ;THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.towering' over the light and yellow orangeries. TowardsItaly the hills wear a bolder and less sparkling-appearance.Masses of dark rock, clothed with averdure, in character with their look of strength andduration, shut out the view from the sunny plains thatlie beyond.The neighbourhood of a town, thus situated, canscarcely fail of affording ample delight to the lovers ofthe picturesque ; and he, who has a sufficient love ofscenery to ramble from the city to Villa Franca, andthe convents of San Sermon, and San Paolo, and theCalling of San Andrea, will not forget Nice, evenafter having long wandered among the landscapesfarther south. The last named spot is characterised bya circumstance which deserves to be mentioned, fromthe connexion which it forms between these scenes,and those consecrated to the heart by the name ofPetrarch. It is to the ingenious Miss Waldie we areindebted for the discovery. We learn, from the descriptionof the valley by that lady, that it is widest atthe entrance ; and that, after having become graduallynarrower in its windings among the hills, it is terminatedby a precipitous and insulated rock, which rearsitself up about the middle of the valley, connected withthe sides by double rows of arches ; serving the purposesof aqueducts and foot-bridges ; and surmountedby a castle, once a convent, but now belonging to aPiedmontese nobleman. The view from this point isstated to be highly beautiful ; but, on proceeding beyondthe castle, it assumes a yet more attractive appearance.The valley becomes narrower, and proportionably moreNICE. 259dark and wild ; the steep banks, with their heavy pinefoliage, appear about to close upon the river that poursbetween them ; and the whole scene is characterizedby a gloom, to which the rushing of the river givesthat same kind of influence over the mind, which itseems impressed by, when approaching the end of atale of great interest. In speaking, however, of thetorrent, Miss Waldie remarks : " Like that of Vaucluse,it derives its source from a deep grotto at the head ofthe valley. Indeed, the whole scenery of San Andrearesembles, in no slight degree, the more celebrated retreatof Petrarch. But the perpendicular rock thatcloses it up — that peculiar feature of the valley ofVaucluse — is wanted here. The fountain, however, or,as it is more commonly called, the grotto of San Andrea,though not so deep, is much more beautiful than thatfrom which the Sorgue rises. Its interior is linedwith stalactites; and the soft, fragile, light green leafof the capillaire plant hangs luxuriantly and gracefullyfrom the roof." Such is this beautiful spot, so littleknown to the generality of travellers, and so littlefamed in tour books, compared with others much lessdeserving description, that we are led to conclude thatmountains and valleys have much the same diversity offortune as men.Villa Franca presents a scene of a different character.It is situated immediately by the sea-side, and issheltered by an immense range of mountains ; up thecrags of which it has been extended, partly, perhaps,by the caprice, and partly by the necessities of theinhabitants. Fort Montauban, and the convent above2260 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.named, offer another variety of scenery. The formercommands a view of the long line of rocks, that hang-beetlingover the Mediterranean, and of no less thansix bays, penetrating a coast of equal fertility and grandeur.The latter lie embosomed in hills, the verynests of solitude and meditation.Nice, itself, contains some objects of interest — a cathedraland one or two other public buildings — butits streets have only their cleanliness to recommendthem, and the Vent de bise, as it is called, whichsweeps through them, in the early months of the year,have cut off many a blossom, which it was hoped thegenial south might have spared. Its climate unites thecapriciousness of the spring with the glow of the summer;a mixture well calculated to give beauty andvariety to the landscape, but fatal to the delicatebeings that are so often led, like sacrifices, with flowersof the brightest hues about their heads, to expire amidits luxuries.*It is justly remarked, by my friend Dr. James Johnson, that there is nodoubt that the change of air and scene — the novelty of a residence under thebrilliant skies of this beautiful place — and the ability to be a great deal in theopen air, must have very considerable and salutary effects on many peoplewhose general health is deranged, but whose lungs are not materially affected.The whole of the surrounding mountains, and even the hills close toNice, were hoary with snow when I passed through, though December hadnot quite set in. The year 1829 was, however, remarkable for premature andsevere cold, as I dearly experienced on the mountain of Finale, the Es-trellis,and the cheerless plains of Provence. — Change of Air, sc.ENTRANCE TO IVREA.I love not man the less, but nature more,From these our interviews, in which I stealFrom all I may be, or have been before.To mingle with the universe, and feelWhat I can ne'er express, yet cannot all conceal.Byron.Like the other towns of this lonely district, Misrepresentsa singular aspect, standing as it does amongthe noblest monuments of nature's strength, but composedof dwellings which, grotesque and picturesque intheir forms, have a strikingly fragile appearance whencontrasted with the mountains which soar around themHow widely different are the feelings of a traveller,at the gate of one of these rock entrenched towns, tothose which arise at the entrance of places lying inthe midst of calm and cultivated plains. Feebleas would seem the defence of its frail roofs againstthe storm, the sense of safety which he experiences inthe poorest cabaret amounts to a feeling of intensepleasure. And it is this sensation which chiefly occupiesthe breast in all situations of a like kind. Curiosityhas no food, and imagination ceases her flight atthe prospect of human habitations and industry ; butthe sensation of security, raised to a certain height, isitself poetical, and is, no doubt, the source both ofthat over-powering love of home which characterizes262 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.mountaineers, and of many of the benevolent qualitieswith which it is associated. Happy ! tranquilIvrea ! we enter thy gate with a benison for thineinhabitants ; thou hast cradled many a generation ofhardy peasants, each of whom could give a history oftempests, and pictures of nature that might delight thetruest of poets and painters to treasure up and recreate.Humble as is thy aspect, we feel how far sublimeris the spot where the stream of human life isflowing, than the grandest exhibitions of scenery whereit is not. The entrance to Ivrea is, as it were, a between the domain of man and nature ;or rather, perhaps, a sign set up to show where thetwo currents of existence flow together. To the eyesof some travellers, however, it will present nothingbut an object of great picturesque beauty; but otherswill view it as one from which the mind may takeits excursive flight over a wide and pleasant region ofthought.Vertex.Here truth may far from every mortal shock,Allow sweet thoughts in nature's lonely bed ;And find a friend in every leaf or rock.And watch each Alpine flower upraise its head,Bathed in the spray from fresh'ning fountain shed.Here vulgar care forgetting, we resignTumult and toil and envy ; being deadTo all save nature's loveliness divine.Whose influence may to peace the wearied heart incline.Be Matt IE.The town of Verres offers nothing but its picturesquesituation to attract attention. It is untamedin history, and therefore, perhaps, has remained thesame quiet retreat, which it now appears, for manya generation of mountaineers. It stands about aleague and a half below the narrow pass of MountJove, overhung by hills which, by turns, wear thegentlest aspect of summer, and, by turns, seem piledabove the valleys, to be the nursing holds of winter.Nothing can exceed the beauty of these little mountaintowns, considered in connexion with all the circumstancesof their situation. The stillness whichpervades them, when the air is calm, is strangelysolemn. With the first awakening of a storm amongthe hills, the wild whispering of the wind through itsstreets is as unearthly a sound as the ear can receive ;and what can equal in terrible grandeur the echoesand reverberations of the tempest when at its height ?264 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.v/hen clouds, and avalanches, torrents overflowingtheir rocky channels, and forests crashing beneath thewhirlwind, contribute to produce a din in which nodistinct sound can be discovered, except every now andthen a wild, bursting report, such as is heard in astorm at sea, when the mass of waters has been liftedto the clouds, and the wind tumbles them down, as itwould a mighty edifice. The little town, lying tranquillyat rest, while the tempest is thus raging in themountains, wakens many a thought that it does theheart good to cherish ; it leads to the feeling that notthe strength of the beast of the forest only has beensubdued for man, but the powers of the mysterious air, —that the Almighty has spread his tabernacle round thehabitations of his creatures, and that their helplessnessis strong in his protection.*For some curious details respecting the ancient inhabitants of this wildand romantic region, and their strange and fearful subjection by the Romans,who overwhelmed them in their caverns by turning in the waters of the adjacentriver, we refer the reader to Mr. Brockedon's able work— so full ofinterest—" The Passes of the Alps."FORT DE BARD.O'er Bernard's cloud-capt heights the Corsican —Oh look, and say, has genius any bound ?A star then brightly shining in the van,Led on the strength of waken'd Gaul, and foundMowers to reap Marengo's harvest ground.Soon as the martial pageantry uprose.The summits bowed beneath the clanking soundOf trampling horses echoing o'er the snowsOf the indignant Alps, astonished at such foes.ByronThere are some events which, like the noblest orderof paintings, impress the mind with the species of awe,which others only acquire, when aided by the associationsof antiquity. Many of those of the late war areof this description, and the passage of the Frencharmy over the Alps affects the imagination with a pleasure,in no way inferior to that inspired by the recollectionof Hannibal and his Carthaginian. Thusequal, in matter of interest, the modern event has theimportant advantage of having a certain locality. Thefancy suffers as much as the reason from scepticism ;and we are half inclined, as a matter of speculation,to suspect that it has more affinity with it. It is thus thatin the enjoyment of scenes, which owe part of theirgrandeur to association, the slightest doubt that entersthe mind, respecting the truth of the association, ruinsthe whole fabric of the imagination ; and the hoary266 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.mountain or the whispering aisles of the abbey, are atonce dispossessed of their charm. The path whichHannibal trod may have, and very probably has, beendiscovered through the patient and bold labours of moderntravellers ; but it is still not unlawful to doubt,that Napoleon's route, rather than that of Hannibal, willbe the one which the eye of the traveller will trace withthe greatest enthusiasm.Fort de Bard is one of the strongest positions in thepasses of the Alps, and gave occasion to one of themost brilliant displays of French valour, and Buonaparte'sgeneralship, on record. The Great SaintBernard had been just past by the army, when, still onits adventurous and too successful career, it arrivedbefore Fort de Bard. The importance of the station hadbeen fully estimated by the Austrians ; and a garrisonof four hundred men, protected by its works, seemedsufficient to defy the whole strength of France. Thedesign of forcing a passage through this formidablebarrier was evidently one of desperate peril. But thefate of the army, in a great measure, and the issue ofthe campaign altogether, depended upon its beingeffected. The provisions which the soldiers had broughtwith them were already nearly exhausted ; and the natureof the surrounding district prevented their indulgingthe hope of further supplies. In this situation ofthings, an order was given for the assault of the town,which was speedily taken, and laid open to the freeingress of the troops. But its streets, the approach towhich was now wholly undefended, were exposed tothe close fire of the batteries ; and instant destruction.FORT DE BARD. 267it is said, must have attended any attempt to passthem, while the fort remained taken. The Frenchgrenadiers, however, made several daring essays toovercome the obstacles which opposed their progress,but failed. At length, a party of fifteen hundred soldiersclimbed the precipitous mountain of Alberto,which commanded the fort ; and having, with almostincredible labour and courage, placed a four pounderon the extreme verge of the precipice, subdued, in somedegree, the confidence of the garrison. GeneralsBertie and Marmot, seeing the effect of this experiment,now determined upon making an attempt to passthrough the town. The movement was to be made inthe night ; and the wheels of the artillery waggonshaving been carefully covered with litter, it was hopedthat the darkness and silence in which the troops wouldpass, might protect them from the fire of the batteries.But in this respect they were deceived. The march hadno sooner commenced, than a furious cannonade wasopened upon them. Battalion after battalion, however,rushed through the streets; each gun being drawn by aband of fifty soldiers. In this manner the passage throughthe town was effected ; and one of the gates of the forthaving been, in the mean time, battered down by acannon placed in the belfry of the church, the garrisonsaw itself deprived of all means of defence.To those who love to exercise their imagination, inquestioning what would have been the course of events,had they been turned a little out of the channel, in whichwe have seen them flowing, this attack on Fort deBard will afford an interesting theme for speculation.268 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.Had it not been taken, the plains of Marengo wouldprobably never have resounded to the roar of theFrench cannon ; the old cities of the Rhine wouldnever have heard the triumphant voices of Parisian conquerors;and Germany would have remained wrappedup in her learned and dreamy security. All Europewould have fallen into its former repose. The turbulentand ambitious spirit of France would have, perhaps,mistrusted its power, and gone to sleep, or employedits might on some more profitable object. Knowledge,and all the results of science would, it may be, bythis time have carried us to inconceivable heights;and, instead of the names of Napoleon, and others ofhis class, appearing as the great land-marks of history,we should have had those of mightier philosophers andpoets than any that have yet flourished. Thirty yearsof war would have been enough to throw states, lessadvanced than were those of Europe at their commencement,into barbarism ; but, though they have notdone this, we may fairly calculate that they have deprivedus of a proportionable measure of improvement.It is thus the taking of a little Swiss mountain fortressmay have influenced the destinies of Europe and theworld.ENTRANCE TO AOSTA.And now farewell to Italy — perhapsFor ever ! Yet, methinks, I could not go,I could not leave it, were it nine to sayFarewell for ever !"Rogers.We now approach that part of the land of ourwandering where the poet and the philosopher, — thecalm, meditative scholar, — the laborious, adventurousnaturalist,— and the mere lover of nature in her solitarybeauty may alike find employment and delight.Were a speculation to ask by the union of what twocountries would the loveliest landscapes, the brightestvalleys, the grandest mountains be produced, we wouldanswer by that of Switzerland and Italy ; and hereatthe gate of Aosta, we might stand, and demonstratethe truth of our remark. There is scarce a foot ofground, for leagues around this spot, from which somescene of surpassing interest is not visible. It is herethe hills lift their giant-peaks to be crowned with themost radiant sun-light, the snows of many centurieslying in crystal brightness about them, the fit mantleof forms so majestic. Here too, the water-coursestake every mood of the scene; become the interpretersto the '' genius loci," or embody the spiritof the hill and the valley, where they love to make270 THE LANDSCAPE ANNUAL.their way, in visible pomp, to the depth of gloomychasms. And here, in untrodden paths, spring thelovely family of herbs and flowers, stronger in stemand bloom than in other lands, breathing of the sweetdews that reach their roots through many a marblefilter, and glowing with tints as deep as the longestsummer can make them. A traveller, with sufficientleisure and love of solitude, and who could find asmuch merest in exploring the by-paths of nature asthe remains of ancient art, would find more of truththan fancy in what we have stated. But the Vald'Aosta has been rarely thus explored, and never, perhaps,was traversed as it ought but by one; and, thata wild, melancholy, reckless being, the poor leper, towhom tradition has assigned the name of the valley.The leper of Aoste ! The very appellation inspiresthe mind with a feeling of awe and pity, mingled withan unaccountable sensation of pleasurable interest.A man shut out from communion with his kind, butshut out from the world only to be driven intothe bosom of his mother nature, there is something inthe idea of such a banishment as attractive to minds ofa certain class, or in a certain state, as it is painful toothers. The sympathies of the heart seem to beextended by the change, rather than cut off from theirproper objects ; the sorrow that tinges thought withsombre hues, gives it power and depth ; imaginationstands on the threshold of its own world when the eyerests on solitude; and it only requires a free conscience,of which affliction in no ways deprives us, to rendersuch a state one of high and unchanging pleasure. Ther.NTRANCE TO AOSTA. 271only pain which a mind thus circumstanced wouldfeel, is that resulting from a conscious sense of weaknessand earthliness. The poet has well said :'Tis on such spots that the exulting soulIts earthly detriment must learn to weep.And feel the bitterness of its control,In which the vulgar, all contented, sleep ;That weight of searchless sorrow burned deepIn the dark clouds of this impervious lair ;Where gloomy thoughts communion often keep.Stinging the soul, which bleeds that it must bearSuch burdens, amid scenes incomparably fair.A Day in Switzerland.J. Haddon, Printer, Castle Street. Finsbury.